Effective Teacher Behaviors in Higher Education and in US Education Programs: A Review of the Literature Donna M. Shannon This article examines the literature related to effective teaching behaviors of postsec- ondary instructors in general and LIS educators in particular. Models for improving instruction in higher education are also considered. The conclusion points out that effective teaching is complex and multi-dimensional and that attention to specific teaching behaviors should take place within the context of a comprehensive plan for improving teaching and learning. Attention to the teaching roles and re- sponsibilities of college faculty has in- creased dramatically in recent years. This impetus for improving college in- struction has come from a number of influential groups. They advocate fun- damental reconsideration of faculty re- sponsibilities that will place excellent teaching and improved instruction on a level comparable with research.1 The Carnegie Foundation for the Advance- ment of Teaching, long-time leader in the improvement of higher education, has proposed a reconceptualization of scholarship to include a scholarship of teaching as well as a scholarship of re- search.2 Faculty development programs, teaching and learning centers, and men- toring programs for new faculty have been organized on college campuses across the country. Monographs, journals (both discipline-specific and educational research journals), and newsletters are devoted to the topic of pedagogy in higher education.3 The research on effective teaching includes a variety of perspectives and approaches. Shulman has taken on the formidable task of reviewing the para- digms or research traditions which have driven the study of teaching over sev- eral years, and Dunkin and Barnes re- viewed the research specifically de- voted to teaching in higher education.4 This body of research has explored vari- ables that impact all teaching situations. The variables include characteristics of teachers, students, and contexts in which teaching and learning occur. Contextual variables include such fac- tors as size and resource base of the institution, teaching space, size of class, type of discipline, cultural milieu of the institution, and the community, all of which interact to affect the teaching situation in colleges and universities. Summer 1998 163
164 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science About the Author Donna M. Shannon is Assistant Professor, College of Library and Infor- mation Science, University of South Carolina. Results of research on teacher charac- teristics, teaching methods, and teach- ing behaviors contribute to our knowl- edge of effective teaching and how it affects learning. Such knowledge pro- vides guidelines for designing faculty development programs and more effec- tive methods of teacher evaluation which have as their primary objective the improved performance of teachers. Miller and Miller have postulated that three competency areas determine the effectiveness of the college teacher. They are technical competencies, pro- fessional competencies, and personal competencies.5 Technical competen- cies refer to knowledge of the subject matter together with the skills for its application. Professional competencies are those areas concerned with theory and practice of teaching and learning, such as instructional planning, instruc- tional delivery, and instructional evalu- ation. Personal competencies include characteristics such as attitudes, com- munication skills, creativity, and a myr- iad of interpersonal skills. Research on teaching in higher education has ad- dressed all of these competencies in some form. This article examines the literature on teacher effectiveness with a focus on the teaching behaviors of college in- structors in general, and LIS educators in particular. Methodology and results of research studies investigating "low- inference" teaching behaviors of col- lege and university instructors are re- ported and discussed. These include "process-product" studies, perception studies of effective college teaching, and teacher "immediacy" studies. Three research-based models for the study and improvement of college teaching are described. Findings from the literature on effective teaching in LIS are presented. Finally, the impor- tance of adopting a multi-dimensional perspective with regard to the compli- cated construct of teaching is discussed. Teacher Behaviors Much of the research pertaining to stu- dent rating of university teaching has been criticized because of its focus on "high-inference" instructor charac- teristics such as "flexibility," "enthusi- asm," and "clarity." In order to assess such high-inference teacher charac- teristics, observers must make judg- ments or inferences. These "global" or abstract constructs (as well as overall averages of teaching effectiveness) are too vague to provide real help for indi- vidual instructors trying to improve their teaching skills. Research on col- lege teaching effectiveness that focuses on specific, "low-inference" teacher be- haviors may be more useful to individ- ual teachers and to those who are re- sponsible for faculty development programs. Low-inference behaviors are those specific and discernible actions that can be recorded with little or no inference on the part of the observer. Examples of such behaviors include "moves about while lecturing," "gives multiple examples," and "praises stu- dents for good ideas." The methodolo- gies most commonly employed to study Volume 39, Number 3
Effective Teacher Behaviors 1 65 this dimension of teaching are systematic observation, experiments, and surveys. Process- Product Studies "Process-product" studies look at the relationship between specific teaching behaviors (the process of teaching) and student outcomes (product), usually in the form of cognitive gains or affective outcomes. Researchers collect data in authentic classroom teaching situations or conduct laboratory or field experi- ments, live or videotaped. Data are col- lected in a variety of ways, including teachers' self-reports, ratings com- pleted by students, or ratings completed by trained observers. Possible products or outcomes of cognitive gains come from scores on content knowledge, problem-solving ability, reading com- prehension, student self-ratings of edu- cational gains, and student judgment of overall course/instructor effectiveness. In order to determine students' affective development, researchers elicit student attitudes toward the course, the instruc- tor, or the discipline. Affective out- comes such as student motivation may also be determined by whether students enroll in additional courses in the con- tent area and by student self-reports of the amount of time spent studying. In actual practice, most process-product research relies on student ratings of in- structional effectiveness in natural or laboratory settings. Methodological problems sometimes occur in these studies when students serve both as ob- servers of teacher behavior and as raters of overall teaching effectiveness. Infla- tion of process-product correlations can result in such circumstances. Results of Process-Product Studies Overall results of these investigations indicate that low-inference teaching be- haviors account for a large proportion of variance in effective teaching in college classrooms. Various research designs have been used to demonstrate that spe- cific teaching behaviors make a signifi- cant difference in student attitude, stu- dent learning, and student motivation to pursue further learning. Observa- tional studies have revealed that dimen- sions of teaching behavior that are the strongest predictors of instructional ef- fectiveness are enthusiasm/expressive- ness, clarity, and rapport/interaction. Teacher enthusiasm and expressive behaviors have been found to play a critical role in effective classroom teaching.6 Specific expressive behav- iors that Murray found to be the most highly correlated with student global effectiveness ratings were "speaks ex- pressively or emphatically," "shows fa- cial expressions," and "uses humor." He concluded that such factors are im- portant across all disciplines and influ- ence the effectiveness of other teacher behaviors. These behaviors appear to serve as "attention-getting" methods; those instructors who engage students' attention are more likely to succeed with other effective teaching behav- iors.7 Similar behaviors identified by other researchers include "vocal ex- pressiveness," "clarity of speech," "show interest in topic," and "speaks expressively or dramatically." Specific behaviors found to impact the "clarity" factor are "uses concrete examples," "gives multiple examples," and "stresses important points." Those be- haviors most closely related to the rap- port/interaction factor are "encourages student participation," "approves or praises student comments," "asks ques- tions of the class," and "addresses stu- dents by name."8 Observational studies show corre- lations between teaching behaviors and student outcomes, however, causal rela- tionships cannot be assumed. Experi- mental studies supplement the findings Summer 1998
166 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science of observational studies by confirming or refuting such relationships. In a re- view of experimental studies of low-in- ference teaching behaviors, Murray concluded that those behaviors associ- ated with enthusiasm and clarity ap- pear to have a cause-effect relationship with instructional outcomes. Generally, low-inference teaching behaviors (e. g., enthusiasm, clarity, and interaction) ac- count for more variance in student rat- ing of instruction (affective outcomes) than in objective measures of student learning (cognitive outcomes).9 Limitations of Process- Product Studies The relationship between teaching be- haviors and student outcomes is not as simple and straightforward as it first appears. First, teaching behaviors that correlate with one outcome measure may not correlate with other measures. Those behaviors that correlate with af- fective outcomes may not correlate with cognitive outcomes. Conversely, behav- iors that correlate with cognitive out- comes may not correlate with affective outcomes. Second, few studies of low- inference teaching behaviors have been conducted in contexts other than in the traditional lecture situation, and most of them concentrate on undergraduate students. Third, while process-product studies reveal that certain effective classroom behaviors are consistent across disciplines in lecture settings, one must keep in mind the research on student evaluation of teaching which indicates that student ratings of instruc- tion differ by academic discipline.10 Other researchers have found that certain teaching behavior factors differ in frequency of occurrence across aca- demic disciplines even though correla- tions between particular teaching be- haviors and overall student assessment of instructional effectiveness were similar across different academic fields.11 Per- haps most importantly, Shulman warns against process-product research that observes teacher behavior "without ref- erence to teachers' intentions or cogni- tions, oblivious to their contexts and constraints."12 Educators should be cognizant of the fact that the results of process-product studies alone may not provide dependable guidance for those who seek to improve their teaching techniques. Observational and experi- mental studies support the positive re- lationship between certain low-infer- ence classroom behaviors and student outcomes. Nonetheless, drawing gener- alizations from the results of these in- vestigations is problematic. Perceptions of Effective College Teaching College students' assessment of effec- tive instructional behaviors and atti- tudes constitutes a large body of re- search on teaching in higher education. Data are collected by asking students to specify characteristics of the "ideal" teacher, characteristics essential to "good" teaching, or characteristics of the students' "best teachers." These studies are broader than the "process- product" studies in that they examine characteristics and behaviors exhibited by teachers both inside and outside the classroom. Overall, this research re- veals that students and teachers share many perceptions of effective instruc- tion, including teacher knowledge of subject and teacher organization and preparation for class. Perceptual differ- ences between students and teachers do emerge from these studies. That is, stu- dents are far more concerned with teacher enthusiasm and teacher stimu- lation of interest in the subject or the course, while instructors are far more likely to rate as important the teacher's ability to provide intellectual challenge Volume 39, Number 3
Effective Teacher Behaviors 1 67 and to stimulate students' intellectual curiosity. Student Perceptions In his 1976 synthesis of research into student perceptions of instructional characteristics of effective teachers, Feldman found that those attributes stu- dents most often associated with good teaching or good teachers were "stimu- lation of interest," "clarity and under- standableness," followed by "knowl- edge of subject matter," "preparation for and organization of the course," and "enthusiasm for the subject matter and for teaching." It should be noted that students who participated in these studies were not "evaluating" a particu- lar teacher or a particular course. Feld- man acknowledges that readers should be cautious in interpreting the results of studies that ask students for their gen- eral views on teachers and teaching. Students' assessments of actual teach- ers within the context of particular courses might be different.13 Student and Teacher Perceptions In a later review of research on studies that collected comparable data from both students and teachers, Feldman found that the two groups were similar, but not identical in their opinions. Thirty-one studies in which teachers and students at the same school were asked about the importance of various dimensions of teaching to "good teach- ing" or "effective instruction" were ana- lyzed for similarities and dissimilari- ties in student and faculty views. Across all thirty-one studies, the aver- age correlation was +.71, indicating substantial agreement between the views of students and faculty on twenty-two instructional dimensions. When rank-ordered, the most striking differences in student and faculty views were "teacher's stimulation of interest in the course and its subject matter" (rank 3.5 for students vs. rank 13.5 for faculty), "intellectual challenge and en- couragement of independent thought" (rank 17.5 for students vs. rank 6 for faculty), and "motivating students and setting high standards" (rank 17.5 for students vs. 7.5 for faculty). Of the twenty-two dimensions, faculty and students agreed on three of the four highest-ranked dimensions - "teacher's sensitivity to and concern with class level and progress" (rank 1 for students vs. rank 3 for faculty), "teachers' prepa- ration and organization of the course" (rank 2 for students vs. rank 4 for fac- ulty), and "teacher's knowledge of the subject" (rank 3.5 for students vs. rank 1 for faculty).14 In a more recent study, Douglass considered the importance of eight in- structional variables as perceived by award-winning teachers and their stu- dents at one university. Overall, teach- ers and students agreed on two of the four most important teaching behaviors identified by each group. They were "being knowledgeable in subject area" (rank 1 for students vs. rank 4 for teach- ers), and "being well-prepared" (rank 2 for both students and teachers). Signifi- cant differences between perceptions of students and faculty were found. Stu- dents identified the following variables as significantly more important than did their instructors: "uses a variety of audiovisual aids," "uses appropriate in- structional material," "relates knowl- edge of subject matter to solution of practical problems," "gives lectures which make it easy to take notes," and "stresses important points." The two in- structional variables rated higher by teachers than by students and found to be statistically significant were "moti- vates the student's intellectual curios- ity" and "presents thought-provoking ideas."15 Summer 1998
168 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Based on the premise that the social dimension of teaching is critical to teaching and learning outcomes, Walsh and Maffei studied student and faculty perceptions of factors affecting the stu- dent-teacher relationship.16 Closed- ended survey items concerning stu- dents' perceptions of fairness, caring, flexibility, and trustworthiness were se- lected from leading college textbooks and journal articles on effective teach- ing. From the student point-of-view, those behaviors which clearly enhanced the student-teacher relationship were "treats students equally regardless of race or sex," "learns students' names quickly," "shows patience in explaining points," "treats students as equals," and "smiles and displays a friendly demeanor." Be- haviors that students identified as strongly detracting from the student- professor relationship were "often fails to keep posted office hours or appoint- ments," and "offers little explanation of grading decisions." Teacher Immediacy Studies Further empirical support for the im- portance of the student-teacher rela- tionship is found in the instructional communication literature on teacher "immediacy behaviors." Defined as the physical and psychological closeness between people, teacher immediacy studies focus on the verbal and non-ver- bal communication behaviors of college teachers that affect their relationship with students. Though the research in this area is limited, investigators have found a relationship between the use of immediacy-enhancing behaviors and student perception of their own affec- tive and cognitive learning. Student motivation, however, appears to be the primary effect of teacher immediacy be- haviors.17 Specifically, which commu- nication behaviors are important to col- lege teaching? In a study designed to identify which specific communication behav- iors are important to the prototypical "ideal" professor and how they ranked with other dimensions of the "ideal" professor, researchers at Michigan State University surveyed 108 undergraduate students enrolled in upper-division communication classes in a large uni- versity with an open-ended question- naire.18 They found that communication behaviors were important to students. Of twenty-four categories (by which data were coded) of the prototypical "ideal" professor identified by the subjects, four of the top one-third were communication behaviors - "good speaker," "encourages interaction," "moves about the class- room," and "uses expressive voice." It is interesting to note that both Douglass and the Michigan State researchers found more student interest in behav- iors associated with communication and presentation than did the Feldman syntheses. In a different approach to the study of teacher immediacy behaviors, Crump investigated which verbal and non-verbal teacher behaviors college students con- sider to be effective.19 A researcher-gener- ated questionnaire that asked subjects to respond to specific behaviors using a Lik- ert-type scale was administered to seventy students enrolled in communication courses in a community college. Of the twelve behaviors (eight nonverbal and four verbal) students rated "humor" as most important, followed by "dynamic de- livery," "vocal variation," and "personal examples." Models for Improving College Instruction Many observers insist that most col- lege teachers are not well-prepared for their responsibilities as pedagogues; neither courses nor clinical experiences Volume 39, Number 3
Effective Teacher Behaviors 1 69 devoted to effective teaching are part of their formal education. One way re- search and scholarship devoted to effec- tive teaching has been used to improve the quality of teaching and learning in institutions of higher education is the conceptualization, development, and use of models. Described below are three models which provide college fac- ulty with strategies and techniques for self-assessment of teaching and for elic- iting feedback from others with regard to their teaching. Two-Dimensional Model Lowman's "Two-Dimensional Model of Effective College Teaching," inspired by years of his own empirical research, is consistent with his synthesis of re- search on student satisfaction with pro- fessors' teaching skills.20 According to this model, "quality of instruction re- sults from a college teacher's skill at creating both intellectual excitement in and interpersonal rapport with stu- dents - the kinds of emotions and rela- tionships that motivate them to do their best work."21 The model is based on an assumption that instructors are evenly distributed over each dimension, and that most experienced teachers fall at about mid-point for each dimension. The exemplary teacher is one who ex- cels in at least one of these dimensions and who is adept at both. Competent teachers are moderately skillful at each dimension. Dimension I relates to what instructors do in the classroom; Dimen- sion II is influenced by student-teacher interactions both within and outside the classroom environment. Factor analysis indicates that Dimension I is somewhat more important to students than is Dimension II. Dimension I, intellectual excitement, involves the clarity of teacher presenta- tion (what is presented) as well as stimu- lation of emotional impact (how material Summer 1998 is presented). Instructors who possess a high level of intellectual excitement present well-organized content in clear language and emphasize the relation- ship between concepts and applica- tions. They present course material in an engaging way "with high energy and strong sense of dramatic tension," and they appear to love what they are doing. Dimension II, interpersonal rap- port, deals with interpersonal relation- ships and an instructor's communica- tion skills. Those instructors who rate highest on this dimension exhibit a strong interest in students as individu- als and are sensitive to their feelings regarding course content and delivery. They encourage students to think for themselves and to express their own points of view. Lowman suggests many specific strategies and behaviors that college teachers can use to develop their effec- tiveness in each of the two dimensions. For example, for Dimension I he speci- fies how to design a course, how to organize and present course content, how to prepare and deliver exciting lec- tures, and how to conduct class discus- sions. Included in his recommenda- tions for improving interpersonal rapport and communications skills (Di- mension II) are suggestions for learning students' names, being accessible to students, and presenting student as- signments. He offers a checklist and a rating form to elicit feedback from stu- dents that can be used to evaluate one's teaching based on the model. Seven Principles for Good Practice Developed by a task force of educators and scholars in 1987, the well-known Seven Principles for Good Practice in Undergraduate Education incorporate the best from fifty years of research on teaching and learning.22 Although based on research on undergraduate
1 70 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science teaching and learning, these principles are applicable at any level of higher education. The principles set out the following elements of good teaching and learning: (1) student-faculty con- tact; (2) cooperation between students; (3) active learning techniques; (4) prompt feedback; (5) time on task; (6) high expectations of students; and (7) respect for diverse talents and learning styles. To assess conformity with the seven principles, Chickering and Gamson de- veloped two inventories - one for indi- vidual faculty members and one for in- stitutions.23 The faculty inventory is intended as a self-administered diag- nostic tool for use by individual in- structors interested in improving their teaching rather than as a summative evaluation or administrative review of a faculty member's performance. The inventory contains ten statements (spe- cific teacher behaviors) emanating from each of the seven principles; faculty members rate themselves on each of the seventy items using a five-point scale. Individuals can then decide which area to target for improvement. Case studies and vignettes have been published based on the Seven Principles.24 A Five-Step Process for Improving Teaching Maryellen Weimer suggests that im- proving college teaching requires a bal- ance between individual and institu- tional efforts. Institutions, she insists, must stimulate and support faculty in their individual efforts to become better teachers. Her model for better teaching, intended for use by individual college instructors, is a five-step process.25 We- imer points out that college teachers most often take a "hit or miss" approach to improving instruction. Instead, she encourages college teachers to be sys- tematic and to view the process as on- going. Her model includes the follow- ing steps: (1) developing instructional awareness; (2) gathering information; (3) making choices about changes; (4) implementing the alterations; and (5) assessing the alternatives. First, teachers should develop a clear understanding of their current in- structional practices as well as the as- sumptions they hold about teaching and learning. Weimer suggests that teachers can do this by viewing videotape of their own teaching; using checklists, in- ventories, or other evaluation instru- ments; reading articles; and talking with colleagues about teaching prac- tices. Second, instructors should use multiple methods to acquire input on their teaching, including the solicita- tion of ongoing feedback from col- leagues and students. This feedback should include information based on observations of faculty members' teach- ing as well as perceptions of the impact of their instructional policies and prac- tices. Observers should also make sug- gestions for other ways teachers can reach their instructional objectives. Third, instructors make decisions about what to change and which alternative strategies and methods to implement, including how and when to make changes. Fourth, faculty members im- plement planned changes by integrat- ing new or revised practices into in- structional activities. Finally, teachers evaluate new practices in order to deter- mine the effects of the changes and to decide if additional modifications or re- visions are appropriate. Weimer believes that the responsi- bility for instructional improvement is clearly the individual teacher's, how- ever, she points out that institutions are responsible for communicating high ex- pectations for instructional quality and for providing support and resources necessary for faculty to improve as teachers. Volume 39, Number 3
Effective Teacher Behaviors 1 7 1 Library and Information Science Education Library and information science educa- tors will find scant information on ef- fective teaching behaviors when they examine their own body of literature. Although there are many available pub- lications devoted to LIS curriculum, to the impact of technology on LIS educa- tion, and to teaching methods in par- ticular, there is no empirical research that specifically addresses effective teacher behaviors.26 Yet, it is interesting to note that Jesse Shera, in The Foundations of Education for Librarianship, pointed out that a good teacher must commu- nicate with enthusiasm for learning and with "mastery of the knowledge to be communicated,"27 two indicators of good teaching consistently found in the literature on effective college in- struction. Shera contends "that there are no generally accepted criteria for the identification of those qualities which make for success in teaching," but he identifies what he refers to as four "maxims" defining generalized characteristics of the successful teacher: "(1) competence in the appro- priate subject; (2) effectiveness of ver- bal communication; (3) a sincere con- cern with, perhaps even dedication to, teaching; and (4) a genuine liking for students coupled with an under- standing of their problems and points of view."28 In his 1980 study of library educa- tion, Conant offered the following list of "qualities" that the ideal educator in a graduate program of library science should possess: a distinguished back- ground in librarianship and/or in schol- arly work, including a mastery of the several areas of librarianship (these are the generalists); proven effectiveness in graduate instruction; ability to apply theory to practice and to encourage in students a conceptual approach to prob- lem solving; skill in utilizing libraries as laboratories for instructional pur- poses."29 Like Shera and Conant, Gorman ac- knowledges that effective LIS educators are knowledgeable and enthusiastic about their subject area, organized, ef- fective communicators, and are ap- proachable and caring. But, Gorman goes further with his consideration of effective teaching, insisting that there is a "catalyst" at work in those truly effec- tive teachers, "something which causes knowledge, attitudes, and personality to fuse in an unfailingly creative and responsive way that appeals to stu- dents." This catalyst, according to Gorman, is made up of the attitudes and personal characteristics of the teacher as well as the practical teach- ing methods employed by the instruc- tor.30 Although Gorman does not dis- cuss low-inference teaching behaviors, he does encourage LIS instructors to remain active as researchers and to up- date their past LIS work experience by "regular and lengthy forays into the market place." Effective teaching behaviors of instructors in programs of library and information science is unmapped terri- tory. Most research in this area has been conducted with full-time undergradu- ate students in lecture situations. Few studies address teaching effectiveness in professional schools and colleges. Because there is evidence to suggest that certain specific teaching behaviors are effective regardless of student age and experience or teaching context, the results of these studies can offer some guidance to LIS instructors striving to improve as teachers. Perhaps even more helpful to LIS faculty would be a body of research conducted with graduate students in professional schools in which various teaching methodologies are employed. Summer 1998
1 72 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Conclusion and a Cautionary Note A wide range of variables impacts teaching and learning in higher educa- tion settings. Effective teacher behavior is one of many. These variables include student characteristics and motivation, teacher characteristics, institutional characteristics and resources, teaching methods, and teaching behaviors. Even though research has identified a num- ber of effective teaching behaviors, We- imer reminds college instructors that "what may be effective for some, may be ineffective for others. For this reason, few (if any) teaching behaviors are uni- formly good or bad in their effect."31 Effective teaching behaviors interact with each other and with a myriad of other factors to affect teaching and learning. Gorman refers to this same theme in his article on LIS education in his discussion of a "teaching catalyst," which he says "cannot be defined or dissected objectively. . . ."32 Effective teaching is more than technique. Effec- tive teaching is a complex and multidi- mensional construct that "is unpre- dictable, ambiguous, contextual, and value-laden - a journey into uncer- tainty."33 Therefore, it is important to view the teaching enterprise from mul- tiple perspectives - effective teaching behaviors being but one. Current thinking about teaching re- sponsibilities of faculty in institutions of higher education includes a growing interest in and conversation about "re- flective teaching." Schòn wrote about the importance of "reflection-in-ac- tion," thinking about how we know what we know about what we are do- ing.34 The reflective process involves seeing things from a variety of perspec- tives and viewpoints. Palmer calls on educators to stop "privatizing" teaching and instead to engage in "creative con- versation" about good teaching.35 These notions are consistent with what is rec- ommended in current models for im- proving teaching and call on teachers to question their assumptions about teach- ing, to reflect on what and why they do what they do and how what they do affects their students, and to engage in a range of activities in order to improve teaching and learning. Recognizing and discussing specific effective teaching behaviors is one piece of the puzzle. These behaviors will be most effec- tively integrated into what teachers do when they are part of a comprehensive plan for instructional improvement that addresses the total context of teaching and learning. References 1. Association of American Colleges, "Per- spectives on Teaching from 'Integrity in the College Curriculum: A Report to the Academic Community,'" College Teach- ing 33 (1995): 117-24; National Institute of Education, Involvement in Learning: Realizing the Potential of American Higher Education (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1984). 2. Ernest L. Boyer, Scholarship Reconsid- ered: Priorities of the Professoriate (Princeton, N.J.: Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching, 1990). 3. For a review of these materials, see Maryellen Weimer, "The Disciplinary Journals of Pedagogy," Change 25 (Nov./Dec. 1993): 44-51. 4. Lee S. Shulman, "Paradigms and Re- search Programs in the Study of Teach- ing: A Contemporary Perspective," in Handbook on Research in Teaching, ed. Merlin C. Wittrock (New York: Macmil- lan, 1986), 3-36; Lee S. Shulman, "Research on Teaching: A Historical and Personal Perspective," in Effective and Responsible Teaching: A New Synthesis, ed. Fritz K. Oser, Andreas Dick, and Jean- Luc Patry (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1992), 14-29; Michael J. Dunkin and Jennifer Barnes, "Research on Teaching in Higher Education," in Handbook on Volume 39, Number 3
Effective Teacher Behaviors 1 73 Research in Teaching, ed. Merlin C. Wittrock (New York: Macmillan, 1986), 754-77. 5. W. R. Miller and Marie F. Miller, Hand- book for College Teaching (Sautee-Na- coochee, Geor.: PineCrest, 1997). 6. Beginning with the Ware and Williams report of the so-called "Dr. Fox" effect, this factor has been viewed with skepti- cism on the part of some college teachers. Yet, there is other research which indi- cates that teacher expressiveness does produce greater student learning. See Raymond P. Perry, "Instructor Expres- siveness: Implications for Improving Teaching," in Using Research to Improve Teaching, ed. Janet G. Donald and Arthur M. Sullivan (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1985), 35-49. 7. Harry G. Murray, "College Teaching Be- haviors Related to College Teaching Ef- fectiveness," in Using Research to Improve Teaching, ed. Janet G. Donald and Arthur M. Sullivan (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1985), 21-34. 8. Joel J. Mintzes, "Overt Behaviors and Stu- dent Rating of Instruction," Journal of Ex- perimental Education 48 (1979): 145-53; Harry G. Murray, "Low Inference Class- room Teaching Behavior and Student Rat- ing of College Teaching Effectiveness," Journal of Educational Psychology 75 (1983): 138-49; Daniel Solomon, "Teacher Behavior Dimensions, Course Charac- teristics, and Student Evaluations of Teachers," American Education Research Journal 3 (1966): 35-47. 9. Harry G. Murray, "Effective Teaching Be- haviors in the College Classroom," in Higher Education: Handbook of Theory and Research, vol. 7 (New York: Agathon Press, 1991), 135-72. 10. William E. Cashin, "Students Do Rate Different Academic Fields Differently," in Students' Ratings of Instruction: Issues for Improving Practice, ed. Michael Theall and Jennifer Franklin (San Fran- cisco: Jossey-Bass, 1990); Kenneth A. Feldman, "Course Characteristics and College Students' Ratings of their Teach- ers: What We Know and What We Don't," Research in Higher Education 9 (1978): 199-242. 11. Stephen Erdle and Harry G. Murray, "In- terfaculty Differences in Classroom Teaching Behaviors and Their Relation- ship to Student Instructional Ratings," Research in Higher Education 24 (1986): 115-27; Harry G. Murray and Robert D. Renaud, "Disciplinary Differences in Classroom Teaching Behaviors," in Disci- plinary Differences in Teaching and Learning: Implications for Practice, ed. Nira Hativa and Michele Marincovich (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1995), 64: 31-39. 12. Shulman, "Research on Teaching: A His- torical and Personal Perspective," 20. 13. Kenneth A. Feldman, "The Superior Col- lege Teacher From the Students' View," Research in Higher Education 5 (1976): 243-88. 14. Kenneth A. Feldman, "Effective College Teaching From the Students' and Fac- ulty's View: Matched or Mismatched Pri- orities?," Research in Higher Education 28 (1988): 291-344. 15. Thelma J. Douglass, "A Study of the Per- ceived Importance of Selected Instruc- tional Variables and Their Demonstration by Award-Winning Teachers in Higher Education" (Ed.D. dissertation, Univer- sity of Houston, 1992). 16. David J. Walsh and Mary Jo Maffei, "Never in a Class by Themselves: An Ex- amination of Behaviors Affecting the Stu- dent-Professor Relationship," Journal on Excellence in College Teaching 5 (1994): 23-49. 17. Diane M. Christophel, "The Relation- ships Among Teacher Immediacy Behav- iors, Student Motivation, and Learning," Communication Education 39 (1990): 323-40. 18. Sandi W. Smith, et al., "The Prototypical Features of the Ideal Professor from the Female and Male Undergraduate Per- spective: The Role of Verbal and Nonver- bal Communication," Journal on Excellence in College Teaching 5 (1994): 5-22. 19. Charla A. Crump, "Teacher Immediacy: What Students Consider to be Effective Teacher Behaviors," (West Texas A & M University, 1996), ERIC, ED 390099. 20. Joseph Lowman, Mastering the Techniques Summer 1998
1 74 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science of Teaching (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1995). 21. Ibid., 20. 22. Arthur W. Chickering and Zelda F. Gam- son, "Seven Principles for Good Practice in Undergraduate Education." AAHE Bulletin 39, no. 7 (1987): 3-7; For a sum- mary of the research support for the Seven Principles, see Mary Deane Sor- cinelli, "Research Findings on the Seven Principles," in Applying the Seven Prin- ciples for Good Practice in Undergradu- ate Education, ed. Arthur W. Chickering and Zelda F. Gamson. (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1991), 13-25. 23. Arthur W. Chickering and Zelda F. Gam- son, "A Brief History of the Seven Princi- ples for Good Practice in Undergraduate Education," in Applying the Seven Prin- ciples for Good Practice in Undergradu- ate Education, ed. Arthur W. Chickering and Zelda F. Gamson (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1991); Arthur W. Chickering, Zelda F. Gamson, and Louis M. Barsi, Faculty Inventory: Seven Principles for Good Practice in Undergraduate Educa- tion (Racine, Wise: Johnson Foundation, 1989). 24. Louis M. Barsi, "Some Illustrative Vignettes on the Uses of the Seven Prin- ciples and the Faculty and Institutional Inventories," in Applying the Seven Prin- ciples for Good Practice in Undergradu- ate Education, ed. Arthur W. Chickering and Zelda F. Gamson (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1991); Susan R. Hatfield, The Seven Principles in Action: Improv- ing Undergraduate Education (Boston: Anker Publishing, 1995). 25. Maryellen Weimer, Improving College Teaching: Strategies for Developing In- structional Effectiveness (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1990). 26. Anne Woodsworth, et al. The Future of Education for Librarianship: Looking Forward from the Past (Washington, D.C.: Council on Library Resources, 1994). 27. Jesse H. Shera, The Foundations of Edu- cation for Librarianship (New York: Becker and Hayes, 1972), 424. 28. Ibid., 432-33. 29. Ralph W. Conant, The Conant Report; A Study of the Education of Librarians (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Pr., 1980), 186. 30. G. E. Gorman, "Teaching Library Science: Aspects of Effectiveness in Academic Life," Libri 38 (1988): 301. 31. Weimer, Improving College Teaching, 203. 32. Gorman, "Teaching Library Science: As- pects of Effectiveness," 301. 33. Stephen D. Brookfield, The Skillful Teacher: On Technique, Trust, and Re- sponsiveness in the Classroom (San Fran- cisco: Jossey-Bass, 1990). 34. Donald A. Schòn, The Reflective Practi- tioner: How Professionals Think in Ac- tion (New York: Basic Books, 1983). 35. Parker J. Palmer, "Good Talk About Good Teaching: Improving Teaching through Conversation and Community," Change 25 (Nov./Dec. 1993): 8-13. Volume 39, Number 3