HERMANN ERNST LUDEWIG, 1809-56: BIBLIOGRAPHER ALEX LADENSON T O A German-American bibliogra- pher, Hermann Ernst Ludewig, belongs the unique distinction of having written the first detailed account of the libraries of the United States. Pre- ceding the well-known work of Charles C. Jewett, Notices of Libraries in the United States of America, by about five years, Ludewig published a series of articles2 in I845-46 in which, among other things, he described the principal libraries of this country. In calling atten- tion to the work of Ludewig, Professor Jewett declared: It is a singular, and to us a mortifying fact, that the most accurate account of American libraries was published in Germany, and has never been translated into English ... . The fullness and accuracy of the details which he [Ludewig] has given are remarkable. I have made free use of them, and have found my labors much facilitated by so doing.3 Because of his interest in the libraries of this country and for his pioneer efforts in the field of American bibliography, Ludewig merits wider notice than he has received to date.4 He was born in Dres- den, Saxony, on October I4, I8o9.5 Despite the limited means of his father, who was a petty government official in the city of Dresden, Ludewig was given excellent educational training. At an early age he exhibited a keen thirst for knowledge, and upon reaching manhood he was sent to the universities of Leipzig and Gottingen to study law. Though pre- occupied with jurisprudence, he devoted a considerable part of his time at the uni- versity to history, literature, music, and the fine arts. After receiving his degree he visited France and then, returning to Dresden, settled down to practice law. In I836 he was married, and for a wedding trip the young couple toured southern Germany, Austria, Switzerland, France, and Italy. This extensive trip afforded Ludewig an opportunity for further study and observation. He delved deeply into the history, lan- guage, and literature of the countries through which he traveled. On his re- turn to Dresden, Ludewig resumed his legal practice, which in a short time grew to considerable proportions. His in- terests, however, were not confined ex- clusively to law. He was a man of many pursuits, moving freely in the learned circles of Dresden, acting as secretary of the local historical society, and finding time to publish two bibliographical works. I Published originally as A Report on the Public Libraries of the United States of America: Appendix to the Report of the Board of Regents of the Smtithsonian Institution (3Ist Cong., ist Sess., Sen. Misc. No. I120 [i850])- 2 "Bibliographie und Bibliotheken in den Verein- igten Staaten von Nord-Amerika," Serapeum: Zeit- schrift fur Bibliotheksunissenschaft, Handschriften- kunde, und dltere Litteratur, VI (I845), 209-24; VII (I846), 113-23, I29-72, 177-92, 204-6. 3 Third Annual Report of the Board of Regents of the Smithsonian Institution (3oth Cong., 2d Sess., H.R. Misc. No. 48 118491), P. 34. 4 For full biographical sketches of Ludewig see Ilistorical Magazine, and Notes and Queries concern- ing the Antiquities, History, and Biography of Amer- ica, I (I857), 33-34; XII ( I867), 145-47; and Memo- rial Biographies of the New England Historic Genea- logical Society (Boston, I883), III, I36-39. 5 There appears to be a discrepancy of one year in accounts of the date of his birth. Several sources give October 14, I8io, as the date. 126
HERMANN ERNST LUDEWIG, 1809-56 127 In I837 he published Le Livret des ana: essai de catalogue manuel,6 which has been described as the most exhaustive compilation of books in ana to have ap- peared at that time.7 In I840 appeared Zur Bibliothekonomie,8 a work published as a Festgabe to mark the four-hundredth anniversary of the invention of printing. In this essay Ludewig advanced his ideas on cataloging. He made a strong plea for what he termed the "Subject Catalog," better known in this country as the "classified" or "systematic" catalog. Though the title of the essay is somewhat ambitious, Ludewig's obser- vations are interesting as revealing the state of cataloging in Germany at that date. He was frank to state that, al- though librarians could compile the "Nominal Catalog"-that is, the author catalog-they did not possess the neces- sary knowledge to undertake the prepa- ration of the "Subject Catalog." For this latter type of catalog, subject ex- perts were necessary. Ludewig was an advocate of full cataloging. The entry in the catalog, he insisted, ought to contain not only the most complete bibliographi- cal description of the book but also a scientific appraisal and evaluation of the work. Accompanying the essay is a sample section of a "Subject Catalog" in the field of law prepared by the au- thor. In the course of his writing and re- search, Ludewig developed an interest in the United States; and, being pos- sessed of a freedom-loving bent, he was naturally attracted to this country. So intense did his admiration of America become that in I844 he decided to dis- pose of his property, surrender the ease and comfort of Dresden life, and, to- gether with his wife, emigrate to the New World. Arriving at New York, he made immediate plans for an extended tour of the country. Before settling down per- manently, he was desirous of observing and studying the political, cultural, and social life of America at first hand. For almost two years Ludewig trav- eled through the states. Starting in New England, he covered the entire Atlantic seaboard and then turned westward, his travels carrying him as far as Missouri and Arkansas. His former penchant for libraries and bibliography led him to ex- plore these subjects in this country. As he journeyed from place to place, he surveyed the library resources of each locality. Not only did he inspect and use the principal libraries of the United States, but he also become acquainted with the important private collections. At every turn he sought out and won the assistance of the literary men of America. The monumental collections of Peter Force and George Brinley were placed at his disposal. The bibliography of America no less than the general subject of libraries intrigued Ludewig. His coming to this country at a time when the democratic impulse ran high, coupled with his innate love for free government, strengthened his intellectual interest in the young re- public. Wherever he went he collected bibliographic data relating to the United States. Of special interest to him were the printed sources of American local history. In a real and not a rhetorical sense Ludewig was a bibliographic ex- plorer. The art of bibliography received scant attention in this country at that day; for America, it will be remembered, 6 Dresden, I837. 7S. Austin Allibone, A Critical Dictionary of English Literature and British and American Au- thors (Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott Co., i89i), I, 1 142. 8 Dresden: C. H. Gartner, 1840. For assisting in the translation of Ludewig's works, the writer is in- debted to Ernest Oberlander.
128 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY was still too busily engaged in conquering the wilderness. In unearthing biblio- graphic material Ludewig mentions the difficulties encountered. In one place he wrote: For in Europe the gathering of accurate bibliographical notices is an easy and pleasant task, when compared with the trouble and diffi- culties to be encountered in the same pursuit in this country where the sources of bibliographical instruction, as far as they exist, are scattered here and there; where the collector, as pre- viously remarked, must be constantly on his guard, and can rely only on himself for every accurate notice which he may want; and where, besides, the attempt to supply these notices has but very little of the "spiritual pleasure of a trip from page to page, from book to book," but requires an actual and fatiguing tour in search of literature. It requires indeed a true "bibliophile voyageur."9 From the material collected during his travels and earlier studies, Ludewig published the articles in the Serapeum, referred to above, which dealt with the bibliography, libraries, and book trade of the United States. The first article consisted of a bibliography of bibliog- raphies on America. It was probably the earliest work of its kind; Justin Winsor described Ludewig's accounts of American libraries and bibliography as "the first contributions to this subject.""1 Not only was each entry in the bibliog- raphy fully described, but a complete bibliographic history of every item was included. Ludewig compiled the list in a manner which left little doubt as to his high scholarship or professional in- tegrity. Ludewig's succeeding articles in the Serapeum contained a detailed descrip- tion of the libraries of the United States. Although his list was not so comprehen- sive as the later Jewett compendium, as a pioneer effort it is not without interest and value. Whereas Jewett listed over six hundred libraries, Ludewig described approximately two hundred. None of the principal libraries, however, was omitted by the latter. Ludewig was quite cogni- zant of the fact that his compilation was not an exhaustive one. for he stated that his list could easily have been tripled if time and funds had been available. Whereas Jewett obtained his material largely through the questionnaire meth- od, Ludewig was obliged to rely mainly on personal visits for his source of in- formation-a far more costly procedure. In speaking of his difficulties he ob- served that the traveler too often dis- covers in the South what he should have seen in the North from whence he has just come and similarly learns, upon returning to the East from the West, what he should have visited in the latter region. Ludewig arranged his data alpha- betically by state and city. In so far as he was able, he included in each notice a brief historical statement of the institu- tion, a description of the book collection, and a listing of the printed catalogs. Unlike many other European trav- elers, Ludewig was enthusiastic about America; moreover, he was most liberal in his praise of American libraries. In contrast to the rigidity of European li- brary rules, the ease with which books were made accessible to readers in the United States was a source of no small wonder and delight to him. A few of Ludewig's observations concerning American libraries are of sufficient im- portance to warrant summarization. In one place he gave it as his opinion that no country had done as much for libraries in the last seventy years as the United States. At another point he observed that, although many of the American 9 The Literature of American Local History (New York: R. Craighead, I846), p. xviii. 10 Narrative and Critical History of America (Boston: Houghton Mifflin & Co., I889), I, v.
HERMANN ERNST LUDEWIG, 1809-56 I29 libraries were small when measured in terms of volumes alone, their usefulness was far greater than similar institutions in Europe by reason of the printed cata- logs that were in current vogue. The idea of printed annual reports appealed to him, but he considered it regrettable that libraries did not exchange such re- ports, and it distressed him even more to find that some libraries did not have on hand an unbroken sequence of their own reports. Equally disturbing to him was the fact that libraries did not exchange catalogs. Very little escaped the notice of Ludewig. He described the various types of libraries, outlined the method by which they were organized, commented on the manner in which book purchases were made, and noted the use that was made of American libraries. In addition to the Serapeum articles, Ludewig published, as a result of his tour of the United States, The Literature of American Local History. The latter is a bibliographical work of some fourteen hundred items consisting of historical sources pertaining to the individual states, counties, cities, and towns of the United States. It is restricted to "books either published by Americans at home or abroad or reprinted in the United States." In a lengthy Introduction, which is largely devoted to paying a glorious tribute to this country, the au- thor offers some general comments on the nature of bibliography. It is signifi- cant that in I846 Ludewig found it neces- sary to justify the publication of a biblio- graphical work in this country in such elementary terms as the following: . True bibliographical knowledge is not only the safest insurance against literary dep- redations and mystifications, and the surest test of originality, but also an actual savings bank for time and money in literary pursuits. Historical sciences especially, being founded on former records only, and depending principally upon a thorough and critical use and knowledge of existing sources, stand more in need than others of the aid of bibliography, as the topo- graphical statistics of literature.", One of his principal purposes in com- piling this work, Ludewig announced, was to stimulate interest in the study and writing of American history and in the founding of an "American Historical Library," where there could be deposited as complete a collection "as possible of writings concerning the history of the whole American continent." To what extent Ludewig succeeded in his aim, and what influence he exerted on the subsequent writings of American his- tory, cannot be measured. This much at least is known: no less distinguished a bibliographer than Henry Harrisse as- serted'2 that Ludewig's work prompted the publication of a series of local state bibliographies in Norton's Literary Letter, three of which were published. The reception that was given to The Literature of American Local History at the time it appeared was extremely dis- appointing to the compiler. Ludewig had five hundred copies of the work privately printed. Half of this number he sent to his friends in Europe. The other half he distributed to libraries and to the literati of America. Of the two hundred and fifty copies distributed in this country, Lude- wig received only twenty-seven letters of acknowledgment. This was a shocking blow to him. The failure to recognize the immediate value of Ludewig's work, however, is probably to be accounted for, as already indicated, by the fact that the art of bibliography was an innova- tion in this country in the i840's. When Ludewig came to publish a supplement'3 "ILiterature of American Local History, p. xvi. I2 Bibliotheca Americana vetustissima (New York: Geo. P. Philes, I866), pp. xxxvii-xxxix. 13 The Literature of American Local History: First Supplement (New York: R. Craighead, I848).
130 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY two years later, he struck off only thirty copies, sending them to the persons who ha(l acknowledged the earlier work. Another one of the many intellectual interests of Ludewig was the study of ethnology, particularly in the field of comparative philology. For years he col- lected material on the history of lan- guage. Of especial interest to him was the linguistics of the aborigines of North America. After some ten years of re- search in this area, Ludewig compiled a bibliography entitled The Literature of American Aboriginal Languages'4 which he intended to make the first part of a more extended study on the history of language. The bibliography, while in manuscript form, was first deposited by its compiler in the library of the Ameri- can Ethnological Society of New York. At the request of Nicolas Trnbner, a prominent English philologist and bibli- ographer and also a publisher of no small repute, Ludewig turned the manuscript over to him for publica- tion, and it was published posthumously under Trubner's editorship. The Litera- ture of American Aboriginal Languages contains references to over five hundred languages and dialects used by about nine hundred tribes.'s Sabin describes the work in these words: "As a monument of linguistic industry it is scarcely ex- celled."'6 For several decades it remained the principal bibliographical source on the subject. So much for Ludewig the bibliogra- pher; now a few concluding remarks about Ludewig the man. When Ludewig returned from his tour of the United States in I845, he made Brooklyn, New York, his permanent residence. Without unnecessary delay he applied for Ameri- can citizenship and became naturalized in due course. With equal dispatch he also applied for admission to the New York Bar, where before long he gained the respect and admiration of jurist and layman alike. But, as was the case in Dresden, the practice of law did not in- terfere with his many leisure-time ac- tivities, which he continued to pursue with avidity. His private library of some fourteen hundred volumes"7 provided him with the tools for carrying on his in- dependent studies. He contributed nu- merous papers to the learned societies of America as well as of Europe."8 In addi- tion, he was secretary of the American Ethnological Society of New York. He was elected a member of the New York, Georgia, New Hampshire, and Iowa his- torical societies; he was a corresponding member of the New England Historic Genealogical Society, and a leading spirit in the German Emigrant Society. He corresponded with several editors in Germany, furnishing them with informa- tion about America. Late in i856, how- ever, his career came to an abrupt end. He met with sudden death on December I2, at the early age of forty-seven. What position does Ludewig hold in the field of American bibliography? From the standpoint of professional bibliography Winsor considered him as "one of the earliest workers in the new spirit."'9 The following estimate of Lude- This work related only to New York and was also published in the Literary World, III (I848), 46-So. I London: Trubner & Co., i858. is J. Sabin, A Dictionary of Books Relating to America (New York: J. Sabin & Sons, 1878), X, 532. '6Ibid. I 7Upon Ludewig's death a sales catalog of his private library was issued under the title Bibliotheca bibliographia (New York, I858). Although several copies are extant, the writer was unable to consult any of them. i8 Ludewig's nonbibliographical writings are not included in this paper. I9Op. cit., P.
HERMANN ERNST LUDEWIG, 1809-56 wig by a contemporary is, perhaps, rep- resentative of the man and his work: Among the losses in the literary circle of this country that of Hermann Ermst Ludewig will long be felt. He had a mind capable of accom- plishing what few are able to perform. In esti- mating the amount of his labors, it should be remembered that his works were not written in his own language, and that he had to overcome obstacles with which a native does not have to contend. He was benevolent without ostenta- tion, and felt happy in the performance of labors that he was conscious would result in good to the world. But death is no respecter of talents, nor of moral worth; and in the midst of his usefulness and the fulness of his powers this brilliant scholar has been torn away. Yet his life has not been fruitless, and his name will be cherished hereafter as that of a true benefactor of his race.20 Ludewig's contribution to bibliography, it may be fairly concluded, lies not so much in the intrinsic merit of the bibli- ographies which he prepared, though they are useful to this day, as in the fact that he was the first to have compiled them. Most of them at the present time have been superseded by more volumi- nous works. But Hermann Ludewig was a pioneer-a trail-blazer-and therein lies his significance. 20 Editorial, Historical Magazine, p. 34.