Improving the Leadership Skills of Pre-Service School Librarians Through Leadership Pre-Assessment Daniella Smith, Ph.D. Assistant Professor , Department of Library and Information & Library Sciences , College of Information, The University of North Texas , 1 155 Union Circle 31 1068, Denton , Texas 76203-501 7, Email: Daniella.Smith@unt.edu School librarian guidelines encourage active leadership in schools. Two ways school librarian educators can encourage school librarians to be leaders are to embed the standards into the certification curriculum and to assess the leadership potential of pre- service school librarians in order to adapt the curriculum to their needs. This mixed- method study examines how a pre-assessment of leadership potential was implemented in a school librarianship certification program that emphasized leadership skills. The results of the study indicate that the leadership pre-assessment implemented during the program application process effectively identified teacher leaders with the potential to be exceptional school librarians. This signifies that leadership pre-assessments can enable school librarian educators to help pre-service school librarians to improve their leadership skills. Keywords: mixed method, survey, school librarians, LIS education, leadership develop- ment Introduction School fessional librarians guidelines are called to exhibit upon by leader- pro- fessional guidelines to exhibit leader- ship behaviors. However, recent budget cuts within the educational system make it increasingly necessary for school library degree and certification programs to teach school librarians how to advocate for their positions and to provide programs that clearly impact student achievement. The Project LEAD degree program, described in this study, was specifically designed to serve this function. Based on the foundations of the Nation- al Board for Professional Teaching Stan- dards (NBPTS) to promote excellence and leadership (NBPTS, 2013), the Institute of Library and Museum Services (IMLS) funded a program offering full master's degree scholarships to teachers in the state of Florida who were pursuing an Ameri- can Library Association (ALA) accredited degree in librarianship and school librari- anship certification. Thirty participants were recruited from six Florida counties. Because the program emphasized leader- ship preparation and the development of a model for helping teachers transition from the classroom to the library, the program directors (two university professors) re- quired applicants to be current classroom teachers who were also leaders. The teacher-leaders selected to partici- pate in the program completed a rigorous application process that included a leader- ship pre-assessment. The program direc- tors designed the leadership pre-assess- ment with the assistance of an advisory board consisting of school librarianship leadership experts. These experts reviewed the pre-assessment prior to its distribution to program applicants. Suggestions made by the advisory board were incorporated into the pre-assessment. Potential students began the applica- vi of Education for Library and Information Science, Vol. 55, No. 1 - (Winter) January 2014 ISSN: 0748-5786 © 2013 Association for Library and Information Science Education 55
56 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE tion process by obtaining a recommen- dation from their principals in the form of a rubric. The rubric (Danielson, 2007) is widely accepted by school districts for providing professional development and evaluating teachers (Alvarez & Ander- son-Ketchmark, 201 1). The rubric is also endorsed by the ASCD (formerly the As- sociation for Supervision and Curriculum Development) and is included in the or- ganization's Teacher Effectiveness Suite (ASCD, 2013). The categories on the ru- bric reflect teacher-leadership domains pertaining to the classroom environment, lesson planning and preparation, and pro- fessional responsibilities. Next, the prospective students who se- cured recommendations from their princi- pals were invited to complete a scholarship application consisting of questions regard- ing their previous degrees, use of technol- ogy, reasons for applying to the program, beliefs about teaching reading, and col- laborative activities with school librarians. In addition to the scholarship application, each prospective student was required to submit transcripts, GRE scores, a univer- sity graduate admissions application, and a degree program application. Students who were unable to meet the university graduate school admission and the degree program admission requirements were excused from the scholarship application process. The remaining students were des- ignated as finalists. These finalists com- pleted an essay detailing their perspectives on the leadership role of school librarians. The project directors, with the assistance of school librarian supervisors from the school districts, assessed the leadership essays using Loertscher's (2000) taxono- my for scoring. When all of the application materials were submitted, the program directors as- sessed the leadership potential of each fi- nalist by combining several scores. (See Table 1 .) These scores included: the rubric completed by the principals, grade point averages, answers to the application ques- tions, and the leadership essays. Points were also given to achieve a diverse group according to gender, race, age, ethnicity, and subject taught. The total of the pos- sible points was 100. The program par- ticipants were selected from the applicants with the highest scores. Literature Review Leadership in School Librarianship Standards Standards have been developed to guide the professional practice of school librari- ans. The Information Power guidelines for school library programs (AASL & Asso- ciation for Educational Communications and Technology, 1998) presented the first set of standards that specifically described the leadership role of school librarians. These guidelines encouraged school li- brarians to be vocal advocates for library programming, technology integration, and instructional partnerships with teachers. The viewpoints articulated in Infor- mation Power were updated and school librarians were presented with Empower- ing Learners : Guidelines for School Li- brary Media Programs (AASL, 2009). Empowering Learners further defined the leadership role of the school librarian, "As interactive technology has come to perme- ate every aspect of daily life; leading busi- nesses and organizations have changed the way they work in order to thrive . . . SLMSs must lead this revolution to make room for new models of teaching, learn- ing, and organization to prepare learners" (AASL, 2009, p. 46). Accordingly, these standards assert that school librarians should be visible leaders who model vari- ous leadership behaviors. These behaviors include being among the first educators in schools to demonstrate technology, partic- ipating on school committees, providing input in the development of school cur- ricula and reforms, offering professional development, collaborating with other teachers, and utilizing research to engage in evidence-based practice.
Improving the Leadership Skills of Pre-Service School Librarians 57 Table 1 . Leadership Pre-Assessment Criteria. Principal Rubric 42 Points • Domain 1: Planning and Preparation - Designing coherent instruction • Domain 2: The classroom environment - Creating an environment of respect and report - Establishing a culture for learning • Domain 3: Instruction - Using Questioning and discussion techniques - Engaging students in learning - Providing feedback to students - Demonstrating flexibility and responsiveness • Domain 4: Professional responsibilities - Reflecting on teaching - Maintaining accurate records - Communicating with families - Contributing to the school and district - Growing and developing professionally Leadership Questions 30 Points • Technology integration behaviors • Motivation for becoming a school librarian • Teaching reading • Prior collaboration with school librarians • Examples of teacher leadership • The leadership role of school librarians CPA 20 Points • 3.0-3.1 9= 5 points • 3.20-3.49= 10 points • 3.50-3.79= 1 5 points • 3.80^1.0= 20 points Diversity 8 Points • Age = 2 points • Gender = 2 points • Ethnicity = 2 points • STEM Subject Taught= 2 points In addition to Empowering Learners , the ALA in conjunction with the AASL revised the Standards for Initial Prepa- ration of School Librarians in 2010. The guidelines, which were approved by the National Council for Accreditation of Teacher Education, consist of five stan- dards. The fourth standard is Advocacy and Leadership. This standard implores school librarians to demonstrate a com- mitment to the profession, become life- long learners, establish networks to share resources, articulate and implement their roles in effecting student achievement,
58 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE and use evidence-based practice to effect school reform (ALA & AASL, 2010). Another organization that has been in- strumental in guiding the leadership prac- tices of school librarians is the NBPTS. The NBPTS' (2013, J 6) fifth core prop- osition states that educators should be, "leaders and actively know how to seek and build partnerships with community groups and businesses". In addition, the standards that the NBPTS has designed specifically for school librarians include a standard that addresses leadership. In this standard, the NBPTS affirms that school librarians should be visionary leaders in the profession and in their schools that model administrative, professional, and instructional leadership. Leadership Development Efforts in the School Librarianship Community In addition to dictating these standards, the school library professional community provides support in implementing the stan- dards. For example, the School Library Journal sponsors a leadership summit each year. Similarly, the ALA created the Emerging Leaders Program. This program is a leadership development initiative that brings together librarians from across the country to network, learn problem-solving skills, and offer the participants opportuni- ties to learn more about the ALA by serv- ing in a leadership position (ALA, 2012). The AASL supports the ALA's Emerg- ing Leaders Program with the Leadership Development Task Force (AASL, 2012). The purpose of this task force is "to investi- gate ways to expand and promote leadership opportunities for AASL members" (AASL, 2012, ļļ 1). In addition to exploring strate- gies to support AASL members through the Emerging Leaders Program, the taskforce's duties include developing strategies to pub- licize leadership opportunities for AASL members, increasing the involvement of AASL members under 35, and increasing the number of AASL members who partici- pate in ALA leadership activities. While the School Library Journal, ALA, and AASL engage in leadership de- velopment by offering professional devel- opment, the I M LS has emerged as a ma- jor source of federal funding for libraries. This funding provides support for school librarian leadership development through grant opportunities. The programs that are funded by I M LS sustain the growth of leadership skills in school librarians through opportunities such as master's de- gree programs, doctoral degree programs, and research (IMLS, 2012). There is still a tenuous relationship be- tween research, professional practice, and library science education. This relation- ship exists despite the emphasis that has been placed on leadership in the guide- lines, professional development activities, and funding opportunities. Everhart and Dresang (2007) acknowledged this void by conducting a study to assess the needs of school librarians who participated in the NBPTS certification process. The re- sults indicated that universities needed to develop more courses that place emphasis on the leadership role of school librarians. The degree program that is the subject of this study emerged as a result of Everhart and Dresang's research. When it was de- veloped, it was one of the only program in the United States that addressed leadership for school librarians through a research- based curriculum. The Leadership Debate While the school librarianship commu- nity endeavors to teach school librarians how to be effective leaders, there is an ongoing debate about whether leadership is learned or innate. There are those who argue that some people are predisposed to be leaders. In describing leadership, Burns ( 1 995) provided several examples of lead- ers who seemed to innately possess lead- ership qualities. There is little research to explain the phenomenon. On the contrary, there is ample research providing evidence that leadership skills can be learned (Co-
Improving the Leadership Skills of Pre-Service School Librarians 59 peland & Chance, 1996; Feidler, 2001; Kouzes & Posner, 2007). Bennis and Nanus (2003) assert that learning new concepts is a survival mechanism that facilitates the creation of new ideas and enables leaders to adapt to change. Moreover, it has been found that the ability to learn (Brown & Posner, 2001), as well as the possession of skill- ful learning strategies (Trautmann, Mäher, & Motley, 2007), is highly correlated with leadership behaviors. Respondents who showed high performance on a learning inventory also demonstrated a remarkable number of transformational leadership be- haviors (Brown & Posner, 2001). Transformational Leadership In addition to the ability to easily learn new skills, another characteristic that is valuable for leaders is the ability to learn from previous experiences (Brown & Pos- ner, 2001; Trautmann et al., 2007). This trait is also considered to be an indicator of transformational leadership because transformational leaders are people who evolve with the situations present within their organizations. They are able to learn from existing conditions to make changes that benefit an entire organization. Trans- formational leadership can be defined as a leadership approach that builds on the concept that leaders may bring about or guide change within an organization by engaging in unselfish behavior (Bass & Bass 2008; Burns 2003). Thus, transfor- mational leaders are agents of change who benefit from their ability to challenge their own preconceived conceptions of their en- vironment (Trautmann et al.). Transformational leadership, the theo- retical foundation of this study, is desig- nated as an effective form of leadership in schools because of the need for educa- tional reforms (Griffith, 2004). Coinciding with the meaning of transformational lead- ership, (Bass & Bass, 2008; Burns, 2003), the Project LEAD program aimed to pre- pare participants to be transformational leaders. The standards embedded within the curriculum note that school librarians can be leaders within schools (NBPTS, 2013). Therefore the students were taught several transformational leadership behav- iors and completed multiple activities that encouraged them to become change agents through collaborating, creating shared vi- sions and missions, using technology for school reform, being role models for out- standing leadership practices, and teach- ing information literacy skills to improve their school communities. Training in transformational leadership components such as those taught in Project LEAD and the assessment of leadership is important because research indicates that school librarians are not always perceived to be leaders by teachers (McCracken 2001), principals (Edwards 1989), or even school librarians themselves (Ishizuka, Minkel, & Lifer 2002; McCracken 2001). School librarians have the advantage of interacting with students, parents, classes, teachers, and community members. The combination of interaction and the use of transformational leadership behaviors have the potential to empower school li- brarians to become change agents without being formally appointed as leaders. Methodology Statement of the Purpose and Research Questions As previously discussed, the partici- pants of this study participated in the Project LEAD program that was de- signed based on the NBPTS standards. The program incorporated training for transformational leadership behaviors. Acceptance into the program required the participants to complete a leadership pre- assessment. Upon the completion of the program, the participants were asked to comment on their experience with the program and to share their opinions on their lead- ership skills. This study was designed to
60 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE determine the effectiveness of the leader- ship pre-assessment that the participants completed before starting the program. The researcher also sought to determine if the participants learned transforma- tional leadership behaviors during the program. The examination of the effec- tiveness of the leadership pre-assessment, the participants' transformational leader- ship strengths and weaknesses, and the relationship between the leadership pre- assessment and the participants' self per- ceived transformational leadership skills are important components of establishing the effectiveness of the Project LEAD pro- gram. If school librarians, school librar- ian educators, and school administrators can appraise the leadership strengths and weaknesses of school librarians, at various stages of their careers, the information can be used to help school librarians become successful leaders. The following questions guided the in- vestigation. • RQ 1: To what extent does the leader- ship pre-assessment correlate to the self-perceived transformational leader- ship potential of the program partici- pants? • RQ 2: What does the participants' self- perceived transformational leadership potential reveal about their leadership behavior strengths and weaknesses? The Population Thirty pre-service school librarians par- ticipated in this study. This represents a 1 00% response rate for the entire popula- tion of students that were offered schol- arships and completed an online school librarianship degree program focused on leadership. Each participant was a class- room teacher from one of six school dis- tricts in Florida that entered into a partner- ship with the program directors to fulfill a grant from IMLS to implement the degree program. The participants matriculated through the program as a cohort. Data Collection and Analysis A mixed method design with concur- rent triangulation was implemented for this study. The researcher chose this type of methodology because this study is ex- ploratory in nature and the program lead- ership pre-assessment tool was designed to identify leaders. As such, a purely sta- tistical analysis may not have divulged subtle relationships between the partici- pants' scores. The inclusion of open-ended questions allowed the participants to share their opinions about the skills they learned during the program. Each participant received two paper- based self-administered surveys in the mail. The first data collection instrument was the Leadership Practices Inventory (LPI) which was designed by Kouzes and Posner (2007). The LPI was the ideal in- strument for this study for several reasons. First, it has been shown to be a valid and reliable instrument (Brown & Posner, 2001 ; Fields & Herold, 1997; Harris, Mar- tin, & Agnew, 2004; Hautala, 2005; Ridg- way 2001) and has been used in various educational settings to explore leadership behavior (Joseph, 2009; Koh, 2008; Laf- lin, 2009; Moniz, 2008). Secondly, the LPI was designed specifi- cally to assess transformational leadership behaviors by measuring five dimensions: 1 . Modeling the way: the ability to estab- lish best practices for the treatment of others, create goals for an organization, and to act as a role model. 2. Inspiring a shared vision: the ability to envision a future of an organization and excite others about the vision. 3. Challenging the process: the ability to take risks in order to change the current conditions of an organization. 4. Enabling others to act: the ability to em- power others by promoting trust, mutu- al respect, and teamwork. 5. Encouraging the heart: the ability to recognize, reward, and celebrate the
Improving the Leadership Skills of Pre-Service School Librarians 61 contributions of others in an organiza- tion (Kouzes & Posner, 2007). The second survey contained open- ended and closed-ended questions. It was designed by the researcher to collect infor- mation about what the participants learned during the program. The survey instrument was pre-tested on a group of ten graduate students and reviewed by three university professors with expertise in leadership and survey research methodology. Feedback from the graduate students and professors was used to edit the survey. Each partici- pant was asked to answer two open-ended questions related to what they learned dur- ing the Project LEAD program in each transformational leadership dimension as they were defined by Kouzes and Posner (2007). (See Table 2 for a list of the ques- tions.) In addition to the data collection instru- ments, pre-existing data resources were used to complete the study. For example, the leadership pre-assessment scores from the application process were used. While there were thirty study participants, the project directors were only able to provide twenty-eight of the pre-assessment scores. The scores for two of the pre-assessments were lost. This is reflected in the results for Research Question 1 . Furthermore, the national norm scores reported by Kouzes and Posner (2003) were incorporated into the study. The participants' scores on the LPI were com- pared to the national norm to determine if the scores were similar. The participants' scores on the LPI, the comparison of par- ticipants' scores to the national norms, and the responses to the open-ended questions, were used to answer Research Question 2. All statistical analysis was conducted using the software SPSS. A Spearman cor- relation coefficient was computed to assess the relationship between the respondents' leadership pre-assessment scores and the LPI total score and the LPI subscale scores for Research Question 1. Research Ques- tion 2 was analyzed in two ways. First, the software Nvivo was used to code data from the open-ended questions into themes. Next, a t-test was employed to examine the difference between the study popula- tion's LPI mean scores and the national population norms reported by Kouzes and Posner (2003). Findings Research Question 1 The first significant finding is a correla- tion between the leadership pre-assessment scores and the LPI subscale for Enabling Others to Act, rs = .446, n = 28, p = .017. This was revealed through an analysis of the pre-assessment's relationship to the LPI total score and LPI subscale scores. A correlation was not found between the LPI total scores and the pre-assessment scores or the pre-assessment scores and the re- maining subscales. One reason why the leadership pre- assessment had a correlation with the En- abling Others to Act subscale could be that successful teachers are adept at helping others use their strengths to achieve goals and learn strategies for improving their weaknesses. For example, York-Barr and Duke (2004) assert that "[t]eacher leader- ship reflects teacher agency through estab- lishing relationships, breaking down barri- ers, and marshaling resources throughout the organization in an effort to improve students' educational experiences and outcomes" (p. 264). Moreover, Crowther, Ferguson, and Hann (2008) describe teach- er-leaders as educators who can improve schools by forming collaborative networks between schools and communities. Hence, teacher-leaders are adept at enabling oth- ers to succeed in their endeavors. Research Question 2 The maximum amount of points for each LPI subscale is 60. The participants' average scores on the LPI subscales are as follows: Modeling the Way (50.30), In-
62 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE Table 2. Open-ended Leadership Skill Questions. Leadership Dimension Question 1 Question 2 Question 3 Modeling the Way Have you learned Have you learned any Have you learned any any new techniques new techniques and techniques and strategies and strategies during strategies during Project during Project LEAD that Project LEAD that have LEAD that have helped have helped you to model helped you to demon- you to be a mentor to high ethical standards? If so, strate to others how to other teachers? If so, please describe them, achieve goals? If so, please describe them, please describe them. Challenging the Process Have you taken more Have you learned any Have you learned any risks within your new techniques and special techniques and school because of Proj- strategies during Project strategies during Project ect LEAD? If so, please LEAD that have helped LEAD that have helped you describe them. you to discover innova- to share future trends that tive ways to improve will influence how work your school? Is so, gets done at your school? If please describe them. so, please describe them. Enabling Others to Act Have you learned Have you learned any Have you learned any new any new techniques new techniques and techniques and strategies and strategies during strategies during Project during Project LEAD that Project LEAD that have LEAD that have helped have helped you to pro- helped you to work you to empower the mote diversity? If so, please in team environment? people around you? describe them. If so, please describe If so, please describe them. them. Encouraging the Heart Have you learned Have you learned any Have you learned any new any new techniques new techniques and techniques and strate- and strategies during strategies during Project gies during Project LEAD Project LEAD that have LEAD that have helped that have helped you to helped you create har- you acknowledge the celebrate working with your monious environments accomplishments of peers? If so, please describe within your school? others? If so, please them. If so, please describe describe them, them. Inspiring a Shared Have you learned Have you learned any Have you learned any Vision any new techniques new techniques and special techniques and and strategies during strategies during Project strategies during the Project Project LEAD that have LEAD that have helped LEAD program that have helped you to share you to shape the culture helped you to promote future possibilities for within your school? your school community's your school? If so, If so, please describe shared vision of teaching please describe them. them. and learning that supports academic achievement? If so, please describe them. spiring a Shared Vision (44.13), Challeng- ing the Process (46.83), Enabling Others to Act (5 1 .77), and Encouraging the Heart (49.29). (See Figure 1). The range in the scores suggests that the behaviors Enabling Others to Act, Encouraging the Heart, and Modeling the Way were strengths for the participants. Their scores on the Challeng-
Improving the Leadership Skills of Pre-Service School Librarians 63 Figure 1. Average Scores on the LPI Subscales. ing the Process and Inspiring a Shared Vi- sion subscales signify that these leadership behaviors were more difficult for the par- ticipants to grasp. It is possible that the scores on the Chal- lenging the Process and Inspiring a Shared Vision subscales are lower because this research reflects a time in educational re- form when teachers feel disenfranchised. For example, the Florida legislature re- cently passed the Student Success Act (Florida Department of Education, 201 1). This act links teacher compensation and retention to student achievement on stan- dardized tests. In a follow-up conversa- tion to this study, the participants noted that they spend a substantial amount of time teaching students how to pass stan- dardized tests, such as the Florida Com- prehensive Assessment Test (FCAT). This requirement is one that offers little encour- agement for exploring new techniques for teaching students or challenging current school policies. Further examination of the data indi- cated that there were significant differ- ences on two subscales between the study participants' self-perceived leadership practices and the national norms reported by Kouzes and Posner (2003). The pro- gram participants had significantly higher scores on the Modeling the Way subscale, /(47.01) = 3.865, p = 0.001 (two-tailed) and the Enabling Others to Act subscale, /(49.39) = 2.610, p = 0.014 (two-tailed). The participants' responses to the open- ended questions further signified that they learned skills in each of the five leadership dimensions (see Table 3). While the results of Research Question 1 only revealed a correlation between the pre-assessment and the Enabling Others to Act subscale, these results suggest that the leadership pre-assessment was effec- tive. The program directors were able to choose people who, upon the conclusion of the program, matched or exceeded the leadership behaviors reported for the na- tional norms. This is encouraging because the directors were able to create a process that can be used as a foundation for future pre-service school librarian leadership pre-assessments. They were also able to develop a program that enabled the par- ticipants to learn transformational leader- ship skills. Bennis and Nanus (2003) suggest that teaching these skills increases a leader's ability to survive by adapting to change. The participants of this study were teach- Inspiring a Shared Vision WKÊÊÊÊÊÊÊÊÊÊÍÊÊÊÊÊÊÊÊÊÊÊÊÊm ' ¡ ' r í Challenging the Process Encouraging the Heart Modeling the Way Enabling Others to Act 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 National Norm ■ Project LEAD
64 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE Table 3. Skills Learned in the Transformational Leadership Dimensions. Leadership Dimension Skill Learned Modeling the Way • Collaborating • Using Technology • Sharing Knowledge • Using Research • Promoting Diversity • Modeling • Mentoring • Self-Educating Challenging the Process • Collaborating • Using Technology • Sharing Knowledge • Using Research • Seeking New Perspectives • Networking • Volunteering Enabling Others to Act • Collaborating • Sharing Knowledge • Promoting Diversity • Seeking New Perspectives • Networking • Leading • Mentoring • Risk-taking Encouraging the Heart • Collaborating • Using Technology • Modeling • Networking • Recognizing and Celebrating Others Inspiring a Shared Vision • Collaborating • Using Technology • Sharing Knowledge • Using Research • Promoting Diversity • Modeling • Involving Stakeholders • Promoting the Big Picture er-leaders who were currently working in the classroom. They were learning to transition from teachers who are leaders to school librarians who lead. While the participants were currently working in the classroom, the school library is a nontra- ditional learning environment because school librarians are also educators who must teach 21st century skills the same way other educators do, only they do so in a school library environment. Because school librarians have an impact on the entire school, it is essential for them to flourish as leaders during their transition from teachers to school librarians who are integral assets to school communities.
Improving the Leadership Skills of Pre-Service School Librarians 65 Recommendations The Recruitment of Pre-Service School Librarians It is often perceived that the role of school librarians is limited to activities such as providing reference services and checking out books (Alexander, Smith, & Carey, 2003; Hartzell, 2002). The ap- plicants were all chosen because their re- sponses to the pre-assessment indicated that they understood the importance of the role of school librarians in schools and had the aptitude to fulfill these roles in an ex- ceptional manner. From this, it can be as- serted that the pre-assessment achieved its purpose because the participants were all current teachers who answered the ques- tions based on their personal experiences and perceptions. The questions on the pre-assessment were designed to identify teacher-leaders who wanted to be school librarians who are leaders. It is feasible that the applicants' current positions as teachers influenced their responses be- cause the program directors were able to identify a process appropriate for distin- guishing candidates with strong leadership potential. This can be concluded because the participants' high scores on the LPI and the positive relationship that the lead- ership pre-assessment had with the En- abling Others to Act LP1 subscale signify that teachers with strong leadership poten- tial were chosen. This study shows that leadership pre- assessments for school librarians can be instrumental in helping school librarian- ship faculty, school library administra- tors, and principals identify the motives of students who are entering the field. This is important because experienced teach- ers often gravitate to school librarianship as a way to leave the classroom (Ever- hart, 2002). Yet, it is important to recruit teacher-leaders who want to move beyond the perception that school librarians have limited responsibilities. Each individual who seeks to be a school librarian should be aware of the professional guidelines and the important roles that school librar- ians have before they choose to enter the profession. Counseling prospective school librarians can increase the quality of edu- cation offered to students. Teaching School Librarians to be Leaders One cannot ignore the effect of the leadership instruction that the participants received during the program. The skills that the participants stated they acquired, as shown in Table 3 coincide with the as- sertions of numerous researchers that state that leadership skills can be learned (Co- peland & Chance, 1996; Feidler, 2001; Kouzes & Posner, 2007). These findings support the notion that some leadership skills may be innate (Burns, 1995). How- ever, instruction can improve them. According to Glickman, Gordon, and Ross-Gordon (1995), teachers are con- servative professionals. Because of this, several advocates have promoted teaching risk-taking skills to teachers in order for them to spark instructional reform (Lein- wand, 1992). While the overall scores of the participants on the total LPI and its subscales were high, a closer look at the average LPI subscale scores indicated that there were some weak areas in the scores of the participants. These weak areas were the Challenging the Process and Inspiring a Shared Vision subscales. Risk-taking is a part of the Challenging the Process sub- scale. Developing and promoting a shared vision can be part of a risk-taking behavior for an educator who may not want to ap- pear to counteract school norms. The results of this study imply that it would be helpful to teach school librar- ians how to cope with change, take risks, and ways to promote shared visions. It is essential for school librarians to acquire these skills because school librarians in- teract with the entire school community in highly visible instructional settings that affect student achievement. School librar-
66 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE ians need to make a difference in their school communities by promoting their vision for the programs they offer and tak- ing risks to explore new instructional tech- niques. Improving the Assessment The School Library Journal, ALA, and AASL help pre-service and current librar- ians improve their leadership skills by offering them professional development. The Project LEAD directors introduced another option by creating a research- based curriculum that also addressed pro- fessional practice. The instruction offered to the study participants was important because teaching experience may not pro- vide aspiring school librarians with trans- formational leadership experiences. As shown in the results of this study, even ad- ept teacher-leaders need to be introduced to transformational leadership skills that support the roles of school librarians. By examining Table 3, one can deduce that pre-service school librarians can be taught transformational leadership behaviors that are consistent with the NBPTS (2013) standards, Empowering Learners (AASL, 2009) and the Standards for Initial Prep- aration of School Librarians (ALA & AASL, 2010). One way to ensure that pre-service school librarians understand the standards is to offer them pre-assessments during their degree programs. The results sig- nify that the pre-assessment of leadership potential and instruction was effective. However, making a few changes to the pre-assessment could have provided better evidence of the pre-assessment and pro- gram success. For example, the pre-assessment was developed without consideration for how it could have been used after the students completed the degree program. In hind- sight, it would have been useful to have the participants submit another principal rubric and answer the questions on the pre- assessment again. This post-assessment could have been used to determine how the participants' viewpoints about school librarianship changed during the program. Moreover, the principals would have been able to provide input about the partici- pants' leadership development. Another change that could have been made to improve the pre-assessment was to include a tool, such as the LP1, to mea- sure transformational leadership traits. Kouzes and Posner (2007) developed a leadership workbook for facilitating trans- formational leadership skill improvement. Pre-service school librarians, as well as veteran school librarians returning for re- fresher courses, should be encouraged to complete the workbook. The LPI could then provide them with feedback from an easy to administer, reliable, and valid tool. Taking a few minutes to assess leadership before and after a school librarianship pro- gram of study could potentially mean the difference between school librarians who think they understand leadership and those who know how to build upon their lead- ership strengths and improve their weak- nesses. Conclusion This study was limited to thirty pre- service school librarians. Although the number of respondents was small, the results encompass the entire population of a unique group of teacher-leaders who were educated to become school librarian leaders. The admissions process, which included a leadership pre-assessment, was also unique. Although the results may not be generalizable to the overall popu- lation of school librarianship students in the United States, they have implications for the recruitment and training of school librarians. Based on the results, it can be concluded that counseling pre-service school librarians throughout their degree programs based on leadership pre-assess- ments can prepare them to be the resilient change agents who are depicted in school librarianship professional standards.
Improving the Leadership Skills of Pre-Service School Librarians 67 References Alexander, L. B., Smith, R. C. & Carey, J. O. (2003). Education reform and the school library media specialist: Perceptions of principals. Knowledge Quest, 32( 2), 10-13. Alvarez, M. E. & Anderson-Ketchmark, C. (201 1). Danielson's framework for teaching. Children & Schools , 35(1), 61-63. American Association of School Librarians. (2009). Empowering learners: Guidelines for school li- brary media programs. Chicago, IL: American Association of School Librarians. American Association of School Librarians. (2012) Leadership task force. Retrieved from http:// www.ala.org/aasl/aboutaasl/aaslgovernance/aasl- committees/leadershipdev American Library Association (2009). ALA emerg- ing leaders program. Retrieved from http:// www.ala.org/ala/aboutala/offices/hrdr/abouthrdr/ emergingleaders.cfm American Library Association & American As- sociation of School Librarians. (2010). ALA/ AASL standards for initial preparation of school librarians. Retrieved from http://www.ala.org/ aasl/sites/ala.org.aasl/files/content/aasleducation/ schoollibrary/2010_standards_with_rubrics_ andstatementsl -3 1-11 .pdf American Association of School Librarians & As- sociation for Educational Communications and Technology. (1998). Information power: Build- ing partnerships for learning. Chicago, IL: American Library Association. ASCD. (2013). The Charlotte Danielson library of professional development resources. Retrieved from http://www.ascd.org/professional-develop- ment/teacher-effectiveness-suite.aspx Bass, B. M., & Bass, R. (2008). The Bass handbook of leadership: Theory , research , and managerial applications. New York, NY: Free Press. Bennis, W. G., & Nanus, B. (2003). Leaders: Strat- egies for taking charge. New York, NY: Harper Business Essentials. Brown, L., & Posner, B. (2001). Exploring the re- lationship between learning and leadership. The Leadership & Organization Development Jour- nal, 22(6), 274-280. Burns, J.M. (1995). Transactional and transforming leadership. In J.T. Wren (Ed.), The leader's com- panion: Insights on leadership through the ages (pp. 100-101). New York, NY: Free Press. Burns, J. M. (2003). Transforming leadership: A new pursuit of happiness. New York, NY: Atlan- tic Monthly Press. Copeland, M. & Chance, E. (1996). Successful rural superintendents: a case study of four long term superintendents. Rural Educator, I8( 1), 24-28. Crowther, F., M. Ferguson, & L. Hann. 2008. De- veloping teacher leaders: How teacher leader- ship enhances school success. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin. Danielson, C. (2007). Enhancing professional prac- tice: A framework for teaching. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum De- velopment. Edwards, K. (1989). Principals' perceptions of li- brarians: A survey. School Library Journal. 55(5), 28-31. Everhart, N. (2002). Filling the void. School Li- brary Journal, 48(6), 44-49. Everhart, N., & Dresang, E. T. (2007). Integrating research results and National Board Certification standards into a leadership curriculum for school library media specialists. Journal of Education for Library & Information Science, 48(4), 271- 283. Fields, D. L., & Herold, D.M. (1997). Using the leadership practices inventory to measure trans- formational and transactional leadership. Educa- tional and Psychological Measurement, 57(4), 569-579. . doi: 10.1 177/0013164497057004003 Florida Department of Education. (2011). Student success act. Retrieved from http://www.Agov. com/wp-content/uploads/201 1/03/03.24.201 1- Student-Success-Act-SB736.pdf Glickman, C. D., Gordon, S. P., & Ross-Gordon, J. M. (1995). Supervision of instruction: A develop- mental approach. Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon. Griffith, J. (2004). Relation of principal transforma- tional leadership to school staff job satisfaction, staff turnover, and school performance. Journal of Educational Administration, 42( 3), 333-356. Harris, J., Martin, B. N., & Agnew, W. (2004). The characteristics, behaviors, and training of effec- tive educational/leadership department chairs. Retrieved from http://ucea.org/storage/conven- tion/convention2004/proceedings/04uceal 1 .pdf Hartzell, G. (2002).The principal's perceptions of school libraries and teacher-librarians. School Li- braries Worldwide, 5(1), 92-1 10. Hautala, T. (2005). The effects of subordinates' per- sonality on appraisals of transformational leader- ship. Journal of Leadership and Organizational Studies, 1 1( 4), 84-92. Ishizuka, K., Minkel, W., & St. Lifer, E. (2002). Biggest challenges for 2002. School Library Journal, 48( 1), 50-53. Institute of Museum and Library Services. (2012). About us. Retrieved from http://www.imls.gov/ Joseph, S. (2009). A comprehensive evaluation of a school system's grow your own principal prepa- ration program. (Doctoral dissertation). Avail- able from ProQuest Dissertations and Theses database. (UMI No. 3344418) Koh, S. E. (2008). Leadership and management skills of preservice teachers. (Doctoral disserta-
68 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE tion). Available from ProQuest Dissertations and Theses database. (UMI No. 3308408) Kouzes, J.M. & Posner, B.Z. (2003). New norms for the Leadership Practices Inventory (LPI), 3rd edition. Retrieved from http://media.wiley.com/ assets/463/75/lc Jb_norms2003.pdf Kouzes, J. M., & Posner, B. Z. (2007). The leader- ship challenge. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. Laflin, E. (2009). Self-perceived leadership behav- iors of students enrolled in graduate teacher edu- cation. (Doctoral dissertation). Available from ProQuest Dissertations and Theses database. (UMI No. 3344250) Leinwand, S.J. (1992). Sharing, supporting, risk taking: First steps to instruction. The Mathemat- ics Teacher , 85(6), 466-470. Loertscher, D. V. (2000). Taxonomies of the school library media program. San Jose, CA: Hi Willow Research & Publishing. McCracken, A. (2001). School library media spe- cialists ' perceptions of practice and importance of roles described in " Information Power ". Re- trieved from http://www.ala.org/aasl/aaslpub- sandjournals/slmrb/slmrcontents/volume4200 1 / mccracken Moniz, D. C. (2008). Leadership development: The relationship between successful mentoring re- lationships and exemplary leadership practices among women proteges within the United States Navy. (Doctoral dissertation). Available from ProQuest Dissertations and Theses database. (UMI No. 3336834) National Board for Professional Teaching Stan- dards. (2013). The five core propositions. Re- trieved from http://www.nbpts.org/the_stan- dards/the_five_core_propositio Ridgway, K. (2001). Leadership practices, cultural values, and organizational performance. Perfor- mance Improvement Quarterly, 14( 1), 77-95. doi: 10.1 1 1 1 /j. 1 937-8327.200 1 .tb00202.x Trautmann, K., Mäher, J.K., & Motley, D. G. (2007). Learning strategies as predictors of trans- formational leadership: the case of nonprofit managers. Leadership & Organization Devel- opment Journal, 28( 3), 269-287. http://dx.doi. org/10.1 108/01437730710739675 York-Barr, J., & K. Duke. (2004). What do we know about teacher leadership? Findings from two decades of scholarship. Review of Educa- tional Research 74(3), 255-316.