EARLY PRINTING AND THE BOOK TRADE IN THE WEST INDIES' Roderick Cave This paper considers developments in printing prior to 1865 in the British colonies in the Caribbean plus those Dutch, Danish, French, and Swedish colonial possessions which were influenced by the British islands. The reasons for the establishment of presses in these West Indian colonies are examined. Official printing, newspapers, periodicals, and ephemera formed the mainstay of the West Indian printer's business. Though there was some literary publication at the end of the eighteenth century, accompanied by the start of subscription libraries, the decline of the planter class and the weakening of the sugar colonies' economic position prevented indigenous publishing from developing success- fully. At the time of the independence of the not far distant American colonies, the West Indian islands were established and rich colonies, in several of which printing had long been exercised. Kingston, Jamaica, was preceded only by Boston in the publication of a regular weekly newspaper. Barbados had printing before South Carolina, Antigua and St. Christopher (better known as St. Kitts) before North Carolina and New Jersey [1, pp'. 59-60]. Although by the time the thirteen American colonies became independent printing had not been introduced into all the West Indian islands - and was not to reach some of them for a remarkably long time2 - there were sufficient centers and enough work being produced for us to consider the West Indian printer as distinct from the American colonial printer and to make a study of early printing and the book trade in the Caribbean of some interest. There are, of course, many difficulties in an attempt of this kind. The 1. The research for this paper was in part made possible by a Daniels Fellowship at the American Antiquarian Society, to which my thanks are due as to the other libraries on whose holdings I have drawn. The paper was originally delivered at a meeting of the Liverpool Bibliographical Society in May 1977. 2. Printing was not introduced into the Turks Islands until the mid-1840s or the Dutch island of Aruba until the beginning of this century. In the Cayman Islands there was no press until after World War II. [Library Quarterly, vol. 48, no. 2, pp. 163-192] ? 1978 by The University of Chicago. 0024-2519/78/4802-0003$02.00 163
164 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY geographical limits of the "West Indies" are imprecise, and the patterns of political control constantly changed until the end of the Napoleonic Wars. Bibliographical history is but one minor aspect of cultural history, and one can no more account for printing developments in many of the islands, except against the backdrop of their constant transfer back and forth between France and England, than one could disregard the War of Independence in considering Massachusetts printing in the 1770s. Even for those colonies, like Jamaica and Barbados, which remained securely British, the economic and social effects of the political kaleidoscope had a distinct effect. The "West Indies" in fact is not a unit; each island had its distinctive political and cultural history, just as it had its own racial and religious mix. English administrators in the early nineteenth century often found it extremely difficult to cope with this complexity-that St. Lucia was governed under prerevolutionary French law, Trinidad by Spanish law, or Demerara according to the regulations of the Dutch West India Company. So difficult was it that, in at least one instance, advice had to be sought from the previous colonizing power.3 These local differences had their bibliographical effect, notably in control of the periodical press. A further difficulty in the study of early printing and the book trade in the area arises from the dearth of material on the book trade in the West Indies. With a handful of exceptions- Isaiah Thomas, Douglas McMur- trie, Bradford Swan- historians of typography have ignored it. There have been no regional studies, and the accounts of printing on individual islands have been written in most cases by local historians (often amateur) without special interest in bibliographical niceties and without access to a wide range of material, for the documents printed in the Indies which must form the basis for such accounts are excessively rare. With the exception of a handful of Caribbean libraries with respectable collections of local printing, "West Indiana" is not to be found in the islands at all. Instead, it is in the archives of the colonizing powers and in some of the research libraries of Europe and North America, such as the Royal Library, Stockholm, orJohn Carter Brown or the Bodleian. 4 3. In the mid-1820s, the British Foreign Office had to seek explanation and elucidation from The Hague to clarify the role of the Court of Policy in the government of Demerara [2, pp. 588-89]. Similar problems had been encountered earlier with Spanish law in Trindad by Governors Picton and Hislop [31. 4. Jerome Handler's Guide to Source Materials for the Study of Barbados History, 1627-1834 (Carbondale, Ill.: Southern Illinois University Press, 1971) is the only adequate guide to resources of the kind needed for a definitive study; Lowell Ragatz's seminal Guide for the Study of British Caribbean History, 1763 -1834 (Washington, D.C.: Carnegie Corp., 1932) is fatally flawed for this purpose by the lack of locations for works cited.
PRINTING AND BOOK TRADE IN THE WEST INDIES 165 The present study, limited originally to those West Indian territories which are part of the British Commonwealth, has been extended to include those other Caribbean territories which had a formal British presence or British influence long enough to have bibliographical implications. In fact, this definition let in all the territories of all the other European colonial powers with the exception of Spain. The Spanish colonies' bibliographical history is so different from that of the other powers (Denmark, France, Holland, and Sweden) that it seemed more helpful to leave it out of consideration, save in the case of Trinidad, which was not taken from the Spanish by Britain until 1797. On the other hand, those British, Dutch, and French colonies in Central and South America whose cultural and economic (and bibliographical) ties were with the Caribbean colonies were included. For the purposes of this study, therefore, "West Indies" includes Bermuda, the Bahamas, Belize (British Honduras), and the Guianas but excludes Cuba and Puerto Rico. The cutoff point for the study is 1865. As the date of the Morant Bay rebellion in Jamaica and almost exactly a century and a half from the introduction of printing, it is a particularly appropriate terminal point for the study of that island. For the British islands of the eastern Caribbean, 1876 would have been more meaningful, but for the area as a whole any date is arbitrary. However, the sixties or early seventies were in most cases the nadir of the islands' cultural and economic success and provide a reasonable dividing point between the period in which printing catered to the planter class and that of the emergence of new nationalist movements. In purely typographic terms, also, these decades mark the break between old hand production and the mechanized methods which assumed a more important place in the last third of the nineteenth century. The Early West Indian Book Trade Between the discovery of the West Indies by Columbus in the 1490s and the introduction of printing into the islands, there was a period of over two centuries of European colonization. It was, of course, slow: for nearly a century after Columbus the settlement was limited to the Spanish. But from the early seventeenth century on there was effective settlement by the British, Dutch, and French, and rather later by the Danes. Of course, the pattern of settlement was uneven: St. Vincent remained largely under Carib control until the second half of the eighteenth century, for instance. By 1700, there were substantial num- bers of Englishmen in St. Kitts, Barbados, and Jamaica; of Frenchmen in
166 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Martinique, Guadeloupe, and St. Domingue;5 and of Dutchmen in Curasao and the Guianas. However primitive these early settlers' societies may have been, they had a need for books, which were imported from the mother countries. What books these were (beyond the obvious devotional works) there is litfie surviving evidence to show. The inventory of the Port Royal merchant Thomas Craddock [4], who may have been the first Jamaican bookseller, is the only informative seventeenth-century record that has been traced. By the early eighteenth century, there were facilities for bookbinding in Jamaica [5, pp. 9-10] and no doubt in other islands. In 1702, the British West Indian colonies were placed under the ecclesiastical control of the bishops of London. An inquiry addressed to his clergy by the bishop in 1725 reveals that there had been a good parish library in Port Royal some years earlier. However, the rector, Calvin Galpin, stated in his reply to the bishop that most of the books had been lost before his arrival in July 1721 and the rest since destroyed in a hurricane [6, fols. 215- 161 6 The Anglican church was also responsible for at least one other parish library set up in Jamaica at this time. Records survive which list the "books sent 1st April 1724 wUl Mr. Barrett Missionary to Jamaica towards a Catechetical Library . . . in the Parish to wch he shall be appointed" [6, fols. 175-80]. Barrett was a recent convert from Roman Catholicism, and the books were in part intended to keep him personally steadfast in the Protestant faith, but they were also supposed to be used in catechiz- ing the children of Negro slaves. Whether such titles as Dr. Clarkes Practical Essays on Baptism, . . . BPi Gibson on the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, BP Fleetwoods Reasonable Communicant, [and] ... Mr. Kettlewells Death Made Comfortable or the Way to Dye Well were an ideal selection for this pur- pose is open to question; what is interesting is that at this early period, and through the established church (commonly thought not to be interested in slaves), attempts at religious education were made through libraries of this kind. The Introduction of Printing Before presses were set up in the islands, material of local interest was produced elsewhere, either in the mother country or in the North American colonies. In 1703, for instance, a sermon preached in King- ston by William Corbin on June 7 (the anniversary of the great 5. That is, the French colony in the western part of Hispaniola now known as Haiti. 6. Probably in the great hurricane of August 28, 1722.
PRINTING AND BOOK TRADE IN THE WEST INDIES 167 earthquake which devastated Port Royal in 1692) was printed by William Bradford in New York [5, p. 1]. Similarly, when the Barbados Assembly passed a bill about privateers in 1698, it prayed the governor and council that the bill should be sent to New England to be printed-and printed it was, also by William Bradford in New York [7, p. 191. To use the resources of one colony to fill the needs of another was a commonplace device of the old empire. It was one which was to continue in the West Indies for many years after the introduction of the first presses. Thus, Jamaican printers were employed to print material for the British settlements in the Bay of Honduras [8] and in the Cayman Islands. Antiguan printers supplied the wants of the British Virgin Islands; Nevis was served from St. Kitts. Political changes in the eighteenth century often imposed other temporary patterns of trade in which, for example, French royalist printers in Dominica printed material for circulation in Martinique, or St. Kitts printers moved for safety to the Dutch island of St. Eustatius. Most of such patterns are easily explained in terms of trade or shipping routes or the political and administrative structure. 7 But some intercolonial trade in printing is much harder to under- stand. Why did the Abbe Roland have his Mercure des Antilles, which was intended for circulation in St. Domingue, printed with great trouble in Jamaica [9]? How did the printers of the Bridgetown Ledger in 1887 secure the position of printers to the constabulary in (British) Honduras, almost 2,000 miles distant from Barbados? In some cases, there is no doubt that the tiny local market on any one island was an influential factor, at any rate in the eastern Caribbean. 8 For instance, when in 1795 Henry Thornhill wrote A Narrative of the Insurrection and Rebellion in the island of Grenada immediately after the rebellion was crushed, he was unable to get it printed on the island, as the one local printer had already undertaken publication of Thomas Turner Wise's Review of the events, which happened in Grenada (St. George's, 1795). Even when, in 1797, Thornhill moved to Barbados he found the publisher of the Barbados Mercury equally unwilling. Only when a new printing house set up in business the following year was he able to have "recourse to the proprietor thereof, who was pleased to undertake and print the follow- ing sheets" [8, pp. 29-31]. The circumstances under which printers were introduced to the colonies follow several patterns. 7. Both the Bay settlements and the Caymans came within the area administered by the governors of Jamaica, for example. 8. For distribution of locally printed books, see below, "Publications of the West Indian Printers."
168 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY A government-controlled press, introduced at the wish of the local population and authorities.- In the case of the first press in the Antilles (that of Robert Baldwin in Jamaica, 1718), the council of the island and the governor- designate, Sir Nicolas Lawes, obtained permission from London for the introduction of a press. To persuade the commissioners for trade and plantations, however, Sir Nicolas suggested that "there should be but one, and that licensed to the Govr. for the time being," and for the first year or two each issue of the Weekly Jamaica Courant carried an im- primatur [10, p. 13]. In Belize, the first press was a public press [11]. In the Dutch colony of Demerara, a similar situation obtained for the press of J. C. de la Coste, in support of whose wish to start a paper the Court of Policy applied to the Hague for approval [12, pp. 3-8]. Pressesfor which a privilege had been granted by the metropolitan power. -This was the pattern in the French islands and an unsuccessful one. A brevet d'imprimeur was granted to a bookseller from Metz named Joseph Payen for the "Isles sous le vent" in April 1723. However, when the unfortu- nate printer arrived in St. Domingue, Governor de la Rochelard prevented him from establishing his printing office and had him imprisoned for selling obscene books. On his release, still circumvented by the governor, Payen was unwise enough to print the text of his letters patent at Leogane, with the false statement that it was "par ordre de M. le Chevalier de Rochelard," for which he was again imprisoned. This time he got the message and left for France as soon as released. The next printer did not set up office until 1764 [13, pp. 4-6]. It appears that the authorities in Martinque were no more welcoming than in St. Domin- gue: though a brevet d'imprimeur was granted in 1729, it was not until the 1760s that a printer set up in the island [14, p. 41]. A brevet d'imprimeur for Guadeloupe was granted by Louis XV to Jean Benard in June 1764, and he established himself in Basse Terre the following spring [15, pp. 1, 23-251. In only one instance does metropolitan planning seem to have envisaged sending out a press as a part of first settlement of a new colony-though "planning" may be the wrong word for the crack- brained Scottish schemes in Darien. Nevertheless, William Simpson, printer of Edinburgh, was contracted to perform the printing needed by the Scottish settlers at forty shillings per month, and had the venture succeeded Darien would have been the first Caribbean colony with its own press [16, p. 104]. Presses established as entrepreneurial ventures. -The press set up in Bar- bados by Benjamin Franklin's old colleague David Harry in 1730 and the
PRINTING AND BOOK TRADE IN THE WEST INDIES 169 Antigua press which Franklin set up in 1748 under his employee Thomas Smith (and, after Smith's death, Franklin's own nephew Benja- min Mecom) appear to have been normal business ventures undertaken by shrewd businessmen [7, 17]. Later in the century, J. Stockdale's establishment of a press in Bermuda followed the same commercial instincts [18], while in many instances the establishment of second or subsequent printing houses in a colony came from the expectation (often disappointed) that the local society could support several printers. Presses established as a result of conquest or occupation. - In many instances, English-language papers, issued from presses run by British subjects, rapidly followed the pattern of conquest. Joseph Berrow, in St. Lucia in the early 1780s, and Matthew Gallagher, in Trinidad (from 1799), are instances of the printing trade following the flag. Other British printers were active in Curasao [19, pp. 39-40] and in the Danish Virgin Islands during the British occupation in the Napoleonic Wars. Similarly, there was a press with the British expeditionary force in St. Domingue (1793-98), while during Napoleon's abortive attempts to reconquer the island there was also a French press in the city of Santo Domingo itself. In other instances, after conquest, printers already established in a colony merely trimmed their sails to the wind: George Burnett was imprimeur du roi in Tobago during the French occupation in the late 1780s, while in Guadeloupe, one Ginet was official printer during the British occupation, 1810- 14 [15, pp. 27-301. Presses established as an escapefrom war.-On several islands, printing was introduced as a result of wars elsewhere. Save in Nassau, to which John Wells, printer of the East Florida Gazette, moved (when St. Augustine was evacuated by the British) in 1784, the Loyalists were not responsible for the spread of printing. 9 However, there seems little doubt that the introduction of printing into the Dutch island of St. Eustatius (Statia) in the late 1780s and into the Swedish colony of St. Bartholomew in the early years of the nineteenth century resulted from the unsettled state of the neighboring islands [19, pp. 37-39]. 9. Several Loyalists were of importance in the colonial book trade in Jamaica, however: William Aikman from Annapolis and his brother Alexander Aikman, who had worked in Charleston, S.C., for Robert Wells (father of John Wells of Nassau) and was to become king's printer and a very wealthy man.
170 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Presses established through colonial pride. In Belize, though the first press was publicly owned, its introduction may be taken as an instance of local pride [11, pp. 21-22]. It may possibly have been a misguided entre- preneurial instinct which led Samuel Nelmes to set up shop in Grand Turk in 1845, but the separatist movement which three years later succeeded in having the Turks Islands removed from control of Nassau and made into a separate colony was also influential [20]. As no copies of the Carriacou Observer seem to survive, it is not possible to say why Alexander Murray set up there in the mid-1840s, unless the indepen- dent spirit of the inhabitants of this tiny island in the Grenadines (a chain of islets between St. Vincent and Grenada) was an influential factor: it seems an improbable choice for a purely commercial venture. Presses set up with official support to counter prevailing attitudes. - In several instances, when the editorial tone of an existing colonial paper aroused official displeasure, other printers were invited to set up in competition. Thus in Bermuda, when the printers of the Bermuda Gazette had published some libelous attacks on Governor Hodgson, he invited Edmund Ward from Halifax to become king's printer [18, pp. 5-6]. The recalcitrant attitude of the planters and their newspapers in the period immediately before and after the emancipation of the slaves in 1834 led to the establishment of papers in both Jamaica and Trinidad which propounded the home government's colonial policies [21, vol. 2, pp. 264-67]. Presses set up for special political or religious reasons. In the nineteenth century, as the number of presses increased, some were set up deliber- ately to further the interests of particular groups. In general, the older, established papers reflected the interests of the planters and merchants. In both Jamaica and Barbados, papers of a liberal cast which were aimed at the colored population appeared from the 1830s on. In other cases, Catholic papers were produced. In Guyana, the gold rush of the 1850s led to the production of such special interest papers as the Nugget and the Gold Mining Gazette. In the same colony, the 1870s saw the publica- tion ofA Voz Portugu;ez, A Liberdade, and other Portuguese papers catering to the Madeiran element in the population. Though some unusual features appear in these different categories, no doubt, there is considerable resemblance to the expansion of printing in other parts of the world. It is worth remembering, though, that the West Indies were more dangerous and presented more difficulties to the intending printer than is apparent from this dry account. Losses at sea
PRINTING AND BOOK TRADE IN THE WEST INDIES 171 were not uncommon;'0 earthquakes and hurricanes took a regular toll. In one instance, a printer's adventures had a Hollywood epic quality. Donald McPhee Lee, having gone from Bermuda to Halifax to obtain types for his new paper, the Royal Gazette, reembarked for Bermuda in the sloop Sally Ann in October 1827. The master of the sloop had no chronometer and little knowledge of navigation, and for two months the vessel drifted around the Gulf Stream until provisions had run out and the vessel was dismasted in a storm. A Spanish privateer was persuaded not to blow them out of the water but to replenish their supplies. With Lee navigating the sloop-the captain having gone blind-they made landfall in Bermuda on the seventy-seventh day out. So carefully had Lee guarded his heavy boxes that the crew were convinced they contained gold. One can imagine their surprise when-having carried them ashore through the surf-the boxes were opened to reveal not gold but printing type [22, pp. 204-5]. The Printers What sort of men were the early West Indian printers, and where did they come from? This is an interesting question to which a partial answer is possible. Of particular interest is the role of the Sephardic Jews. Apparently responsible for the first press in Curasaoll and certainly active in early printing in Surinam [24], members of this small group were of great importance in nineteenth-century Jamaica, where the Daily Gleaner-the oldest of West Indian newspapers still appearing remained under the control of the De Cordova family for many years [25]. In many instances, it is possible to identify the printers who came to the islands with some precision. Whether Jamaica's first printer, Robert Baldwin, is to be identified with the Stationers' Company apprentice freed by patrimony on February 6, 1716, is uncertain,'2 but in many instances it is possible to trace the printers' earlier careers, however sketchily. The records preserved in the Jamaica Archives are rich in the 10. For example, Michael Ryan, proprietor of the Barbados Globe and printer to the Assembly, set sail from Newfoundland to Bridgetown in 1828 in a vessel which disappeared without a trace. 11. The inventory of the estate of Jeosuah Guidon Mendes, who died in Curacao in 1797, included a small printing press [231. I am indebted to Eugene S. Richardson, Jr., for this reference. 12. He may have been connected with the Baldwins who were active in the London book trade, but no certain evidence has come to hand.
172 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY wills and inventories of the estates of those in the book trade. One can learn much about many of these men.13 Robert Sherlock, a printer at Spanish Town and the first to exercise the art at Montego Bay, for example, was the son of Robert Sherlock, printer in the Strand, London. He was apprenticed to William [Mc]Faden in 1752 and when he died, in 1779, left an estate of some ?3,000, most of which, apart from provision for his "housekeeper" and bequests to friends, was left to his younger brother Thomas, a printer in London. No detailed study of these records has yet been made,14 but they offer many interesting sidelights on the lives of the Jamaican printers. Most, like Sherlock, had colored mistresses; only the most well-to-do printers seem to have been married to white women, and even then their wills often include bequests to various side children.15 The wills reveal the riches that could be gained by the successful-James Fannin, of Montego Bay, was worth nearly ?12,000 on his death in 1809 and Alexander Aikman some ?13,600 in 1838-and the relative poverty of others like Alexander Davidson, whose work on theJamaica Gazette in 1759 resulted in an estate of no more than ?164 in value.16 These were, of course, master printers. Their employees seldom had estates worth making an inventory; indeed, often the only record of their existence that I have been able to trace is in the obituary columns in the Jamaican press. For a few of the more prosperous Jamaican printers, it is possible to establish family trees which illustrate the ramifications of their business concerns. Alexander Aikman and his son of the same name controlled official printing in Jamaica for many years and operated some successful bookselling and stationery ventures, as well as the prosperous Royal Gazette. Another family, the Lunans, controlled the St. Jago de la Vega Gazette and the Kingston Chronicle and various bookselling concerns for a long period. The Strupars had the Jamaica Courant and other papers under their control for nearly fifty years, from the 1780s onward. For 13. I am indebted to Donald McKenzie for assistance in identifying many West Indian printers in the records of the Stationers' Company. 14. A preliminary list, "A Digest of the Wills and Inventories of Members of the Jamaican Book Trade," has been published in Working Papers on West Indian Pninting, no. 18 (1976). 15. West Indian attitudes to racial origins were ambivalent and different from those in the United States. Most housekeeper/mistresses were described as "mulattoes" or "free women of color" and were apparently free women of mixed blood rather than slaves or of pure African origin. Doubtless some of the white women, like the printers they married, were of mixed blood but were sufficiently high in the social scale for this to be forgotten. 16. Jamaican currency; in sterling, the sums quoted would be reduced by one-third.
PRINTING AND BOOK TRADE IN THE WEST INDIES 173 such families, printing and bookselling were but a part of their activities. All these families owned extensive lands: the Aikmans the properties of Wallenfield, Dunsinane, and Birnamwood, the Strupars the coffee plantation of Bellevue in the Port Royal Mountains. They had made it into the ranks of the plantocracy. It is also possible to reconstruct many details of the lives of such men from secondary sources. Yet only one printer in Jamaica, as far as I can trace, has left a firsthand account of his affairs. A series of autobio- graphical letters written by Curds Brett (1720-84) to his son gives an excellent account of the way in which an industrious and lucky printer could make his fortune in the Caribbean. Apprenticed to a Dublin bookseller/printer who failed in business, he moved to London, where from 1743 to 1748 he worked for William Strahan. In 1748, he was tempted by a gentleman going to Jamaica to join him as a storekeeper and to invest his own small savings in a cargo of goods on his own account. In Jamaica, he set up in partnership with another merchant, lost everything, and was reduced to working as a plantation overseer. His fortunes gradually rose: having become partner in an ironmonger's business in Spanish Town (the Jamaican capital), his background as a printer became known to various members of the assembly who wanted a press set up in that town as a counter to the Kingston press. With support from them, he returned to London (where he arranged the printing of an edition of the Laws of Jamaica by his old master) to purchase equipment and on his return commenced publication of the St. Jago Intelligencer on May 8, 1756. "From that time to this," he observed with some complacency, "I have never. . . been in want of money." He was a capable printer and a hardworking one. Within five years he had amassed a fortune of some ?5,000 and "having had the marrow of the printing business . . . thought it proper to quit and turn merchant" [26, 271. Few other islands have such rich records, and it is particularly hard to gather such detail for them. The earliest printers were often English, sometimes Scots or Irish. By the beginning of the nineteenth century, Scots printers predominated, and the lack of centralized Scottish records comparable to those of the Stationers' Company make it difficult to trace their history before they went to the Indies. In the French colonies, the early printers came from France, as those in Surinam were of Dutch origin. But in the Danish Virgin Islands and in the Netherlands Antilles, most of the early printers seem to have been of British birth or descent. In the Swedish island of St. Bartholomew, the first printer was Swedish, but the press soon passed into English hands. At what stage creole printers took over from the expatriates is difficult to judge. The colonial printers took creole apprentices, and by the early nineteenth century many printing businesses were owned by local men
174 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY with local training, but there was a steady, if diminishing, flow of craftsmen to the islands until the last days of colonial rule, at any rate at the more senior levels. The mobility of many of the printers who worked in the West Indies was reminiscent of fifteenth-century Europe. Jean Cassan had printed in Grenada before moving to (Spanish) Trinidad. Matthew Gallagher, the first printer in Trinidad under British rule, had worked previously in Dominica and Grenada and was later to spend some time in Caracas setting up the subsidiary firm of Gallagher y Lamb. Sextius Buffardin, originally from Aix, worked in both Dominica and Guadeloupe and Joseph Berrow in Dominica, then St. Lucia, and finally St. Vincent, where he was the first printer. Sometimes their moves came as a result of political changes, sometimes because they saw economic advantage in moving to a fresh territory. Alexander Holmes, for example, who had served his apprenticeship in Edinburgh, started the Bermudian in St. George's as a rival to the long established Bermuda Gazette in 1819. After some initial success, he ran afoul of the governor and had to leave Bermuda in 1823 [18, 22]. For a while he worked in a subordinate capacity in Falmouth, Jamaica, eventually in 1828 managing to buy the plant and copyright of the old, established Cornwall Chronicle in Montego Bay. Despite his editorial espousal of the planters' cause in the con- troversy over emancipation (an economic necessity with his early reader- ship, and in any case his was a less fanatical advocacy than that of some other Jamaican papers), he successfully conducted the paper until his death in 1862, being remembered as "a genial old Scotchman" [28]. Other expatriates were less fortunate than Holmes. As suggested above, the risk of death from disease was not inconsiderable. As late as 1870 Otto Wenkstern, a Prussian who was proprietor of the Trinidad Chronicle, fell a victim in the last great yellow fever epidemic to strike Trinidad. Others who did not succumb were often shattered in health and had to sell their businesses (or leave them in the hands of managers) and return to temperate climes. It was not only expatriates who suffered, of course. Creole printers died young or had their health wrecked in the same way. In one instance, in the Cable family's business in St. Kitts, Robert Cable (who died from burns in 1829 through having set his bed hangings on fire) had been running the business since the age of fifteen in consequence of his father's early death. Several other West Indian printers had to assume editorial/managerial responsibilities while still underage for similar reasons. Although the change of ownership of some West Indian printing houses was rapid, in other cases there were long dynasties. In little St. Kitts, the Howes and Cables ran rival concerns (and papers) for well over a century. Very little evidence survives on the conditions of employment of those
PRINTING AND BOOK TRADE IN THE WEST INDIES 175 working for the master printers. There is occasional evidence of strikes'7 and occasional illustration of the regard in which a master printer was held. 18 Instances of the employment of slaves have been noted for the British islands [291; slave labor was also used by the Dutch in Surinam. But of the wage rates and working conditions of free labor hardly any information has been found. The wages of personnel in the Government Printing Office at Scarboro' (Tobago) in 1899 show that the foreman received fifty pounds per year, the two compositors fifteen and twelve pounds, respectively, and the apprentice but ten shillings a month. This was at a time when the economic state of Tobago was at its worst, and it would be unwise to draw general conclusions from these pay scales. The Places of Printing Many West Indian islands are too small for printing to have been worth attempting outside the capital. The needs of Barbados, for instance, could very easily be served from Bridgetown. Only in a few colonies, therefore, did printing spread outside the capital. Admittedly, Guadeloupe had printers in both Basseterre and in Point-a'-Pitre and Martinique in St. Pierre and Fort-de-France; and in Trinidad a printer set up in San Fernando as early as 1850. But in the eighteenth century, only two islands had several centers of printing. Both Jamaica and the French colony of St. Domingue were large enough for there to be commercial centers too remote from the capitals for easy communication and large enough to provide printers with a local market for a local paper. In St. Domingue, the two chief centers of printing were Cap Frangais and Port-au-Prince, but at times presses operated from St. Marc, Leogane, and Aux Cayes also; during the reign of Emperor Christophe in independent Haiti a royal printing office was also set up in his palace Sans Souci [30]. In the Spanish part of the island-the Dominican Republic-it is worth noting that, as well as the purely Dominican papers issued in Santo Domingo, there was a weeklyJournal 17. For example, a compositors' strike at the Montego BayJamaica Standard in January 1837. There was a printers' general strike in Jamaica in 1908, broken by the Daily Gleaner by installing linotypes imported from New York. The luckless compositors, most of whom came from Barbados and Trinidad, were forced to return to their native islands to seek employment. 18. In Antigua in February 1850, when Frederick S. Jewett retired from the direction of the Antigua Observer, a letter of regret signed by all the printing house staff-the foreman, four journeymen, plus five occasional workmen-was published in the paper. Such tributes are rare.
176 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY of Commerce issued by a Bahamian printer in the north coast town of Puerto Plata in the late 1 870s. In Jamaica, printing spread from Kingston and Spanish Town to Montego Bay in 1771 and to Savanna-la-Mar in 1788. Though this last venture soon failed, the introduction of printing into the north coast town of Falmouth in 1791 was much more successful, despite its proximity to Montego Bay. Printing spread slowly to other towns in Jamaica-to Old Harbour in 1843, to Port Maria about 1862, and to Port Antonio later in the nineteenth century. 19 With improved internal communications in the island, only Kingston and Montego Bay remain of significance as printing centers today. To locate the whereabouts of the printing houses in these various towns is not always easy. Although most of the colonial towns were laid out on a grid, many were far too small to make it necessary for the printers' imprints to specify their location, and when they did it was often in terms which, retrospectively, are valueless- "close by the Courthouse," "on the Parade," "in the house formerly occupied by Dr. Baker." In the cases of Port of Spain and Kingston (the most important printing centers by the mid-nineteenth century), the information gleaned suggests that there was no special center for the printing trade in the first, whereas in Kingston, Harbour Street had become the normal place for a printer to set up, with the bookshops and subscription libraries in King Street, the fashionable shopping area. Not until the suburban dispersal of Kingston after World War II did Harbour Street lose its special position in the trade. Printers' Equipment Until the late eighteenth century, printing facilities in the West Indies were limited to letterpress printing. When copperplate printing was required-for example, for various engraved views of planters' houses or for maps- local advertising always emphasized that the plates would be printed in Europe. The inventory of Robert Baldwin's business [321 was not untypical, nor was it very different from similar inventories of printers in North America or the English provinces. Paper was occasion- ally obtained from the American colonies in the early days,20 but after 1776 importation direct from Europe was universal. In the late 19. Since this paper is concerned with the printing trade, I have left out reference to St. Ann's Bay, in which the Reverend George Wilson Bridges had a private press in the 1820s [311. 20. William Daniell of Kingston purchased paper from Benjamin Franklin in 1754 [33, pp. 51-52, 721. Franklin also supplied printers in Antigua and Barbados.
PRINTING AND BOOK TRADE IN THE WEST INDIES 177 eighteenth century, of course, Caslon's types were to be found in most printing houses in the British islands,21 usually in a rather limited range. Several Jamaican printers had small Hebrew fonts, but in 1783 the Abbe Roland could find only one Kingston printer with the accented sorts needed for printing in French [8]. By the end of the eighteenth century, other types appear more often-from the Wilson foundry, for instance. When printers set up shop or reequipped, they often included advertisements for their supplies. In the 1840s the Guiana Times obtained its types from V. & J. Figgins. Woods & Sharwoods Austin Letter Foundry was responsible for equipping the St. Lucia Palladium in 1844 and the Bermuda Royal Gazette in 1850. By 1850, however, the European founders were being chal- lenged. An advertisement from George Bruce & Co. of New York appeared in the Antigua Weekly Register, September 11, 1849, and Bruce's skillful advertising succeeded in placing his types in other West Indian printing houses very rapidly. Other suppliers' advertisements are informative. William Gibbs, suc- cessor to Paas & Co. of High Holborn, advertised in the St. Lucia Palladium in March 1847 that he cut heads of newspapers, coats of arms, etc. We learn that the Grenada Free Press had a demy jobbing press by Ruthven and a royal press by Anderson in 1842. These were the only presses owned by this firm; few West Indian printers had more.22 Wooden presses, of course, deteriorated rapidly in West Indian condi- tions, and one suspects that all were replaced by iron presses rather quickly. The fact that all surviving early iron hand presses in the islands are Columbians23 suggests that these may have been the commonest, though in the second half of the nineteenth century treadle presses were widely used. At what date rolling presses for copperplate printing were introduced is uncertain. Joshua Peterkin's Treatise on Planting, printed in St. Kitts in 1790, has a curious engraved frontispiece produced locally. There was at least one copperplate printer active in Kingston about the same time, while by the 1830s these presses were to be found also in Trinidad, Grenada, and, no doubt, other islands. Lithographic printing in a primitive form had reached Bermuda by 1821. The circumstances were rather amusing: Governor Lumley, 21. The Barbados Gazette, January 30, 1788, and advertisements for the New Jamaica Almanack, 1790, both draw attention to their elegant new type cast by Caslon. 22. Alexander Aikman, Jr., had three wooden and three iron presses listed in his inventory of March 1832, but his was the largest printing house on the island. 23. One in Georgetown (Guyana), one in Port of Spain, and one still in use in Montego Bay [34].
178 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY having quarreled with the printers of both the colony's papers, tried to bypass them by having official proclamations produced on a little lithographic press imported for the purpose and published them in the old way of posting them as handbills about the streets of Hamilton. The newspapers' editorial comment, as can be imagined, did little to reconcile the governor to them [23, pp. 152-54]. There was some amateur lithographic work in St. Ann's Bay, Jamaica, later in the 1820s [31]. By the 1830s, Isaac Mendes Belisario of Kingston was producing some very accomplished work, notably in his splendid Sketches of Character . . . of the Negro Population in the Island of Jamaica, which was issued in three parts, 1837-38. Public support for Belisario's work, however, was disappointing. Some primitive wood-engraved work was produced in Kingston in the 1840s to illustrate various agricultural works, but little sophisticated wood engraving seems to have been executed in the islands. One notable exception was in Port of Spain, where in 1884 the short-lived satirical magazine Pixy contained some vigorous and competently engraved cartoons. (Pixy's advertising, incidentally, included telephone num- bers - remarkably early for the Caribbean.) The standards of workmanship of the West Indian printers varied widely. In general, the bookwork of the eighteenth century was of very good quality, and some of the more prestigious items such as Peter Pindar's Persian love elegies (Kingston: Joseph Thompson & Co., 1773), or Alexander Dirom's Thoughts on the State of the Militia ofJamaica (Spanish Town: Douglass & Aikman, 1783) are very attractively produced. Some of the more ephemeral items-the almanacs produced by printers in the French islands or, in St. Kitts, several of the newspapers-show the hands of accomplished craftsmen of some taste. Others show deplorable composition and presswork: the Aikmans, for example, were extremely slovenly in the production of their Royal Gazette, although their almanacs and bookwork were well done. In general, the declining economic position of the West Indian colonies in the second half of the nineteenth century was reflected in the printing: worn-out types badly set and printed without skill on defective presses by uncaring printers-this is to overstate the position, since competent work continued to appear, but one can produce many examples of such slovenliness. Perhaps the worst was the Trinidad Recorder, whose final issue of June 18, 1884, was of strange appearance: "The publishers of the 'Recorder' beg to be excused for issuing the paper without the first and fourth pages. Upon going to press the forme burst, and both pages went to pi. They also take this opportunity of thanking their many friends for past patronage, and to inform them that it being impossible to continue, under existing circumstance, the present issue closes the career of the 'Trinidad Recorder.' "
PRINTING AND BOOK TRADE IN THE WEST INDIES 179 The Publications of the West Indian Printers Newspapers Almost without exception, printers in the West Indian colonies de- pended for their survival upon the production of a regular newspaper. The earliest were weeklies; in the more populous colonies, papers appearing twice or thrice weekly, or daily, had emerged before the end of the eighteenth century, though in the smaller settlements it was a struggle to keep even a weekly paper alive. The typical paper (before the mid-nineteenth century, when machine-made papers and powered presses led to a larger format) was a demy folio24 with three or four columns to the page. Page 1 would contain proclamations and other official advertisements, plus world news culled from European and North American papers,25 which generally spilled over onto page 2. Page 3 would contain local news, plus matter lifted from other West Indian papers and often a substantial number of advertisements, which usually occupied the whole of the fourth page. If their matter stretched beyond a single sheet, many of the pro- prietors issued regular supplements with their papers. The Aikmans' Royal Gazette of 8 quarto pages, for example, usually had another 8 pages of Supplement and 8 pages of Postscript, while a further 4 or 8 pages of Additional Postscript were not uncommon. This was to accommodate the hosts of official advertisements required by Jamaican law-of pound sales, of runaway slaves lodged in the parish workhouses, and so forth-which made printing such a lucrative business for those running the semiofficial papers. Few other papers were quite as prolific in their provision of addenda, but most published occasional supplements or extraordinary issues from time to time-to report the British victory at Waterloo or the results of a British parliamentary election and so forth. In several instances, when the departure of the mail vessels from a particular island did not coincide with regular publication, a special "packet edition" of the paper was published. Most newspaper proprietors aimed at the production of a long-lived paper, of course. Very occasionally, in response to local political stimuli, however, papers sprang up to play their part in the discussion of that single issue and then died. The "Federation Riots" of 1876 in Barbados, which marked a stormy episode in the tumultuous colonial career of John Pope Hennessy [35, pp. 156-82], were accompanied by a host of 24. Some proprietors, like the Aikmans with their Royal Gazette, preferred a quarto format. 25. Sometimes from further afield, for example, India, though I suspect most was taken at second hand from English papers and not directly from the Indian press.
180 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY short-lived papers whose owners evidently felt that the established press of the colony was unfair to the governor. In earlier days, the prices quoted for the papers was the price to regular subscribers. Not until Victoria's reign did the newspaper pro- prietors recognize in print that purchases of single copies were an important source of income. The price to subscribers for the different colonies' papers is difficult to compare because of the fluctuations in colonial currency. In 1840, Jamaican dailies cost one doubloon,26 the papers of Barbados, the Leewards and Windwards, some six to eight dollars; those of Trinidad twelve dollars per year [36]. These prices were not low (the era of the cheap West Indian paper was yet to come) and had been rising steadily from the 1780s until about 1820, when they leveled off or were lowered. In Jamaica, only sub- scribers in Kingston, Spanish Town, and Port Royal had their papers delivered (or could collect them from the printers). In the other parishes, they were sent by post, for which a substantial extra payment was due to the postmasters in each parish, who acted as subscription agents for the papers. 27 The printed terms to subscribers always called for at least partial payment in advance-a vain hope. From Samuel Keimer's "Sorrowful Lamentation" in the Barbados Gazette of May 4, 1734, which he addressed to "those wou'd-be thought gentleman, who have long taken his paper, and never paid for it, and seem never to design to pay for it," onward, the West Indian papers are filled with a chorus of polite requests,jocular reminders, desperate pleas, or threats of immediate legal action against subscribers who were one-or two, or three-years in arrears. More than a few printers were placed in very difficult straits by this load of almost uncollectable debt; several newspapers were suspended or ceased publication completely for this reason.28 Deliveries to subscribers were a constant headache. The Antigua Free Press of October 7, 1829, illustrates vividly the tribulations of the colonial printer: We have frequently, at different times, had complaints from some of our country subscribers, that persons who are not authorised, take the liberty of sending for the paper in their names. The practice is mean and paltry; it subjects us to some loss, and much inconvenience. Persons may, if they please, take the paper in shares of 8ths and 16ths, but we can only recognise one subscriber to each paper. 26. That is, ?5 6s. 8d. in colonial currency. The semiweekly Spanish Town paper was little cheaper, but the semiweekly Cornwall Chronicle of Montego Bay cost only 12s. 6d. per quarter in 184 1, though two years earlier it had cost ?4 per annum. 27. In 1776, subscribers to the Cornwall Chronicle paid ?1 1 Os. a year if they collected their papers or ?2 lOs. when they were sent by post. By 1803, this had risen to ?3 5s. called for or ?4 when "sent off the Bay." 28. For example, the Trinidad Examiner in 1854 and the San Fernando Gazette in 1877, to name only two instances from a single colony.
PRINTING AND BOOK TRADE IN THE WEST INDIES 181 All persons are cautioned against purchasing papers of the lad (Frederick) who usually delivers them to the town subscribers. There is reason to believe that papers are frequently purchased in this way at a reduced price: the practice is dishonourable in the extreme: those who would thus encourage a young lad in a dishonest act, deserve the severest punishment of the law, as they must know he is not authorised to dispose of them, and they may rest assured that if once detected, a proper example will be made of them. How many copies of the papers circulated is very hard to judge, as information on this is seldom to be found. The Jamaica Despatch, whose success was regarded with awe by other newspaper proprietors in the 1830s, was said to circulate some 1,400 copies in 1836. Thirty years earlier, the Barbados Mercury had some 616 subscribers, probably much nearer the normal circulation figure for a successful paper in a prosper- ous and populous colony. But in the smaller islands the situation was very different. The Report of St. Bartholomew had forty-three subscribers in 1814. The Grenada Weekly Record estimated in 1854 that not one of the three Bahamian newspapers had as many as 100 subscribers. When the Tobago Chronicle ceased publication in August 1871, the editor referred to his twenty-five or thirty subscribers29- not all of whom were paid up! When one reads in the St. Christopher Advertiser in September 1858 that the intending promoters of a newspaper in Tortola (in the British Virgin Islands) had abandoned the project for lack of support, one wonders whether their tentative subscription list had even reached double figures. Periodicals In several colonies, attempts were made from time to time to issue monthly or quarterly magazines. In Jamaica, in particular, there were several such attempts from the 1780s onward. Some, like the Cornwall Magazine, or Temple of Pleasure, issued from Savanna-la-Mar by Monk & Leyburn in 1788, were doomed from the start; but others, like William Smart's Columbia Magazine or Monthly Miscellany (Kingston, 1796- 1800) or the Jamaica Magazine (Kingston, 1812- 13), were competently pro- duced and edited and contain much interesting and important matter.30 But they, like the magazines which appeared in Grenada and Barbados, failed for lack of support. Henry Breen's comments on the (Barbados) West India Magazine sum up the typical expatriate's attitude: "The scant support given to the West India Magazine . . . has been referred to as 29. Out of a total population of some 17,000 in the colony, in which there was no rival paper-some indication of the parlous state of the island's economy. 30. Characteristic Traits of the Creolian & African Negroes in Jamaica &c. &c. (1797) edited by Barry Higman (Mona: Caldwell Press, 1976) reprints some valuable material from the Columbian Magazine.
182 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY evidence of a want of disposition to encourage a taste for polite literature. Upon the whole, however, it would hardly be fair to admit this test. The Magazine possessed the natural advantage of local interest on many colonial topics; but independently of the inartistic style in which it was got up, it gave very little promise in a literary point of view; its pages being generally characterised by bombast, triviality, 'bad grammar' (as the Editor used to term it) and worse taste . . . " [37, pp. 273-74]. Official Printing Equally important as their newspapers for many West Indian printers were the contracts to be gained for official printing. Proclamations, editions of a colony's laws, votes of the Houses of Assembly-this was the kind of work which could put a printer into easy circumstances. Much official work could, of course, be published through the medium of a newspaper. From time to time, individual colonies attempted to force their contractors to issue an official gazette distinct from their own newspaper, but such attempts seldom lasted long. In Jamaica, all official advertisements had to appear in the three county papers-the Royal Gazette (Kingston), the St. Jago de la Vega Gazette (Spanish Town), and the Cornwall Chronicle (Montego Bay), at any rate until the 1830s. Other printers secured contractual positions as printer to the Corporation of Kingston or even as printer to the Parish of Hanover-such was the competition for official contract business in the colony. In other islands, official work was generally farmed out to a single printer for the whole island, and there was much jobbery to secure the position. Frequently, newspapers which did not have these contracts nevertheless included much official matter to improve the usefulness of their paper to subscribers and in the hope of securing official approval against the day their rivals fell from favor. Ephemera So little ephemera from West Indian printers survives and is easily accessible that it is easy to forget the enormous importance its produc- tion had for the colonial printer.31 But from Robert Baldwin onward, all West Indian printers advertised a range of blank pro formas- attorneys' blanks, bills of lading, seamen's articles, articles of administra- tion, muster rolls for the militia, letters of marque for privateers, and so forth. In addition, of course, there were innumerable official forms- certificates that vessels had checked with the appropriate port au- thorities, blanks for letters of administration, etc.-the production of 31. Bradford S. Swan identified some Antiguan ephemera in the Rhode Island archives [381, and much must survive in other record repositories.
PRINTING AND BOOK TRADE IN THE WEST INDIES 183 which must have afforded the printers a substantial part of their living. Under the heading of ephemera also must be included the handbills for livestock and slave sales and theatrical performances (and the theater tickets), auction catalogs and catalogs of circulating libraries, and at times other matter which has disappeared from view almost completely.32 Almanacs From the earliest days of West Indian printing, the publication of an annual almanac formed a normal part of the activities of most busi- nesses. Sheet almanacs appeared regularly from 1719 onward in Jamaica. The first book almanac did not appear on that island until the publication by William Daniell of The Merchant's Pocket Companion for 1751. The subtitle of Daniell's venture gives a pretty good conspectus of the contents of this genre: An Almanack ... fitted to this Meridian containing, the different Courts of Quarter Sessions, Common Pleas &c. for Port Royal and Kingston throughout the year, the last Day of summoning for ditto and Grand Court. The Jews Hollidays throughout the Year. A list of such Goods as are liable to pay Duty in the Receiver General's Office and the sums that are to be paid. A complete list of the Council and Assembly of this island. The Public Offices and Officers, Names of the Custos's, Judges of the Gr. Court, Chancery Office and Officers, Admiralty Office and Officers, King's Officers, Provost Marshall and his Dep- uties. Days for chusing vestrymen, &c. &c. To which is added, A Discourse upon Meteors. Other almanacs would replace the discourse upon meteors with other improving essays (sometimes of great value, like those which appear in the Honduras Almanacks [11 ] on the lumber industry) and would include other material likely to be of value, such as the lists of officers in the militia. Many almanacs also had considerable information on the mother country: a court calendar, list of Members of Parliament, and so forth. In a few West Indian islands, whose printers obviously hoped for a wider Antillean circulation for their work, the almanacs included much useful information on sister colonies. Thus, J.-B. Thounens' Almanach His- torique . . . pour l'annee 1789, printed in Castries, is a valuable source of information on all the French colonies, as well as St. Lucia. The almanacs published in St. Kitts by Thomas Howe and Robert Cable deal with Nevis, Montserrat, and Tortola and to a lesser degree the Danish Virgin Islands and (Dutch) St. Eustatius, as well as St. Kitts itself. In a good many colonies, there were several rival almanacs produced by the different printers, each one praising the accuracy and superior detail of his own work. Only in Jamaica, however, does the demand seem 32. In 1780 in St. Lucia, for example, masters of arriving vessels were required to have an inventory of their cargoes printed.
184 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY to have been great enough for printers regularly to produce two editions of a particular year's almanac: the first in mid-December of the previous year, the second in February or March after the elections of vestrymen, etc., had produced changes in the local information. In general, the production standards of the West Indian book almanacs of the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries were very high, both in internal design and execution (those of St. Kitts being particularly well done) and in their binding. Some were simply stitched in Dutch gilt or marbled papers, others full-bound in straight-grained morocco (green or red or, more occasionally, blue) with competent gold tooling. During the nineteenth century, however, more and more of these almanacs were produced in Britain.33 This had, strangely, always been the commoner pattern in Barbados where, for example, the long series of almanacs (1829?-58) calculated by Tobias Phillips was printed for him in Liverpool by Thomas Kaye [39]. Bookwork To leave the mention of book printing until last may seem topsy turvy, but, in relation to its importance to the life of the printing trade, it is not. Unlike the settlers of New England, the West Indian planters preferred to have their substantial books published in London. Very little of the work of the Jamaican historian Bryan Edwards, for instance, was first published in Jamaica. Relatively few examples of "the literature of power" were printed in the islands, and those which were, were usually rather lightweight- such as the very handsome quarto The Sable Venus; An Ode inscribed to Bryan Edwards Esq. (Kingston: Bennett & Woolhead, 1765), which paints vividly the attractions of an African mistress. For a short period, it must be confessed, it did appear as though colonial society had reached a point at which the idea of local literary publication was being consolidated. The theater was very popular in the islands, and several editions of the plays performed were printed-The New Comic Opera of The Duenna (Kingston: W. Aikman, 1779);A Schoolfor Soldiers, or the Deserter (Kingston [?], 1784); The Patriot, a tragedy, altered from the Italian of Metastasio (Montego Bay: Fannin, 1785). There were other local editions which point to a more cultivated market than one might have anticipated: Montego Bay, May 21, 1785. This day is published, at the Printing Office, The Sorrows of Werther: a novel from the German of Mr. Goethe, first translated into French, then into English, and now reprinted from the London Edition, at 33. At any rate in part, although the local information might be printed in the islands to be bound up with sheets imported from Europe.
PRINTING AND BOOK TRADE IN THE WEST INDIES 185 the particular desire of a number of Ladies and Gentlemen *** A few spare copies for sale. Such enterprise on Fannin's part was, however, but a flash in the pan. The decline in the planter class, from the Napoleonic Wars onward, almost wiped out ventures of this kind, which became increasingly rare as the nineteenth century wore on.34 There were, of course, plenty of examples of "the literature of knowledge." Manuals on tropical diseases, on the care of horses, on improved methods of distillation, on botany, and on methods of planting formed the backbone of local book production, while in the first third of the nineteenth century the controversy over the slave trade gave birth to many pamphlets. Sometimes the subscription proposals and other advertising and the subscription lists which were included in the more substantial of these books tell us a good deal about the publication history of the book or even the trading pattern of the printer/publisher concerned. Thus, we can learn that there were insufficient subscribers to John Lunan's Hortus Jamaicensis to permit publication in volume form, and we can follow the book's issue in parts with some accuracy. We will learn to beware of printed subscription lists, since the Jamaican agents for Cobbett's Works lost the additional list of subscribers not printed in the volume and had to advertise for the subscribers to call [40]. On the other hand, from the subscription list included in Peterkin's Treatise on Planting (St. Kitts, 1790) we get a very interesting distribution pattern for the edition of about 550 copies: St. Kitts, approximately 150 copies; Nevis, 40; Mont- serrat, 24; Antigua, 100; Tortola, 51;35 St. Vincent, 1; Dominica, 2; Anguilla, 3; St. Eustatius, 5; St. Croix, 125; St. Martin, 45; Puerto Rico, 2;36 and St. Thomas, 1. Few books enjoyed as wide a circulation as this. Peterkin's work gives some indication of the cooperation between printers on the different islands who would advertise and act as subscription agents for one another. Because the receipt of foreign news was always slow and often a chancy business during the periods of war, even for neutral islands,37 the colonial papers depended very much on being able to pick up from one another items of foreign as well as local news. Masters of arriving vessels were solicited for any papers they might 34. Trinidad is a partial exception in the mid-nineteenth century. 35. There were only two subscribers, but one was for 50 copies. 36. Both were men with Irish names. This is the only trade connection with the Spanish colonies that I have traced. 37. Mails for St. Bartholomew came via St. Kitts, so when the French intercepted the mails to the British islands, as they did frequently before Trafalgar, the Swedish colonists might be without direct news from Europe for two or three months at a stretch.
186 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY have with them and subscribers asked to let the editors have a view of any newspapers they received. Newspapers from the European and New England and Nova Scotian ports trading with the Caribbean were most frequently quoted, of course, but the array of papers occasionally quoted is very wide, with such unexpected bylines as the Elgin Courier and the Cherokee Phoenix. In the mid-nineteenth century, Australian papers were often quoted in the Jamaican and St. Kitts press;38 the Sierra Leone New Era had a subscription agent in St. Vincent.39 By the middle years of the nineteenth century, the exchange of papers among the West Indian islands had become automatic and formalized, with most editors sending out perhaps 30 copies of their papers on a regular basis. In the case of the Turks Islands, as the cost of interisland postage was a burden on the editor of the Royal Standard, the islands' legislative council in 1861 voted a sum of ten shillings a month to relieve him of this charge. By the 1840s, also, communications with Britain had improved con- siderably. The European Times, published by Willmer & Smith of Liver- pool, had become a standard source for European news. Copies of West Indian papers were filed in the newsroom run by Peter Lund Sim- monds.40 Rather later, the London offices of Holloway's Pills (which were advertised very extensively in the West Indian press) were another place in which the colonial papers could easily be consulted. The Control of the Press Preceding sections of this paper have indicated some of the ways in which the islands' printers could be kept at heel. Both the stick and the carrot were used-the stick in the form of imprisonment or fines (or both) for contempt of the Privileges of the Houses of Assembly, the Judiciary, or the Executive. The carrot was usually in the form of the 38. There was a small migration of Jamaicans to the Australian goldfields in the 1850s; the St. Kitts interest is explained by the fact that the Howe family of printers in New South Wales and Tasmania was originally from St. Kitts. 39. Another family connection: William Drape of the New Era being a member of the Drape family who published the St. Vincent Royal Gazette. 40. Peter Lund Simmonds (1814-97) was a sugar planter in Jamaica shortly before the emancipation of the slaves in 1834. In the late 1830s and early 1840s he ran a newspaper room, subscription library, and colonial subscription agency, at first in Chichester and later in London. Many of the West Indian papers of 1839-41 now in the British Library (often the only known copies) are those sent to him when he was preparing his study of the newspaper press [36]. His interesting later career as a journalist of the use of tropical products merits a modern study.
PRINTING AND BOOK TRADE IN THE WEST INDIES 187 award of government contracts but could at times be more subtle.41 It would scarcely be an exaggeration to say that all printers in the West Indies suffered to some extent. Some would eat humble pie: Whereas we, Woolhead, Gadd and Bennett, Printers did in the Kingston Journal . . . insert ... a Paragraph scandalously reflecting on the Justice and Equity of the Judges of his Majesty's Courts of Admiralty in the American Colonies, and more particularly aspersing the Proceedings of His Majesty's Court of Vice Admiralty in this Island: And whereas theJudge of the said Court hath (upon our Entreaty) consented to withdraw thejust Prosecution ... provided we should make a Public Declaration acknowledging our sincere Regret for the offence we have commit- ted: Conscious therefore of the malevolence and Injustice of the Defamation, we do in this public Manner, declare . .. ourselves heartily sorry . .. and we do hereby promise,, that we will never again suffer this Paper to be prostituted to the servile and iniquitious Purpose of calling Abuse and Obloquy on Men in public Charac- ters, or of questionning the Justice of any of His Majesty's Tribunals. [Kingston Journal October 24, 1761] Others were more defiant, if less prudent. When the editor of the Jamaica Standard was arraigned for contempt in December 1839, he printed the following in his paper: To the Usher of the Black Rod, and others whom it may concern, Greeting. Whereas it has come to our knowledge that a second Warrant is now against our Editorial Person, at the instance of their Honours of the Council, and whereas the state of our health and other circumstances do not second this apparent urgency on the part of that honourable Board, THIS IS TO GIVE NOTICE, that we have considered it expedient to retire for a while to Country quarters. ... How long the Standard editor managed to elude arrest I have yet to establish. Others were less fortunate. Charles Wells of the St. Lucia Palladium spent over four years in a debtor's prison for refusing to pay the fine imposed in another contempt case. The subject of official control of the press in the Caribbean is too large for detailed consideration here. It will suffice to say that the control was always stricter in the French, Dutch, and Danish colonies than in the British possessions and that in British colonies the worst repression came as a rule from the local legislative bodies and from the judiciary, many of whose members played a contemptible part in attempts at muzzling the press in the 1830s and 1840s. The attitude of the islands' governors was usually more enlightened,42 while appeal to Britain produced a much 41. An example is William Dyer of Falmouth, Jamaica, one of the bitterest and most vituperative opponents of the work of the Baptist missionaries on the north coast, who was given a gift of plate by admirers of his editorial stance in the Cornwall Courier in December 1839. 42. Governor Eyre in Jamaica was a significant exception to this general rule at the time of the Morant Bay rebellion.
188 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY more liberal response. That the printer of 1870 was less liable to harassment than the printer of thirty years earlier was almost entirely due to metropolitan influence and direction. Bookselling and the Growth of Subscription Libraries For the nineteenth-century colonial printer, the exchange of publica- tions referred to above was not merely a convenience in obtaining news at little cost, it was a source of income. J. W. Irwin, proprietor of the Trinidad Guardian, for instance, in September 1826, advertised the opening of his St. Vincent Street reading room, in which for eight pounds a year subscribers would have access to files of some 10 British, 3 American, 3 French, and 24 West Indian papers, most of which he received on exchange. As soon as there were sufficient subscribers, Irwin stated, he would add a range of monthly and quarterly periodicals and would start a circulating library. Many other printers in other islands adopted a similar policy. There were attempts by persons in other fields of business to start similar ventures. In 1790, for instance, one Ebenezer Edie advertised that he had built a coffeehouse in Kingston at great cost, and among its many attractions would be a Subscribers' Room "fur- nished with all Newspapers and Prices Current, for the entertainment and information of the Subscribers"-but newspaper proprietors had an obvious economic advantage in such enterprises. Importations of books into the West Indian colonies were very considerable. Giles Barber's invaluable analysis of the Customs House records [41] shows that in the period from 1700 to 1780 British exports of books to the West Indian colonies represented about a quarter of total exports to the New World and exceeded those to the East Indies. Importations to Jamaica were little less than to New York, Barbadians bought nearly as much as settlers in the Carolinas, and Antigua accounted for more than Nova Scotia and Canada, while the importa- tions to the West Indies as a whole exceeded those into New England. Of the West Indian colonies separately listed, Jamaica took 43 percent and Barbados 30 percent, followed by Antigua with 10 percent, St. Kitts with 6?2 percent, and Bermuda with 2 percent of the total.43 In the nineteenth century Trinidad was to move into third (perhaps second) place, but the pattern of importation of the majority of reading material from Britain was to remain much the same. In the 1850s, to be sure, 43. The islands of the Leewards were mostly still under French control, Trinidad was Spanish, and the Guianas Dutch at this time.
PRINTING AND BOOK TRADE IN THE WEST INDIES 189 American piracies of English periodicals were to be advertised in several colonies. At the end of the nineteenth century, the Trinidad blue books record the importation of some printed matter from Germany (whether this was of Tauchnitz's cheap paperbound reprints of standard English authors, of music, or of other matter I have been unable to learn). But in general substantial foreign (and particularly American) entry into the West Indian market was not to come until very recently. From the inventories of the late eighteenth-century Jamaican book- sellers and from the advertisements one finds in the West Indian papers of the early nineteenth century, one can reconstruct the stock of the bookseller in King Street, Kingston, or on the Parade in St. John's, Antigua. There would be a substantial stock of stationery-paper of all sizes, gilt-edged cards, ink, quills, standishes, sealing wax, files, memorandum and account books of various kinds. Pencils, brushes, and artists' colors, ruled music, packs of cards, chessboards and backgammon sets, fiddle strings and fishing tackle and the hundred and one other things one finds in a stationer's store would fill the shelves on one side of the room. There would be tobacco, silk purses, balls of blacking, satin ribbons, shoes, hats, and haberdashery, garden seeds, and patent cures for the gout-the extent of the merchant's trade in these other lines varying a great deal. The stock of books would consist of some standard schoolbooks, a range of medical and law books, history, biography, and political treatises for the man of affairs, charts and pilots for the mariner. In general, Sir John Shore's comment in 1772 that the libraries taken to the East Indies for sale "though very voluminous, consist mostly of novels, and such books as are termed, by the London shopkeepers 'light summer reading' " [41, p. 201 ] seems not to have been altogether true of the West Indies at the time he wrote, although by the end of the eighteenth century the stock advertised in the various circulating li- braries had more than a leavening of poetry, magazines, gothic novels, and such frivolities. A study of the reading tastes of West Indian society is a desideratum and will contain some surprises-the demand in St. Vincent for Armstrong's Gaelic Dictionary in 1826, for example. As the planter class left the islands, the market for polite literature declined. There were some outstanding exceptions to the general rule that by the mid-nineteenth century the West Indians were buying fewer books, and then books of a utilitarian nature, often in cheap reprints like Bohn's various series. Such men as the Jamaican naturalist Richard Hill, to give but one instance, remained closely in touch with advances in learning, but such men were exceptional and more often to be found in the rising class of men of color than in the dwindling ranks of the planters. The history of circulating libraries in the islands is illustrative of this decline. Though there were subscription libraries in Kingston and
190 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Montego Bay in the early 1790s, both failed for lack of subscribers. The circulating libraries set up with high hopes by printers in Port of Spain, St. George's (Grenada), and other towns in the 1820s and 1830s seldom lasted more than a year or two before their proprietors gave up the struggle to make them pay. However, several of the missionary and church groups in various colonies persevered with the provision of libraries for their own special purposes. Conclusion To compare West Indian printing of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries with that emanating from the British colonial press in Canada, India, Africa, or the Far East is instructive but reopens once more the question, Was there a distinctive West Indian printer? At a cursory glance, the similarities between the work undertaken-and the way it was undertaken-in Kingston or Calcutta, Grenada or the Gold Coast, are very great indeed. Similarities between West Indian and West African printing are not surprising, since West Indian printers were often active in the early West African press. Nor are the other similarities, as the printers concerned were (at any rate in the first generation or two) Englishmen printing for other Englishmen. The fact that they were doing so in minor outposts of empire made little difference. As the printers to client cultures in client states, the West Indian printers had (as well as their similarities to colonial printers elsewhere) many common areas of interest. Slavery, sugar, immigration: these were persistent themes in British, Dutch, French, and Danish possessions. The nature of the plantation economy was to impose a more uniform pattern than might be expected. Although the West Indian colonies were not to maintain their impor- tance as centers of printing that the early introduction of the art might have indicated or to produce material of lasting significance in the world of letters,44 their bibliographical history is by no means insignificant. The inclusion of their output in the eighteenth-century Short Title Catalogue, or the recording of nineteenth-century West Indian imprints will be difficult tasks for the bibliographer. When such work has been under- taken, a full assessment of West Indian printing and its part in the formation of contemporary Caribbean society will be possible. 44. West Indian literary work, whether of a Naipaul or a Cesaire, has almost without exception been published outside the West Indies, despite the valiant efforts of such little magazines as Bim or Savacou to redress the balance.
PRINTING AND BOOK TRADE IN THE WEST INDIES 191 REFERENCES 1. Wroth, L. C. The Colonial Printer. 2d ed. Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia, 1938. 2. Rousseau, I. J. "The Making of a Cape Governor-Sir Benjamin D'Urban." South African Journal of Science 28 (November 1931): 584-93. 3. Naipaul, V. S. The Loss of El Dorado. Rev. ed. Harmondsworth, Middx.: Penguin Books, 1972. 4. Cave, Roderick. "Thomas Craddock's Books: A West India Merchant's Stock." Book Collector 25 (Winter 1976): 481-90. 5. Cundall, Frank. A History of Printing inJamaicafrom 1 717 to 1834. Kingston: Institute of Jamaica, 1935. 6. Fulham Papers, v.XVII, Lambeth Palace. 7. Shilstone, E. M. "Some Notes on Early Presses and Newspapers in Barbados."Journal of the Barbadas Museum and Historical Society 26 (November 1958): 19-33. 8. Annual Report, John Carter Brown Library, 1960. Providence, R. 1.: John Carter Brown Library, 1962. 9. Debien, G. "Un Abbe maitre de pension a Saint Domingue pais journaliste a la Jamaique." Notes d'histoire colonial 43 (1953): 1-43. 10. Cave, Roderick. "Printing comes to Jamaica." Jamaica Journal 9 (Summer 1975): 11-17. 11. Cave, Roderick. "Printing in Nineteenth Century Belize." Library Quarterly 46 (January 1976): 20-37. 12. Rodway, James. The Press in British Guiana. Worcester, Mass.: American Antiquarian Society, 1918. 13. Cabon, Fr. Adolphe. "Un Siecle et demi de journalisme en Haiti." Petite revue hebdomadaire, 1919; reprinted as Cabon's History of HaitiJournalism, with an introduction and notes by Clarence S. Brigham (Worcester, Mass.: American Antiquarian Society, 1940). (Page references are to Brigham's edition.) 14. Bibliotheque Nationale. Le Livre (catalogue d'un exposition). Paris: Bibliotheque Nationale, 1972. 15. Blanche, Lenis. Contribution a l'histoire de la presse a la Guadeloupe. Point-a-Pitre: Gouvernement de Guadeloupe, 1935. 16. Prebble, John. The Darien Disaster. London: Secker & Warburg, 1968. 17. Eames, Wilberforce. The Antigua Press and Benjamin Mecom. Worcester, Mass.: Ameri- can Antiquarian Society, 1929. 18. Lincoln, Waldo. History of Bermuda Newspapers. Worcester, Mass.: American Antiqua- rian Society, 1925. 19. Swan, Bradford. The Spread of Printing: The Caribbean Area. Amsterdam: VanGendt, 1970. 20. Cave, Roderick. "The Early Printers of Grand Turk." Papers of the Bibliographical Society of America 70 (Winter 1976): 519- 28. 21. Fraser, Lionel Mordaunt. History of Trinidad. Port of Spain: Government Printing Office, 1891-96. 22. Kennedy, Jean de Chantal. Biography of a Colonial Town: Hamilton, Bermuda, 1790- 1897. Hamilton: Bermuda Bookstore, 1962. 23. Emmanuel, Isaac S., and Emmanuel, Susan A. History of the Netherlands Antilles. Cincinnati: American Jewish Archives, 1970. 24. Seeligmann, S. "David Nassy of Surinam." Publications of the American Jewish Historical Society 22 (1914): 25-38. 25. De Cordova, Joshua. "Early Enterprise." Gleaner, centenary no. (September 13, 1934), pp. 2-5.
192 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 26. Kingston. Institute of Jamaica. Curtis Brett letters, MST.1O. 27. Cave, Roderick. "Two Jamaican Printers." Amphora, in press. 28. Judah, George F. "The Newspaper History of Jamaica." Jamaica Times (January 14, 1899), p. 4. 29. Cave, Roderick. "The Use of Slave Labour in West Indian Printing Houses." Library, 5th ser. 30 (September 1975): 241-43. 30. Esterquest, Ralph T. "L'Imprimerie Royale d'Hayti (1817-1819): A Little Known Royal Press of the Western Hemisphere." Papers of the Bibliographical Society of America 34 (1940): 171-84. 31. Cave, Roderick. "The First Jamaican Private Press." Private Library, 2d ser. 8 (Autumn 1975): 115- 19. 32. Cave, Roderick. "An Inventory of the First Jamaican Printing House." Papers of the Bibliographical Society of America 69 (Winter 1975): 560-65. 33. Eddy, George S. Account Books Kept by Benjamin Franklin, Ledger 'D'. New York: Columbia University Press, 1929. 34. Cave, Roderick. "The St. James' Printery, Montego Bay." Jamaica Library Association Bulletin (1976): 7-8. 35. Pope-Hennessy, James. Verandah: Some Episodes in the Crown Colonies, 1867-1889. London: Allen & Unwin, 1964. 36. Simmonds, Peter Lund. "Statistics of Newspapers in Various Countries."Journal of the Statistical Society 4 (1841): 111-36. 37. Breen, Henry. St. Lucia: Historical, Statistical and Descriptive. London: Longmans, 1844. 38. Swan, Bradford S. "Checklist of Early Printing on the Island of Antigua." Papers of the Bibliographical Society of America 50 (1956): 285-92. 39. Shilstone, E. M. "Book and Pocket Almanacs." Journal of the Barbados Museum and Historical Society 28 (1960): 78- 84. 40. Cave, Roderick. "The Plantocracy's Passion for Porcupine." Library, in press. 41. Barber, Giles. "Books from the Old World and for the New: The British International Trade in Books in the Eighteenth Century." Studies on Voltaire and the Eighteenth Century 151-55 (1976): 185-224.