Introduction “Of recent years the adolescent girl has been much in the public eye,” a 1929 Publishers’ Weekly article began [1, p. 2077]. The years to which this author referred encompassed the Progressive Era and were ones that saw long‐standing American taboos, if not broken, then challenged by reformers’ attempts to address myriad social problems.3 These reform efforts included the work of the widely divergent Purity Movement [2–5], which regarded issues of sexuality and gender roles as its central concerns.4 Attention to Purity Movement concerns grew, so that sexuality and female roles became less the particular province of reformers and associated professionals and more the subject of popular press articles. By 1913, concerns ranging from out‐of‐wedlock births to prostitution and the white slave trade were treated with such relative openness that one writer proclaimed with dismay that it had become “Sex O’Clock in America” [6, p. 113]. While some writers and reformers considered the role of young men in this social turmoil, young women, whom reformers sought to protect from an array of sordid influences, received even greater consideration. This scrutiny of female adolescents was perhaps to be expected in an era in which, according to historian Rosalind Rosenberg, the best efforts of social scientists to disprove sex‐linked personality traits were insufficient to defeat lingering Victorian notions of women’s special attributes and needs [7, p. 207]. Consequently, professionals involved with books and adolescents had the opportunity to read extensively about female teens in the popular and professional press of the day. It was observed that “her psychology, her behavior problems, her needs, all have been discussed at great length” [1, p. 2077]. Some of this scrutiny concerned “why girls go wrong,” a catch phrase for female sexual and social transgressions evoked first in sources such as the New York Times and later in the lyrics of theatrical performances. Thus, reformers’ concerns about young women’s sexual mores became translated into the popular lexicon of the Progressive Era. This rhetorical transition discursively maintained notions of innate differences between men and women; few presumed that young women went astray for the same reasons that young men did. Greater public awareness of the factors involved in a young woman’s fall from respectability by no means ended discussion of how to prevent it. The adolescent girl of the early twentieth century was scrutinized, if first by reformers and journalists, then also by librarians and others concerned with the books available to female readers. Although the wordings differ in their specific focus on transgression, these discussions of “why girls go wrong” echo the gendered notion of separate spheres. The work of two historians in particular frames this discussion of the rhetorical construction of gendered space. Linda K. Kerber noted of research on “women’s part in American culture” that studies of earlier eras have explored how “notions of women’s sphere permeated the language” of those times [8, p. 10]. Kathy Piess, in Cheap Amusements: Working Women and Leisure in Turn‐of‐the‐Century New York, demonstrated that “a sphere of life separate from the workplace” was “shaped by sexual divisions” [9, pp. 4–5]. This article seeks to understand this particular invocation of a female sphere of error and its consequences for reading guidance to young women in the Progressive Era. Most library literature of the first decades of the twentieth century understood the needs of young men and women as distinct rather than mutual. The question remains why librarians, college‐educated individuals likely to have been exposed to the egalitarian views of gender roles put forth by “university dissidents” [7, p. 207], would have adopted conventional ideas that regarded their own sex as distinct and in need of protection. The answer invokes contemporary concepts involved with gender roles, especially sexuality, as well as issues of public space and public health. This approach to understanding a historical problem focuses on the profession’s public discourse, as recorded in conference talks and periodicals indexed in Cannons’s Bibliography of Library Economy, 1876–1920.5 It considers the collective, contextualized significance of these speeches and articles, looking not only at meaning but also at the broader historical factors informing these utterances. This approach recognizes two divergent streams of library and information science literature; it relates library history to other contemporary reform work by drawing on the methods of discourse analysis. Jenkins has advocated comparing youth services work with other “female‐intensive fields” emerging simultaneously, asking “What role(s) … did librarians play in the general movement toward child welfare during the Progressive Era?” [10, pp. 126–27]. While this inquiry is interested in the ways those librarians explained their service priorities to one another, without further context their language suggests something different to present‐day researchers than it would have to contemporary colleagues. John M. Budd and Douglas Raber have noted the potential value of contextualized discourse analysis to library and information science [11], and Bernd Frohmann has also argued for contextualized studies of professional language in order to investigate “historical contingencies of the resources available for these interpretations” [12, p. 135]. The study of Progressive Era librarians’ professional discourse, framed by other contemporary documents that attend to shared concerns, reveals and elaborates multiple motives for creating a particular kind of reading environment for young women. Librarians’ interests in engaging girls with wholesome activities and good books were significant when so much attention focused on those “gone wrong.” Most librarians and other readers’ advisors took seriously the matter of moral and upright reading. The responses of an average teenage girl to books and an increasing array of other leisure activities further suggest something about the way that middle‐class adolescents responded to these strategies for engaging their interest in good, safe books. More concretely, the situation of girls who had actually, in the eyes of the law, gone wrong, further delineates the problem librarians discussed in delicate terms and sought to combat with books. This professional discourse, which prescribed a particular kind of reading for female adolescents, rhetorically constructed the library as a safe and appropriate place for girls, who were understood as endangered in sources ranging from the popular media to the pulpit. This article traces historical uses of the phrase “why girls go wrong” to provide a context for Progressive Era library literature on reading guidance for girls, then turns to actual girls’ responses to reading. Further historic context describes the milieu in which young women and the advisors who sought to guide them lived and read. Contextualized analysis of popular and professional discourse reveals ongoing concern with adolescent female sexual activity, which was understood as wrong doing. Librarians’ articulations of their responsibilities responded to these broadly circulated issues and created, through arguments that selected titles represented persuasively pure and feminine ideals, images of the early twentieth‐century library as a wholesome, protective space for young women. 3.  Dates for the Progressive Era diverge, with some sources framing the span of this heterogeneous movement from 1900 to 1920, while others acknowledge its association with late nineteenth‐century reform work and its later continuance. Alison M. Parker may offer the most inclusive date range in defining the time period under study from 1873 to 1933 [2]. This article acknowledges these variations in dating the Progressive Era yet derives its data almost exclusively from sources created during the first two decades of the twentieth century. 4.  The Purity Movement had its origins in nineteenth‐century reform associations and was manifested in the United States and Europe. Its concerns were diverse, even at times conflicting. As David J. Pivar describes them, members of the Purity Movement possessed “seemingly dissimilar reform interests” and “interested themselves in … moral education, child rearing theories, sex education programs, organizations for the protection of women travelers and workers, vocational education, social hygiene, and especially, the abolition of prostitution” [3, pp. 6–7]. The movement flourished into the twentieth century [4]. For discussion of censorship‐oriented purity campaigns by analogous organizations, see Alison M. Parker [2] and Paul S. Boyer [5]. 5.  Cannons’s Bibliography preceded Library Literature. Its full title is Bibliography of Library Economy: A Classified Index to the Professional Periodical Literature in the English Language Relating to Library Economy, Printing, Methods of Publishing, Copyright, Bibliography, etc., from 1876 to 1920. A supplement indexes the professional literature from 1921 to 1932. “Why Girls Go Wrong”: A Social Problem and Dramatic Responses One early articulation of this phrase occurred in a 1907 Ladies’ Home Journal article by Colorado Judge Ben B. Lindsey [13], who blamed girls’ sexual misconduct on their ignorance of basic reproduction. Others argued that young women’s impoverished circumstances, the result of low pay and costly living expenses in the cities where they found work, were responsible; these charges were refuted by assertions that a woman who would compromise her virtue was driven by base impulses rather than extreme needs [14]. These themes were repeated in many sources in subsequent years, among them a volume in the Self and Sex series for young people in 1913 [15] and in news reports on “America’s Only Woman Judge,” who was responsible for the Court for Delinquent Girls, established in 1912 in Chicago [16, p. SM4]. Other reformers evoked the phrase in their calls for chastity and an end to the double standard that tolerated male promiscuity [17]. Journalist Reginald Kauffman Wright saw varied forces leading young women into illicit sexual encounters; his book The Girl That Goes Wrong recounted stories of hardship, abuse, and failed dreams in chapters with titles like “The Girl That Was Bad,” “The Girl That Wanted Ermine,” and “The Girl That Studied Art” [18]. This concern was articulated from the pulpit, with evangelical minister Billy Sunday’s attributing adolescent female misbehavior to numerous causes, ranging from mothers who must work too hard to those “always dressed up” and “visiting neighbors” to a lack of “life—light—joy” leading the girl to seek those things in the “street [or] dance hall” [19]. Twenty years later, serious attention to young women’s behavior had persisted. By the early 1930s, a Harvard law professor would create a sort of rogue’s gallery of girls who had been sent to reformatories in the preceding decades, attracting the attention of academics and the popular press. The types Sheldon Glueck and “his scholarly wife Eleanor” [20, p. 11] identified tended to reflect defiance of sexual and other norms affirmed by nativist Protestant culture. Despite a statistical composite revealing that one‐fourth of the population studied were immigrant children, the “more intimate picture” of reformatory inmates featured ten whose parents were born abroad and only one of “wholesome Yankee stock” [20, p. 41]. Among the female inmates profiled was “Annie, the adultress,” a Catholic immigrant teen who married a “kindly Protestant … 25 years her senior.” According to the Gluecks, Annie argued about religion, “particularly after the birth of their little daughter,” before leaving her husband for a younger man [20, p. 45]. Another of these transgressors was Angelina, a “psychotic Portuguese” girl who, as Time magazine informed its readers, “bobbed her hair” and “caused her parents more anguish by dyeing her hair a flaming red and taking to bright colored berets, tawdry dresses and high heels” [21, p. 12]. What Annie and Angelina had in common with the hundreds of others studied by Glueck and his wife was that these behaviors were associated with sexuality. The Gluecks claimed that “illicit sexual indulgence was the chief form of adolescent and early‐adult misbehavior” [20, p. 300]. It was reported that “a fifth of the girls had their first unconventional sex experience before they were 15, and their average age at such time was but 17 years” [20, p. 300]. These liaisons were characterized as “erotic adventures” and resulted in a 50 percent rate for out‐of‐wedlock pregnancies [20, p. 300]. These cautionary narratives of young women whose sexual and social activities took them outside the bounds of accepted behaviors identified childhood and adolescence as the time when a girl’s path to the reformatory was determined, yet other treatments of this theme proliferated. In spite of the seriousness of these concerns, or perhaps because of it, “why girls go wrong” became the stuff of literary works as well. In correspondence published to promote the novel, Hagar Revelly, itself a controversial work [22], Ida Tarbell told author Daniel Goodman that his story revealed “a secret more difficult than why girls go wrong, and that is why thousands upon thousands of girls go right in spite of hardship” [23, p. 4].6 Tarbell’s judgment notwithstanding, the more illicit popular theme became the subject matter of a play called By Products [24], the performance of which would support unemployed or otherwise financially strained actors, and the title of a three‐act comedy [25, p. 2567]. Among the audiences for Why Girls Go Wrong was one Louise B. Hancock, an Illinois teen who kept a diary from 1916 to 1919 [26]. On February 25, 1916, Louise noted without comment that she and her friends had been to see a movie with this title. Louise recorded other activities in her diary as well, many involving popular entertainments that she enjoyed with friends and dates. The library figured in her explanations of her adolescent life but not to the extent that she, a typical Midwestern teenaged girl, figured in the professional discourse of librarians and others who sought to ensure that she would live a happy and healthy, if conventional, life. As adults discussed the implications of girls’ reading choices, Louise, while not uninterested in books, was attracted to entertainment made possible by advances in technology, such as going to the movies and riding in cars with boys. Louise was also distinctive in enjoying a sort of privilege and financial security that many of her peers did not. 6.  “In 1913 the first obscenity suit involving an American novel took place over Daniel Goodman’s Hagar Revelly, a cautionary but not overly judgmental account of a girl gone wrong,” according to Evelyn Geller [22, p. 100]. The Living Conditions of Progressive Era Youth A dialogue about female adolescents was carried on in many popular and professional outlets. Librarians conducted these discussions in their professional meetings and journals, but others whose work focused on adolescents’ development contributed to this sustained conversation about girls. Social workers and government administrators articulated concerns about the environment in which young people, especially young women, lived and worked. Their observations recorded the great strain young women faced in trying to earn their living and carry out other ordinary activities. Sexuality was often in the background of this discourse. For many girls and young women, sufficient wages, personal safety, and the right to be in public places were not fully established norms. As historian Philip Jenkins has stated, multiple sources detail the sexual and other threats to young women on city streets at this time [27]. Among them are works like The Child in the City, which collected reports presented at the 1911 Child Welfare Conference in Chicago in order to reveal “the unfulfilled demands of childhood today” [28, p. v]. The addresses, given by Jane Addams, U.S. Children’s Bureau Head Julia C. Lathrop, and others, argued the need to protect children and provide education, offering some attention to the particular concerns of adolescent girls. Juvenile Court Judge Merrit W. Pinckney observed of a teenaged store clerk forced to leave high school to help support her family, “After working a year or more for this store, she received the … salary of $4 a week. Is it any wonder she yielded to temptation?” [29, p. 352]. Titles like The Children in the Shadow, published in 1913, depicted in words and photographs the plight of youth without means. It included the story of a girl named Florence, “a frail creature physically and morally” whose garb included silk stockings and rouge, told by her mother that “the lower you fall, the higher you’ll bounce” [30, p. 14]. Regardless of a young woman’s decisions about sexuality, it was difficult for her, if alone and of limited means, to find a safe place to live; in 1914, the New York Times reported that tens of thousands of young women suffered from the paucity of housing or other support for “the respectable woman out of work and penniless” [31, p. SM9]. The respectable woman was one whose reputation was unblemished, who would not be suspected of permissive behavior or closeted prostitution, as some reformers observed, to supplement her meager earnings. Young women’s wages were often insufficient to afford rent, and the city’s aid agencies did not serve single women [31]. Thus, in spite of activism and reform work, difficult conditions for many young women prevailed in the Progressive Era. Progressive Era Readers’ Advisory for Girls Just as society at large viewed boys' and girls’ sexuality differently, many involved with guiding adolescents’ reading in the Progressive Era believed that, while boys and girls both needed good reading matter, the tastes and needs of each sex differed. Lurid and adventuresome dime novels, for example, were seen as more of a nuisance for male readers [32]. At the same time, there were numerous laments about young women’s attraction to sentimental novels and frivolous romances. Librarians’ articles and conference talks provided sex‐specific lists, although educators or ministers tended to identify titles presumed to benefit boys and girls alike. Such reading lists proliferated, even though titles were not always mutually exclusive. Some recommendations were firmly traditional, with books on sewing thought to benefit girls, while there was “no line of activity which the boy at a certain period of his development wants to know more keenly than uses of electricity” [33, p. 13]. Yet topics like gardening and science were presumed to be equally compelling to both boys and girls [34, p. 31], and one teacher argued that “there is no reason why they should not be encouraged in reading the same books on the sports and industries, and receive the same amount of good therefrom” [35, p. 154]. Despite these common reading interests, the assumption that girls’ reading preferences and needs were distinctive and that young female readers posed special challenges to librarians was frequently and strongly articulated in the course of Progressive Era reading guidance. Some librarians attempted to quantify the differences they saw in youth’s reading choices, recounting the results of surveys taken at their institutions or simply listing, as the Mankato Public Library did in 1909, “Some Books That High School Girls Like” [36, p. 289]. The methods used to conduct these surveys were seldom fully elaborated, but recommenders demonstrated the seriousness of their efforts by noting the collection of “600 ballots” or referring to an “investigation [that] covered about 150 high schools” [37, p. 188]. Titles frequently appearing on such lists included, for example, Rebecca of Sunnybrook Farm, Ivanhoe, Evangeline, and various works by Charles Dickens. Earlier efforts, in 1902, to account for female reading interests depended on librarians having asked what young female patrons wanted, reporting back preferences for “excitement or adventure,” “historical stories,” and “anything about girls” [38, p. 408]. Yet female reading was not understood simply in terms of preferences for content areas. Librarians also endeavored to understand female teens’ behavior. Their efforts in this were not unified. A few contrarians warned against responding negatively to readers’ preferences [39], and one presented the slogan “The right book for the right child at the right time” as a reflection of “great ideas and great ideals” rather than male or female attributes [40, pp. 168–69]. A literature professor who was asked to contribute to this discussion critically rebuffed librarians’ understandings of girls as requiring a different sort of reading, suggesting that librarians’ perceptions were out of sync with the real world. He argued that, if librarians deplored girls’ reading behaviors, then they should not encourage them: “If we do not want girls in their middle teens … to devote themselves so largely to the reading of love stories and fiction, we should not develop this taste in them” [41, pp. 21–22]. This refutation of the dominant strain of Progressive Era library literature on teen reading guidance hardly halted efforts to match the girl and the book. More common were articulations of the belief that girls read differently than boys did and that much was at stake in advising girls about reading [42]. These views were articulated by librarians and authorities outside the field who addressed the effects of reading on youth development. Morality, competing leisure activities, and the need for direction were the touchstones of these conversations. Psychologist G. Stanley Hall, the first psychologist to study adolescence as a distinctive developmental phase, was a key external authority who expressed concerns about reading, insisting that “there is something wrong about a girl who is a gormandizer of books … of any kind.” Among the concerns he presented was the possibility that “the modern school girl early in life will acquire false views of it … which will cloud her life with discontent in the future” [43, p. 391]. Multiple aspects of reading were responsible for these outcomes: for example, books intended for boys would condition her to aspire to masculine aims, and risqué love stories would contaminate her ideas about relationships. Girls, especially as they approached adolescence, needed far more protection from books than boys did, both because girls’ reading material tended to be poorer and because girls were more inclined to read than boys. The advantage to librarians in encouraging girls to the right sort of reading, according to Hall, was that girls were less drawn to prohibited books and more amenable to guidance. Reading guidance was the most essential function of the youth services librarian, he argued, because it was a kind of moral guidance. He told the profession: “Literature should preform moral choices which, having acted aright in ideal cases, will be more likely to do so in real and trying emergencies. Urgent as are practical needs in our age and land, librarians seem now likely to be held more and more responsible as guardians of all those educational agencies that take the individual out of his narrowness into the larger life of the race.” Concluding this eugenics‐tinged pronouncement, he predicted that the profession was “only just beginning … [its] task of ministering to the young” [44, p. 128]. Hall was a powerful and persuasive speaker, and his addresses to librarians reflected common concerns about reading’s potential to lead girls astray. Less florid, but equally passionate, librarian Lutie Stearns spoke and wrote multiple times on “The Problem of the Girl” and “The Book for the Girl,” warning, or perhaps commiserating with, her fellow librarians, “No greater problem confronts the librarian than the problem of the book for the girl—the girl that has outgrown her doll and her dishes along with her short skirts … who has become conscious that the life before her means energy and has caught glimpses of happiness and sorrow” [38, p. 408]. While Stearns promoted open access to books [45], when it came to adolescents, she advocated reforming readers’ ungoverned impulses. Responding to an example of an actual girl’s reading matter, a list containing everything from Water Babies and Dombey and Son, Stearns lamented the “aimless mixture of good and evil” [46, p. 105]. She argued that popular taste in literature had declined, as evinced by surveys of girls who argued that Jane Austen was dull but that the latest magazines were enjoyable [46]. Although she believed librarians ought to sympathize with “girlish needs,” she was nonetheless emphatic about participating in “the process of evolution” that will bring girls “into the high places of our glorious literature.” This would deter girls from accessing the “underground traveling library,” which allowed many to read “books of an immoral nature” [46, p. 105]. In these remarks, Stearns endorsed the popular sentiment that the wrong sort of reading could lead girls astray and that librarians must work to relate to youth interests while directing them toward better ideas. Other librarians echoed her concerns, while sometimes acknowledging that things other than books might lead girls to unwholesome ideas and actions. Magazines and other popular periodicals were the subjects of complaints, even as their appeal was recognized. Librarians were advised to consider how many young women read this sort of publication: “If you would know how real and far‐reaching is this influence in the reading of adolescent girls, spend one hour with … the women’s page editor, and ask if you may read the letters in her waste basket” [47, p. 166]. In these and similar statements, librarians seemed to recognize that their bookish province was under attack from popular media and even other professionals interested in youth. In 1911, one writer told her peers that, “The library has mighty influences to counteract—the lure of the nickelodeon with its moving pictures that often arouse a morbid curiosity … the cheap and sensational juvenile literature that is so widely circulated … and the ever present comic supplement that … has done more to debase and brutalize what is fine in boys and girls … than can be counteracted by all the attempts being made by school, church, museum and library” [48, p. 181]. Of these same contenders for young people’s attention, another librarian observed that “cases are not infrequent in which magistrates have stated that certain juvenile offenders brought before them owe their fall from virtue to vice to the direct or indirect influence of pernicious reading,” acknowledging that “this may be true in some instances.” This writer continued wryly, “It may have been noted that the Picture Palace is now a more favorite magisterial reference” [49, pp. 41–44]. In these expressions of concern and in numerous guides to “wholesome” books for girls, librarians of the Progressive Era considered how books and competing entertainments might lead adolescents to transgress. They sought to understand the interests and inclinations of potential youth patrons in order to counter endangerment with enlightenment. One librarian went so far as to criticize her fellow professionals for responding to “a girl [who] ‘goes wrong’” by holding “up our hands in horror” and insisting that “a bad girl is worse than a bad boy and hence more hopeless.” Instead, she urged consideration of how this state of affairs came to be [50, p. 13]. In these articles and presentations, librarians took up a concern that prevailed in the public discourse of the times, and they articulated ways that their libraries’ resources could be marshaled on girls’ behalves. Most of their ideas revolved around strategies for connecting female teens with improving books, in order, as one librarian wrote, to make “the adolescent girl … a source of pleasure and profit to all who may know her” [47, p. 167]. Still, some turned from books to the importance of the library as a place for youth, describing program work that hosted club meetings as another way of encouraging youthful self‐improvement [51]. A notable report on working with teen girls presented at a New York library conference contained the anecdote of a librarian who “once asked a group of girls what they would like to do; to her surprise they said that they would like to go downstairs to dance.” This request provoked the realization that “girls of that class have no respectable place to go for recreation, except the nickel show, and to the library” [52, p. 17]. This dawning recognition of the need for protected recreational outlets anticipates the American Medical Association’s 1917 resolution calling for “provision of suitable recreational facilities” as one of the “constructive measures” for “the prevention of venereal diseases” [53, p. 706]. Seeing the library as a safe place for young women is key to understanding the services that librarians provided to female adolescents in the Progressive Era. Girls’ Responses to Living and Reading in the Progressive Era Regardless of the earnestness with which the profession approached girls’ situations in an increasingly industrial, urban, and multicultural society, librarians’ efforts, even in tandem with those of other reform‐minded professionals, were insufficient to the self‐appointed task of keeping young women from moral harm or sexual experimentation. Anecdotes provided by fifteen‐year‐old Louise Hancock and by those who watched over her peers whom the courts deemed fallen indicate something of how teen girls responded to such efforts. Considered in the context of their social situation, these reactions suggest the significance of librarians’ hopes of providing young women with high‐minded reading. As the various public and professional discussions of girls’ transgressions persisted across the first decades of the twentieth century, Louise was one girl who went to the library, to the movies, and to dances with boys who sent her roses. She recorded her activities, like attending a reading circle and using the library to do her homework, except one day when “Lucy sent us out because she thought we were making too much noise.” Her notes about books are simple and seldom involve elaborate details or even titles, thereby revealing something of how she and other female teens interacted with libraries, schools, and other social institutions. Despite the considerable concern that librarians and those in the book trade evinced about their abilities to shape young women through literature, Louise suggested that they were simply one force vying for her attention, and not always the most competitive one. She provided more detail about movies, offering titles and even assessments of quality. Still more recollections followed her dates, when she would identify the songs she danced to and enthuse about the color of the flowers she was given by her dates. In spite of these apparent preferences for boys rather than books, there is no indication that Louise, in the language of the day, “went wrong.” She simply did not share librarians’ perception of the role of books in her active adolescent life. The library and its books, rather than being remarkable, seem normal; instead, Louise called attention to the activities and social interactions that she engaged in at the library. There were indications that less carefree girls also were intrigued by the idea of reading, even though their circumstances were not as benign as those enjoyed by Louise. In another Midwestern state, in 1909, Amos W. Butler, head of the Indiana State Board of Charities, conducted an inspection of the Indiana Girls School and its 295 female inmates living on 127.5 acres with three horses, thirty‐one swine, and 100 poultry tended by one farmer. The Girls School was a reformatory, and its inmates included those who had, in the most literal sense, “gone wrong.” Butler’s notes are telling. He indicated that the school had a library, but it likely saw little use. Regarding the female population’s reading ability, he wrote, “Lean. Nearly all want to” [54]. Thus, while librarians adopted the social concerns articulated in the public discourse of the era as a matter of professional action, those who were the true subject of evocative phrase “why girls go wrong” were unlikely to have benefited from librarians’ efforts. These girls’ illiteracy and their isolation from public library venues where readings lists and attention were provided were factors that placed them beyond librarians’ reach. Nonetheless, Butler’s records indicate that books and reading were desirable to the young women whom society and the courts referred to as girls “gone wrong.” Conclusion It has been argued that, in the early, post‐Victorian years of the profession, female librarians approached reading guidance by offering youth titles and authors that reflected their own status as middle‐class white women and conventional notions of femininity [55]. Yet the significance of these efforts extends beyond reflected values, because, by creating reading lists for girls and labeling certain books as wholesome and improving, librarians designated a public space as both appropriate and safe for adolescent girls. Such efforts were reflected in the work of many unremembered librarians, as well as those of Edith Guerrier, who not only strove to see girls read better books but directed the girls’ reading club that met at her library in the formation of the Paul Revere Pottery guild [56]. These activities appealed to contemporary young women: girls who had access to libraries seemed to value the social activities there as much as the resources that professionals devoted their time and efforts to collecting, while some young women without literacy longed to become readers. Guerrier and other librarians who aided young women’s development as readers in these years created, with their lists and prescriptions, a female sphere in the library. This interpretation returns us to Kerber’s arguments about the female sphere, conventionally a domesticated one that emphasized purity and goodness as markers of desirable feminine conduct. Kerber reminds us, though, that the sphere is a metaphoric one, socially constructed and interpretive to serve particular purposes [8, p. 39]. In their discussions of reading guidance to girls, Progressive Era librarians used the language of the female sphere to characterize the library, a public space, as one appropriate for young women. Rather than attributing the creation of a female sphere in the reading room to librarians’ personal attributes of race and class, it is worthwhile to consider concerns about gender of the time in which they lived. Public places were not neutral spaces that anyone could frequent; rather, many venues, particularly those associated with entertainment, were associated with immorality and vice. By coding their reading selections as wholesome choices and arguing for the reform of girls’ reading behaviors, librarians indicated that their reading rooms differed from the other public areas where a young woman’s virtue, or even simply her safety, was thought to be in jeopardy. Their evocation of traditionally feminine traits was not simply conformist; instead, in echoing conventional ideas about sex as a sort of wrong doing, librarians rhetorically aligned their domains with those accepted as moral and appropriate. While the profession’s activities on behalf of young women were far from all encompassing, this historic discourse shows librarians responding to contemporary concerns about teenaged girls’ sexuality. Thus, librarians’ reading guidance for girls carried a dual importance. By considering “why girls go wrong” and focusing attention on young readers’ mores, librarians’ activities paralleled those of their professional peers in other aspects of Progressive Era reform. The literature on reading guidance also demonstrated efforts to create a protective space, one absent of the moral and physical dangers present in other public places. This dialogue about young women’s reading, which saw female adolescents as distinct from their male counterparts, did not simply reinforce existing attitudes; rather, by acknowledging social norms, librarians signaled that their bookish domains were places where young women were led to wisdom and to right rather than to wrong ends.