Igniting Diversity: Actionable Methods and Ideas for Advancing Diversity in LIS Education in the US Shari A. Lee Division of Library and Information Science, St. John’s University, Email: lees2@stjohns.edu Renate Chancellor Department of Library and Information Science, Catholic University of America, Email: chancellor@cua.edu Clara M. Chu Mortenson Center for International Library Programs, University of Illinois Library at Urbana-Champaign, Email: cmchu@illinois.edu Howard Rodriguez-Mori School of Information, Florida State University, Email: hmori@fsu.edu Loriene Roy School of Information The University of Texas at Austin, Email: loriene@ischool.utexas.edu The Association for Library and Information Science Education (ALISE) appointed a five-member Taskforce in 2011 to pursue the development of an ALISE Statement on Diversity. Two years later, the ALISE membership voted unanimously to adopt the state- ment. In an effort to move the statement from mere words on paper, the Taskforce provided actionable models and ideas in an “ignite” session on diversity. In this collab- orative piece, four members of the ignite diversity panel share their ideas, experiences, and methods for advancing diversity in the classroom and beyond. Professors Renate Chancellor, Clara Chu, Howard Rodriguez-Mori, and Loriene Roy provide ideas and real world examples that can be readily implemented in the classroom, in research, and at the institutional level. While the United States provides the context for these discus- sions, many of these methods and ideas are readily adaptable to countries across the globe. Background and Introduction— diverse communities. Unfortunately these Shari Lee librarians are a rarity. In fact, this very is- sue was raised by librarians, library direc- A long acknowledged, but growing, tors, and Library and Information Science concern among library directors and (LIS) program directors who attended the library science educators in the United Deans and Director’s meeting at the 2011 States is that today’s librarians need New York Library Association Confer- unique skills, knowledge, and abilities in ence in Saratoga Springs. Attendees unan- order to provide the cutting edge library imously agreed that many newly qualified services the country’s growing number librarians are ill-prepared to work in di- of distinctly urban environments require verse neighborhoods. The consensus was (Wayne State University, 2008). This has that these librarians lacked the cultural spawned the term “urban librarians” to experiences necessary to support the 21st describe those who need to possess the century information needs of our increas- cultural awareness to work effectively in ingly culturally diverse user populations. J. of Education for Library and Information Science, Vol. 56, Supplement 1 ISSN: 0748-5786 © 2015 Association for Library and Information Science Education S47 doi:10.12783/issn.2328-2967/56/S1/6
S48 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE Similarly, the findings reported in the Edu- and/or at the institutional level. The ignite cating Urban Librarians Summit state that session, which I moderated, was tremen- an urban librarian should possess specific dously successful: attracting over 100 at- cultural competencies, one of which is tendees, several of whom described it as determined to be “an understanding and the “best” session they had ever attended appreciation of various cultures, a respect at an ALISE conference. The informa- for diversity and a willingness to deliver tion presented below constitutes a set of library and information services to each actionable diversity resources upon which and every patron” (Wayne State Univer- ALISE will continue to expand. sity, 2008, p. 5). In this collaborative piece, four mem- In considering this vision for diversity bers of the ignite diversity panel share and cultural fluency in the profession as their ideas, experiences, and methods well as LIS research and education, Clara for advancing diversity in the classroom M. Chu urged the Association to consider and beyond. Drawing on her innovative taking an official stance on diversity. Fol- teaching strategies, Renate Chancellor lowing Lorna Peterson’s successful Presi- provides step-by-step instructions on in- dent’s Program on diversity at the 2011 corporating assignments and activities ALISE annual conference, an ALISE Di- that not only expand the cultural fluency versity Taskforce was appointed to pursue of LIS students on an individual basis, but the development of an ALISE Statement which also open the door to candid class on Diversity. The five-member Taskforce, discussions on difficult issues. Clara Chu led by Chu, examined how to define diver- argues that “a critical approach to library sity, determined what should be included and information research requires engag- in a diversity statement, and looked at the ing multicultural knowledge, attitudes and impact such a statement would be expect- skills because most communities are mul- ed to have on ALISE and its membership ticultural.” However, in pointing out that in the US. This led to the adoption of a cultural awareness does not always lead definition of diversity that was crafted to to the appropriate action, she provides ten describe what diversity is, rather than how strategies aimed at reducing research bias. it might be achieved. At the 2013 ALISE While making a case for the inclusion of conference, the membership voted unani- cultural communication competencies in mously to adopt the ALISE Diversity State- LIS curricula, Howard Rodriguez-Mori ment. In the document, diversity is defined notes that the United States will become as “the difference among us” (Lee and progressively diverse. He argues that the Chancellor, 2011, as cited in the ALISE cultural factors that affect how people Diversity Statement, 2012). from diverse groups communicate, per- Given that LIS researchers, faculty, and ceive, and deduce meaning can have a administrators often lack the know-how significant impact on interpersonal inter- required to advance a diversity agenda, the actions. Therefore, LIS educators need Taskforce also presented an “ignite” ses- to consider how to incorporate cultural sion intended to move the statement from communication competencies into the mere words to one that provided action- curriculum. Finally, Loriene Roy cham- able models and ideas. The two-part ses- pions the integration of civic engagement sion held at the 2013 ALISE conference in in LIS education as a means of advancing Seattle, Washington took the following ap- diversity. She points out that through this proach: (a) introducing the ALISE Diver- academic approach educators and students sity Statement and next steps, and (b) pre- work together, which not only enriches the senting a panel on diversity that provided students’ learning experience, but also sig- actionable examples that could be readily nals a move from the lone-researcher model implemented in the classroom, in research, to one that is grounded in collaboration.
Igniting Diversity S49 These scholars address a critical area Although many LIS scholars have of need in LIS research and education, written about diversity (De la Peña Mc- which, by default, is reflected in the pro- Cook, 2000; Fish, 1992; DuMont, Butlar fession. Through the incorporation of their & Cayon, 1994; Gollop, 1999; Neely, strategies and ideas into LIS research and 1988; Peterson, 1996; Honma, 2005), few education, LIS professionals will gain publications provide examples of how to ground zero perspectives of the difference incorporate diversity in the classroom. among us, as well as an understanding of Moreover, while there have been elec- how to effectively serve the increasingly tive courses, such as Ethics, Diversity and diverse user populations across the United Change in the Information Professions at States. These strategies not only encour- UCLA [University of California, Los An- age thoughtful and reflective expression, geles], rarely do we see issues related to but they also lay the groundwork upon diversity in core courses. The following which researchers and educators can con- are three examples that have been used in tinue to expand in an effort to effectively the LIS foundations course at the Catho- incorporate diversity into current LIS ped- lic University of America, Department of agogy and research. Library and Information Science Program. Each has been used over the last five years Exemplars for Incorporating and has been successful in fostering en- Diversity in an Introductory Library lightening and provocative discussions & Information Science Course— on diversity. It is important to note that a Renate Chancellor holistic approach is applied when incorpo- rating diversity in the foundations course. In an era of controversial jury verdicts, Rather than focus on diversity for one or voter suppression, and talk of compre- two weeks, it is important to address the hensive immigration reform in the United issue throughout the course. This can be States (US), a foundations course in Li- done through lectures, class exercises, and brary and Information Science (LIS) is assignments. ideal for incorporating diversity into the curriculum. A typical introductory course The Diversity Awareness Quiz is usually taught as a seminar that covers (http://www.edchange.org/ traditional themes such as the history and multicultural/quizzes.html) nature of information and the role of li- braries and the profession in contemporary A classroom exercise that has been society. Emphasis is also placed on tech- very useful is the Diversity Awareness nological innovation, values, principles, Quiz created by Paul Gorski (2013). Al- legal, and ethical responsibilities of the though quizzes are not new the classroom profession, which provide grounding for environment, this one has proven to be ef- each student’s ongoing professional de- fective in generating good discussion on velopment and leadership (Rubin, 2010). diverse populations. Since questions on Evoking discourse on the current immi- the quiz do not specifically address infor- gration dilemma and how it affects users mation professions, it is important that the of information centers, or exploring what instructor provides context for students. impact, if any, have the recent jury deci- For example, one question asks, “What is sions and incidents of voter suppression the percentage of US schools that have no had on information professionals and race teachers or staff of color?” When the an- relations in the US is important. These swer is revealed to be 40%, students are are all current societal issues that can be asked, “What does this mean for informa- discussed in the classroom within the con- tion professionals?” This always stirs an texts of diversity and LIS. interesting discussion.
S50 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE The quiz is also intended to allow stu- b) The daily earnings of the average dents to understand, and possibly confront, CEO in the US personal biases they might have about cer- c) The weekly earnings of the average tain groups. It is always astonishing to see CEO in the US how students respond to the answers to d) The monthly earnings of the aver- some of these questions. Often there is an age CEO in the US evolution of thinking on views of certain groups at the conclusion of this session. Students are appreciative of the opportu- The Luminary Analysis nity to discuss this sensitive subject in a comfortable, non-threatening, environ- Popular among students, the library lu- ment. The following are three examples of minary analysis assignment has provided questions (with answers in bold) that have a great forum for engagement with a sig- been used: nificant luminary figure in LIS. Students 1. are required to write an in-depth analysis According to the 2006 report from the ACLU [American Civil Liberties and to present their findings in class using Union], African Americans comprise PowerPoint, Prezi, Youtube, etc. Lasting no longer than 15 minutes, presentations more than 37% of people arrested for must demonstrate the students’ under- drugs use, 59% of those convicted of standing of the luminary’s professional use, and 74% of those sentenced to prison for drug use. African Ameri- contributions. Assessment is based on the cans comprise this percentage of drug depth of knowledge, analysis, clarity of users: writing, and overall presentation. A list of recommended luminaries is provided for a) 15% the students. Included on the list, for ex- b) 30% ample, are: E.J. Josey, S.R. Ranganathan, c) 45% Augusta Baker, Regina Andrews, Pura d) 60% Belpre, Sandy Berman, Eric Moon, and Judy Krug. Student presentations have of- 2. What percentage of gay, lesbian, bi- ten segued to discussions about the history sexual, and transgender high school of discrimination towards certain groups students report that their teachers in LIS. Therefore, a collective learning “never” or “rarely” respond to ho- experience occurs—for the student who mophobic remarks made by students, researches the luminary and prepares the according to national study by the presentation, and for the class that learns GLSEN [Gay, Lesbian & Straight Ed- about the luminary from the presenter and ucation Network]? through the discussions that follow. a) 15.1% The Research Paper b) 37.8% c) 63.2% The core assessment for the course is d) 84.5% a research paper in which students ana- lyze an issue confronting the information 3. Based on a 2007 report from the Eco- profession. Students are strongly encour- nomic Policy Institute, the annual aged to research a topic related to one that earnings of the average full-time US has been covered in class, such as: policy, worker is roughly equal to: technological innovation, ethical issues, a) The hourly earnings of the average or diversity. The final product should CEO [Chief Executive Officer] in present an exploration of the topic that is the US well-researched, analyzed, and supported
Igniting Diversity S51 by documentation. In the past, students tributes to the development of informa- have examined the demographic disparity tion practices. Likewise, by substituting between library professionals and library “research” for “information” they can be users; the research strategies and methods mindful of the potential biases while con- used in public libraries to determine how ducting multicultural research. users with disabilities are accommodated; Moreover, racism is a placeholder for and the recruitment and retention of librar- other “isms” that signal social hierarchies, ians of color. and oppression of the “Other,” their cul- A foundations course in LIS educa- ture and history. It should be noted that tion is designed to provide an introduction racism doesn’t need to be associated with to critical issues facing the profession. overt acts of violence, such as burning of Global challenges such as laws to protect books or destroying of tangible cultural citizens, economic disparity, and criminal heritage, but includes silent acts of disal- justice are covered, along with more tradi- lowing of cultural practices, speaking in tional topics such as intellectual freedom, non-dominant languages, and not collect- surveillance and security, and professional ing or recording minority histories, rend- principles. Equally important are chal- ing them invisible. lenges of information equity, access, pow- A critical approach to library and in- er and diversity—diversity is more than formation research requires engaging nationality, gender, race, physical ability, multicultural knowledge, attitudes and or age. It is also language, religion, sexual skills because most communities are mul- orientation, and educational background. ticultural. First, one needs to recognize It simply is . . . the difference among us. (consciousness) the social construction All of these current trends are important in of knowledge and information practices. that they provide a grounding of the pro- That is, research needs to be conducted fession. Therefore, emerging information with attention to information as a social professionals must be aware and be able process. Second, by questioning (critical to grapple with these controversial issues, reflection) our assumptions and attitudes and what they mean for users nationally about the world (social, professional, in- and globally if they are going to be suc- stitutional) around us, we are critically ex- cessful in the 21st century and beyond. amining behavior and practices to shine a light on any injustices. Third, by acting Perspective and Bias in (change) to remove systemic barriers and Information and Research— to give voice to those silenced, we can be- Clara M. Chu gin to change both research and informa- tion practices for the better. Information both reflects and shapes so- In order to reduce sexism in research ciety, as society both reflects and shapes and adopt a feminist methodology, Margrit information. It is this interdependent Eichler (1988) wrote Nonsexist Research worldview that has allowed legal scholars, Methods, which identified seven sexist who use critical race theory as a research problems in research and provided strate- lens, to uncover the intersections between gies to address them. Eichler (1988) noted the law and racism. Invoking the work of that the basic problem that perpetuates critical race theorist Mari Matsuda (1996, biases related to gender/sex in research is p. 52), and positioning it within library and androcentricity, and Chu (2014) noted that information studies (LIS), LIS researchers the basic problem related to cultural/racial are called to uncover and understand the bias in research is ethnocentrism. Andro- ways in which information supports rac- centricity is the social condition that fa- ism and other forms of oppression, and the vors men, and ethnocentrism is the social degree to which racism/oppression con- condition which privileges mainstream
S52 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE culture and the predominant race. Eichler mainly White library users were stud- later expanded her work with Mary Anne ied. Conversely, over-specificity oc- Burke, to develop the BIAS FREE Frame- curs in a study when it is impossible work (2006), a three-dimensional matrix to determine if the findings or other that identifies and eliminates biases created aspects of the research are applicable by social hierarchies such as sexism, rac- to one or all races/cultures/ethnici- ism, ableism, ageism, etc. found in research, ties. Many of the problems associated legislation, programs and other practices. with biased or oppressive language fit in this category (e.g., racist language, Seven Cultural Biases in Research cultural omission, ethnic exclusion, etc.). For example, in a study that uses Informed by Eichler (1988), Chu (2014) the term Hispanic, does it also include proposed seven cultural biases in order to people from Spain, and when the term identify and eliminate cultural and racial White is used, do people of Middle biases when conducting research. These Eastern and North African descent ethnocentric problems, except the concept consider themselves in this category, of “privilege,” parallel Eichler’s seven which is how they are currently classi- sexist problems. fied in the US Census? 3. Culture/race insensitivity—Insensi- 1. Ethnocentrism—This is the act of tivity takes place in research when judging another culture using the culture/race is ignored as a social vari- norms of one’s own culture, con- able. If the aim of a study is to be able sciously or unconsciously, and consid- to access the community and obtain au- ering it more important or significant thentic responses, the cultural practic- than others. In the research process, es of the community under study need -ethnocentrism occurs when research- to be adopted, as in those communi- ers, who belong to the majority cul- ties that have norms about who may ture/race, overlook or devalue other interact with an older person or some- cultures and their communities. Thus, one of a specific gender, and how they research is conducted in accordance engage in these circumstances. Other with the parameters of the majority examples include instances when race culture. In the United States (US) and or culture is not considered in a study, much of the Western world, the White i.e., not used as an analytic variable, or race and their respective cultures are when race and culture is considered as considered at the center, and minori- the only analytic variable rather than ties are marginalized or oppressed, a multivariate category. When study- and are viewed as passive objects ing ethnic or racial groups, the use of rather than active subjects, acted upon additional variables such as length of rather than being actors. time in country, knowledge of heri- 2. Over-generalization, over-specificity— tage language, ethnic media use, etc. Over-generalization occurs when one would reveal aspects of the group’s cultural/racial group has been stud- experience or circumstances that are ied (sample) and is generalized to all associated with observations related cultures/races. An example would be to race or culture. research on e-book use in libraries in 4. Double Standards—A study uses dou- the Southern States of the US (where ble standards when it treats or mea- historically there are large numbers of sures identical behavior, traits, or situ- African Americans), which used lan- ations differently. For example, in the guage that generalized the findings US, when discussing film, the label to the region, but did not specify that Foreign Films rather than Internation-
Igniting Diversity S53 al Films is often used, which results objectivity is valued, English is the in the categorization of non-US films language of communication, and fa- as “Other.” In the music field, the cat- miliarity with consumer research and egory World Music has been used to other forms of surveys is the norm. group the various types of music out- 7. Culture/race dichotomism—Dichot- side the US In contrast many more la- omism occurs when races/cultures/ bels exist to recognize the variety of ethnicities are treated as discrete cat- music in the US such as jazz, blues, egories, attributing human character- country, and pop. istics to a race/culture/ethnicity, and 5. Culture/race appropriateness—Ap- ignoring intra-group differences. This propriateness is present when human leads to an exaggeration of differenc- characteristics are assigned only to es rather than an acknowledgement of one or another culture/race, and they both differences and similarities. An are very important in the race/culture/ example of this is when a minority ethnicity. Some cultures have certain group is associated with a feature or values, traditions or practices, but it stereotype and it is attributed to all in doesn’t mean that everyone in the the group, such as being good dancers cultural group applies them or cannot or math geniuses. adjust depending on the cultural mi- lieu. Culture is pervasive but not im- Ten Strategies to Reduce Research Bias mutable (e.g., nature vs. nurture). For example, in Latin American culture, Although researchers may be aware of there is an orientation toward the pres- and learn the research biases noted above, ent, so there is flexibility toward the awareness or understanding doesn’t nec- notion of time. Thus, in social circum- essarily lead to counter-action. Thus, the stances, there is a reference to “Latino following strategies offer essential and do- time,” which for some means arriving able actions to reduce research bias: late, but it means that one will arrive to the social event at the time that is ap- 1. Consider culture/race as a research propriate to the individual rather than factor. All research should consider necessarily at the start of the event. In culture/race as influencing the re- professional circumstances, however, searcher or study, and as appropriate, punctuality is standard practice. adopt it as a social variable for study. 6. Privilege—In research, privilege oc- Furthermore, researchers need to con- curs when researchers are a part of sider a multivariate approach to under- the dominant culture/race, hold spe- standing culture and/or race. cific assumptions to be normative, and 2. Understand how to conduct research don’t have to think about or adapt their within the applicable sociocultural research practices because the system context. When conducting research of is made for members of the dominant a community outside one’s own, there group. Moreover, in contrast to eth- is a need to learn and adopt culturally nocentrism, which emphasizes how appropriate and relevant methodology other cultures/races are judged, privi- and methods. By applying cultural rel- lege is the set of advantages or immu- ativism, the researcher can understand nities that researchers who belong to another culture in its own terms and the dominant culture/race have. In the using its own norms and rules. US, for example, Western theories and 3. Question objectivity and subjectivity. research methodologies are taught, In the name of objectivity, research and assumed to be applicable for is overlooked as a social act in order any research context by researchers, for it to be deemed robust. However,
S54 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE by acknowledging subjectivity in re- members? Funding for research on search, it allows for a clearer interpre- multicultural or minority issues is of- tation of the findings. Thus, research ten targeted or a one-time effort, lead- is in fact more robust when there is ing to one-time research that is not transparency, which can be achieved sustained, and/or to drive-by research, by reporting any issues in a “limita- where researchers are only interested tions” statement often found in re- in the research as an object and not a search publications, or by adding a subject, without a sustained commit- separate positionality or transparency ment to the community under study. statement. 7. Use the appropriate language. Be 4. Recognize one’s positionality. Re- cognizant about language use, in searchers should know their limits, terms of using language that does not weaknesses, and attitudes regarding offend, language at the appropriate the research topic, methodologies, and level of understanding, and the lan- methods in order to identify whether guage that the subject prefers, which and what assistance and knowledge may not be the language spoken by the they need, and to maintain transpar- researcher(s). ency through stating the study’s limi- 8. Understand authenticity vs. author- tations or the researchers’ positions. ity. When considering the intellectual 5. Engage in reflexivity. By reflecting on capital of researchers and subjects, the entire research process and con- the notions of authority and authen- text, the researcher is systematically ticity need to be clear and considered. attending to their effect on the study, Chu (2000) describes authority (es- and how these actions, attitudes, val- tablished reputation) as held by those ues, and beliefs impact knowledge who have subject mastery or expertise, construction. Researchers can use gained through academic training, ex- journaling to reflect, which allows tensive experience, or established or them to make the research process it- proven through prior work. Authority self a focus of inquiry. Overt biases is also reflected in the way that factual may be apparent in the regular course evidence is presented or documented of research, but this reflexive exercise in a work by footnotes or references. is critical in identifying unintended Authenticity (being true to culture), discrimination, such as micro-aggres- on the other hand, refers to knowledge sions. A micro-aggresion is an action that is realistic and true to the cultures or expression that, while made without presented, to the situation, and to life conscious choice, has the same effect based on the actual experience or per- as conscious, intended discrimination. spective of the culture itself or created For example, when one asks a person by members of the particular cultures. of color “where are you from?” it sig- It presents the internal perspective nals to that individual their foreigner rather than external perspective of a status. culture/race. 6. Attend to Intentionality. Research is 9. Diversify the research community. not just for research or knowledge’s By having researchers from different sake. It is critical to know the reason communities and experiences, diver- for conducting a study and its poten- sity creates the conditions for not only tial impact. In learning about the edu- diversity of research topics pursued cation performance of a community, but also of methods and methodolo- for example, is it only to understand gies applied. A more diverse research the community, or will the research community also creates an inclusive result in stigmatizing or helping its and robust peer-review process that
Igniting Diversity S55 welcomes diverse topics, methods and more diverse (Ortman & Guarneri, 2009; methodologies. Passel & Cohn, 2008; Pew Research Cen- 10. Practice a scholarship of dialogue. ter, 2013; Vincent & Velkoff, 2010). As A research subject (i.e., participant) modern society strives to keep up with shouldn’t just become an object. Ques- technological advances and innovations, it tions and research conditions should is of equal importance, and perhaps, im- allow them to provide authentic re- perative, that LIS programs also consider sponses, and to the extent possible, the inclusion of cultural communication allow them to be at the table to pres- competencies into their curricula. ent their perspectives on their research No other function of library service re- experiences and the topic. A scholar- quires more attention to advance diverse ship of dialogue (Chu, 2005) calls for interpersonal communication competen- research participants to have a voice cies than those that depend on direct con- and be credited for the research by in- tact with people, whether face-to-face, by volving them at conferences and other phone, or online. Library professionals forms of dissemination. providing information (reference), out- reach, and other customer-related services In summary, because meaning and will invariably engage in communication learning are contextual, it is important to interactions with the public, and unless recognize biases (positive or negative) in they are trained in intercultural communi- the process of any multicultural research cation competencies, they may, inadver- or academic endeavor. As Matsuda notes tently create barriers and hinder the out- “. . . where we stand shapes what we see, come of their service. what we believe, and what privileges and Let’s take a closer look. Communica- subordinations we experience” (1996, p. tion is the process of creating or sharing xi). Through the conscious act of recogniz- meaning through the use of verbal and ing one’s prejudice, research has a chance nonverbal behaviors (Verderber & Ver- of becoming less biased and providing an- derber, 2005), but there are also cultural swers that approximate reality. Through factors that affect how people from di- the conscious act of stating one’s position- verse groups communicate, perceive, and ality, even research that is biased would deduce meaning from communication in- be less so, because both the researcher and teractions. the consumer/reader are informed/aware When people interact with others (com- of what is influencing the research. municate), the intention is to transmit a message, and, in doing so, the sender tends Cultural Communication to assume that the message is received and Competencies to Bridge Barriers translated by the intended target person or in Communication Interactions— group according to the initial intention or Howard Rodriguez-Mori purpose of the sender. Yet, as the reader may note from the Shannon and Weaver’s It does not take long to realize how much model of communication (Case, 2012), society in the United States has changed the message is usually affected by factors in just 20 years. Technology innovations that may or not be in control of the sender. that are common in our daily lives and Cultural factors can, and often are some of workplaces did not, for the most part, exist those affecting factors. back then. In a global society, the demo- Communication is much more than just graphical composition of many countries words. Communication is a multimod- has also changed. One example of this is al process that uses the verbal medium the United States, whose population is, (voice), voice intonation, facial expres- and will progressively become, more and sions, and body language (Kress, 2010;
S56 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE Okun, 2002). At the receiving end, people tact, or provide the minimum service will receive or capture the content of the possible to others that look (or are as- message, but also the facial expressions, sumed to be) different. body language, and the intonation of the • A marked change in attitude when voice, and create a combined interpreta- interacting with people who are, (or tion. For some, understanding the verbal are assumed to be) from diverse and message is more than sufficient and will minority groups. Observed change in pay little attention to other communica- attitude may include friendly, “service tion factors. Yet, some people tend also with a smile” to mainstream customers to notice if the message carries more than that without reason changes to a frown a verbal message and will recognize, and and a stark attitude when servicing per- interpret other messages. Examples of this ceived minority customers. Selective include, among others, perceptions and use courtesies and small talk (and lack hints of sarcasm, happiness, sadness, and thereof) are also noticed. anger. There are people in some cultures • Preferential or full service treatment to that are more prone to perceive these hints mainstream customers, while limiting and interpret them according to their cul- options to others. This includes offering tural lens. Unfortunately for our profes- alternatives or options for services to sion, many public service librarians are some customers, while failing to offer not yet aware of this multimodal aspect of similar alternatives to people perceived communication and its potential to effects as minorities. on customer service. How much or how little people capture Perceived differences in service, un- from the multimodality of communica- fortunately, tend to be interpreted as the tion depends on their cultural background. organization’s culture rather than the em- According to Edward T. Hall (1976), cul- ployee’s attitude, and this has lasting neg- tural groups vary in how much, or little, ative consequences. When people from they use elements of the context of com- high-context cultures perceive disdain or munication to draw their understanding, a lack of desire to provide good and equi- or perceived meaning of the messages table service, they tend to look for alterna- they receive. As such, some cultures will tives elsewhere to satisfy their information draw meaning exclusively from the literal needs, and some may choose not to return meaning of words (low context). On the to the library for some time, or forever. other hand, high context cultures will draw In communication interactions, diverse meaning from a combination of elements, groups use and interpret context in differ- including the verbal message plus their ent ways. As a result, there are best prac- interpretation of non-verbal (conscious or tice variants that work in some cultures unconscious) messages. but not in all. Examples of how people Further, diverse groups will infer mean- from different cultural backgrounds and ing from perceptions of preferential treat- nationalities react to differences in ser- ment to others, or deferential treatment re- vice abound in the professional business, ceived when there are no obvious reasons communication, sociology, and market- for such treatment. Observed examples of ing literature. For example, people from preferential/deferential treatment include, some cultures will be put off or highly but are not limited to: upset if they are not addressed with their expected level of professional demeanor. • Customer service/front desk staff who Others, however, will not mind at all if try their very best to make and establish they are treated casually (Harris & Moran, contact with mainstream population 2007). Some groups prefer to “get straight customers, yet avoiding making con- to business” without much consideration
Igniting Diversity S57 to other factors, yet others will take their those in their social networks. As a result, time to study how they are treated in or- the lack of multicultural communication der to determine whether the individual or competence could have a multiplying ef- institution can be trusted with their busi- fect and lasting consequences for librar- ness. For them, until trust can be estab- ies. If our students are to become the front lished, they will avoid engaging in their face of libraries in this increasingly mul- intended business or information interac- ticultural and diverse global society, they tion (Hall, 1990; Korzenny & Korzenny, should be made aware of, and trained on, 2012; Schaefer, 2006). Other groups have cultural communication competencies. different nonverbal communication pref- erences. For example, some groups have Do it Yourself/Do it With Others: strong opinions and interpretations about Blending Teaching, Research, eye contact while interacting. Some peo- Service—Loriene Roy ple expect to make direct eye contact. Yet others will find it offensive, or will just I am an Anishinabe woman, enrolled hesitate and act confused (Harris & Mo- or affiliated with the White Earth Reser- ran, 2007). These behaviors and prefer- vation, and a member of the Minnesota ences are just a few examples of culturally Chippewa Tribe. My own perspectives on based factors that may affect the outcome advancing diversity within LIS education of communication interactions. reflect my cultural identity, my strong be- The question for LIS educators to con- lief in the potential contributions of service sider is: how do we incorporate cultural learning, and my treasured connections communication competencies to our cur- with other indigenous peoples around the riculum? Let us not forget that excellent world. I express these connections through customer service is not only expected of direct service, publications, teaching, and current LIS students (future library pro- collaborations. fessionals), but it is also the backbone of When alone, I continually return to two LIS ethical service. As we teach our stu- books by others for inspiration and sup- dents: port: Greg Cajete’s Look to the Moun- We provide the highest level of service to tain: An Ecology of Indigenous Education all library users through appropriate and and Linda Tuhiwai Smith’s Decolonizing Methodologies: Research and Indigenous usefully organized resources; equitable Peoples. Look to the Mountain affirms service policies; equitable access; and accurate, unbiased, and courteous [verbal the indigenous worldview as a process of and nonverbal] responses to all requests. seeking a fulfilled life, one that is a process of being, asking, seeking, making, having, (American Library Association, 2007) sharing, and celebrating. Decolonizing In order to provide the highest level of Methodologies reminds me that the pro- service, LIS students must become com- cesses of working as an indigenous scholar petent and pay active attention to all com- involves employing strategies that diverge munication elements. The verbal message from the quantitative and even qualita- is not an exclusive factor anymore. The tive methods that are more commonly traditional, one-size-fits-all service model discussed in graduate research methods is already obsolete. If LIS students enter courses. This involves recognizing and the work force being ignorant and incom- valuing the processes such as claiming, petent in multicultural communication, testifying, storytelling, remembering, re- their interactions with customers will be turning, naming, and protecting. My own affected. Those affected more adversely cultural background is based on a clan sys- will take notice, and will likely share tem. This tells me that successful efforts their experiences with family, friends, and evolve from ensuring that human efforts
S58 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE are balanced in terms of leadership, learn- events, and a book drop that involved the ing, sustenance, medicine, and defense. delivery a free new book to 10,000 Native LIS faculty can support and advance teens during National Library Week. The their own involvement in the philosophy Four Directions grant also involved mu- of diversity through service learning or seum staff and provided opportunities for civic engagement. This is an academic ap- a number of my students to work on digital proach that enables LIS educators to blend initiatives at the National Museum of the their teaching, research, and service while American Indian including the creation of including students. Over the past fifteen online exhibits. years, my students and I have contributed Over time, students developed end prod- to work that extends beyond individuals’ ucts to serve indigenous peoples. They did life spans and across borders. In this way, this in formal classes, through indepen- we have expanded the image of the solo- dent work, or through volunteering. They researcher, who is doing-it-by-him/herself developed websites for a Native filmmak- to a do-it-with-others model that more er, instruction videos for tribal colleges in honestly reflects and respects true col- the United States, Canada, and Aotearoa/ laborations. My students and I have cre- New Zealand, evaluated the collection at ated our diversity community of schools, a tribal public library, and co-authored/ museums, information workers of color, co-edited books and other publications. tribal colleges, and professional organiza- They traveled with me to conferences and tions within the United States as well as meetings in Arizona, Montana, Canada, with colleagues in Canada and Aotearoa/ Australia, and Aotearoa/New Zealand. New Zealand. These connections were These conferences included the Interna- aided by various tools, especially the use tional Conference of Indigenous Archives, of technologies that have allowed us to Libraries, and Museums; the World Indig- communicate across time zones and create enous Peoples Conference on Education; and contribute to demonstration projects. the International Indigenous Librarians While I am not a specialist in school li- Forum; and the annual conference of LI- brarianship, I had a small role in the late ANZA, the Library and Information As- 1990s in a large grant project called Four sociation of New Zealand/Te Rau Her- Directions that assisted tribal school edu- enga o Aotearoa. Other students traveled cators within the United States in using to tribal lands in Arizona and Washington technology to develop culturally based to helping catalog collections or organize curriculum. These connections, includ- map collections. Whenever I received an ing visits to a number of schools, and the invitation to join a project, this opened support of American Library Association the door to include students who would Past-President Sarah E. Long, led to our be my witnesses and collaborators. This launching a national reading club for Na- brought students in contact with key staff tive children through their tribal school li- at WebJunction, the Fetzer Institute, and braries. Operated largely by my graduate a publishing team for ABC Clio/Green- students, over ten years we delivered over wood and to the ALA, especially during 100,000 new books and developed read- the time I served as President-Elect and ing promotion events involving some sixty President. schools, including a school serving Maori In time, the student group enlarged as children on the North Island of Aotearoa/ I served as an adjunct professor in the New Zealand, enrolling children from School of Information Resources & Li- kindergarten through high school. These brary Science at the University of Arizona events included sponsoring writing and and in the Library and Information Sci- art contests, a regional battle of the books, ence Program at the University of Hawaii literacy open houses, scary story open mic at Manoa. I was able to recruit American
Igniting Diversity S59 Indian and Native students in our iSchool to communicating the efforts and their with support from one of the first Laura outcomes. Bush 21st Century Librarian Program 6. Be patient. Remember to provide ser- grants from the US Institute of Museum vice without expectation; lessons and and Library Services. Those graduates are gifts will return your efforts. now connecting with other Native new 7. And take time to acknowledge the les- professionals, creating the next generation sons you learn: celebrate, honor, and of Native information workers developing dream. innovative services and interdisciplinary scholarship. We learned much about program man- References agement through these experiences. Work American Library Association. (2007). Code of with indigenous peoples has its own ethi- Ethics. IL: American Library Association. Re- cal and social concerns. I offer these rec- trieved from http://www.ala.org/advocacy/pro- ommendations to other LIS faculty mem- ethics/codeofethics/codeethics bers interesting in finding their path to Burke, M. A. & Eichler, M. (2006). The BIAS FREE advancing diversity: Framework: A practical tool for identifying and eliminating social biases in health research. Ge- 1. Begin with friendship. Meet Native neva: Global Forum for Health Research. people on their ground. Start by at- Cajete, G. (1994). Look to the mountain: An ecology tending both local events and profes- of indigenous education. Skyland, N.C.: Kivaki sional meetings where Native people Press. gather and their issues are discussed. Case, D. O. (2012). Looking for information: A sur- While indigenous librarianship is dis- vey of research on information seeking, needs, cussed at meetings and programs of and behavior. Bingley, UK: Emerald Group. the American Indian Library Associa- Chu, C. M. (2000). See, hear, and speak no evil: A content approach to evaluating multicultural mul- tion (AILA) and at the annual Asso- timedia materials. RUSQ: Reference and User ciation of Tribal Archives, Libraries Services Quarterly, 39(3), 255-264. & Museums (ATALM) conference, Chu, C. M. (2005). Web based communities schol- consider attending and participating arship: From silence to dialogue. International in other meetings of such groups as Journal of Web Based Communities, 1(4), 423– the Native American and Indigenous 435. Studies Association (NAISA), the Chu, C. M. (2014). Investigación sobre necesidades World Indigenous Peoples Confer- y uso de la información de grupos multicultura-les [Research on information needs and use by ence on Education (WiPC:E), and LI- multicultural groups]. In J. Tarango, L. P. Mur- ANZA conferences. guía-Jáquez, G. Ascencio-Baca, & J. R. Romo- 2. Create your global community. Native González (Eds.). Educación y servicios bibliote- peoples view their families and con- carios: conectando fronteras (255–268). Buenos Aires: Alfagrama. nections beyond traditional govern- mental boundaries. Gorski, P. C. (2013). Diversity awareness quiz-zes [Measurement instruments]. Retrieved from 3. Be attentive to protocol or the Native http://www.edchange.org/multicultural/quizzes. ways of communicating. Ask for guid- html ance. De la Peña McCook, K. (Ed). (2000). Ethnic diver- 4. Reflect on your role in collaborative sity in library and information science. Library Trends, 49, 1–219. efforts. Consider your motivation for participation. You need not always DuMont, R.R., Butlar, L., & Caynon, W. (1994). Multiculturalism in libraries. Westport, CT: lead an initiative; sometimes listening Greenwood Press. is the best action. Read about the con- Eichler, M. (1988). Nonsexist research methods. cept of shared authority. Boston, MA: Allen & Unwin. 5. Be inclusive, especially with regards Fish, J. (1992). Responding to cultural diversity: A
S60 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE librarian in transition. Wilson Library Bulletin, Ortman, J. M., Guarneri, C. E. (2009). United States 66(6), 34–37. population projections: 2000 to 2050. Washing- Gollop, C. (1999). Library and information science ton, D.C.: Census Bureau. education: Preparing librarians for a multicultural Passel, J. S., Cohn, D. (2008). US population pro- society. College and Research Libraries, 60(4), jections: 2005–2050. Washington, DC: Pew Re- 385–394. doi: 10.5860/crl.60.4.385 search Center. Hall, E. T. (1976). Beyond culture. Garden City, Peterson, L. (1996). Alternative perspectives in li- N.Y.: Anchor Press. brary and information science: issues of race. Hall, E. T. (1990). Understanding cultural differ- Journal of Education for Library and Informa- ences: Germans, French and Americans. Yar- tion Science, 37(2), 163–174. mouth, ME: Intercultural Press. Pew Research Center. (2013). America is chang- Harris, P. R., & Moran, R. T. (2007). Managing cul- ing. Washington, DC: Pew Research Center. tural differences (7th ed.). Houston, TX: Butter- Retrieved from http://www.ncsl.org/documents/ worth-Heinemenn. summit/summit2013/online-resources/taylornc- Honma, T. (2005). Trippin’ over the color line: The sl2013.pdf. invisibility of race in library and information Rubin, R. (2010). Foundations of library and in- studies. InterActions: UCLA Journal of Educa- formation science (3rd ed.). New York: Neal- tion and Information Studies, 1(2). Schuman Publishers Inc. Korzenny, F., & Korzenny, B. A. (2012). Hispanic Schaefer, R. T. (2006). Racial and ethnic groups marketing: Connecting with the new Latino con- (10th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson/ sumer. London, UK: Routledge. Prentice Hall. Kress, G. (2010). Multimodality: A social semiotic Smith, L. T. (1999). Decolonizing methodologies: approach to contemporary communication. New Research and indigenous peoples. London; New York, NY: Routledge. York: Zed Books; Dunedin, N.Z.: University of Otago Press. Lee, S. A., & Chancellor, R. (2011). Definition of Diversity, adopted by the ALISE Diversity Task- Verderber, R. F., & Verderber, K. S. (2005). Com- force for the ALISE Diversity Statement, Janu- municate! (11th ed.) Belmont, CA: Wadsworth. ary 19, 2012, Dallas, TX. Available: http://www. Vincent, G. K., & Velkoff, V. A. (2010). The next alise.org/alise---alise-diversity-statement four decades: The older population in the United States: 2010 to 2050. (P25-1138). Washington, Neely, T. Y. (1988). Diversity in conflict. Law Li- brary Journal, 90 DC: US Department of Commerce, Economics (4), 587-601. and Statistics Administration and the US Census Matsuda, M. J. (1996). Where is your body?: And Bureau. other essays on race, gender, and the law. Bos- Wayne State University, Library and Informa- ton: Beacon Press. tion Science Program. (2008). Educating Urban Okun, B. F. (2002). Effective helping: Interview- Libraries Summit final report. Retrieved from ing and counseling techniques (6th Ed.). Pacific http://slis.wayne. edu/about/ urban_libraries_fi- Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole-Thomson Learning. nal_report.pdf