UNIVERSITY LIBRARIES FACE THE FUTURE' KEYES D. METCALF War rE ARE here today to dedicate a building which is a noteworthy forward step in library co-op- eration. I am proud and honored to have been selected to represent the outside library world. I take it that I was chosen because, some ten years ago, it was my good fortune to supervise a study, made by John Fall, of the New York Public Library, of the need for a regional li- brary in the Middle West.2 At that time I spent a day with the men who were then presidents of thirteen midwestern universities, a group that was struggling with the problem of inter-university co- operation. I must confess with some chagrin that many of the librarians of those universities were then opposed to a regional library, while the university presidents were, on the whole, favorably inclined toward the proposal. Funds were not available, and the project was held in abeyance for a happier time. In the last decade, most of those presidents have retired, as have most of the head librarians who were then in office. The change in presidents did not result in a different attitude toward the proposal. Happily, the change in librarians did. Some of us are inclined to think that the world moves slowly as far as co- operation is concerned, but the fact that we are here today to dedicate this Center is the best of evidence that librarians. at least, have taken long strides during the last ten years. I want to take this opportunity to congratulate those concerned with the planning and construction of this build- ing, particularly on two counts. First, on its appearance: it is a noteworthy addition to library architecture at its best. You can all be pleased by it and proud of it. Second, on its economical construction: it was built at no greater cost per thousand volumes housed than was estimated by the University of Chi- cago's architect ten years ago, when building costs were about half what they are today, and that, I assure you, is no mean feat. I was asked to speak on the subject "University Libraries Face the Future," and I suppose that the title was assigned because I ventured to speak at the dedi- cation of the Lamont Library at Har- vard two years ago on "The Harvard Library Faces the Future." That was a difficult task, but to speak adequate- ly for university libraries in general is much more difficult. The program calls my talk "Inter-Library Co-operatiQp and the Future." What I have to say will, I think, fit either title. The first and most obvious thing to say about the university libraries of the future is that they will continue to grow. Some of us have spent a good share of our lives trying to increase the size of libraries and have perhaps failed to real- ize that one of the easiest things we could do was to make our libraries grow rapidly. Library growth reminds me of 1 A paper presented at the dedication ceremony of the Midwest Inter-Library Center on October 5, 1951. 2 John Fall, "A Proposal for a Middle West De- posit Library" (MS in the New York Public Li- brary. New York. N.Y.). 5
6 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY the Sorcerer's Apprentice, who turned on the water but didn't know the com- bination with which to turn it off and so was swamped by the results. That is now happening to many of us, and, while we still enjoy the swimming, we are begin- ning to be worried about the future. I often say that one of my duties at Har- vard-perhaps the most important of them-is to keep its library from grow- ing as fast as it has grown in the past. So far I must confess that I have failed miserably. One way to describe the growth of li- braries is to observe that we have as many university libraries today in this country with over i ,ooo,ooo volumes as we had in 1920 with over 250,000- fourteen in each case. During the same period, the annual expenditures for books for these libraries have more than tripled, rising from an average of less than $75,000 for each to about $245,000, and the money spent for staff salaries has gone up from a little over $I00,ooo for each library to something approaching $500,000. While I hope that we shall not grow so rapidly, per- centagewise, in volumes and in money used for staff and books in the next thirty years as we did in the last thirty, I think it not unreasonable to expect that in I 980 we shall have more li- braries with 2,000,000 volumes than we had in I920 with 250,000. Libraries will grow in size, and, as one result of that growth, they will re- quire more and more money. This can- not help meaning that, as we face the future, we are going to have financial problems. Perhaps we had better speak plainly and say that we shall be in fi- nancial difficulty. No library, even in the boom days of the late twenties or the somewhat similar period immedi- ately after World War II, ever seemed to have all the funds that its librarian would have liked to have at his dis- posal. We always want more money for more books, and then more space to take care of those books. We want to spend more money for cataloging not only because there are more books to catalog but because the cost of cata- loging increases as the library grows larger and also because there is a tend- ency on our part to want to do more and better cataloging. You may call this a beneficent or a perversive tendency, as you like, but it costs money for staff and, incidentally, for space for the staff. Then, for some reason or other, the better the librarian, the better service to the students and faculty he wants to give, and the students and faculty ap- parently do not object to better service if it is made available. So it seems to me obvious that, as we face the future, there will be a constant demand for larger budgets. But there must be a limit to the funds that we can, or for that matter should, put into our libraries. For a large part of the last thirty years we have been living in an age of economic expansion-of great university building programs and of rapidly growing student enrolments -and, as a result, we have not realized so fully as we should that in our li- braries we have a section of our uni- versities that tends, year in and year out, in good times and bad, to increase in size and cost geometrically, while the rest of the institution grows arithmeti- cally. It is obvious that this cannot go on without the library's taking an ever increasing percentage of our total re- sources. That, expressed in other terms, means that, if we have a fairly stable economic situation-that is, if we have a return to "normalcy" and if our li- braries are permitted to continue to
UNIVERSITY LIBRARIES FACE THE FUTURE 7 grow as they have in the past-each year (and I put it as dramatically as possible) professors will have to be dropped so that the money from their salaries can be spent for library pur- poses. This, I submit, may very well turn out to be an untenable situation from the over-all educational point of view, one not desirable for the univer- sity or, for that matter, for the library itself. Sooner or later we shall find that there is a limit to the percentage of the funds in each university that can be properly spent for the library. As far as I know, there has never been an ade- quate study made of this problem. The figures should, of course, vary in differ- ent institutions. One that is interested primarily in the scientific and techno- logical fields and spends a large share of its funds for its laboratories should, other things being equal, use a smaller percentage for its libraries than an insti- tution that specializes in the humanities and the social sciences. An institution that emphasizes its graduate work and has a large research faculty will require larger library expenditures than an in- stitution that is primarily undergradu- ate in character. Even if a formula were found on which to base library expendi- tures, it would have to be interpreted with great discretion and changed from time to time. The percentage should undoubtedly be increased when a new library building is constructed and then should decrease (very gradually, of course), as the years go on. In times such as we have been going through during the last five years, when, rightly or wrongly, clerical and professional library salaries-because of the mar- ket rate of pay-increase more rapidly than the salaries of professors, library expenditures inevitably increase more rapidly than those of the institution as a whole, if service standards are to be kept up. We have recently had a study known as "The Public Library Inquiry," spon- sored by the Carnegie Corporation and the American Library Association. I suggest that it would be desirable to have the library situation in colleges and universities studied in a similar manner, and one of the important points to be considered should be the proper relationship of library expenditures to those of other parts of an institution. If such an inquiry is made, I do not know what the results will be. Un- doubtedly, some institutions will find that they are not spending enough for their libraries and should be urged to appropriate more. Others will find that they are already spending as much as can properly be devoted to the library without interfering unduly with the rest of the university's educational program, and a few may discover that their li- braries have overexpanded. But I am sure that, in the years ahead, we are going to have to consider more seriously than in the past the rate of library growth which we encourage or permit, the total size of the accumulation of books that we gather together, and, finally, the whole question of the weed- ing-out of our collections. We may well set an outside figure on the number of books that we can afford to keep on our campuses. We should study the cost of weeding and the methods to be used in determining the books that may be dis- carded. We should plan our catalogs and records in such a way that we can "de-catalog" a book less expensively than is now the case. In brief, when we have found the proper level of library expenditures in relation to the rest of the institution, we must manage to stick to it; and, to do this, I am sure that we
8 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY must have more inter-library co-opera- tion than we have ever had in the past. I have talked for a long time in order to provide a background for the main points that I want to make. As we face the future, with larger libraries, greater costs, and more financial troubles, we must have more inter-library co-opera- tion along many lines. We must, for instance, go forward with co-operative storage in libraries such as this one, particularly when by so doing we can eliminate little-used, unnecessary dupli- cates; but we must not stop there and think of the Midwest Inter-Library Center as solely or even primarily a storage library for little-used books, because that is only a part of the picture. I think that, ultimately, there should be, in addition to the Midwest Inter- Library Center, a number of other re- gional libraries, one in the Northeast, one near Washington in which the fed- eral libraries should join, one some- where in the South, and one in the far West. I hope that all these will be avail- able not just to a limited number of li- braries that take the initiative in start- ing them but to any library that is ready to co-operate and pay its fair share of the costs. In this connection let me add that, when institutions use collections brought together and fi- nanced by others, they must expect to pay their way directly or indirectly. In addition to these regional libraries, I believe that we should have less pre- tentious and more local institutions, such as the New England Deposit Li- brary, to house material that does not require on-campus storage but should not be too far away. These deposit li- braries have their place. They have many important features, but their scope is limited, and they cannot take the place of the regional libraries. There might well be one of them in every large metropolitan center. I hope that the whole group of regional and deposit li- braries will work closely together. I am sure that their collections should be re- corded in the Union Catalog of the Li- brary of Congress and that they should co-operate closely with the national li- brary. As I have already indicated, we should not stop with co-operative stor- age, and I am very glad to learn that the Midwest Inter-Library Center con- siders storage less important than joint acquisition programs. We must have such programs, both in connection with and separate from the regional libraries, programs through which fewer copies of books that will obviously be little used are purchased in the beginning, thereby saving cataloging, storage, and purchase costs and freeing funds for other, much needed books not now available. The Farmington Plan, even if it develops much farther than it has as yet, should be considered as only one step in this program. Some of these programs should be connected with the regional libraries, but others may be the result of unilateral agreements be- tween libraries within a region, as there are some collections that are more suit- ably stored in a university library than in a regional library. In this connection, however, I think it will often be easier to persuade libraries to join in a re- gional plan than to agree on co-oper- ative acquisition arrangements with an- other library that may have been a rival in the past. A neutral center, such as a regional library, should be helpful. We must forget as far as possible about inter-library rivalry. We have gone a long way in this direction al- ready by realizing that no one library
UNIVERSITY LIBRARIES FACE THE FUTURE 9 can have everything and that unneces- sary duplication of little-used books among libraries reduces the total re- search resources of the country and just does not make sense. On the other hand, we must realize that we cannot cure undesirable rivalry any more than race prejudice by going too fast or by being arbitrary in dealing with it and thereby arousing passions. It may well be that it would be better, theoretical- ly, for Harvard to send its Gutenberg Bible and its Bay Psalm Book to Chi- cago, because Yale has a copy of each, but I doubt that we would promote inter-library co-operation at Harvard by proposing it. We must not forget about micro- filming, when that will help, or about microcards or microprints. I believe that there is a place for all three of these methods of photographic repro- duction. Microfilming should be con- sidered primarily when a single copy, or a very limited number of copies, is re- quired. I might interpolate at this point my belief that microfilm would have come into wider use in the last decade if we had been wise enough to make it, particularly for reproductions other than newspapers, in sheet form some- what similar to "microprints" or micro- cards instead of in reels. Microcards and microprints are edition methods. They are not economical for a very few copies because of the cost of making the original master negative, but they are suitable if a large edition can be printed at once and advance orders can be arranged. This brings me to another interpola- tion which seems appropriate. It has been suggested for many years that microreproductions of one kind or an- other should, in the long run, replace a large part of our library collections and that these copies could be made available for less than it would cost to store the original volumes in co-oper- ative storage warehouses. Expressed in a different way, the theory is that it costs as little for each of a group of libraries to own a microreproduction as it does for the group to share the cost of housing the original. I have yet to be convinced, with the high labor costs of today, that microreproductions are cheaper than the storage of an original already in hand and stored under inex- pensive conditions, unless fifty copies or more of the reproduction can be sold without great sales expense. I suggest that further study be made of this problem. Neither am I ready to propose that all originals of materials that have been reproduced photographically should be discarded, but replacement of the origi- nals in many libraries should be con- sidered, if it can be proved that the savings are great. If the library already owns a bound volume, the saving made by buying a photographic reproduction may be negligible, and, as I have always said, we shall rarely, if ever, find it pos- sible for any library to replace a large part of its collection by microfilm. But if not one of a group of libraries owns a volume, the cataloging, binding, and storage costs, as well as its purchase price, should be considered. We may well find, then, that if microreproduc- tion is kept in mind from the beginning and the material is copied for a num- ber of libraries at once, microreproduc- tions will prove to be even more useful and economical than we have already found them. We must, incidentally, consider the acquisition of material that is used heavily for a short time and infre- quently thereafter. This may deserve
THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY only temporary cataloging and storage; and, when the proper time has come, we may dispose of it and rely on micro- film copies, with perhaps one copy of the original for the whole group of li- braries. This logically brings us to a kind of co-operation that has been neglected up to this time, namely, the co-oper- ative acquisition of master-microfilm copies of bulky sets of little-used ma- terial, such as some foreign and state public documents. Those of us who have had our own microfilm programs Ihave been inclined to try to sell as many copies of the film as possible, so as to reduce the cost for each copy, and have failed to realize that the net cost to the library would would be less if a group of libraries split among them the cost of making master-negatives and then made it possible for each of them to acquire or borrow a positive of any part of the microfilmed material when it was needed. This may be a field of great im- portance for a library such as this one. Some of us will object, of course, to this, as well as to all kinds of co-oper- ative storage, on the basis that most material is of little use unless it is actu- ally- under our roofs at the time it is called for. Here I think we shall have to realize that we can no longer afford to store in our own buildings all the ma- terial that we may want. This is a fact that must be emphasized if the Midwest Inter-Library Center is to be a success. Our scholars will have to be content in many cases to wait twenty-four or even forty-eight hours for books or re- productions of books. It may be incon- venient, it may require a change in work habits, but it is practicable for most of us; and our methods of re- search will have to be adapted to cur- rent conditions just as they were in the past, when many of our scholars had to wait for years until they could make a trip abroad to see the books and manu- scripts they needed. The choice may be between having several million addi- tional volumes available on one or two days' notice and having a small frac- tion of that number under our own roofs. I am sure we must continue the strug- gle to find better ways and means to carry on co-operative cataloging so as to hold down expenses in that field. This is another problem that we have by no means solved as yet. The Library of Congress cataloging takes care, to a very considerable extent, of the needs of our smaller university and college and public libraries. This, unfortunate- ly, is not true for our great research libraries, and many of us have found that joining in co-operative cataloging as well as adapting Library of Congress cards resulted in additional expense rather than saving. I think that the time has come for a new study of the co-operative cataloging situation and for a report on it to the research li- braries of the country. Indeed, a full-scale study of the whole cataloging situation in research libraries is in order. While it is not diffi- cult to argue that the larger the library, the more detailed the cataloging should be and the higher the standards used, it is also not difficult to prove that spending as much for cataloging as many of us now do prevents us from acquiring additional books and pam- phlets that might be even more valuable to research workers than higher cata- loging standards. A third cataloging problem which must be faced within a generation is whether the card catalog which we have come to take for granted has not
UNIVERSITY LIBRARIES FACE THE FUTURE II reached a state where it will begin to break down of its own weight in our larger libraries. I believe that we shall always have card catalogs for our re- cently published material, but I am not at all sure that we shall not find it more economical and convenient and more useful for research, in the long run, if a number of our largest institutions, in addition to the Library of Congress, print catalogs in book form for older material, either independently or, better still, jointly. Another problem on which I feel that special study is required is the question of fees for library use by those who have no official connection with the institution owning the volume required. Such use might include requests for inter-library loan as well as use in per- son. I think that most of us have felt in the past that there should be com- pletely free use of material by any re- search worker, but I am not so sure that we are going to be able to promote inter-library co-operation of the kind that I have outlined if a few libraries carry most of the burden of the cost of acquisition, cataloging, storage, and service of material and then find that the use of the books is largely by others. We may well find that a reasonable sys- tem of charges for use by outsiders would, in the long run, encourage li- brary co-operation and joint acquisition programs. This problem may prove to be one of the most important and diffi- cult ones to be faced by the Midwest Inter-Library Center. All these points which I have dis- cussed seem to me to be of importance, but there is another matter which I cannot refrain from mentioning and for which I have no solution. I am inclined to think that it may be more serious and more important than all the other matters which I have taken up put to- gether, but it is one that we are prone to forget. Every year that goes by brings closer the time when a large percentage of the printed material in in our great research libraries will have reached a stage so near to disintegra- tion that further use may destroy it. Our public and college libraries, on the whole, will not have to worry about this problem, for the books that they must have are mostly modern and re- placeable, and it is easy to arrange to replace books needed by a good many libraries; but there are millions of dif- ferent titles on poor paper in our larger libraries of which few copies are avail- able, and, though these are not worth reprinting, we ought not to let them disappear off the face of the earth. Microfilming, of course, will help. It has largely solved this problem with newspapers, but it and other amelio- rating plans have not even scratched the surface of the main problem. Are we ready to join Louis XV and simply say, "After us the deluge! Let our suc- cessors face the problem of paper dis- integration"? Finally, we must make a special effort to eliminate as far as possible the fur- ther building-up, and in many cases the continuance, of large duplicate collec- tions of very specialized, little-used ma- terial. Why should a single section of the country have three large collections of Friesian literature, old textbooks, or material on Egyptology, for instance? This question, alas, cannot be an- swered by librarians working alone or with one another. It will have to be answered on an inter-university level by the top university administrative officers. A library is primarily a service institution. If a university insists on giving advanced work in Egyptology,
I2 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY it is up to its librarian to furnish the material required, in spite of the fact that there may be two or three other universities in the region, each trying to specialize in Egyptology, each with only one or two students in the field, and each with a large and expensive library collection on the subject. But the decision is in the hands of the uni- versity, and it would seem to me that the heads of the universities must get together and make firm commitments for specialization in such fields as those just mentioned. Division of fields on the university level, not just that of the library, is one of the best possible ways to relieve financial pressure for the li- braries and for universities as a group, and it should release library funds and funds for instruction that can be put to better use in fields not now covered in the same part of the country, if at all. Let me now attempt to summarize what I have said. As university libraries face the future, they must take into consideration the fact that libraries will continue to grow, that they will require larger and larger budgets, and that money will be short. Libraries cannot continue to grow as in the past without taking a larger and larger share of the resources of their institutions, unless we can bring about more inter-library and inter-university co-operation. That co- operation should include: i. A careful inquiry into the library costs and their proper relationship to the total expenses of the insti- tution 2. Regional and deposit libraries for the storage of little-used collections 3. Joint acquisition programs, going on from the Farmington Plan, in which regional libraries should take a lead- ing part 4. Promotion of library co-operation in the field of microreproduction 5. A study of co-operative cataloging methods, including the question of printing catalogs in book form 6. An investigation of the desirability of fees for inter-library use 7. An attack on the paper disintegra- tion problem 8. Consideration of the division of fields among universities, not just by libraries but by the top-level uni- versity officers as a group I propose that foundation aid be so- licited to finance a study of these prob- lems by a competent outside group and that it be sponsored by the American Association of Universities and the As- sociation of Research Libraries. I fur- ther suggest that the Midwest Inter- Library Center would provide a first- class background for much of the work and that one of the results of the study might well be the development of the next regional library.