THE LIBRARY QUAR TELY Volume XIV JULY 1944 Number 3 SPECIAL COLLECTIONS OF NEGROANA ARNA BONTEMPS R EFERENCES to special collections of Negro lore have been cropping up in library literature for a long time. Soon or late, no doubt, it was in- evitable that someone should have a look at the whole species. The present report is the result of such an inspection. Obviously, all Negro collections could not be examined at first hand or studied closely. A few outstanding, and perhaps representative, examples were selected after preliminary inquiry, and these (minus one described elsewhere)' are the collections treated herein. THE SCHOMBURG COLLECTION OF NEGRO LITERATURE Perhaps the best known-certainly the most publicized-of the Negro col- lections is located in the One Hundred and Thirty-fifth Street Branch of the New York Public Library. The Division of Negro Literature, History, and Prints, as it was originally designated, was es- tablished in 1925. A year later it ob- tained the Schomburg Collection, one of the largest and most important private libraries on the Negro. With this ac- quisition, containing between five and six thousand books. three thousand manuscripts, two thousand etchings, and several thousand pamphlets, the division at once became a center for scholarship dealing with Negro life and history. Actually, the collection has a longer history than the date of its founding implies. Indeed, it has three histories. The first can be traced in the history of the New York Public Library itself. The second is rooted in the Harlem communi- ty. And the third is a personal story. As early as I902 the bulletin of the New York Public Library mentioned a "list of works relating to the American Colonization Society." Later surveys of resources and guides to special collections have noted the "slavery" collection of the New York Public. While these items do not relate directly to the Division of Negro Literature, History, and Prints, a certain kinship may be detected. Al- most from the beginning of its existence the New York Public Library appears to have shown some interest in Negro ma- terials. Moreover, there was precedent of an- other sort in the New York system. The central library includes other racial divi- sions which antedate even the "slavery" collection. The Jewish, the Slavonic, and the Oriental divisions are examples. I "The James Weldon Johnson Memorial Col- lection of Negro Arts and Letters," Yale Univer- sity Library Gazette, XVIII (1943), 19-26. i87
i88 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Even the notion of putting such material in a neighborhood library was familiar. The collection of Czechoslovakian liter- ature is located in the Webster Branch, and the Russian literature collection, formerly located at One Hundred and Twenty-fourth Street, is now at the Hamilton Grange Branch, following the ethnic group as it shifted from one sec- tion of the city to another. So, while the Division of Negro Literature, History, and Prints, including the Schomburg Collection, was at the time of its estab- lishment the only division of its kind in any public library, it was not without a certain background in New York. Its roots in the community are per- haps equally significant. When the One Hundred and Thirty-fifth Street Branch was established in I905, the neighborhood which it expected to serve was a quiet, well-to-do American Jewish section. By I920 it had become half-Negro, and the influx was just starting. Ernestine Rose, chosen because of her experience in de- veloping library service among racial groups, was made librarian for the ex- press purpose of adapting the staff, service, and book stock of the branch to its altered public. By 1924 Harlem had become the acknowledged capital of Black America. Its population, thanks to the migrations of the preceding dec- ade, had reached approximately I 50,000. At the same time it had drawn Negro talent and leadership from all parts of the United States and from the Caribbean. Young musicians and writers assembled there. Serious scholars took note of the group and of its relation to the burgeon- ing community. All-Negro shows be- came Broadway hits. The American Mercury, at the peak of its popularity, came out with a series of spectacular articles on uptown doings. Novels like Carl Van Vechten's Nigger Heaven be- came best-sellers. Park Avenue dis- covered a fabulous night life centered around the Cotton Club, Baron's, the Nest, and other spots in Harlem. The Survey Graphic published a large special issue devoted to Harlem. The attention thus drawn to the new nerve center of Negro life in America resulted in a book called The New Negro, in which the same material was greatly expanded. These, and scores of related developments, gave the community a new spurt of growth, a fresh surge of race conscious- ness. By the end of T924 Ernestine Rose had a serious library problem on her hands. Books on the Negro were in such de- mand that they could not be kept on the shelves. So avidly were they read, in fact, that their mortality exceeded their birth rate. Titles which continued in print could not be replaced fast enough with the available funds. Books hard to obtain were deteriorating without hope of replacement. The branch librarian was frankly distressed. In her perplexity she called together a group of influential scholars and leaders from the communi- ty. Among them were Arthur A. Schom- burg, James Weldon Johnson, Hubert H. Harrison, and John Nail. The first result of the consultations which followed was the decision to start a modest collection of rare books relating to the Negro, books difficult to replace. These were to be withdrawn from the circulation department, the primary aim being simply to preserve the existing resources in this field. This modest ges- ture provoked an immediate response on the part of the community and of those who had been called in to represent it. Gifts and loans came to the new collec- tion from the private libraries of people like J. E. Bruce, Louise Latimer, Hubert H. Harrison, George Young, Dr. Charles D. Martin, and Arthur A. Schomburg. Perhaps the idea of building up a col-
SPECIAL COLLECTIONS OF NEGROANA I89 lection that would give the Harlem pub- lic a sense of background had already occurred to Miss Rose. The New York Public Library's general policy of buy- ing books of special neighborhood in- terest would suggest this. In any case, the books withdrawn from circulation and placed in the reference room soon began to supply material to students of Negro history and culture both in the neighborhood and elsewhere; and on May 8, 1925, the new Division of Negro Literature, History, and Prints was officially opened. In outlining the division's plans to the press, Miss Rose called attention to the fact that, although there were then collections of the same kind in the Li- brary of Congress, in the libraries of such institutions as Tuskegee and Howard University, in certain large city refer- ence libraries, and in a few private li- braries, the collection at the One Hun- dred and Thirty-fifth Street Branch promised to become one of the largest and most valuable in the whole country. She gave her reasons for this prediction: To begin with, there is the question of avail- ability. Works of this nature in private collec- tions and in institutions are not readily accessi- ble to great numbers of students of these prob- lems, either white or colored. We have here in Harlem the greatest negro city in the world- approximately I75,000 colored inhabitants. There should be available for these people and for those who have their interests at heart the most interesting and complete collection that can be formed. These books will foster the inter- est of the children and young folk in the history of their own race and inspire them to develop their own talents. The collection should be available equally to scholars, to the man in the street and to school children of all races. She called attention to several unique items in the collection as it existed then (none of them impressive by later stand- ards) and announced the organization of a group of prominent persons to pro- mote the new department. Today her statement seems overly optimistic, on the basis of the collection in hand and the immediate prospects, but it was taken seriously by the Times and other New York newspapers, and in I926 the collection received the windfall that justified Miss Rose's optimism and raised the division to its present impor- tance. This came with the acquisition of the Schomburg private library. The third history behind the Schom- burg Collection of Negro Literature is, as has been suggested, a personal story. Arthur Alfonso Schomburg, a Puerto Rican partly of Negro descent, was born in I874. He was educated in Puerto Rico and later at St. Thomas College. In I89I he came to the United States. Here he was employed for a number of years as a clerk by the Banker's Trust Company. But the force behind his long and zealous career as a collector of Ne- gro lore appears to have been generated by a casual statement by one of his ele- mentary teachers on the island. That individual, as Schomburg later recalled, dropped the remark before his pupils that the Negro had no history. There was no bitterness in the observation as he made it, no intended aspersion. Yet the assertion touched off a fire in Schom- burg that was still burning brightly at the time of his death on June Io, I938. Oddly enough, this story is essential to an understanding of the collection which the One Hundred and Thirty- fifth Street Branch has built around the private library of Arthur A. Schomburg. Here, in fact, is its point of unity, its principle of selection, its area of interest. That the story encompasses and re- flects a special need of the community can also be assumed. "The American Negro must remake his past in order to make his future," Schomburg wrote in an essay included in An Anthology of Ameri- can Negro Literature. "When we consider
I90 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY the facts, certain chapters of American history will have to be reopened." He then pointed to an exhibit of pamphlets, documents, prints, and engravings from the collection in the New York Library and asserted proudly, "Here is the evi- dence." His argument is worth following: Though it is orthodox to think of America as the one country where it is unnecessary to have a past, what is a luxury for the nation as a whole becomes a prime social necessity for the Negro. For him, a group tradition must supply compensation for persecution, and pride of race the antidote for prejudice. History must restore what slavery took away, for it is the social darage of slavery that the present gener- ations must repair and offset. So among the ris- ing democratic millions we find the Negro thinking more collectively, more retrospectively than the rest, and apt, out of the very pressure of the present, to become the most enthusiastic antiquarian of them all. This point of view, Schomburg ad- mitted, is not new. In i8o8 Abbe Gre- goire, the genius of French abolitionist sentiment, published in Paris a book about distinguished Negroes. Two years later the volume was issued in transla- tion in Germany and England. Com- pendiums of the same sort have followed at intervals ever since. Many of them, Schomburg grants, have been "over-cor- rective, ridiculously over-laudatory," but the purpose has generally been sound. Today scholarship in this area is better balanced, and the need is for a well- documented history-a history that is "less a matter of argument and more a matter of record." Schomburg's own research had, he felt, established at least three conclu- sions: First, that the Negro has been, throughout the centuries of controversy, an active col- laborator, and often a pioneer, in the strug- gle for his own freedom and advancement. This is true to a degree which makes it the more surprising that it has not been recognized earlier. Second, that by virtue of their being regarded as something "exceptional," even by friends and well-wishers, Negroes of attainment and genius have been unfairly disassociated from the group, and group credit lost accordingly. Third, that the remote racial origins of the Negro, far from being what the race and world have been given to understand, offer a record of credible group achievement, when scienti- fically viewed, and more important still, that they are of vital general interest because of their bearing upon the beginnings and early de- velopment of culture. The international flavor of his collec- tion becomes understandable when these points are held in mind. Schomburg's European quests and his preoccupation with Latin-American materials begin to make sense. The rarities and treasures which he unearthed begin to take their places in a clear-cut scheme. Under these conditions one would scarcely expect to find the collection putting great store by slave documents. Even folklore could be expected to take second place to records of achievement and evidences of Negro progress. Jupiter Hammon's An Address to the Negroes in the State of New York (edition of I787), the work of America's first Negro poet, was obviously in the right mood, for Schomburg could heartily ap- plaud the poet's now famous remark: "If we should ever get to Heaven, we shall find nobody to reproach us for be- ing black, or for being slaves." Manu- script poems and early editions of the works of Phillis Wheatley, slave girl, immediately became part of the "evi- dence" which the collector had dedicated himself to assembling. In the same category were the sermons of Lemuel Haynes, the Negro who served as pastor of a white church in Rutland, Vermont, for thirty years following the Revolution- ary War, and John Marrant's St. John's Day eulogy to the "Brothers of African Lodge, No. 459," delivered at Boston in
SPECIAL COLLECTIONS OF NEGROANA I 789. The scrapbook of Ira Aldridge, Negro actor who won fame in Europe as a Shakespearean actor during the nine- teenth century, became an appropriate item. The same could be said for the various editions of Clotel; or, The Presi- dent's Daughter; A Narrative of Slave Life in the United States, the first novel by an American Negro. Items acquired abroad, some of them even rarer than his Amenrcan discover- ies, frequently tended to reinforce Schomburg's conclusions about the Ne- gro's past. Naturally, a copy of Juan Latino's Latin verse (Granada, 1I573) was cause for excitement. The same au- thor's book on the Escorial (I576) was a find of almost equal value. Remem- bered as incumbent of the chair of poetry at the University of Granada during the reign of Philip V and spoken of as the "best" Latinist of Spain in his day, Latino had not been thought of as a Ne- gro for generations. Schomburg reminded scholars that Juan Latino was a full- blooded African Negro and offered the poet's verse on the return of the Spanish prince from the battle with the Turks at Lepanto, published twenty years before the first of Shakespeare's writings, as an exhibit of Negro accomplishment. These were starting-points. Latin and Dutch treatises were found. The auto- biography of Gustavus Vassa, which led to Granville Sharp's attack on slavery in the British colonies, was included in various editions. Schomburg found copies of the Almanacs (X792 and 1793) com- piled by Benjamin Banneker, the Ne- gro whose unusual abilities were em- ployed by Thomas Jefferson and others. It is not surprising that the collection had become widely known before the New York Public Library set eyes on it or that Schomburg himself should have been called into the conferences when it was first proposed to set up the new division in the One Hundred and Thirty- fifth Street Branch. The transaction by which Schom- burg's private library was acquired was not a complicated one. The collection was purchased by the Carnegie Corpora- tion at the suggestion of L. Hollings- worth Wood, Charles S. Johnson, and Eugene Kinckle Jones, officials of the National Urban League. The price, $IO,OOO, was regarded as token pay- ment, a mere fraction of the collection's, actual value. It is thus suggested that Schomburg had a personal interest in placing the books in the Division of Negro Literature, History, and Prints. The first attendant of the collection was Mrs. Catherine Latimer. A later gift from the Carnegie Corporation in I932 en- abled the New York Public Library to retain Mr. Schomburg as curator, a posi- tion he held, with certain interruptions, until his death. In I939 Lawrence D. Reddick suc- ceeded Schomburg. Since that time ac- counts of the collection have appeared regularly in the yearly reports of the New York Public Library. Meanwhile, the holdings of the collection have been ex- panded and the directions of its future development outlined. The search for rarities continues; "old" items still get more than a third of the annual book budget. New books dealing with the subject of the Negro and books by Ne- gro authors are added to the division as soon as published. The collection of manuscripts and letters has been en- riched by subsequent contributions. The correspondence between Paul Laurence Dunbar and his agent, Paul R. Rey- nolds, donated by the son of the latter, was such a gift. SeveralAfrican collections have come in. These include the Blon- diau-Theatre Arts Collection from the
192 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Congo, gathered by Dr. Alain LeRoy Locke; the Nigerian Collection from West Africa, donated by Mrs. Florence Bruce; and the African masks and fe- tishes placed on exhibit by Mary Hoyt Wiborg. From other patrons of art, as well as artists, have come various single pieces to be added to the collection. There are in the division at least two thousand etchings, lithographs, engrav- ings, and water colors by Negro artists and of Negro subjects. A spectacular new acquisition is the Eric de Kolb Col- lection of African arms, containing rep- resentative war weapons from all over that continent. The collection has many autographed letters and inscribed volumes. A number of Negro newspapers and magazines of America, as well as some from the West Indies and Africa, are to be found in its files. The projected "Calendar of the Manuscripts in the Schomburg Collec- tion of Negro Literature" will be a large volume. The division also owns a micro- filmed version of the most nearly com- plete existing file of Frederick Douglass' newspaper. By reason of its location in the heart of Harlem the Division of Negro His- tory, Literature, and Prints has been as- sociated with a number of related activi- ties. One of these was an experiment in adult education, because "the One Hun- dred and Thirty-fifth Street Branch Li- brary was recognized throughout the city library system as one that had suc- cessfully attempted to make itself a part of its community." Another has been an annual "Honor Roll of Race Relations," the result of an extensive poll of scholars and leaders conducted by the division. Still another has been a series of forums and book evenings which have at one time or another included such speakers as Franz Boas, Percy Stickney Grant, James Weldon Johnson, Alexander Gold- enweiser, May Lamberton Becker, Hey- wood Broun, W. E. B. DuBois, Carl Van Doren, John W. Vandercook, Chris- topher Morley, Richard Wright, and scores of others. The division has been visited by Mrs. Franklin D. Roosevelt and praised by Mayor Fiorello La Guardia, who, on the occasion of the cornerstone ceremony, October 28, I94I, made it the object of some of his most ringing eloquence. "We give you the key to the temple of knowledge," said the Mayor. "Come in and use it." In 1935 a Citizens' Committee of the One Hundred and Thirty-fifth Street Branch Library was formed for the pur- pose of obtaining more adequate quar- ters for the steadily expanding work of the library in general and of the division in particular. Twenty prominent Ne- groes supported the library's request for- funds, and in I940 the Board of Esti- mate and Apportionment appropriated the final sum and Louis Allen Abram- son was named as architect for a new building. For a year, dunng construc- tion, the division was housed at the Har- lem Branch on One Hundred and Twenty-fourth Street. The new quar- ters into which it moved at the end of that period included the entire top floor of the newest and finest branch library building in New York. Subsequently it adopted officially the name by which it was best known: The Schomburg Col- lection of Negro Literature. The collection can now offer its users ample room in which to carry on their investigations. That this was needed is indicated by the steadily increasing number of patrons and the mounting number of books whose authors make due acknowledgment of the collection's value to them. Like all other collections of its kind,
SPECIAL COLLECTIONS OF NEGROANA the Schomburg Collection of Negro Literature has come to the point where it must define the field of its future growth and expansion. Dr. Reddick has set these forth in a recent interview. The collection will continue to add to its re- sources all new publications that fit into the categories already established. It will consider any title which concerns the Negro in the United States within its scope. Outside the United States it will seek to be exhaustive in the Negro in Latin America, with special reference to the Caribbean, and in Africa in the twentieth century. The collection will take a positive interest in race relations at home and abroad. Obviously, Schomburg's principles are still the basis for the expansion of the col- lection which he founded. Dr. Reddick's proposals in no way conflict with Schom- burg's own forward glance. "The.. . most fascinating of all of the attempts to open up the closed Negro past," the lat- ter once said, "[is] the important study of African cultural origins and sources. The bigotry of civilization .... must be corrected at its source. Fundamen- tally, it has come about from that depre- ciation of Africa which has sprung up from ignorance of her true role and posi- tion in human history." The recognition which African sculpture, for example, had received, first in France and Ger- many, then gradually in the United States, seemed to him to be highly signifi- cant. The treasure of treasures in the Schomburg Collection is, of course, the volume of Juan Latino's poems. Edward Laroque Tinker, columnist for the New York Times Book Review, is authority for the statement that this is one of the rarest books in the world. In the Schom- burg Collection, however, the Juan Lati- no is both a treasure and a symbol. It suggests both the past which the collec- tion has sought to rediscover and the kind of future toward which it strives. A LIBRARY OF NEGRO AUTHORS: THE ARTHUR B. SPINGARN COLLECTION The Arthur B. Spingarn library is the only collection of its kind which limits itself to Negro authorship. All the others have focused their interest upon Negro life or history as a subject. The collection which has evolved from this principle of selection has more in common with the Schomburg Collection (with its accent on achievement) than with any of the others examined in connection with this study. The result is not surprising. Arthur Schomburg started his collection for the purpose of correcting historical misrepre- sentations which embarrassed him as a Negro. Arthur B. Spingarn, a white man actively interested in the welfare of Ne- groes, started out to "assemble a small representative group of books that I could show to doubting friends who questioned the intellectual capacity of the Negro." He intended to offer these few specimen books to his own acquaint- ances who asked, "If the Negro has the capabilities you insist he has, why hasn't he published books to prove it?" That this plan would gradually extend itself into an endeavor to collect all books written by Negroes certainly did not oc- cur to him at that time. Yet this is its present scope and ambition. While the goal has not been achieved, it has un- doubtedly been approached. This means that, barring a few score rare items that have eluded the collector, all books by authors known to have been Negroes have found a place on his shelves. Mr. Spingarn admits the obvious possibility that many foreign-language books which
I94 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY would fall within the area he has selected may have escaped him. The extension of his first modest en- deavor to its present scope he attributes to a human instinct which he has de- scribed as the "mania for completeness." Thus, the endeavor to collect "some- thing" the Negro had written became the really large task of acquiring "every- thing" the Negro had written. The method by which he proceeded was not unconventional. He began with his own reading and experience. The first step was to acquire as large a list of Negro names as possible to carry in his memory for reference purposes. When- ever these basic names were encountered, they would be recognized. With this equipment he turned to the available check lists, to Who's Who's, to American Negro and African college catalogs, to histories, church records, biographies, autobiographies, proceedings of Negro conventions, transactions of lodges, anti- slavery literature, and Negro periodicals. Abbe Gr6goire's book of Negroes of achievement (Paris, i8o8) offered a good point of departure. The names in- cluded in this volume were followed through the catalogs of the great Ameri- can libraries, the British Museum, and the Bibliotheque Nationale. An antholo- gy called Les Cenelles, published in New Orleans in I845, became even more use- ful. Written in French by free men of color, Les Cenelles was the earliest col- lection of poetry by Negro poets in the United States. Its contributors, pursued singly, turned out to be surprisingly good material. One of them, for example, was Victor Sejour. Spingarn's discovery of this au- thor, one of the most popular dramatists of his period in France, is typical of the general results of his search. French en- cyclopedias like the Nouveau larousse illustre and the Larousse du XXe siecle generally assume that Sejour was a Pari- sian and carelessly state that he was born in the French capital. Nothing is said of his Negro blood, for from their point of view, as in most countries other than the United States, and perhaps Great Britain, this has generally been re- garded as an immaterial literary consid- eration. It has meaning for this collec- tion, however, and Spingarn made it his business to establish the point. When Sejour's name was found among the colored poets of New Orleans in Les Cenelles, Spingarn went to work on his bibliography. A diligent quest, here and in Europe, eventually yielded copies of nearly all the dramatist's twenty-two published plays. Later investigation by scholars whose attention had been drawn to Sejour's origin brought out the fact that he had been born in I817 in the heart of the old French quarter of New Orleans. His white father, a native of Saint-Domingue (colonial Haiti), and his free colored mother were not married at the time, but later this omission was corrected. Sejour's baptism was recorded in St. Louis Cathedral. The free colored caste numbered near- ly twenty thousand in New Orleans at the time Les Cenelles was published. Many of its members were well-to-do, and a surprising number of them were sent to Paris to be educated. Many, like Victor Sejour, remained abroad to escape the restrictions imposed upon their group in New Orleans-though these were, in the main, far less severe than elsewhere in the southern states. Against this back- ground the story of Sejour was easily un- derstood. Moreover, it was a clue to other writers from the same background. This type of historical and biblio- graphical detective work was essential to the principle of selection which Spingarn
SPECIAL COLLECTIONS OF NEGROANA I95 had adopted. His sources were severely limited. Check lists on the so-called "Ne- gro problem" seldom differentiated white and colored authors, being concerned as they were with the Negro as a subject, not as a point of view or as a voice. A few specialized histories were found to have bibliographies appended, but most of these were too sketchy to be helpful to a man who had undertaken to collect "everything the Negro had written." Even Monroe N. Work's extensive Bibliography of the Negro was so far from complete that Spingarn presently found that he had approximately a thousand books and pamphlets not listed in the volume. None of this is meant to imply that conventional tools were of no help at all. Vernon Loggins' The Negro Author, re- stricted to American authors writing be- fore I900, was useful within those limits. Specialized check lists of poetry were found; also catalogs of exhibitions. More often, however, Spingarn appears to have relied on his own enterprise. He ex- amined all the existing collections he could find, public and private. He wrote letters to editors and scholars in the United States, in Africa, in the West Indies, and in Central and South Ameri- ca. He made contacts with American consuls in a variety of places. And he hobnobbed with others who were work- ing the same field, exchanging books, stories, and ideas with these kindred spirits. The current output he endeav- ored to follow through the usual book supplements and trade publications. This presented no special problem. In the whole world of books, however, the question, "Who is a Negro?" is not an easy one. Neither Walter F. White (The Fire in the Flint, Flight, Rope and Faggot) nor Charles W. Chesnutt (The Conjure Woman, The House behind the Cedars, etc.) nor Jean Toomer (Cane) would be considered a "Negro" any place other than in the United States or perhaps Great Britain. Yet they live and write as Negroes here. Alexandre Dumas, father and son, and Alexander Pushkin would be classified as Negroes in the United States, though they neither lived nor wrote under such a label. Others, like Audubon and Browning, must be put in a doubtful category. Spingamn broadened the base of his selection to include any author who would be classified as a Negro in the United States. This, it need scarcely be added, gave him ample scope. It meant, for example, a wide swath for his blade in Brazil, Cuba, and most of Latin America and the Caribbean area. It meant, to put it in quite another way, the inclusion of more than two thousand authors before I937. Even then the coverage was by no means complete, and since that date it has been steadily expanded. While foreign publications covered some of the most interesting areas in the field which Spingarn had chosen for him- self, they also offered some of the most annoying problems. As has been indi- cated, Negro authorship is a concept which lacks meaning in many foreign countries. Here and there, however, Spingarn managed to stumble upon the kind of help he needed. The Bibliograffa de autores de la raza de color de Cuba by Trelles (I927), while neither exhaustive nor completely accurate according to the United States definition of "color," was nevertheless such a help. It listed some- thing over a hundred Cuban writers of Negro blood. Similar assistance was found in an exhibit of books at the Club Atenas in Havana, where seven hundred works by colored Haitians were dis- played. To these Spingarn was able to add a bibliography gleaned from the
i96 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY hundred-and-fifty-year-old work by Ab- b6 Gregoire and from the titles men- tioned in Duracine Vaval's history of Haitian literature and in the anthologies of Louis Morpeau. Then in 194I Ulrick Duvivier published his useful Bibliogra- phie generale et methodique d'Haiti in two large volumes at Port-au-Prince. This was a start, but it added up to an unim- pressive total when considered against the complete output of colored authors in languages other than English. For the rest, Spingarn worked unassisted. How well he has succeeded can be judged by a sampling of some of his rari- ties. He has, to begin with, acquired works by all but one or two of the Negro authors mentioned by Gregoire. He has assembled nearly all the items recorded by Loggins. And, within the areas which these men sought to cover, he has found many titles missed by them. Typical of his acquisitions are the following: The Spingarn library, while still housed in the collector's home, is avail- able to bona fide scholars, subject to a single stipulation: that they first exhaust the resources of such public institutions as are accessible to them. The books are arranged in six divisions:- American, African, French, West Indian, Portu- guese and Brazilian, and Dutch and i. Juan Latino's Ad Catholicum pariter et invictissimum Philippum (Granada, I 573). 2. J. E. J. Capitein's Dissertation on Slavery in Latin and in Dutch, published in Leyden in 1742 and his Sermons published in Dutch the same year; the former is interesting not only because it is an early, perhaps the first, disserta- tion of a native African presented to a European University but because of its content; it is a defense of slavery. 3. Some fifteen addresses and petitions by Julien Raymond and other colored residents of St. Domingo addressed to the National Assem- bly of France during the French Revolution. 4. Some Royal Almanacs published by the Court of King Christophe between i8i6 and I820. 5. Probably the only copy of Phillis Wheat- ley's Poems uncut in the original wrappers. The first and American editions, which are rarer than the English edition. Also, some of her verses in broadside pamphlet form published prior and subsequent to her volume of 1773. 6. Two original pamphlets by Jupiter Hammon. 7. The first and later editions of the works of Ignatius Sancho, Gustavus Vassa, and Ottobah Cugoano. 8. Original pamphlets by Richard Allen, Absalom Jones, Benjamin Banneker, Daniel Coker, Paul Cuffe, Abraham Johnstone, Hosea Easton, Lemuel Haynes, John Marrant, Henry Sipkins, Prince Saunders, William Whipper, Martin Delany, Henry Highland Garnett, Nathaniel Paul, Benjamin Hughes, James W. C. Pennington, David Ruggles, Robert Purvis, James McCune Smith, Frederick Douglass, Robert Elliott, P. B. S. Pinchback, Blanche K. Bruce, and F. L. Cardozo. 9. The Constitution and By-Laws of the Brotherly Union Society (I833). io. The African Methodist Hymn Book, edited by Bishop Morris Brown (I833). i I. The first four editions of Walker's A ppeal (two of them called "2d ed."). 12. Proceedings and Minutes of about twenty-five early Negro conventions, beginning with I831. 13. A file of Frederick Douglass' paper, from the first number in I85I to I856, not complete. 14. A collection of several hundred slave narratives and autobiographies. 15. Les Cenelles, edited by Armand Lanusse in New Orleans (I845); the first anthology of Negro poetry in the United States. i6. Joseph C. Holly's Freedom's Offerings (i853); one of only two known copies. I7. The earliest extant known volume of Albery A. Whitman, believed to be unique. i8. A collection of over four hundred vol- umes of poetry and about an equal number of fiction titles published by colored authors. I9. Several hundred volumes on church history and Negro Masonry. 20. A representative group of works by na- tive Africans and a number of works by na- tives of the British and French Colonies, Haiti, South and Central America, and Cuba. 2I. A collection of upward of two thousand musical compositions by Negroes. 22. Most of the books and many of the pamphlets issued since i9oo.
SPECIAL COLLECTIONS OF NEGROANA other languages. The African section is broken down into native dialects, Eng- lish, French, Arabic, and Portuguese. One subdivision of the French section is devoted to Haitian authors. In the same way the writers who used the Portuguese language are divided geographically. The American section has been sub- divided even further. Here the headings include: (i) church history and theology; (2) slave narratives, biographies, auto- biographies; (3) rarities; (4) history; (5) education; (6) proceedings and reports of conventions; (7) sociology; (8) law; (9) medicine; (io) fraternal organiza- tions; (ii) notable individuals: W. E. B. DuBois, Frederick Douglass, William Welles Brown, James Weldon Johnson, etc.; (I2) poetry; (I3) drama; (I4) fic- tion. These groupings, with the thousands of titles involved, are not to be taken as evidence that the Negro has thrived un- duly under his disabilities in America. Spingarn is careful to note that we have in the United States no Negro poet who can be compared with the Russian Pushkin, the Cuban Placido, the Haytian Durand; no novelist who can be compared with the French- man Dumas, or the Brazilian Machado de Assis; no dramatist who can be compared to the Frenchman Dumas fils; and no historian who can be compared in importance (to take but one illustration) to the African author of the Tarikh-es-Soudan. SLAVERY AS A THEME: THE HENRY P. SLAUGHTER LIBRARY If the Henry P. Slaughter library were recataloged, it could be made to fit neat- ly into a radial system of classification. In such a scheme the hub would consist of materials on Negro slavery in the United States. The spokes would repre- sent such related subjects as Africa, abo- lition, freedmen, reconstruction, ances- try of the slaves, descendants of the slaves, etc. This pattern is, of course, accidental from a librarian's point of view, but, like all accidents, it had its causes. In the case of the Slaughter collection the causes were mainly personal. Henry P. Slaughter, a Negro and the son of former slaves, traces his book-col- lecting to impulses awakened in child- hood. He recalls a day when, as a school- boy in Louisville, Kentucky, he came home puzzled by the question of how the slaves got the news that they were free. To his surprise his parents were unable to enlighten him. Indeed, he was obliged to wait until he learned to venture be- yond conventional textbooks to find his answer. The question seems insignificant in retrospect, but it was enough to awaken the boy's curiosity about a subject which, by its very nature, was close to his own people-his own family. Slavery could be remembered vividly in those days. The boy's interest was further spurred when, a year or two later, he carried home a copy of Smith's School History of Kentucky. His mother happened to open the textbook during the course of the evening. In a few moments she found herself on familiar ground. The subject was slavery, and the area was one she knew from personal observation. Her interest mounted. Then, quite suddenly, she closed the book with a bang. "It's not true," she announced. With that, she commenced to set the record to rights for the benefit of her son. The next day she sternly refused to allow the boy to return to school. It was her opinion that he was being maliciously misin- formed concerning a vital, though deli- cate, subject, and she proposed to end it. Fortunately for the youngster, her wrath was tempered in time, and Henry P. Slaughter returned to complete the school curriculum available to him in
i98 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Louisville. But the "damage" had been done. Another natural-born collector's fate had been sealed. Moreover, his field of interest had been staked out for him. Young Slaughter went to Washington, D.C., just before the turn of the century. He found employment in the Govern- ment Printing Office. Here, on the lim- ited income of a civil service employee, he began to gather books on the subject of his greatest curiosity. A few years later his bookish interests earned him the editorship of the Negro Odd Fellows Journal. He continued in this capacity twenty-seven years. By increasing his in- come he was able to intensify his collect- ing. Subsequent Wall Street investments further extended his capacity to collect. Under these conditions the present li- brary in his Washington home began to take shape-a library which, in its area, has been called "fabulous" by Carl Van Vechten and described as "a very won- derful lot of material" by Charles E. Tuttle. Perhaps "fabulous," if it can be applied with meaning to any library col- lection, is the right word, for it has been more talked about than described in print, and some of the accounts have been on the marvelous side-witness the article by J. A. Rogers in the Pittsburgh Courier. In any case, the legends sur- rounding the collection and its collector do have genuine story value. The one about the first of Slaughter's wives, a woman who couldn't survive his book- collecting zeal, is typical. This wife, according to Slaughter's own anecdote, presently found herself in a double quandary. Because her husband put all his financial resources into his li- brary, he was habitually clad in frayed raiment. Because he was without a suit- able hat, he was frequently unable to ac- company her to social gatherings. The situation reached a climax one day when Mrs. Slaughter offered to advance her husband the price of a new hat on condi- tion that he attend a dinner with her. He could repay the loan at his own conven- ience. Slaughter was touched by this proposal. He promptly consented and straightway started toward the haber- dashery. It was his misfortune, however, to pass a bookstore. To make matters worse, a clearance sale was in progress. Boldly displayed in the window was a five-volume set of books essential to the Slaughter collection. The little man en- tered the store shyly. By every means known to him he tried to persuade the clerk to put the books aside for him. This the bookseller was unwilling to do for several reasons, but he was inclined to make a special offer of the volumes to Slaughter on the condition that the lat- ter take them away immediately. The special offer, as fate would have it, was exactly the amount the wife had ad- vanced for the hat. It is perhaps unnecessary to say that the purchase was made on the spot- with dramatic domestic results. Slaugh- ter vainly attempted to save the situa- tion by having the books packed in a hat- box, but the ruse didn't work. His wife was wise to his ways. There are many more stories, but this one is perhaps sufficient to indicate that Slaughter's quaint and unusual library has not been collected in a vacuum. The books themselves fill a medium-sized house-a house purchased by Henry P. Slaughter specifically for this purpose. Of course, he happens to live in it too, but he has reserved little enough space for this purpose and has virtually sold himself into slavery to his housekeeper in return for her tolerance of the unortho- dox arrangements. The following items, selected at ran-
SPECIAL COLLECTIONS OF NEGROANA dom, are perhaps representative of the character of the collection: i. Approximately a thousand volumes on Africa. 2. Nearly five hundred on Abraham Lincoln. 3. More than one hundred and fifty slave narratives. 4. Sections devoted to books on Haiti, Negro fraternal orders, Negro churches, Negro sol- diers, Negro music, and kindred topics. 5. A large collection of personal letters and autographs, including items from Abraham Lincoln, the members of Lincoln's cabinet, the leading Union generals in the Civil War, mem- bers of Congress, and abolitionists like Harriet Beecher Stowe, William Lloyd Garrison, Frederick Douglass, Gerrit Smith, Horace Greeley, John Brown, and Wendell Phillips. 6. Letters of English abolitionists like Wil- liam Wilberforce, Thomas Clarkson, Granville Sharp, and James Montgomery and of the prominent Haitian revolutionaries, including Toussaint L'Ouverture, Henri Christophe, Jean Jacques Dessalines, and Jean Pierre Boyer. 7. An assortment of autographs and manu- scripts. 8. Numerous prints and photographs. 9. Files of various newspapers, including the New York Age, the Odd Fellows Journal, the Louisville Defender, Baltimore Afro-American, etc. IO. Files of such magazines as African Re- pository, Anglo-African, Colored American, Opportunity, Crisis, etc. ii. Approximately five hundred auto- graphed books by Negro authors. I2. A large collection of poetry of similar authorship. Slaughter's treasures include most of the known editions of Phillis Wheatley's poems and also those of Jupiter Ham- mon. He owns three of the rare Ben- jamin Banneker Almanacs-two for I 792 (Baltimore) and one of the I793 issue (Philadelphia). He has complete sets in first editions of such writers as Frederick Douglass, Booker T. Washington, Al- bion W. Tourgee, and Paul Laurence Dunbar-not to mention a sheaf of let- ters by Dunbar. A catalog of the collection was made by workers of the Work Projects Ad- ministration at the instance of librarians at Howard University and perhaps at the Library of Congress, but Slaughter is not enthusiastic over the results. He has certain reservations about "school- book" librarianship. Pending their gravi- tation to a public institution, however (after years of reluctance Slaughter is now open-minded on the question of a sale), his own arrangement of the books seems fairly adequate. He has lists of most of his holdings. The rest he re- members! THE MOORLAND FOUNDATION HOWARD UNIVERSITY The Moorland Foundation, the Li- brary of Negro Life and History, was created by the board of trustees of How- ard University, Washington, D.C., in I914. The action of the trustees followed by a few months an action of another sort by one of their number. Earlier in the same year Rev. Jesse E. Moorland, a resident of New York City, an official of the Y.M.C.A., and a member of the Howard board since I907, gave the uni- versity his private library. Included were more than three thousand items re- lating to the Negro, among them books, pamphlets, engravings, portraits, manu- scripts, curios, pictures, and man.y en- velopes of clippings. In the Howard Li- brary Rev. Moorland's gift was com- bined with an older collection of anti- slavery literature, the gift of Lewis Tap- pan in I873, and together they formed one of the important collections of such materials in the country. Since 1914 other scattered collections have gravitated to the Moorland Foun- dation. The resources, too, have been expanded by year-to-year purchases. Funds have been available, thanks to a variety of circumstances which worked
200 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY to Howard's advantage, and they have been used energetically by an active and alert director, Mrs. Dorothy B. Porter. The result is a well-organized reference library, strategically located in the na- tion's capital, available for serious re- search, and housed in the new $r,io6,ooo Founder's Library at Howard. The distinguishing feature of this col- lection, as compared to the others de- scribed herein, is its relation to the cur- riculum of the university. Built original- ly around the two private collections mentioned above, the Moorland Founda- tion nevertheless reflects even more strongly another influence. Its growth and expansion have been, in the opinion of its director, basically conditioned by Howard courses in the various aspects of Negro life, literature, and history. The largest of the Negro institutions of high- er learning, Howard has had many such courses and not a few others in which the Negro background of its students has tended to slant the teaching. Inevitably the library was affected. The results of such a principle of selec- tion are perhaps no more unusual than the principle itself. The Moorland Foun- dation, like the collections at Fisk, At- lanta, and other colored schools, includes everything about the Negro which prom- ises to fit into the educational program of the institution. These materials, viewed as a spectrum, might show rari- ties like Hiob Ludolf's A New History of Ethiopia (London, I682) and the pam- phlet An African's Anti-slavery Views (1789) at one end and at the other the titles of "Howardiana," including the writings of Howard faculty members, material about the university, and the university's own publications. In be- tween there would be a number of dis- tinct shades, but where one ended and the other began would be hard to deter- mine. Perhaps this tendency toward fusion explains the arrangement of a "Catalogue of Books in the Moorland Foundation." This mimeographed publication, also a product of the Work Projects Adminis- tration, is broken down not by subject but by the publication dates of the titles listed. An odd side-view results. It is dis- covered, for example, that of the five hundred pages of annotated items nine- ty-four are devoted to titles printed be- tween I682 and I849. The period be- tween I850 and i899 is represented by listings which fill twenty-three pages. Nineteen pages are devoted to unpub- lished Howard University Master's the- ses. Some uncataloged pamphlets were also selected for inclusion. By the spring of 1943 Mrs. Porter estimated that the catalog listings repre- sented less than one-third of the collec- tion's current holdings. New gifts, plus purchases in excess of $io,ooo worth of books in the four-year interval, had brought their number of cataloged items to about i6,500. The influence of the Moorland Room has been considerable. Its director has written frequently about the collection and the special problems of librarianship which have grown out of it. Her Mas- ter's thesis (Columbia, I932) was on "Afro-American Writing before i835.2 Since that time Mrs. Porter has con- tributed to the American Scholar and frequently to the Journal of Negro Edu- cation. A credit, too, goes to the Moorland Room for Naomi J. Rushing's "Catalog- ing and Care of Negro Collections," an- other Columbia Master's thesis. Miss Rushing is still on the staff of the Howard Library. OBERLIN S ANTISLAVERY PROPAGANDA The antislavery materials in the li- brary of Oberlin College are a part of the
SPECIAL COLLECTIONS OF NEGROANA 20I history of the school. Oberlin, it should be remembered, is the school for which John Brown once solicited funds. Its campus was at one time the scene of a heated argument between Stephen Fos- ter, the song-writer, and those who fa- vored compromise and gradualism in the solution of the slavery problem. Founded in I833 by John J. Shipherd, an avowed abolitionist, and Philo P. Stewart, it touched the controversial issue lightly at first, but two years later Oberlin's presi- dent and founder made history by per- suading the trustees to permit Negroes to enter the school. The same year the Oberlin Antislavery Society was founded. The views expressed at this time were moderate, but a few months later a group of firebrands invaded the college. They were led by Theodore D. Weld, and all were former students of Lane Seminary in Cincinnati, seceding from the latter institution because of their unbending stand on the slavery issue. Weld and his colleagues thorough- ly converted Oberlin College and com- munity to the abolitionist doctrine. Thereafter the place continued to be the center of underground railroad and anti- slavery activity. With this background the library, in- evitably, came into possession of a first- rate stock of the literature of protest issued by the advocates of emancipation during the years of their campaign. In 1932 Geraldine Hopkins Hubbard, pre- paring a Master of Arts thesis at Oberlin College, counted some seventeen hun- dred separate items dealing with slavery. This collection, she discovered, could be traced to the original Oberlin Collegiate Institute Library. The institution passed through a se- vere financial crisis in i839-40. Hoping to collect enough money to save the situ- ation, William Dawes and Rev. John Keep, agents of the college, went to England and made an appeal on the ba- sis of the school's affiliation with the an- tislavery movement. The British re- sponded, and the representatives of Oberlin acquired, in addition to the needed finances, about six thousand vol- umes for their library. Among these were many antislavery pamphlets and books, mostly from the British point of view. An indication of their success is the fact that the two-year period of I822-24 is now represented in the collection by no less than twenty-eight British titles. These include a first edition of Elizabeth Heyrick's Immediate, Not Gradual Aboli- tion and items by Thomas Cooper, James Cropper, William WilberforGe, and many others. The copy of Buxton's The African Slave Trade which the school's agents brought back is inscribed "To the Deputation from the Oberlin Institution from their and its Friend and Servant, George Thompson, London, May I3, I839." In a copy of J. J. Gur- ney's A Winter in the West Indies they brought home this inscription: "To John Keep, from his friend Geo. Sturge in pleasing remembrance of his visit to England, I839-40." Not less valuable, though lacking an inscription, was the copy of Granville Sharp's A Tract on the Law of Nature and Principles of Action in Man (I777). A number of years later, in connection with the opening of the Spear Library building in I885, a campaign to enlarge the "Historical Collection on Slavery" was undertaken by a faculty committee composed of the Reverend Henry Mat- son, the librarian, Professor James Mon- roe, and Professor William Goodell Frost. Three times this committee issued the following appeal: "We have a very valuable collection and desire to make it complete. We desire to secure a copy of every book, pamphlet, report, speech,
202 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY tract, newspaper, or private letter bear- ing upon the subject." Among those who responded with con- tributions from their private libraries were Professor John Morgan, Theodore J. Keep, Mrs. Sarah L. Dickinson, Rev- erend George Clark, and Reverend Wil- liam W. Patton. Also acquired through the same appeal was the more important gift, through heirs, of the collection of William Goodell. As a front-line aboli- tionist, active in both the Liberty party and the "Liberty Leaguers," Goodell had assembled materials representing every phase of the movement from the time of its beginning in the United States. His gift, moreover, included his own antislavery works, among them the rare files of the newspapers he edited. Then there were autographed presenta- tion copies which Goodell had received from his colleagues in the movement. Albert Barnes's An Inquiry into the Scriptural Views of Slavery was such a volume, as were also La Roy Sunder- land's The Testimony of God against Slav- ery, Lucius C. Matlack's The History of the American Sla-very and Methodism, Foss and Mathews' Facts for the Baptist Church, and a first edition of The Uncon- stitutionaiity of Slavery by Lysander Spooner. And with the Goodell collection came a variety of manuscripts relating to the same subject. Most important of these is the "Declaration of Sentiments of the American Anti-slavery Society" in the handwriting of William Lloyd Gar- rison. In the years that have followed, the collection at Oberlin has acquired, by one means or another, an interesting as- sortment of rarities. Typical of these, perhaps, are the following: i. Several volumes of The Liberty Bell, two of which are autographed by Maria Weston Chapman and another to S. Margaret Fuller, "with the regards of Oliver Johnson." 2. A copy of W. W. Brown's Clotel, auto- graphed by the author. 3. The History of the Rise, Progress, and Ac- complishment of the Abolition of the African Slave-Trade by the British Parliament by Thomas Clarkson, inscribed to "Wm. W. Patton, from Joseph Sturge per Lewis Tappan." 4. Files of the Anti-slavery Examiner, Anti- slavery Tracts, The Liberty Bell, and Liberty Minstrel, not all complete. Oberlin has also a good collection of the children's literature of the antislav- ery movement, a most interesting phase of the campaign. OTHER COLLECTIONS There are several other important col- lections of Negroana in the United States. Lacking any easy or convenient method of locating these or of evaluating them from a distance, this reporter em- ployed a device which may not be with- out a certain quaintness. Knowing that the Charles E. Tuttle Company of Rut- land, Vermont, had long made a special- ty of the material in which these collec- tions were interested and having seen the undated Tuttle Catalogue No. I I3, Books by and about the Negro and Slavery, he struck upon the idea of tracing collec- tions of Negro lore through the sales records of this company. The plan may be said to have worked, for it had the interest and co-operation of Mr. Charles E. Tuttle himself, and he had kept de- tailed notes of his company's transac- tions. From his cards it was not only possible to determine who was buying in the field and how much but also who had what among the rarer items. Inferences could also be drawn with respect to which collections were static and which growing. While the more detailed descriptions in the foregoing sections are based in considerable part on personal observa-
SPECIAL COLLECTIONS OF NEGROANA 203 tions and interviews with their directors, the following are mainly drawn from evidence and clues provided by the Tuttle files. Duke-North Carolina.-The combined Negro collections of these two university libraries may be larger than any single collection described in the foregoing pages. Certainly, the Tuttle Company's sales to Duke, for its Flowers Collection of books about the South, would indicate this. Something of the nature and scope of the collections may be surmised from a few available facts. It is known, for example, that the division of the field has given folklore, sociology, and litera- ture, as these pertain to the Negro, to North Carolina and assigned history, the Negro in the Caribbean, etc., to Duke. Even this division of area seems explain- able. Guy B. Johnson, a member of the North Carolina faculty, has for years been a leading authority on the Negro, with a great knowledge of folklore and genuine enthusiasm for the material. His volume of "John Henry" songs is one bit of evidence. Howard W. Odum, so- ciologist in the same institution, made his reputation with books like Rainbow round My Shoulder and Wings on My Feet, imaginative treatments of Negro materials, and his sociological studies have never been far removed from the mores of those early books. Then there is Paul Green, the dramatist, who de- spite commercial success on Broadway has maintained his connection with the university at Chapel Hill. Paul Green's plays are predominantly Negro plays, from The No 'Count Boy to his Pulitzer Prize winning In Abraham's Bosom and his dramatization of Richard Wright's Native Son. The university community which includes all three of these unusual southern scholars surprises no one by owning what they have reason to feel is a "right smart" collection of library materials dealing with the ways of black folks. Cornell and others.-Like Oberlin, Cornell owns a large body of under- ground railroad lore and antislavery propaganda. Indeed, its collection is even better known in library circles and is said to be larger than the one at Ober- lin. The history behind these resources is perhaps not entirely unlike the back- ground of the Oberlin materials. It is known, for example, that the Gerrit Smith papers and effects went to Cornell and that the community around Utica was as strategically located for under- ground-railroad passengers as was cen- tral Ohio. Furthermore, the abolitionist sentiment was just as strong in Upper New York State. In fact, it would not be too great a mistake to say that for a number of years, while Frederick Doug- lass was editing his paper in Rochester, the center of gravity of the antislavery campaign shifted to that part of the United States. However that may be, Cornell, with its Samuel Joseph May Collection, is admittedly strong in slav- ery and antislavery materials. Indications are that the collection is static, however. The Tuttle Company showed no sales to them and had no records reading "Cornell wants .... as was the case with most of the others. Wisconsin, Johns Hopkins, and Penn- sylvania, all reputed to have extensive slavery and antislavery collections, were likewise relatively unrepresented on sales or want cards. Michigan, on the other hand, with no reputation for unusual holdings in this field, was buying anti- slavery items actively and increasingly within a limited area. Harvard.-The interesting thing about Harvard was that, while it probably had as much Negro material as any library
204 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY in the country and while it was adding to its stock as actively as any, it had not thrown these materials together to form any sort of special collection. In its case-lacking any special motivation- this seemed a sensible way of handling the subject. There was both rhyme and reason behind collections like the Schom- burg in New York, the James Weldon Johnson at Yale-indeed, behind all of those visited; but, wanting these pur- poses, it would be idle to invent them. Two aspects of Harvard's holdings in this field, apart from its obviouis volume, seem worth pointing out. First is the tendency to include slavery in the li- brary of the School of Business. If this implies (I'm not sure it does) that Har- vard regards the moral and sentimental and propaganda angles of the slavery controversy as of less importance than the business considerations, then librari- anship at Harvard has taken a positive step which is interesting in its connota- tions. A second point concerning Harvard's Negro materials was also derived from the Tuttle Company's records. T. Frank- lin Currier appeared to be the individual who represented the library in this field, and T. Franklin Currier is the scholar responsible for the definitive Whittier bibliography. Whittier, being the poet of the antislavery movement, would seem, then, to be the point of contact between the present library staff at Harvard and these Negro materials. Brown.-The files of the Tuttle Com- pany showed Brown University Library to be in the market for all Negro music and poetry. This special acquisitiveness could, in turn, be traced to S. Foster Damon, the individual in charge of Brown's Harris Collection of American Poetry. Mr. Damon had not only let it be understood that he was to have a chance at all materials in this field but had frequently been a visitor at the Tuttle establishment and had inspected the cards in the "Negro" cases. Further research revealed S. Foster Damon as the author of a monograph entitled The Negro in Early American Songsters, first read before the American Library Association and including a mention of "Backside Albany" (I8I2), one of the first of the genre. This paper seemed to throw a certain light on one aspect of his zeal as a curator. Swarthmore.-Through the efforts of Henry J. Cadbury, whose specialty is the Society of Friends and books and col- lections which concern Quakers, Swarth- more College appears to have acquired a good stock of material from the Tuttle Negro list. The connection is accidental but obvious. Most historical works re- lating to the Friends are likely to be con- cerned with the Negro and slavery in some measure. Emory.-The testimony of William C. Haygood, a former member of the Emory Library staff, had led me to expect refer- ences to their Negro collection in the Tuttle cards. None was discovered. The inference to be drawn is that the books with which they have surrounded the literary effects of Joel Chandler Harris, author of the "Uncle Remus" stories, are mainly "in-print" items. It may be further inferred that the Emory Univer- sity Library has been more concerned with providing a background for their treasure than with reflecting the Negro scene in a broad context. Fisk.-One of the foremost Negro col- lections is located at Fisk University. Fisk, founded in I869, became a leading Negro institution of learning as a result of the triumphal world tour of its original "Jubilee Singers" in I87I. When Tuske- gee Institute was established, based on
SPECIAL COLLECTIONS OF NEGROANA 205 the vocational idea of Booker T. Wash- ington, Fisk accepted responsibility for leadership in liberal education for Ne- groes. The Fisk Negro collection is, there- fore, a long-established one. Indeed, the moment of its creation cannot be fixed, though a certain genesis can be discov- ered. Determined efforts to build an im- portant collection in this field began in the late I920'S. It was considered in the plans for the new library building, which provided a special room and other facili- ties for handling these materials. A year or two later Arthur A. Schomburg, not yet employed by the New York Public Library, was secured as curator for the department. During his years at Fisk he laid a basis for a collection not unlike the one he had assembled privately, the philosophy of which has already been discussed. Later, the library of Willis D. Weath- erford, then connected with the Y.M.C.- A. College at Nashville, was purchased. This acquisition gave Fisk a Negro col- lection of impressive size. Subsequent purchases, plus exchanges of many du- plicates found among the Weatherford books and among gifts, have given it a continuous growth. For several years S. E. Grinstead served the collection as curator. Two publications, important to this report, have stemmed from this collec- tion. One is Mr. Grinstead's bibliography of books by or about the Negro; the other, Frances L. Yocom's subject clas- sification of books in this area, published by the H. W. Wilson Company. Other college and university libraries.- Major and minor Negro collections are also located at such institutions as At- lanta University, Hampton Institute, Virginia Union, Morgan College, Tus- kegee Institute, Dillard University, and others. The ones at Atlanta and at Hampton are of major size, and the one at Dillard appears to be growing rapidly. Mr. Tuttle considered its development most promising from a dealer's point of view. Other circumstances confirm this. Dillard University sponsored extensive studies in the history of Negroes in Loui- siana under the Work Projects Adminis- tration. Workers of the Writers' Program of the Work Projects Administration of Virginia prepared a "Classified Cata- logue of the Negro Collection in the Col- lis P. Huntington Library of Hampton Institute" in I940. This work, a thick mimeographed volume, lists 5,075 an- notated items, of which 820 deal with the Negro in Africa, the Caribbean area, and Latin America, and the rest with the Negro in the United States. Other public libraries.-Depending solely on the Tuttle files as a barometer, one would conclude that the Boston Athenaeum, the Cleveland Public, to a lesser extent the Birmingham Public, and, in a different category, the New- berry in Chicago were the most active public libraries in the Negro field, bar- ring, of course, the One Hundred and Thirty-fifth Street Branch in New York City. This, however, is not a complete picture, for it says nothing about popu- lar collections of the kind that have been established in the Hall Branch of the Chicago Public, in the Vernon Branch of the Los Angeles system, and perhaps in many others. None of these would have occasion to do extensive business with a firm like the Tuttle Company, and their occasional purchases provided a basis for no enlightening assumptions. Also neglected by this reckoning are the public libraries of Brooklyn, Burlington, Houston, Providence, etc., all of which have at one time or another reported con- siderable resources in the field.
206 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY That the Newberry Library and the Boston Athenaeum have important strength in this general area could be de- duced from the titles of their purchases- often rare pamphlets and other items generally associated with the more ex- haustive collections. Library of Congress.-At the time of the Paris Exposition in I903, Dan Mur- ray, a Negro and one of the assistants in the Library of Congress, was asked to prepare an exhibit of Negro books and related materials. The exhibition turned out to be so impressive by current stand- ards that the collection was kept to- gether when it was returned to Washing- ton, and continuous additions were made to it during the remainder of Murray's life. Since the death of Dan Murray it has been known as the Murray Collec- tion. Naturally, thanks to strategic ad- vantages, its acquisitions have been im- pressive. A good example of the type of materi- al which seems to flow to that collection has just been announced: the complete letters and papers of Booker T. Wash- ington, including a wide correspondence with many of the great historical figures of the past generation relating to the ac- tivities of Tuskegee and the whole scope of Negro development in the United States. As the repository for all books copy- righted in the United States since July, I898, the Library of Congress collection is, of course, complete within that peri- od. It is by no means limited to the United States or to the years since I898, however. Frederick Douglass Memorial.-One of the most interesting and valuable col- lections of Negroana in America is one of the smallest. It consists entirely of the writings of Frederick Douglass and is housed in the Memorial Home at Ana- costia, D.C. Douglass' stature as a Negro leader, before and after the Civil War, is constantly rising. Obscured for a time by the more conciliatory Booker T. Wash- ington, he looms up with the develop- ments of recent history. This new evalu- ation has drawn sharp attention to his life and works. A Calendar of the Writings of Frederick Douglass in the Memorial Home at Anacostia, D.C. was prepared by the District of Columbia Historical Rec- ords Survey, Division of Professional and Service Projects of the W.P.A. It is annotated and indexed, contains 3IO en- tries, and has a section of "Documentary References" in addition to a Foreword by the Negro historian, Carter G. Wood- son, and a Preface by H. B. Dillard, su- pervisor of the District of Columbia Historical Records Survey. This small memorial collection, housed in a shrine, is perhaps a synthesis of all the others-their final mean- ing.