COMBINING QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE METHODOLOGIES TO STUDY THE EFFECTS OF AN ACADEMIC BOYCOTT ON ACADEMICS IN SOUTH AFRICA' Lorraine J. Haricombe2 This article presents a comparison of data relating to the same phenomenon but deriving from different methodologies. A mail survey and interviews were used to assess the effects of an academic boycott on South African academics. The mail survey included categorical and open-ended questions that measured reports of direct experiences of the boycott tactics as effects of the boycott. The open-ended questions indicated themes of effect of the boycott for further exploration through focused interviews. Focused interviews were used to pro- vide depth and specificity of the effects through the personal accounts of a subsample of respondents. Analysis of the data supported the value of looking at effects of the boycott in different ways. The quantitative survey data indicated that 57.3 percent of the respondents claimed a direct experience of one or more boycott tactics, while the qualitative data derived from interviews revealed significant psychological effects on South African academics. The use of methodological triangulation has received much attention in the literature [2-4]. Some authors argue that triangulation of meth- odology strengthens study design, while others warn that "one should not . . . adopt a naively 'optimistic' view that the aggregation of data from different sources will unproblematically add up to produce a more complete picture" [3, p. 199]. This article looks at the use of both quanti- tative data from a mailed survey and qualitative data produced from focused interviews to explore what effects an academic boycott had on faculty members at South African universities. The goal of the study was to achieve an understanding of the effects of the academic boycott 1. This article is based on my dissertation [1]. I would like to thank my committee, F. Wilfrid Lancaster (chair), Jana Bradley, Bryce Allen, and Marianna Tax Choldin, for their help in this study. Special thanks are due to Brett Sutton, Jana Bradley, and Stephen Harter for commenting on drafts of this article. 2. Founders Memorial Library, Northern Illinois University, DeKalb, Illinois 60115. [Library Quarterly, vol. 63, no. 4, pp. 508-5271 ? 1993 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-25 19/93/6304-0005$01 .00 508
EFFECTS OF AN ACADEMIC BOYCOTT 509 by exploring the experiences and reactions of these faculty members. This article also aims to describe the procedures and rationale for the several methods used. The Academic Boycott of South Africa For many years, the racial policies of the South African government brought widespread international condemnation, leading to various measures including economic, cultural, and sports boycotts, designed to pressure the government to abandon its discriminatory policies. The academic boycott of South Africa, which was only one aspect of a more general cultural boycott, was initiated by South African political activists who called on universities and scholars from abroad to boycott South African academics. Their purpose was to gain support from the interna- tional academic community in the isolation of academics in South Africa as a means to "bring them out of their ivory towers." The idea of an academic boycott generated widespread reaction from academics in South Africa. While they anticipated certain consequences of the boy- cott, their concerns about what effects it might actually have were based on assumptions rather than supportive data [5, 6]. Among their ex- pressed concerns was the isolation South African academics would suffer and the subsequent parochialism in their scholarly activities. Solomon Benatar raised concern about its effect on medical educa- tion, health care, scientific endeavor, and the international collaborative spirit [5]. The general literature on sanctions lacks an analysis of the outcome or effect of international sanctions as a mechanism for achieving policy change. "This lack of research and knowledge resulted partly from the lack of systematic study and the uniqueness of each situation" [7, p. 403]. Margaret P. Doxey developed a simple framework to evaluate the role of sanctions on target governments. Doxey used the framework to evaluate the United Nations as a sanctioning body and concluded that the "analysis of international sanctions can be usefully carried out in [this] framework" [8, p. 535]. Gary C. Hufbauer and Jeffrey J. Schott relied on survey analysis to assess the effectiveness of international economic sanctions [9]. They concluded that sanctions were effective when the target country changed its policies to conform to the desired political goals of those who implemented the sanctions. Janice Love, in her work on sanctions campaign groups, drew on the work of sociologists studying interest groups to propose two broad analytic frameworks to evaluate the success or failure of sanctions campaigns and to evaluate their effectiveness
510 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY [10]. In her first framework, Love summarized the variables from the sociological literature and identified several indicators to measure why sanctions campaigns succeed or fail, including goals, strength of the campaign, strategies and tactics, reaction and opposition, locus of deci- sion, and time. The second framework presented a technique that was suited to qualitative data and the use of goals as criteria to evaluate effectiveness. Love cautioned against the use of these frameworks for generating hypotheses due to the lack of precise relationships between effectiveness and the variables [101. Despite these shortcomings, some of Love's variables were relevant to measure what effects the academic boycott had on South African academics, namely, strategies and tactics used during the boycott and reaction to the boycott. These studies ex- plored the effectiveness of sanctions in general and presented certain useful elements of research design. However, they were broad studies that lacked contextual focus and were not directly applicable to the problem of perceiving the effects of the academic boycott. They pre- sented the activities of the sanctions advocates rather than the outcome or effects of sanctions based on the personal accounts of those who were affected. To achieve a better understanding of how the academic boycott affected academics in South Africa, this study aimed to interpret and describe effects of the boycott as seen through their own eyes. The underlying questions of this research were: 1. Which boycott tactics were used to isolate South African academics? 2. Were the tactics effective? If so, which ones? 3. Were there any differences in the effect of the boycott on academics in the three broad areas of science and technology, humanities and the arts, and social sciences? 4. Were there any differences in the effect of the boycott among aca- demics associated with specific types of universities?3 5. How did the boycott affect academics and their scholarly activities? Despite the application of a wide range of sanctions to force govern- ments to change their policies and studies that evaluate their effective- ness, academic boycotts are less well-known. Evidence of academic boy- 3. Historically, the predominantly white South African universities have been categorized as "open" or "liberal" if they actively opposed the government's racist policies. Because of their historical ties with British universities, they use English as their medium of instruction and are commonly known as English-speaking universities. Universities who supported the government's policies of discrimination based on race or color were categorized as conservative universities or Afrikaner universities. They use Afrikaans as their medium of instruction. A third category, commonly known as "bush colleges," was established during the late 1950s and early 1960s for various black ethnic groups to implement the government's policy of apartheid.
EFFECTS OF AN ACADEMIC BOYCOTT 511 cotts has been reported, but no formal studies of their effects have been documented. The South African academic boycott provides an opportunity to investigate the effects of such sanctions on an academic community. Design of the Study This study was based partially on relevant variables from Love's analyti- cal framework, with some modifications to measure more effectively what tactics were used during the boycott, its effects on the target sub- jects, and their reaction to these effects. In contrast to Love's study, the operationalization of these concepts and the measurement of variables was conducted using quantitative methods. However, qualitative meth- ods (specifically, interviews) were used to clarify the experiences of those who were affected. The study was conducted in two phases, the first using questionnaires and the second using focused interviews. The two- stage design facilitated the combined use of quantitative and qualitative methods to collect and interpret data. Mail Survey In phase 1, a survey was used to assess the extent of tactics that were employed to isolate South African academics. A brief questionnaire, a cover letter, a bibliography of articles about the academic boycott, and a self-addressed envelope were mailed to a random sample of nine hun- dred full-time faculty members at twenty-one South African and "home- land" universities.4 The letter explained the purpose of the study and guaranteed confidentiality of the responses; the bibliography docu- mented the attention the academic boycott had received in the literature and helped to demonstrate that the study was motivated by academic rather than political concerns. Sampling was done from 1989 and 1990 yearbooks of the universities. Within each university, random samples were drawn from full-time fac- ulty in the three broad areas of science and technology, humanities and the arts, and social sciences. Because it is reasonable to expect a differ- ence between the scholarly activities of junior faculty members and se- nior faculty members, all strata of faculty were included in the sample. Sample size was proportional to the number of full-time faculty in each university in each broad area. 4. "Homelands" are land areas within the borders of South Africa that were declared independent states by the South African government. Homeland universities are pre- dominantly black universities (bush colleges).
512 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY The questionnaire included both categorical and open-ended ques- tions. The categorical questions identified the boycott tactics used and prompted respondents concerning their personal experience of those tactics. They included refusal by some international journals to accept publications emanating from South African authors; denial of participa- tion of South Africans at international conferences; refusal by the inter- national academic community to collaborate with South Africans or to visit South Africa; and the refusal by certain publishers and booksellers to provide information resources such as textbooks, computer pro- grams, and other educational material to South African institutions. For example: Have you ever been denied attendance at a conference outside South Africa because the organizers, explicitly or implicitly, expressed their disapproval of the policies of the government of South Africa? (Denial could relate to rejection of a paper that you planned to present or rejection of your application in general.) No [ I Yes [ ] Please give brief details. Perceived effect was measured when respondents answered yes to one or more of the categorical questions, if they reported some effect directly attributable to the boycott in their notes, or if they reported self-boycott.5 Reaction was measured by other questions. For example: "If you (or groups/institutions to which you belong) have taken any steps to compensate for the boycott (for example, acquiring materials through other channels), please explain briefly." The open-ended questions elicited information about respondents' experiences of the boycott, their perceptions of its effect on their schol- arly activities, and their reactions to this effect. They were also useful in verifying that the respondents understood the questions. Further, they provided descriptions of personal experiences that helped to ex- plain the compensatory steps academics took to avoid direct experience of the boycott tactics. More important, the open-ended data provided a personal focus and indicated emotional aspects of the experience of sanctions that would later be explored more fully in focused interviews to achieve a fuller understanding of the boycott's effects. The questionnaire was chosen as a method of data collection for sev- eral reasons. First, it was useful in reaching a large and dispersed sam- ple. Second, the survey served as a screening device to identify those respondents who had already experienced boycott tactics and those who 5. Self-boycott, a concept similar in meaning to self-censorship, refers to the deliberate and conscious decision of academics to withdraw from those scholarly activities that were targeted during the boycott to avoid any direct experience of the boycott tactics.
EFFECTS OF AN ACADEMIC BOYCOTT 513 indicated that they were affected by them. Third, it facilitated contact with those respondents who were willing to be interviewed. Fourth, the open-ended responses contributed valuable themes unlikely to have been uncovered by only categorical responses. For example, some re- spondents voluntarily expressed sentiments of frustration, anger, isola- tion, and fear, reporting, for example, that they had been "embar- rassed" at conferences and had endured "bad" or "unpleasant" experiences because of the boycott. Interestingly, a few respondents pointed out the positive effects of the boycott, noting, for example, that "the boycott made South African academics more independent." Response rate to the questionnaire was 57.0 percent (513 respon- dents). The survey data were coded to identify additional aspects of the scholars' experiences in a systematic way that could be explored through interviews. A purposive sample of twenty-five respondents was then cho- sen to examine more fully their experiences and reactions. Altogether, forty-two faculty members were interviewed in South Africa in 1991. Of these, twenty-five had completed questionnaires and had indicated their willingness to be interviewed. Interview The interviewees were selected to form a representative sample of male and female academics from Afrikaans-speaking, English-speaking, and black universities in the three broad areas of humanities and the arts, science and technology, and the social sciences. Seventeen academics who were not included in the original sample were identified during the interviews as scholars who had experience of the academic boycott. While they did not complete the mail survey, their experiences, percep- tions, and reactions supplemented the quantitative data and were in- cluded in the qualitative analysis. The primary objective of the focused interview is to elicit as complete a report as possible of what was involved in the experience of a particu- lar situation [11]. In this study, the use of the focused interview was twofold: first, it was used to elicit details about the respondents' experi- ence of the boycott and their reactions to it beyond what had been reported on the mailed questionnaires; second, it was useful to clarify the differences in effect among academics as reported in the survey. The interviews were conducted in the privacy of their campus offices and were recorded and then transcribed. Content analysis was used to develop categories to present the major themes and findings, discussed below. The interviews provided a broader and more complete understanding of how the boycott affected academics. Based on the qualitative data obtained from the brief notes and open-ended questions, partially struc-
514 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY tured questions were used to elicit descriptions of the boycott experi- ences of the academics and their perceptions of the effects on their scholarly activities. Subjects were asked, for example, "How did your boycott experience(s) relate to your experiences prior to the boycott?" "How did you feel about the boycott experience?" and "How were your scholarly activities affected by the boycott?" In some cases interviewees found it helpful to read their questionnaire responses to reminisce about their experiences before talking about them. In other cases the re- searcher asked more direct questions to prevent interviewees from di- gressing and to help them focus on their experiences. The seventeen participants not included in the mail survey were asked in the interview to describe the boycott experiences that they deemed important or sig- nificant to themselves and how they felt about those experiences. The partially structured interviews allowed for active interviewee participa- tion that enabled them to express themselves about matters of central significance to them rather than those presumed to be important by the interviewer. Results Three major categories of data emerged from the study: categorical responses, open-ended responses, and interview transcripts. Each data set broadened and expanded upon the findings of the previous stage. The categorical data established patterns of boycott events as perceived by the respondents and yielded an overview of the problem in descrip- tive terms. The open-ended questions provided for more understanding of the individual responses and, examined in combination with the cate- gorical data, suggested themes and issues that underlay the categorical responses. The interviews facilitated exploration of these themes and also allowed other issues to emerge. The themes are discussed in this article. Questionnaire: Categorical Responses The categorical responses yielded good quantitative data on some of the effects of the boycott. Of the 513 respondents to the questionnaire, 57.3 percent (294) reported experience with one or more boycott tactics. Altogether, they reported 463 cases of boycott events (table 1). Of these cases, the largest number, 33.5 percent (155), referred to the reluctance of international scholars to visit South Africa. Reports about such refus- als reflected a high incidence of pressure from colleagues, students, and political activists at their own institutions not to visit South Africa. The major reason for their refusal included the threat of being "blacklisted"
EFFECTS OF AN ACADEMIC BOYCOTT 515 TABLE 1 Boycorr TACTICS USED IN THE THREE BROAD CATEGORIES HUMANITIES SOCIAL SCIENCE AND AND ARTS SCIENCES TECHNOLOGY TOTAL BOYCOTr ELEMENT Number % Number % Number % Number % Rejection of manu- scripts by inter- national journals 8 4.8 9 7.8 14 7.8 31 6.7 Denial of participa- tion at confer- ences outside South Africa 22 13.2 15 12.9 39 21.7 76 16.4 Refusal of interna- tional scholars to visit South Africa 60 35.9 37 31.9 58 32.2 155 33.5 Refusal of interna- tional scholars to collaborate with South Africans 20 11.9 11 9.5 17 9.4 48 10.4 Lack of access to in- formation re- sources 57 34.1 44 37.9 52 28.9 153 33.0 Total 167 36.1 116 25.1 180 38.9 463 100.0 and ostracized by their colleagues. Thirty-three percent (153) referred to the refusal of certain publishers abroad to provide textbooks, com- puter programs, and other educational materials to South African insti- tutions. The difficulty in obtaining certain educational and research re- sources was largely due to the monopolies certain publishers had on the sale and distribution of these materials. For example, in January 1987 University Microfilms International, a subsidiary of Bell and How- ell, suspended the only service that provided microform copies of pub- lished research material from the United States to South Africa. The Anti-Apartheid Act of 1986 in the United States caused American book- sellers and publishers to reconsider the sale of textbooks and other edu- cational materials to customers in South Africa for fear of losing their markets in the United States. Publishers and booksellers in the United States routinely returned requests for orders with notices that their firms did not do business in South Africa. Other countries who refused to send journal subscriptions to South Africa included Denmark, Aus- tralia, and India. The high incidence of this boycott tactic reflects the reliance of South African institutions on textbooks and other educa- tional material from publishers and booksellers abroad. The data in
516 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY table 1 also indicate that academics in the social sciences consistently reported less direct experience of boycott tactics than their colleagues in science and technology and in humanities and the arts. The survey data reflect the effects of the boycott as perceived by the respondents. Perceived effect measures what academics reported as effect of the boycott even when there was no clear evidence that their experiences were linked to the boycott. When they experienced rejec- tion in any of their scholarly activities, they were likely to claim the rejection as a boycott tactic. The clearest examples of these were found in the interviews where several respondents who had experienced rejec- tion of their manuscripts perceived the rejection as a boycott tactic be- cause they felt that "some referees . . . deliberately sink a paper for publication because of South African authorship.... [Publishers] would not say so publicly, but [rejection] happened repeatedly." The questionnaire data revealed interesting patterns among various subsamples in the study. For example, notable differences were found among types of universities in effect of the boycott. Black universities experienced far fewer direct forms of academic boycott than the Afri- kaans-speaking universities or the English-speaking universities. Rela- tively speaking, academics in humanities and the arts reported more incidents of boycott tactics than their colleagues in science and technol- ogy and those in the social sciences. Reaction to the boycott was mea- sured by asking respondents if they took steps to avoid the boycott tactics. The majority, 302 (58.9 percent) of the 513 respondents, did not answer this question. One explanation, derived from brief notes, pointed to the unwillingness of several respondents to divulge the steps they had taken. For example, one respondent reported, "I am not prepared to tell what steps were taken." In other cases, it was reported that "alternative actions or routes to obtain information or material were very seldom necessary." The responses of 211 (41.1 percent) partici- pants are summarized in table 2. The categorical data revealed certain patterns that comprised some of the major findings of the study. They showed that many academics at South African universities had been affected by one or more boycott tactics, that certain boycott tactics were experienced more than others, and that experiences of boycott tactics were uneven within subgroups, such as university types and broad sub- ject categories. The data also show that several respondents took alterna- tive steps to pursue their scholarly activities. Overall, respondents in the thirty to forty-nine age bracket reported more experience of the boycott tactics, followed by those in the fifty to fifty-nine age bracket. There was very little difference between males (57.3 percent) and fe- males (58.0 percent) who reported effects due to the boycott.
EFFECTS OF AN ACADEMIC BOYCOTT 517 TABLE 2 ALTERNATIVE STEPS TAKEN TO AVOID BoYcoTrT TACTICS NUMBER AND PERCENTAGE OF RESPONDENTS ACTION TAKEN Number % No steps were taken 43 20.4 Steps were taken (no details given) 3 1.4 Alternative steps were taken and named 148 70.1 Explicit unwillingess to divulge steps taken 9 4.3 Wrote textbook for specific use by South African students 8 3.8 Total 211 100.0 TABLE 3 REFUSAL OF INTERNATIONAL SCHOLARS TO VISIT SOUTH AFRICA NUMBER AND PERCENTAGE OF RESPONDENTS ACTION TAKEN Number % Declined to visit due to pressure from colleagues, students, or other groups 45 29.0 Declined to visit South Africa to show support for academic boycott 37 23.9 Gave other reasons for refusal to visit South Africa 4 2.6 Self-boycott by South Africans 8 5.2 Reported effect (no details given) 61 39.4 Total 155 100.1* *Total is more than 100 percent because of rounding error. Questionnaire: Open-ended Responses Respondents were invited to provide brief notes to describe or explain their experiences. An analysis of these notes provided a descriptive over- view of the boycott's effect that made it possible to identify certain as- pects of the boycott for further exploration to "capture the essential elements of its meaning to those involved" [4, p. 34]. The notes indicated that 155 respondents referred to the refusal of international scholars to visit South Africa (table 3); 153 reported their difficulties in accessing information resources (table 4); seventy-six described their experiences of boycott tactics at international conferences (table 5); forty-eight re- ferred to the refusal of international scholars to collaborate with South
518 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY TABLE 4 REFUSAL BY PUBLISHERS TO SUPPLY INFORMATION RESOURCES NUMBER AND PERCENTAGE OF REsPONDENTS BoYCoTr TACTIC Number % Explicit refusal by publisher to supply materials to show support for academic boycott 75 49.0 Explicit refusal by UMI to supply dissertations on microfiche 16 10.5 Refusal by libraries abroad to honor interlibrary loan requests 8 5.2 No response from publishers or libraries 14 9.2 Considered economic sanctions to be responsible for problems in accessing resources rather than the academic boycott 5 3.3 Reported effect (no details given) 35 22.8 Total 153 100.0 TABLE 5 DENIAL OF PARTICIPATION AT CONFERENCES OUTSIDE SOUTH AFRICA NUMBER AND PERCENTAGE OF RESPONDENTS BOYCorr TACTIC Number % Protests during the conference 21 27.6 Refusal by conference organizers, host institution, or host coun- try to allow South African participation 16 21.1 Acceptance of South African participation, provided certain con- ditions were met 3 3.9 Self-boycott by South Africans 5 6.6 Other reasons cited for denial 4 5.3 Reported effect (no details given) 27 35.5 Total 76 100.0 African academics (table 6); thirty-one explained effects of the boycott tactics relating to rejection of manuscripts for publication (table 7); and 211 provided information explaining whether or not they used alterna- tive steps to circumvent the effects of the boycott (table 2). Space does not permit a detailed discussion of these findings, which can be found in my dissertation [1]. A recurring theme of effect was self-boycott. For example, one re- spondent reported that "there were conferences where we knew we did not have a chance [to participate] and declined." Another respondent
EFFECTS OF AN ACADEMIC BOYCOTT 519 TABLE 6 REFUSAL TO COLLABORATE WITH SOUTH AFRICAN ACADEMICS NUMBER AND PERCENTAGE OF RESPONDENTS BOYCOTT TACTIC Number % Pressure from colleagues or employing institution 18 37.5 Explicit refusal to show support for academic boycott 9 18.8 Collaboration, provided certain conditions were met 2 4.2 Self-boycott by South Africans 5 10.4 Refusal without any reasons given 10 20.8 Reported effect (no details given) 4 8.3 Total 48 100.0 TABLE 7 REJECTION OF MANUSCRIPTS OUTSIDE SOUTH AFRICA NUMBER AND PERCENTAGE OF RESPONDENTS Boycorr TACTIC Number % Explicitly rejected because of the boycott 11 35.5 Manuscript was returned unopened 4 12.9 No clear reason stated for rejection 4 12.9 No response from the referees 1 3.2 Self-boycott by South African academics 4 12.9 Reported effect (no details given) 7 22.6 Total 31 100.0 referred to "the deadly chilly international atmosphere [which had] a much greater inhibiting effect than overt boycott action." Self-boycott also contributed to other effects of the boycott that emerged during the interviews, for example, isolation and parochialism in scholarly activ- ities. Parochialism was evident in several reports of academics who turned to writing their own textbooks for use at South African universi- ties rather than use textbooks published abroad. Others formed net- works within South Africa to collaborate on projects in their respective fields. One respondent wrote, "We formed a strong internal research infrastructure and founded our own journal for this purpose." This shift in emphasis from international to local networking and local re- search interests raised concern in the interviews about parochialism in scholarly activities.
520 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Several respondents reported a measure of suspicion when they expe- rienced rejection from international scholars even when the rejection was not clearly linked to the boycott. In a few cases, respondents attrib- uted to the boycott the fact that scholars who had accepted invitations to South Africa canceled their trips subsequent to the boycott: "Scholars sometimes found 'other' reasons or difficulties [not to visit South Africa], thus avoiding outright politics." Many international scholars who were willing to visit South Africa "refused an invitation to visit South Africa due to peer pressure at their own university." Not all international schol- ars were pressured to boycott South Africa, as this note indicated: "A team of medical scientists could not travel to South Africa because the South African government would not allow them in [to South Africa] on political grounds." The rejection of manuscripts for publication and the rejection of papers for conferences also engendered suspicion that was identified in the interviews. To avoid direct experience of the boycott tactics a wide range of steps was reported (table 2). The key strategy used to obtain information sources was third parties such as personal contacts, friends, and rela- tives. Respondents reported, for example, "We used other channels to order our material" and "Personal contacts helped to mitigate the ef- fects of the boycott." Some respondents refused to describe what steps they had taken, as reflected in this note: "I most certainly won't [tell which steps were taken] until such time as U.S. sanctions are lifted!9" The brief notes proved to be important in verifying the respondents' understanding of the categorical questions. For example, several re- spondents who reported no experience of the boycott actions in the categorical questions explained that, because they were not actively in- volved in the scholarly activities that were targeted during the boycott, they were not affected. Targeted activities included publishing in inter- national journals, attending international conferences, extending invita- tions to international scholars to visit South Africa, and collaborating with international scholars in research projects. One respondent who reported no effect wrote, "[My university] is a small teaching university without a research culture. Very few of the academic staff members are involved in either international conferences or research projects." Others who did report experiencing boycott tactics explained in notes what they perceived as boycott tactics, such as "no response from certain editors." The open-ended responses were also helpful in preparing interview guides to probe the respondents' experiences and to establish a personal context for the effects of the boycott. The details contained in the brief notes concerning the respondents' experiences of boycott tactics re- vealed the limitations of the categorical questions in recording this infor-
EFFECTS OF AN ACADEMIC BOYCOTT 521 mation. These responses were coded for analysis and provided a better understanding of the range of boycott tactics that were used and the alternative steps that were taken to prevent direct experiences of the boycott. The open-ended questions formed a valuable link between the survey results and the interviews and supported the goals of this study to present the effects of the academic boycott on academics as perceived through their own eyes. Interviews Despite the success of the mail survey in gathering a representative body of information from a large sample, the strategy of depending solely on the survey, and the data derived from it, is open to criticism. To quote Richard L. Hopkins on the use of questionnaires: "It raised more questions than it answered" [12, p. 138]. For example, in purely quanti- tative terms, the data indicate that many academics at South African universities have been affected by the boycott. However, the data could not by themselves explain the differences in effect among subsamples in the survey. Focused interviews made it possible to explore more fully the themes uncovered by the survey, and in particular to convey the range of responses on the part of scholars to the boycott. Overall, the interview data revealed that the boycott's effect on schol- arly research was minimal. Notwithstanding these reports, the inter- views pointed out the psychological effects of the boycott. A number of interviewees described their experiences of the boycott in terms of its isolating effect. Phrases such as "no longer part of the international community," "left out in the cold," and "lack of international exchange" were recorded repeatedly, especially among medical scientists. Medical scientists were more likely to report effects of the boycott in their schol- arly research than other interviewees. One medical scientist felt that "it set back science [in South Africa] by twenty-five years." These feelings of isolation engendered additional consequences. First, they bred suspicion among academics. When their manuscripts were rejected for publication or they received defective supplies or faulty equipment from abroad, these were perceived as boycott tactics. Examples of suspicion were cap- tured in the following statements: "You are not sure whether it is your scientific work that's being penalized [or] is it because you are South African" and "It may be that we are just having the same incidence of malfunctioning material that everybody else in other countries has; it may be because of it being South Africa." Second, the effects of the boycott induced parochialism in some scholarly activities. One academic who had difficulty in obtaining certain literary works from abroad felt "if [they] . . . do not want to make available their work, we will not study their work. . . . I believe in turning to our own work . . . as a
522 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY direct consequence of the boycott." Another, concerned about being rejected by international scholars, refused to extend invitations to inter- national scholars to visit South Africa. This lack of scholarly exchange, one interviewee felt, "has made us more parochial." One effect of the boycott revealed in the interviews was the threat of "brain drain." The loss of academics to other countries was a serious concern among university administrators who felt that "the partial effect of the boycott has led to people leaving the country.... It has encour- aged a brain drain. Such people tend not to come back . . . [and this will have] serious harmful effects." Asked in interviews how they felt about their experiences, university scholars reported additional and more complex effects. For example, their reactions to the boycott seemed to be influenced by their political orientation toward the policies of the South African government. A good example of this was the frustration and anger expressed by several academics who felt that they were already fighting the South African government's policies, yet found themselves in a situation that was spe- cifically intended to force them to pressure the government toward po- litical change. Phrases like "the boycott backfired badly" and "the boycott affected those universities that were fighting apartheid" were recorded frequently. In one case, an interviewee (who had previously been jailed because of his opposition to the government's policies) hit his fist on the table while expressing his anger at being denied participation in an international conference because of the boycott. Another interviewee shook his head in disbelief at not being able to obtain an entry visa to attend an international conference he had helped to organize. Such responses provided a richness and depth that the survey data alone were unable to capture. In summary, the focused interview was used to achieve depth and understanding of effect from the academics' perspective. In addition, it contributed to the interpretation of some of the statistical relationships found in the quantitative data, for example, the difference in boycott effect among university types reported in the mail survey. Interviewees at black universities perceived their institutions as teaching rather than research universities and consequently felt that the boycott was "relevant only to the high-profile researchers." It was also pointed out in the interviews that the focus of the academic boycott shifted during the boycott in 1988 from a total boycott of all South African academics to a selective boycott of those who supported the policies of the South African government. Thus academics associated with institutions that historically supported the government's policies were more likely to be boycotted than others. The qualitative data highlighted the psychological effects of the boy-
EFFECTS OF AN ACADEMIC BOYCOTT 523 cott. Although they reported very little or no interference in their schol- arly research, the academics repeatedly expressed feelings of isolation, insecurity, frustration, and anger. Their personal perspectives added depth and extended the meaning and impact of effect beyond the boy- cott tactics reported in the mail survey. Discussion One rationale for combining quantitative and qualitative methods is "to incorporate at least one method of data collection that describes and interprets the context [of the experience] . . . and one that is designed primarily to illuminate the [experience] itself" [4, p. 34]. In this study, the categorical data proved valuable in gathering a wide range of data that provided a descriptive analysis of the effects of the boycott. The categorical data, however, lacked the depth, range, specificity, and per- sonal context to explain the responses in a way that reflected the lives of the scholars. Because categorical questions impose a fixed structure in which to respond, they fail to uncover those responses that do not fit the structure. For example, although 219 respondents did not report direct experience of any boycott tactics, some of them did experience other effects, such as isolation from the international academic commu- nity. Moreover, several respondents who could not claim a direct experi- ence of the boycott were nevertheless affected by it in the sense that they had actually taken steps to prevent it (for example, not applying to international conferences or not submitting papers to international journals). The categorical data describing the effects of the boycott thus underestimated the range of effects. The open-ended responses indi- cated that there might be more complicated effects than those revealed in the categorical data. The interpretation of these data, based solely on quantitative methods, was "little more than speculation; but it [was] the type of speculation which the focused interview [was] particularly suited to examine, correct and develop" [11, p. 8]. The interview data supplemented the survey data analysis and helped to decipher puzzling responses or to interpret statistical relationships. For example, the survey data revealed a disparity between direct experi- ences of boycott tactics and their reported effect on scholarly activities among subgroups of the sample but could not explain the disparity. More academics in humanities and the arts experienced direct boycott tactics. However, scientists, especially in medicine, were more likely to report that elements of an academic boycott had interfered with their scholarly research than was true for those in other disciplines. By allowing academics to talk freely about issues of central importance
524 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY to themselves, less obvious though important themes were revealed that further illuminated the effects of the boycott. For example, one inter- viewee explained the frustrations and the difficulties of being an aca- demic. Some of these frustrations were directly related to the boycott, while others were cushioned in problematic relationships with other colleagues that were aggravated by their differences of opinion regard- ing the academic boycott and issues of academic freedom. One matter concealed by the survey but revealed in the interviews was the emotional reaction of some academics who had experienced boycott tactics firsthand. While most interviewees expressly supported the principle of an academic boycott (even if they disliked the boycott tactics used), a few academics who experienced boycott tactics firsthand expressed emotional sentiments like "It [the boycott] soured me badly" or "It frustrated me" and "I was angry." Others perceived the boycott as "a nuisance rather than an obstacle" to their research activities. The results of the focused interviews illustrated the limitations of relying on the respondents' own perceptions of how the boycott affected them. For example, the respondents reported very little to no interfer- ence in their scholarly activities; however, phrases like "feeling out of the mainstream," "no longer part of the international community," and "the academic boycott has made us more parochial" pointed toward an effect of isolation as a result of the boycott. Evidently, the boycott had affected them more than they had realized themselves. One scientist admitted that he felt insecure about the quality of his work "due to the lack of international evaluation." An important goal of the focused interview was to provide contextual background to the quantitative data. The brief notes, elicited as part of the survey, provided a contextual focus suited for further exploration through qualitative methods. They also helped to keep the interviewees focused on their own experiences. In doing so, the interviewer was able to assess how prior experiences were related to their situation during the boycott. For example, academics in the medical sciences consistently expressed concern regarding the difference in the quality of the training that their students were receiving compared to their own training-a situation that was directly attributable to the academic boycott. The descriptive overview obtained from the survey data facilitated in-depth interviewing and the ability to probe "leads" for further explo- ration. Moreover, the survey data alerted the interviewer to patterns of selective response, avoidances, or distortions that then could be further explored. One interviewee, who reported difficulty in obtaining impor- tant research material and supplies from abroad, was asked how he was able to pursue his research. His response was, "I have no trouble with an international academic boycott." Upon further probing it became
EFFECTS OF AN ACADEMIC BOYCOTT 525 clear that the sanctions imposed by the South African government were more detrimental to his research than an international academic boy- cott. Evidently, the South African government posed an obstacle in allowing the importation of the materials and supplies he required. The focused interview contributed to a better understanding of the boycott by complementing the information on scholars' experiences of boycott elements found in the surveys with information on the psycho- logical effects of those elements. The questionnaire presented a quanti- tative measure of effect by university, by broad subject areas, and by the various boycott tactics. However, what was actually learned from the survey was limited because of the operational definition of "effect" dictated by the method. The qualitative study of effect provided more illuminating information. The focused interview allowed the responses to be understood from the interviewee's perspective rather than be forced into a quantitative framework. The interviews also yielded a basis for interpreting the differing perceptions of effect. Moreover, they les- sened the gap between interviewees' perceptions of effect and reports of what they had actually experienced. A comparison of the two sets of data endorses the value of triangula- tion to reveal different aspects of the same reality [ 13]. The quantitative method and the qualitative method tapped into the phenomenon of "effect." The quantitative data revealed very little effect on scholarly activities by the boycott; the qualitative data offered a different reality, one that the respondents perceived but did not report as effect. The clearest example of this involved respondents who said their scholarly activities were not affected but who failed to report the anger, frustra- tion, insecurity, and isolation they felt from the international academic community. Many applied self-boycott to avoid any effects of the boy- cott. While self-boycott did not involve rejection from outside sources, it was evidence of the wider psychological impact of the boycott. The data also showed that each of the methods had certain weak- nesses. In contrast to the survey method, the focused interviews pre- sented limitations regarding the size of the sample and the general- ization of the findings. A small subset of forty-two academics was interviewed, making it very difficult to generalize to the larger sample. The interviews, however, added depth and richness to the data that would have been difficult to obtain otherwise. They tell us a little more about the aspects of psychological effect due to the boycott. This has implications for the validity of the findings. In the quantitative part of this study, preselected variables were used as a framework to measure effect, which facilitated coding and analysis of responses from a large sample. Based on these data, it was possible to make generalizations regarding the variables of effect. One of the principal problems of sur-
526 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY veys, however, is that sometimes too much is inferred from answers taken at face value [14]. For example, the survey data showed that 57.3 percent of the respondents reported experience of the boycott tactics. Those respondents who held a particular view could, consciously or subconsciously, choose to answer the questions in a way that favored that view. To generalize from the sample survey to the larger population ignores the possible disparity between the discourse of respondents about an issue and the way they respond in a formal context [4]. For example, some interviewees who claimed very little or no effect in their scholarly activities admitted that they did not want to admit to any ef- fects because "if [they] did, who knows what they (boycott advocates) will do next?" Those respondents who chose not to participate in a mailed survey are not part of the analysis. Would their answers suggest a different reality? To answer this question would require a different investigation. In this study, letters and notes received from a few unwill- ing participants showed that they had experienced boycott tactics. The quantitative method used alone distorted the reality of effect the study was designed to investigate; it separated the actual event of rejec- tion from its wider effect. Nevertheless, the quantitative data proved to be an important source to identify those respondents who were will- ing to contextualize their experiences in interviews. Further, the use of focused interviews to clarify questionnaire results allowed me to com- bine the depth of the qualitative study with the generalizability of the quantitative method [15]. For example, the categorical data indicated that medical scientists reported more effect on their research ;han other respondents. This phenomenon was explained in the interviews, where it was learned that, unlike academics in most other subject areas, medical scientists have been boycotted by the World Health Organization since the 1970s. The study showed that the mailed surveys and the focused interviews were used compatibly, with each supplementing the design or methodological weaknesses of the other. REFERENCES 1. Haricombe, Lorraine J. "The Effects of an Academic Boycott on Academics in South Africa." Ph.D. diss., University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 1992. 2. Patton, Michael Q. Qualitative Evaluation and Research Methods. London: Sage, 1990. 3. Hammersley, Martyn, and Atkinson, Paul. Ethnography: Principles in Practice. London: Tavistock, 1983. 4. Fielding, Nigel G., and Fielding, Jane L. Linking Data. Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage, 1986. 5. Benatar, Solomon. "An Alternative to Academic Boycott." Nature 343 (February 1990): 505-6.
EFFECTS OF AN ACADEMIC BOYCOTT 527 6. Tobias, Philip. "Thoughts on Academic Boycott: The Attrition of South Africa's Uni- versities under Siege: Positive Aid a Ray of Hope: Prehistory and Political Discrimina- tion." Minerva 26 (Winter 1988): 575-97. 7. Marx, Gary T., and Wood, James L. "Strands of Theory and Research in Collective Behavior." In Annual Review of Sociology, vol. 1, edited by A. Inkeles, J. Coleman, and N. Smelser, pp. 363-428. Palo Alto, Calif.: Annual Review, 1975. 8. Doxey, Margaret P. "International Sanctions: A Framework for Analysis with Special Reference to the UN and Southern Africa." International Organization 26 (Summer 1972): 527-50. 9. Hufbauer, Gary C., and Schott, Jeffrey J. Economic Sanctions Reconsidered: History and Current Policy. Cambridge, Mass.: Institute for International Economics, 1985. 10. Love, Janice. The U.S. Anti-Apartheid Movement: Local Activism in Global Politics. New York: Praeger, 1985. 11. Merton, Robert K.; Fiske, Marjorie; and Kendall, Patricia. The Focused Interview: A Manual of Problems and Procedures. Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press, 1956. 12. Hopkins, Richard L. "Attitudes Arising from the Use of Naturalistic Methods." In Naturalistic Inquiry for Library Science, edited by C. Mellon. New York: Greenwood, 1990. 13. Denzin, Norman K. The Research Act. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1978. 14. Schuman, Howard. "Artifacts Are in the Mind of the Beholder." American Sociologist 17 (1982): 21-28. 15. Mellon, Constance A. Naturalistic Inquiry for Library Science: Methods and Applications for Research, Evaluation, and Teaching. New York: Greenwood, 1990.