IMPLICATIONS FOR THE STORAGE AND RETRIEVAL OF KNOWLEDGE C. D. GULL EVOLUTION OF COMMUNICATION W ITH this paper the conference turns from considerations of the "input" phase of our com- munication effort and introduces a new aspect of our topic: that of taking ideas out in new forms. Before we do so, it is entirely appropriate that we consider again what a remarkable achievement the book is and what a remarkable part it has played in the process of distin- guishing man from animals. We need look back only thirty thousand years or so to see man as one of the many classes of animals struggling for existence in a natural environment, in contrast to our highly artificial one. Even then man, at least in our opinion today, stood as the most successful of all the animals, al- though some animals were more ferocious and efficient in capturing food, others were better engineered and armored for life in the wilderness, and many pos- sessed keener sight, hearing, and sense of smell. Man stood upright on two legs, thus freeing his other two feet to use as hands. He looked forward with binocular and hence stereoscopic vision. To com- municate with his fellows, he spoke words or language instead of uttering guttural grunts or barks or squeals. He used fire to warm himself and to cook his food. He developed crude weapons to overcome his deficiencies as a hunting animal. His brain was the largest and most complex in the world, and it gave him his greatest measure of superiority over the animals. Then, we assume as now, the brain con- tained about ten billion or ten thousand million cells, each cell connected directly or indirectly to every other, with small electrical impulses flowing through the connecting nerve fibers at between fifty and two hundred miles per hour.1 This brain serves as the center of an extremely complex communication sys- tem which has uncounted millions of cells on the surface of the body to receive stimuli; more cells in the nerves to carry impulses to the brain; and then more cells to carry impulses to muscles and glands to make them perform. This sys- tem is in continuous operation, receiving stimuli, sending out impulses, receiving new stimuli in a manner called "feed- back" in electronics-all to control the body within very close tolerances as an organism slowly burning its latest meal. Psychologists and psychiatrists be- lieve that an individual's every experi- ence is stored in his brain and can be re- called under proper stimulus. The brain, then, afforded primitive man an extraor- dinary means of storing information and of recalling experience. In addition, the brain could utilize the information it re- tained to lead to learning and even to original thought. And it continued to function and to add to its store of expe- rience and learning as long as the indi- vidual lived. We know how keenly we feel the loss of an older man, an "expert" in today's I B. V. Bowden (ed.), Faster than Thought: A Symposium on Digital Computing Machines (Lon- don: Pitman Publishing Corp., 1953). 333
334 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY terms, in full possession of his faculties. How much more serious must have been the death of an elder or chieftain to a small band of men in primitive times! His communication was limited to primi- tive speech, to the immediate moment, and to other men within hearing of his voice. His experiences and learning had to be passed from generation to genera- tion as memorized accounts, which today we call "stories" and "legends." In a sense, every man and woman had to at- tempt to receive, store, and pass on to sons or daughters the accumulated his- tory of mankind. Some idea of the magnitude of the task may be gained if we think of the members of this conference as the only survivors of a world-wide catastrophe, waking up in a wilderness, a favorable wilderness abounding in wildlife, vegetation, and mineral resources. Together we know enough to reconstitute much of current technology, but I doubt whether we could accomplish it in our lifetimes. How then would we record what we know so that our descendants could build on our experience? The sheer volume of man's accomplishments makes it clear that un- aided memory, speech, and action are in- sufficient to recapitulate and transmit from one generation to the next our con- stantly cumulating store of information. Primitive man may not have recog- nized as clearly as we do the need for storing information outside the brain, but over the centuries he began to do what he could with materials at hand. IPerhaps after piling up sticks and stones in attempts at numeration, it may have dawned on someone that it was possible to make a mark on some physical object, which could be kept for a period of years and which would serve to stimulate an association of ideas in the brains of later generations, thus recalling the experience of earlier ones. Anthropology and history show us that indeed man came to this realization, for we have cave paintings, primitive sculpture, pictographic and hieroglyphic forms of writing and, within very recent times, the development of that remarkable creation, the alphabet, and the later creation of the number sys- tem. In the beginning the substances on which these marks could be placed were not satisfactory. Naturally smooth spaces in protected areas are relatively few, as attested by the few cave paint- ings which have survived to this day. The walls of the Egyptian tombs have suf- fered the ravages of pilfering and of time, and tombs were not public places where the population of an area could go for education. Some other medium for stor- ing these marks was necessary. The clay tablets of the Assyrians had certain virtues for this purpose. It was relatively easy to make marks in wet clay with pointed objects and then, by firing the clay into tablets, to assure the preservation of these marks. But clay tablets are unhandy for the storage of information, and they are very poor for transporting information from one place to another. The wax tablet was an im- provement in this respect, but its dura- bility was not great. Animal skins made into various kinds of parchment and vel- lum provided another medium, but they have a tendency to deteriorate, and only unusual circumstances have permitted the preservation of the few ancient ex- amples which remain. As we know, the Egyptians discovered that the stalks of the papyrus plant could be pounded flat and laid alternatively at right angles and pressed into a relatively acceptable writing surface. When these stalks were laid in long strips, they made a surface that could be rolled up; conse- quently, the scroll became one of the
STORAGE AND RETRIEVAL OF KNOWLEDGE 335 earliest forms on which man attempted to store information. Now the scroll is a very unhandy form for this purpose, as we know from searching for a specific bit of information on such modern scrolls as sound-recording tape, a microfilm, or mo- tion-picture rolls. Consequently, one of the greatest technical advances in storing information came when the sections of a scroll were cut apart and bound on one edge to form what we now call the "book." Perhaps this advance came from tying sheets of parchment together or from tying the edges of accordion-folded papyrus scrolls. At any rate, the advan- tages of such a change in format are clear. A solid object is easier to hold. A book can readily be opened to that place in the text which carries the information we want. And we are not faced with the ne- cessity of carefully rolling up one end while unrolling the other lest the whole thing close up in our faces. Moving ahead, we can see that man did very well in these twenty-eight thou- sand years with the materials available to him. By some two thousand years ago he had, by his own effort, learned how to speak, he had produced the equivalent of speech in the alphabet and numbers, and he had learned how to write them down so that generation after generation could use the information. He had developed from the materials readily at hand a very convenient storage device in the book. The fact that very little change occurred for hundreds of years after these accom- plishments attests to his success. There was not much of a problem with the organization of recorded information when it was all set down by hand. Most individuals owned so few books that they were thoroughly familiar with their en- tire contents. Only in one or two places in the world were there enough books to create a problem of arrangement. It was only when the printing press was invent- ed, enabling man to duplicate his records in great quantity, that he had to face the problem of organizing the information which he had been diligently collecting for centuries. The widespread publication made possible by the printing press so accelerated the growth and recording of knowledge that the sheer bulk of our re- corded information is today a cause of serious concern. Many fear that if the record becomes so unwieldy that it is not possible to locate what is needed when it is needed, the future progress of mankind might be seriously hampered. It is interesting to note that man's at- tempts at improving his communications have been tending toward a more and more accurate reproduction of the living moment as a single person sees it and hears it and feels it emotionally. Visual action, sound, and feeling are present in the theater, in musical performances, in teaching, in motion pictures, and in tele- vision. Telegraphy has changed from the dot-and-dash sounds of the early receiver to the visual action-record of the tele- typewriter. Telephony and radio remain sound and feeling without visual action, but radio has grown into television by adding visual action. The black and white spectrum is being abandoned for the color spectrum in both movies and television. Color sound-movies and tele- vision represent our highest achievement n communication techniques today. But most of the deliberate, rehearsed employ- ment of communication methods are based on a script or book, from which text and directions are obtained by the performers. Thus the book remains cen- tral to all these efforts. As far as we know, the stimuli from the five senses reach the brain with equal speed, but sight and hearing are used to acquire information almost to the exclu-
336 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY sion of touch, smell, and taste. When we consider that touch, smell, and taste de- pend on immediate and convenient con- tact with the stimulus, while sight oper- ates from light waves and hearing from sound waves whose sources may be far or near, it is clear why sight and hearing are so important in acquiring and transmit- ting information. Only the blind who read Braille or other raised writing make conscious use of the sense of touch to acquire information, and they are quite well aware how slowly they acquire in- formation by touch in comparison to the sighted reader and the listener who uses the Talking Book Service. Our senses be- ing what they are, I think we may safely predict that future developments in the storage and retrieval of information will depend upon what we can do technologi- cally with sight and hearing, action and speech, transient impulses and perma- nent records. There are certain physical, physiologi- cal, and social limits to what man can do in the technology of communication. For example, nothing can be communicated faster than the speed of light or electro- magnetic radiation-186,282 miles per second. Our eyes receive as visible light only a fraction of the spectrum, from red with a wave length of 760 millimicrons to violet with one of 390 millimicrons. Be- cause our nerves and brain cannot trans- mit and interpret the impulses fast enough to permit us to see (receive) most of the events which occur in this spec- trum, sixteen pictures flashed on a screen in a second give the illusion of moving pictures. As for sound, a man with sharp hearing can receive roughly only from 20 to 20,000 cycles per second of the waves encompassed in the sonic spectrum in air, which has a range of zero to 500,000,- 000 cycles per second. In spite of the limitation of the eye and ear, there are some 300,000 discriminable colors and another 300,000 discriminable tones which we can receive and which make up the colorful and noisy world we know. Doubtless it is well that we cannot tune in on more of the light and sonic spectra than we do-ultrasonic vibra- tions, for example, may distress or injure the human body-but the wide discrep- ancy between what is scientifically pos- sible to transmit and the physiological limits on man's ability to receive it has an effect on our efforts to mechanize, electrify, and electronize the storage and retrieval of information. The invention of printing from mov- able type and the powering of presses with steam and electricity have blanket- ed the civilized world with the book, newspaper, magazine, pamphlet, and broadside. For all practical purposes mass production assures that every hu- man being can be supplied with the printed word, and, in a 100 per cent flexi- bly intercommunicating world popula- tion, every person would be able to transmit and receive communications with every other person in the world. As yet, however, the saturation point of the human race for printed material is un- guessed and far from achievement. Mass coverage with the spoken word is almost a 100 per cent possibility today in the United States, where 98 per cent of the dwelling units and 71 per cent of the automobiles are equipped with radio. But such communication travels in one direction only. XVhile 31 per cent of our population could conceivably lift a tele- phone receiver simultaneously to reply to a question on the radio, only a fraction of this number could reply at one time over fifty million telephones to any one cen- tral point for tabulating answers. The magnitude of the reply problem is seen in the slowness with which national elec-
STORAGE AND RETRIEVAL OF KNOWLEDGE 337 tions are tabulated, and we all know what a communication upheaval occurs on presidential election night! Conelrad, the civil defense radio air-raid warning system, has been developed in recogni- tion of this condition. While we rarely reflect on the econom- ic and social significance of the vast net- work at our command when we lift the telephone receiver to talk to our neighbor next door or overseas or of the vast in- formation-gathering and transmitting agencies behind our daily newspapers and weekly news magazines, we must conclude here that in the field of commu- nication, as in other phases of our life, mass production and mass coverage have made low unit costs possible, and they in turn have contributed to the spread of mass coverage and mass production. An individual can select what he wants to re- ceive, store impressions in his brain, and discard most, if not all, of the physical means of communication. Mankind in general cannot afford such selectivity and limited storage capacity, and conse- quently our research libraries are crowd- ed today with more information than we can organize and exploit with much suc- cess. You are all familiar with the tre- mendous growth of printed materials and of all the new and old things which li- braries must keep: manuscripts, music, maps, phonorecords, prints, photo- graphs, motion pictures, microfilms, etc. We have reached the stage where the word "library" can be added freely to any word to indicate that information is stored for future use, no matter how un- like the book the storage medium may be. When an executive says to his secre- tary or, in effect, to a librarian, "Please file this, Miss Jones," he really means something like this: "Please put this blasted thing out of my sight for now! I don't know or care where you put it, but be sure you fix it so you can get it out again whenever I need it for any pur- pose." He is vaguely aware that the prin- cipal features of mass communication- high speed, great quantity, excellent quality, almost unlimited flexibility, and low unit costs-do not apply to the storage and retrieval of information in his own office, in his company library, or in research libraries. Yet if we are to im- prove the storage and retrieval of knowl- edge, these features must be applied to libraries, and we must experiment along parallel lines to discover the facts and techniques which will permit imp-ove- ment. In other words, we must study the organization of knowledge and the machines which facilitate organization. THE BRAIN PLUS M-ACHINES Machines are now used in a very lim- ited and disorganized way to aid the brain in the storage and retrieval of in- formation. Pencils, typewriters, office duplicators, telephones, books, and card catalogs are familiar and exceedingly simple machines for this purpose; they perform their functions only when direct- ly used by man. Microfilm cameras, read- ers and rapid selectors, and facsimile transmitters and receivers are more com- plicated machines, and in certain combi- nations can be operated for short periods without human supervision. Punched- card accounting machines can be used with intermittent human supervision for the organization, storage, and retrieval of information. From them we have pro- gressed to the analog and digital elec- tronic computers, which are capable of handling large masses of mathematical information through almost countless operations at unbelievably high speeds and, when properly programmed, can be used for several hours with a minimum
338 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY of supervision. They have been success- fully applied to a variety of operations like warehouse stock-level accounting, air-pilot training, airport traffic control, and prediction of election results, as well as to large mathematical problems. They dominate the field so completely today that they have caught the imagination of documentalists and information-control specialists, who look to them for a me- chanical solution to their problems. Let us define these computers and consider their potentialities, advantages, and dis- advantages for the storage and retrieval of knowledge: A computer is defined here as a device which accepts quantitative information, may arrange it and perform mathematical and logical opera- tions on it, and makes available the resulting quantitative information as an output. This definition is intentionally broad. It includes de- vices from a slide rule to a differential analyzer, and from a desk calculator to a telephone ex- change and a large-scale digital computer. The computer is thus an information-processing de- vice. The arranging of the input-information is frequently as important as the other function.2 The various computing machines available today can, in general, be divided into two dis- tinct classes-analog and digital. Their basic difference lies in the fact that the analog de- pends on the measured value of various physical quantities and the relationship between them, while the digital relies on the spacing and logical use of pulsed or on-off data with time. Analog computors use the technique of models, or more specifically, mathematically equivalent models. Digital computors, on the other hand, use a lan- guage, the language of counting.3 Computers consist of input, output, and storage devices, in addition to the mechanisms or circuits to accomplish the mathematical operations. Their advan- tages include: (1) high speed for many operations, such as 20,000 multiplica- tions per second of two ten-digit num- bers; (2) capacity for operating upon huge problems which would take so many man-years that they would never be attempted without the computers; (3) use of logical as well as mathematical operations; and (4) iteration-repetition of operations until a solution is found for one phase of a problem, thus permitting the computer to move to the next phase. The disadvantages include not only those which hamper computer experts but also those which make it difficult to apply computers to information control: e.g., (1) a language limited to mathemat- ical analogs and binary or decimal digits; (2) input speeds excessively low com- pared to computational speeds, such as 5 keys punched per second by one operator compared to the 20,000 multiplications per second mentioned above; (3) similar- ly low output speeds, such as 300 charac- ters per second from a printing tabulator; and (4) storage or memory devices with capacities impossibly small for informa- tion-control purposes. These low speeds are susceptible of im- provement, and experiments at RCA in- dicate that a new electron-image tube can simulate typesetting, making the output speed more nearly balanced with computational speed. Up to 10,000 let- ters can be produced a second, with 4,000 characters clearly produced on a 5-inch screen. In the laboratory 2,000 charac- ters a second have been clearly recorded on standard 35-mm. film.4 At the Intelli- gent Machines Research Corporation, they are working on a photoelectric read- er to scan 60 words a second and transfer the signals from a phototube to magnetic tape for feeding the inputs of computers.' 2 W. H. MacWilliams, Jr., "Computers-Past, Present, and Future," Electrical Engineering LXXII (February, 1953), 116-21. 3 W. J. M. Moore, "The Application of Comput- ors to Industry," reprinted from Engineering Jour- nal, XXXVII (September, 1954), 1068. 4 "Transducer Tube Changes Signals to Letters," Electronics, XXVIII (May, 1955), 182-84. David H. Shepard and Clyde C. Heasly, Jr., "Photoelectric Reader Feeds Business Machines," Electronics, XXVIII (May, 1955), 134-38.
STORAGE AND RETRIEVAL OF KNOWLEDGE 339 While this device is some sixty times faster than key-punching or typewriting, it is useful only for material already down in black and white on the page. The original placement of new material on the page still requires the depression of a key for each character. A device is needed which will transfer speech to impulses which the computer can handle, and we are far from such a device today. More serious, I think, than the techno- logical problems of storage, input, and output, for which the techniques un- doubtedly can be improved to a certain extent in the next few years, is the code or language which is needed for the machines. A child picks up words, mean- ing, language, long before we try to teach him letters, spelling and grammar, num- bers and mathematics. Machines, on the other hand, approach from units and try to simulate understanding. The Turing machine, which appears to be the foun- dation for a universal computer, can be thought of as a mechanical calculator which literally works with pencil and paper. It writes its numbers in the sim- plest possible form, as a string of units, thus requiring thirty-five of them for the number 35. With a table of logical con- trol of only a few thousand entries, it seems able to perform essentially all the problem-solving tasks that a man can, although at a distressingly slow pace. One reason for the slowness is that infor- mation content per stroke is at a minimum. In the binary scale, 35 can be ex- pressed as 100011, and this is more eco- nomical of strokes than the units of Tur- ing's machine. Here we have introduced speed as well as increased economy of notation, for the binary scale fits the on- off characteristics of an electron tube, and such a tube can easily be switched on and off a million times a second. But it still requires three times as many charac- ters as do decimal numnbers, and the al- phabetic scale goes even farther beyond most of the computer technology of our day. While letters and words can be coded as binary and decimal numbers, visual meaning disappears for the human user when they are so coded. When spoken, too, these numbers do not mean what the spoken words mean. Yet man's nervous system and brain, whose cells cannot be used more than one hundred times a sec- ond, can view 3,000 letters and numbers a minute, sort them into words, under- stand their meaning and relationship, and finally store the impressions for fu- ture use. As John G. Kemeny points out: The fact is that machines have rnot yet imi- tated the human brain's method of storing and recovering information. For instance, it we tried to increase Maniac's memory by any con- siderable amount, we would soon find it almost impossible to extract information. We would have to use a complex system of coding to en- able the machine to hunt up a given item of in- formation, and this coding would load down the memory further and make the logical control more complex. Only when we acquire a better understanding of the brain's amazing ability to call forth information will we be able to give a machine anything more than a limited mem- ory.6 In other words, the difference between a computer memory and the brain is more than a matter of mere complexity. We may well wonder whether imitation of the brain is not a great deal more difficult to achieve than a completely original technological solution of the problem of information control. APPLICATION OF COMMUNICATION THEORY TO RESEARCH LIBRARIES Harold Fleisher has outlined, in the preceding paper, the mathematical theo- ry of communication developed by Claude E. Shannon of the Bell Telephone 6 John G. Kemeny, "Man Viewed as a Machine," Scientific American, CXCII (April, 1955), 60.
340 THE LIBRARY QUAR'TERLY Laboratories and Warren Weaver of the Rockefeller Institute. A simple diagram in their book7 can be used to construct an analogy showing the interdependence between the intellectual or organization- al problems of information control and the possible technological solutions. Their diagram (Fig. 1) shows a message originating at an information source, fed into and then out of a transmitter, to a receiver and thence to the destination. Although the diagram shows semantic noise and engineering noise entering at the middle of the message path, both kinds of noise can enter anywhere on that path. We are familiar with engineering noise as interference, static, and back- ground crackle and hum in our radio re- ceivers. Engineers always face the prob- lem that the message must be conveyed from source to destination at an energy level sufficient to overcome such inevi- table engineering noise. Semantic noise arises from differences in meaning creat- ed at the source and in understanding of the message at the destination. The use of a library or information service is analogous to this diagram of communication, although we shall see significant differences. In Figures 1 and 2 a human brain is the information source and also the destination. But two FIG. 1.-Mathematical theory of communication* Message Circuit Message |Information T7jsi Le Receiver Destination Semantic Engineering Noise Noise * Based on Shannon and Weaver, The Mathemaltcal Theory of Communication (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1949), p. 98. FIG. 2.-Mathematical theory of communication as used in a library or information service QUESTION OR IDEA COLLECTION AND BIBLIOGRAPHIC AIDS ANSWER Information Transmitter Semantic Engineering Receiver Destination Som,rce Noise Noise -, -. - -_ ____4_ - ---- - Brain Voice Classifications Book form Eye Brain Written words Subject headings Card form or Ear _ Typed input -+ Indexes other unit Touch Optical, etc. Numbers form Typed output Scanning input Letters - Tapes - Photographs Punched cards Codes Disks Tapes and tapes in- Author entry Cylinders Disks put Cylinders Cathode-ray tubes Facsimile Television I The Mathematical Theory of Communication (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1949), p). 98.
STORAGE AND RETRIEVAL OF KNOWLEDGE 341 or more brains are involved in the trans- mission of a message in Figure 1, while generally the brain of a single person is both the information source and the des- tination in the use of a library (Fig. 2). Whereas a communication circuit should carry the message through to the destina- tion without alteration, the library user poses a question or idea at the informa- tion source but seeks an answer at the destination. The message, therefore, un- dergoes a complete transformation in its passage through a library or information service. In this passage the association of ideas must be as perfect as possible, whereas in simple communication the faithful reproduction of the message at its destination is all that is required. The library user who makes his own search unaided by his fellowman does not use the transmitter of Figure 1, al- though he carries a verbalization of his question or idea in his mind and attempts to match this verbalization to the collec- tion and bibliographic aids which he con- sults. As he reads his way to the answer he seeks, his eyes serve as the receiver and his brain as the destination. Most users are unaware of the semantic and engineering noise which must be over- come in making such basic type of search, and the difficulties can be neg- lected here for a moment. Most searches are more complicated than the single operation represented by the diagram. They even appear to be iterative in character. The moment our user asks a librarian for aid, face to face, he uses his voice as a transmitter, sound waves as the message path or circuit, the librarian's ear as receiver, and the li- brarian's brain as the destination. The librarian then performs a search for the user and, having found an answer, speaks to the user, thus employing the basic dia- gram to complete the circuit from user through collection to user again, or A-B-A. If the user telephones his question and the librarian replies by phone, the iteration is more complex. The pattern now becomes A-A-B- A-A instead of A-B-A. Questions which reach State Depart- ment librarians from overseas create a very complex communication pattern. For example, a police chief in an Indian city asks for a list of books and articles on modern criminology. When in due course he receives a reply from Washing- ton, his request has gone through the following steps: 1. Police Chief speaks to foreign service of- ficer ........................... . A 2. Foreign service officer dictates cable.... A 3. Cable is transmitted to State Depart- ment Library in Washington. A 4. LibrarianusesStateDepartmentLibrary B 5. Librarian phones FBI Library for aid. . A 6. FBI Library is searched. B 7. Librarian at FBI phones answer to li- brarian at State Department. A 8. State Department Librarian dictates answer. A 9. Cable is transmitted to foreign service officer in India. A 10. Foreign service officer phones answer to police chief, with copy of cable following by mail. A Or the foreign service officer may ask the United States Information Library to check the list against its collections and report how many items it can supply, thus adding to the chain of A's and B's! Although we have seen how many A's and B's may be involved in an informa- tion search, we have not considered the capabilities and difficulties of B which correspond to the transmitter, receiver, and engineering and semantic noise of Figure 1. Writing and speech are the traditional inputs for Figure 2, corresponding to the transmitter inputs in Figure 1. As tech- nology develops, we shall see increasing
342 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY use of stroke inputs, such as typewriters, teletypewriters, card punches, and other devices converting speech and written or printed records to electronic signals. Sim- ilarly, writing and speech are the tradi- tional outputs on Figure 2 corresponding to the receiver outputs on Figure 1. Technological improvements here are likely to call for increasing use of wet and dry photography, signal-controlled type- writers and typesetting machines, fac- simile, television, writing on cathode-ray tubes, sound recordings on disks, cylin- ders, tapes, and wire, and signal-con- trolled Braille writing, all of these being adapted for reception by the eye, ear, or organs of touch. Engineers will continue to strive for speed, capacity, accuracy, and compactness in their transmitting and receiving apparatus. Engineering noise shown in Figure 2 is easier to see than it is in Figure 1, but we give it little consideration because it has been with us for so long. Sheets of paper, cards, bindings on books, loose- leaf binders, microfilms, tapes, disks, cyl- inders, and card catalogs all introduce what we call "engineering noise" into the library. When sheets are bound into books for protection and portability, the possibility of rearranging them is lost. When loose-leaf binders are used to per- mit flexibility, maintenance becomes a problem. Scroll-like devices require ma- chinery for rapid location of parts rolled up in the material. Card catalogs permit great flexibility, but they are only scrolls cut up and put into boxes and lack any mechanization to permit rapid scanning. Photographic reductions require optical devices for enlargement for easy reading. Recent attempts to achieve flexible association of ideas in searching have in- troduced even more engineering noise. Edge-notched and fully punched cards introduce problems of capacity and speed based on sequential searches. The microfilm rapid selector encounters prob- lems of coding capacity and photograph- ic and electronic limitations, again based on sequential searches. Although co-or- dinate indexes eliminate sequential searches, they introduce selection and identification problems for dedicated position or Batten cards, and collating problems for terminal digit cards. If the analogy with electronic commu- nication holds, engineering noise cannot be completely eliminated from libraries and information services, and reduction of one distortion may merely lead to un- covering or aggravating another distor- tion. Thus, there seems now to be no one means of storing information which is so much more efficient that it will become dominant and drive other means out of use. I have kept semantic noise for final consideration, because I believe it is a greater problem for the librarian and in- formation specialist than any other phase of the process of storage and re- trieval of knowledge. Semantic noise is at a minimum in Figure 1, where it is large- ly limited to the meaning of words and speech in messages. The ambiguities are even fewer when Figure 1 is used for computers, for the words used by today's computers can be and are used as nu- merical values in the operations. But semanticists will seriously and rightly claim that even in the simple communi- cation process represented by ligure 1 their problems in meaning and grammar are difficult enough, and they show many instances where semantic noise has al- tered a message beyond recognition and effectiveness. Semantic noise in Figure 2 includes values assigned to numbers, letters, and other symbols used for identification, for the construction of codes, and for classi-
STORAGE AND RETRIEVAL OF KNOWLEDGE 343 fication, cataloging, and indexing. Since these techniques, taken together, aim at the objective and subjective organization of all knowledge, it is easily seen that they -represent the core of the whole problem of information control. Al- though there is considerable empirical knowledge about these techniques, at- tempts to provide a theoretical basis for the organization of knowledge are con- temporaneous with Shannon and Weav- er's statement of the mathematical theo- ry of communication, and that is recent indeed. Not until the last two years have the beginnings of a theory of systematic classification and a theory for alphabetic (i.e., arbitrary-order) indexing found their way into print.8 As conditions exist in libraries today, the information we seek is actually being suppressed in our collections by our own bibliographical aids. To remedy this situation, we must reduce semantic and engineering noise by creating better cir- cuits for the signals which convey the wanted information in our libraries and information services. Considerable sums are now being spent, both here and abroad, on the theory of computers and on the development of these and other devices to handle large masses of infor- mation. Similar sums to support the de- velopment of the theory of the organiza- tion of information should be made avail- able, for it is fundamental to the success- ful operation and application of comput- ers and as yet unforeseen devices for the storage and retrieval of knowledge. 8 John Richard Gregg, The Language of Taxono- my (New York: Columbia University Press, 1954); Mortimer Taube and Associates, Studies in Coordi- nate Indexing (2 vols.; Washington: Documentation Inc., 1953-54).