The Doctorate in Librarianship And An Assessment of Graduate Library Education RAY L. CARPENTER AND PATRICIA A. CARPENTER THE DEMAND for professional librarians in all capacities and the special demand for more highly educated and sophisticated per- sonnel have led to reevaluation of library education programs, the introduction of new goals and courses in established programs, and the development of many newly accredited programs. Furthermore, addi- tional programs are being planned and discussed. As a consequence of these developments, there is an increased demand for library school faculty to man the new programs and a need for clarification of the present status of the several programs. That is, there are many "un- knowns" in existing doctoral programs and several are examined here. The following survey report is offered on the assumption that knowing more about the present graduates of the doctoral programs will provide more notions about the nature of our professional elite, the doctorate in library science. The study has two purposes: to provide a description Ray L. Carpenter is Acting Dean, School of Library Science, and Research Associate, Institute for Research in Social Science, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. He holds a doctorate in Sociology and an M.S. in Library Science. Patricia, also an M.S. in L.S., is presently a research assistant in ILN.C.'s NASA Space Sciences program. Special thanks go to the Institute for Research in Social Science for its assistance in data processing and analysis. Also to the Smith Fund, University of North Carolina, for its financial assistance, to Kenneth Shearer for his many helpful suggestions and to Brenda Roman for editorial assistance. 3
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP of selected socio-economic variables characterizing the present doctoral population and to provide a subjective evaluation of the library educa- tion programs by those people who are presumably the most know- ledgeable people in the profession. This second part of the study was inspired by the Cartter study An Assessment of Quality in Graduate Education: A Comparative Study of Graduate Departments in 29 Academic Disciplines,1 which did not include librarianship as well as many other fields. Our modified counterpart of that study will be dis- cussed later in this report. Hopefully, this information will enable us to understand more precisely the problems involved in reducing the shortage of library science doctorates, especially for teaching. Several basic questions were raised in the study reported below. These include several background characteristics of library science doc- torates - sex, age, marital status, religion, father's occupation, incidence of other librarians in the family, birthplace, residence, institution where the degree had been granted, job title, whether or not the respondent was teaching library science or other courses full- or part-time, and both the present and the expected maximum annual salaries. It was thought that certain of these characteristics would show some higher degree of incidence than might be expected. For instance, while about 75-80 per cent of librarians in general are female, it seemed that this ratio might not be at all true of doctorates. In other words, it was hypothesized that measurement of certain factors - sex, father's occu- pation, religion, and whether or not other members of the family were librarians - would indicate that doctorates in library science were "se- lectively recruited," that they were not typical of a general cross-section of the librarian population. It is assumed, of course, that information about such variables can help to explain several important problems and can help to provide some basis for planning strategies in their solution. Given, for instance, that there are different sex ratios among the leaders in library science and among librarians in general, we would ask if this implies a source of stress. Are women librarians under-represented in the leadership? Are qualified (doctoral) women paid equitably? Are the members of this library elite from a representative socio-economic background - or are they primarily from upper-middle class, Protestant families? The assumption underlying these questions is that leaders are more likely to be attuned to the needs of their "public" if they have participated in the same life experiences; namely, if they have similar socio-eco- nomic life chances. Further, a reasonably representative mixture of the 4
Doctorate in Librarianship various class-status categories should make for a richer interchange among leaders, thereby modifying any tendency to adopt a single class outlook. A second group of questions inquired about several standard "issues" in the field: attitudes about the adequacy of librarianship, its theory, research, and literature, for a doctoral degree; whether the Ph.D., D.L.S. or some other degree were preferred; the relative importance of doctorates in other fields as teachers in schools of library science; and the relative prestige thought to be enjoyed by a library science doctorate. Third were questions designed to draw out attitudes about teaching library science - factors in deciding where to teach, including character- istics about the organization as well as the political/racial climate, etc. Finally, as in the Cartter study mentioned above,1 respondents were asked to rank order the 10 doctoral programs for over-all effectiveness and again for quality of the faculty. They were then asked to describe on a scale of 0-4 ("don't know" to "distinguished") the 44 accredited library schools. Further, in order to accommodate the fact that many library school programs are in a state of change, respondents were given the opportunity to list names of schools whose doctoral or master's programs they expected to decline or improve in the next 5-10 years. THE DATA BASE The three major sub-sets of respondents consist of doctorates in library science, deans of accredited library schools, and a small sample of accredited library school faculty members. Each of these was se- lected on a basis most appropriate for its purpose. An examination of Dissertation Abstracts2 and Cohen's Library Science Dissertations, 1925-1960 3 turned up a total of 249 earned doc- torates in librarianship. Over 20 per cent of these names were elimin- ated - those who were deceased, those who had been long in retirement, and those who had returned to their native countries abroad. A more realistic universe of doctorates, as of the summer of 1968, numbered 191 persons. Each was sent a questionnaire and 136 (or 71 per cent) were returned. All deans of the then 44 accredited library schools were polled, and a total of 27 responded. Among these were 15 with library science doc- torates, included in the 136 total above. This was a period of consider- able change of personnel among deanships; however, over 75 per cent 5
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP of those who were deans at that time and who had doctoral degrees in library science responded. An additional 12 respondent deans had master's degrees in library science or doctorates in other fields or both. In order to provide some contrast or comparison at several points, a random sample of 100 faculty members listed in the Winter, 1968, issue of Journal of Education for Librarianship4 excluding all deans and all persons holding doctorates in librarianship, was queried. Fifty- five of those queried returned the questionnaires. Much of the information following is based exclusively on the re- sponses of the doctorates and deans. While there were 12 deans who did not have library science doctorates, it should be noted that inclu- sion of their responses with those of the library science doctorates does not materially bias the results reported here. In the first place, those deans without library science doctorates did not as a group vary in any important way from the deans as a whole, and as a proportion of the total group of 148 their variation is negligible. Secondly, a primary purpose of the study is to gain insights about the characteristics and attitudes of our professional elite, and all deans clearly belong to this elite group whether or not they hold doctoral degrees in library science. This is especially the case where we are concerned with evaluation of educational programs and of attitudes about teaching. Deans, more than any other group, are regularly concerned with the quantity and quality of doctoral production in order to best screen candidates for their faculties and to counsel students interested in doctoral study. The added weight of the information they have far outweighs the minor problem of nominal difference from their colleagues due to lack of an earned library science degree. As might be expected there are rather large numbers of respondents from a few schools and few respondents or none from several. This is due to the great differentiation in numbers of graduates produced, of course. Following is a short table showing the rate of response by school. It should be noted that the percentages of those responding out of the total doctoral group are misleading in that they are too low. No- tably, of the number of doctorates awarded, 58 were eliminated from polling as discussed earlier - due to death, etc. About 70 per cent of that number eliminated were graduates of the University of Chicago, the school with the largest number of graduates and with the longest history of doctoral education. In effect, the 43 responses from Chicago 6
Doctorate in Librarianship graduates represent nearly 66 per cent of the presently available Chi- cago doctorate population. table I. - Doctorates Awarded and Respondents, by Institution Number Doctoral Respondents Degrees Awarded Number % Berkeley 2 2 100 CaseW. R. 9 3 33 Chicago 95 43 45 Columbia 26 17 65 Illinois 41 26 62 Michigan 58 33 59 Rutgers 17 12 70 So. California 1 0 0 249 136 Not all respondents answered all questions; consequently the total N varies for many tabulations. Also, in cases where only one respond- ent would appear in a cross-tabulation, the information has often been deleted in order to preserve the respondent's anonymity. It is common practice currently to defend or "explain" the use of significance tests in one's reporting. Chi-square test results are presented selectively where we considered them most useful and where "signifi- cance" was reasonably certain. While the data base of doctorates and deans is not a random sample, the reader may find it useful to consider the tests as if the data were representative of a "universe of possibili- ties," 5 recalling that the rate of returns was high and that the distribu- tion by region and by other variables was consistent with that of the total population. SOCIO-ECONOMIC FACTORS Looking at the doctorates and the deans together we find that this group is primarily composed of married, "middle-aged" males who are Protestant by religion or not participants in any formal religious or- ganization. They come mainly from professional or proprietorial fami- lies and are presently employed as major executives, earning salaries more than twice the current rate for beginning professionals. The following tables show more precisely how the group is distributed in 7
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP these respects, except for salary data which will be analyzed in detail in a later section.** Sex and Age table II. - Age Distribution by Sex: Ph.D.s and Deans FEMALE MALE row Age Ph.D. Deans Total Ph.D. Deans Total Total 21-30 10 1 0 0 0 1 31-40 7 0 7 18 3 21 28 41-50 4 2 6 20 6 26 32 51-60 5 4 9 41 7 48 57 over 60 9 1 10 15 4 19 29 26* 7 33 94 20 114 147 * One female did not report age Two results of the data obtained on sex and age are very prominent: the sex ratio is approximately the opposite of that in the general population of library professionals, and the majority of this group (58%) is over 50 years old. (Only one respondent, a female, did not report her age.) There are at least two reasons that may be offered to "explain" the age distribution. First, selection of librari- anship as a career tends to come late in life. Second, the low level of financial support leads to interrupted and prolonged study for the doctorate. The relatively small proportion (22%) of women might be accounted for by the assumption that women are less likely than men to make as total a career commitment as is demanded by doctoral study.6 It should be noted also that women are slightly under- represented among the respondents in that the universe of 191 doctor- ates is about 28 per cent female; the universe of deans, however, does not have a higher proportion of women than our respondents. Deans, expectedly, are quite similarly distributed by sex, but with a surpris- ingly high percentage (41%) under 50. One important probable consequence of age should be noted. There are very few young doctorates - 79 per cent are over 40 - and, given the tendency for productivity to be greatest at 30-40 years of age, there ** The term Ph.D. and doctorate as used in this paper includes all doctorates in librarianship, including the D.L.S. and a few Ed.D. degrees. Doctorate holders who earned their degrees in disciplines other than librarianship are not included. 8
Doctorate in Librarianship is probably a relatively low expectancy for research productivity among most present doctoral recipients. Librarianship, especially library schools, needs desperately to develop its research efforts, and it would appear at this point that such developments must await extensive addi- tions of appropriate personnel. Simply equipping and funding present staffs would not seem to be at all adequate for the needs. Marital Status. When we look at the variable of marital status for our subjects we find that there is a great difference between the sexes. Such a difference may explain in part the greater motivation of men to further their careers in order to provide more amply for their families. The data on salaries shown later tends to bear this out. table in. - Marital Status by Sex Female Male Married 20% 82% Single 80% 18% Using frequencies, chi-square = 37.123, 1 d.f.; significant at .001. Religion. Religious affiliation, of interest for several reasons to be- havioral scientists, is somewhat problematic to assess. Is religious affili- ation related to drive and achievement? to professional status? Are the major religious groups widely represented among our library elite? More than any other, the question on religious affiliation raised the ire of respondents. Analysis of their comments leads one to conclude that many librarians assume that religion does not have any bearing on the profession or that it is not within the scope of science to inquire about one's religious affiliation. As a measure, then, the following figures must be used carefully. Fifty-six per cent reported themselves as Pro- testants; 10 per cent as Catholics; 4 per cent as Jews; 18 per cent as None or "Other" ; and 12 per cent failed to report. Perhaps the best general source for comparison is Greeley's Religion and Career? While our elite would seem to have about its proper share of Protestants who are college graduates, Greeley's data suggests that our Catholic and Jewish proportions are each too small by half.8 Addi- tional research is required to analyze the religious composition of the profession at all levels. We might well inquire of ourselves in the meantime as to the importance of this factor to the profession and to 9
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP the publics it serves. Closely related to the issue is ethnic background; indeed, ethnicity may ' "explain" more than religious affiliation alone the differential distribution of religious groups among occupations. Further, it should be noted that no inquiry about "race" was made of our subjects. It is clear to the authors that the number of blacks among the doctoral/dean group is negligible, and that the need for black doctorates is probably as severe as any one sub-set of the profes- sion's needs can be. Father's Occupation. One of the most useful indicators of social class or socio-economic status is the occupation of the respondent's father. The kind of class situation from which librarians come may, of course, affect their outlook. Perhaps even more important, if we know that a severe shortage of personnel can be partly explained by lack of recruitment from a broad social spectrum, we may take steps to recruit from social groups that may provide more manpower. For as Morrison concluded in his study of academic librarians, "... for a significant number of subjects, the energy that enabled a person to break the social barriers to entrance into the profession also tended to carry him upward within it." 9 Father's Occupation Ph.D.s Deans Total Prof., Tech. 19% 26% 20.3% Farmer, Farm Mgr. 8 4 7.4 Mgr., Official, Owner 22 33 24.3 Skilled Worker, Foreman 10 7 9.5 Sales, Clerical 4 0 3.4 Laborer, Service 3 0 2.0 Deceased 24 19 23.0 Retired 8 11 8.8 No response 2 0 1.4 100% 100% 100.1% table iv. - Father's Occupation: Ph.D.s and Deans, by Percentage If we combine the figures for professional and technical occupations with those for managers, officials and owners, we see that these occu- pations account for 45 per cent of the total group of today's doctorates' father's occupations. These are occupations clearly education-oriented and print-oriented. As a group, persons in these occupations are reason- ably affluent, middle-class and upper-middle class with, no doubt, some 10
Doctorate in Librarianship fully upper-class members. The results are generally similar to those in Bryan's The Public Librarian 10 of 20 years ago. At that time profes- sional librarians, including those holding all types of degrees had fathers who were very much higher in the occupational hierarchy than the population average; 35 per cent of the fathers were professional or managerial people and another 20 per cent were self-employed. The occupational background of doctorates' fathers is quite similar to those sampled by Centers. His urban professionals had fathers who were largely business and professional people (56%), but 21 per cent were in skilled manual jobs.11 In the present study deans are more remarkably "of a class" than non-deans in this respect, since no one reported coming from blue- collar or even white-collar working class family. Obviously, it would not be expected that proportions of the deans and doctorates would be equally from each socio-economic class if only because educational achievement in general tends to relate strongly to class, with lower classes having far less education than others. Perhaps the most surprising finding is the very large percentage of librarians whose fathers were deceased or retired when the respond- ents became librarians. This further attests to previous evidence of late career choice among librarians. It also, however, suggests that there may have been some misunderstanding of the question inasmuch as respondents may have been describing their fathers' present statuses. If, on the other hand, so many do indeed come from homes where the mother was the sole parent for an important length of time, it is tempt- ing to hypothesize that maternal influence may be a large factor in selecting a career that is essentially female, a career in which a male as an administrator or as a teacher may have control over women. For the great majority of these subjects are male, and a great majority of these males are administrators of libraries or library schools whose staffs and students are very largely female. Family Members as Librarians. The mothers of only two respondents were librarians, but 17 report that other members of the immediate family were librarians. Combining these figures, then, a total of 12 per cent of doctorates and deans have close family members who are librarians. This percentage seems low in terms of the group itself, but it is extraordinarily high when we consider it in terms of the total pro- fessional-technical labor force. That group in I960 consisted of 7.2 million persons.12 Mothers alone, at our rate of 2 in 148, would account for 72,000 librarians; family members, for about 860,000! Further, the 11
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP rate of "close family members as librarians" is higher for men than for women. Again, too much should not be made of limited data, but the intriguing notion persists that role-models in the family are very im- portant to persons who have doctorates or who become deans in library science. In particular, the nature of the relationships between the sexes in the profession and the general "female" character of the profession may be closely related to the family of origin as well as to broader social forces and institutions. Birthplace , Residence, and Mobility. Given that there are relatively few doctorates and deans to serve the library community, is their geo- graphic distribution reasonably equitable? Do members of this group tend to follow the widespread pattern of mobility among American professionals, of finding employment in areas other than their birth- places? The following table includes data on deans and doctorates collectively as they do not differ on these variable relationships. table v. - Birthplace and Present Residence Birthplace Totals Present Residence N. E. Midwest South West Canada For. N % N. E. 10 10 12 0 2 25 17.6 Midwest 12 25 9 0 2 2 50 35.2 South 6 11 19 2 0 3 41 28.9 West 5 8 5 5 0 0 23 16.2 Canada 0 1 0 0 1 1 3 2.1 33 55 34 9 3 8 142 23.2% 38.7% 23.9% 6.3% 2.1% 5.6% (Chi-square = 57.42, sig. at .001 level, 20 d.f.) The Northeast is the birthplace of nearly a quarter of our subjects, but only 30 per cent of its natives remain there, while 36 per cent move to the Midwest and the remaining third are about evenly disposed to move to the South and the West. The result is a net loss to the North- east where only 18 per cent of the group resides. The Midwest is both more "productive" of deans and doctorates in library science and more stable in holding them there. It is the birth- place and the residence of over a third of the group. Nearly half of those born there remain there. The South is clearly attractive to its natives: 56 per cent remain in 12
Doctorate in Librarianship the region of their birth. Further, while it is the present home for about 29 per cent of our subjects, only 24 per cent of the total group was born there. There is too little data to present a very clear picture regarding our subjects of the Western region. Not surprisingly, more are presently residing there than were born there. Most of the natives do stay; but they are equalled in number by those born in the South and in the Northeast, and they are outnumbered by those born in the Midwest. Within regions, certain states vary considerably as birthplaces and current residences. Fourteen doctorate respondents reside in Texas, while only five were born there. Iowa, on the other hand, was the birth- place of seven, but no respondent holding a doctorate reported work- ing in that state. It should be noted that if Texas were counted as a Western rather than as a Southern state, the effect to which the South imports doctorates is much reduced, and that of the West is increased. Since about 70 per cent of questionnaires sent to the Northeast, North Central, and South were returned to us, and over 90 per cent of those sent to the West, it may be assumed that this distribution of the respondents is representative. Preferences for living in the different parts of the United States, as well as concern for race relations, climate, and community size, are im- portant factors for many people in deciding where they will work. These factors will be discussed in a later section to provide partial explanation of this geographic distribution. Present Positions Held by Doctorates. One of the most important reasons for encouraging doctoral study is to develop larger and more qualified faculties for library schools as well as to provide more library administrators. While it is difficult, if even desirable, to say what pro- portion of doctorates should become library educators, the present pro- portion indicates that there is little reason for hoping that faculties in the near future will be upgraded by sizable additions of doctorates in librarianship. Of the 121 Ph.D.s reporting their primary occupation (not including deans of library schools), 51 per cent are major execu- tives - heads of a library system or major divisions of a library system, or of a library; 4 per cent are heads of smaller divisions of a library (department heads), 39 per cent are members of library school facul- ties, and 6 per cent are employed as systems analysts, academic deans, and in similar peripheral or non-library capacities. When we consider that the total library science doctoral population is only about 200, it is apparent that the 44 accredited library schools 13
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP (1968) could readily use all of them and still not satisfy the need for faculty. That less than half of this small, educated elite group of the profession is involved full-time in library education documents the tremendous staffing problem cited so often by library school adminis- trators. It might be supposed that the situation is somewhat improved by the fact that some administrators also teach. However, only 28 per cent of the administrators teach either part-time or in the summer. Such assist- ance is, of course, very valuable in itself - but it can hardly provide a strong basis for maintaining or upgrading professional school faculties. The following three sections explain in more detail the relationships between positions held by doctorates and three previously described variables - sex, father's occupation, and religion. Deans, regardless of degree held, are not included in these sections. Present Position of Ph.D.s Related to Sex. Relating the four major classes of present positions held by Ph.D.s to the variable of the respondents' sex shows some interesting patterns. The positions of major executives and of faculty members, accounting for 90 per cent of all doctorates, are distributed as in the following table. table vi. - Positions Held by Doctorates by Sex Position Female Male Major Executive 10 51 Faculty Member 15 32 (N=108) Chi-square 3.4, 1 d.f., (>.10 <.05) Of those not shown in the table five are minor executives; one is female and four are male. Of the seven employed in other capacities, one is female, six are male. While 61 per cent of the men, by this analysis, are major executives, only 40 per cent of the women are so employed; men clearly either seek or are favored more than women for top positions in administra- tion. Findings in this survey in regard to women doctorates tended to follow those reported by Guy Marco in 1967, for he too found it ". . . interesting to note that women graduates have been more likely to go into library school teaching than into administration." 13 Present Position of Ph.D.s Related to Father's Occupation. Apart from those whose fathers were deceased or retired, head librarians are 14
Doctorate in Librar tanshtp overwhelmingly of middle and upper-middle class background; only 13 per cent of their fathers were in blue-collar, clerical, or laborer positions. The single highest percentage in any cell indicates that eight of ten librarians from farm families became major administrators. In contrast, of their 12 colleagues whose fathers were urban skilled work- ers or foremen, seven have turned to library education rather than administration. Sons and daughters of professional and technical work- ers are evenly divided in administrative and teaching careers. table vii. - Positions Held by Ph.D.s by Father's Occupation (N=118) Mgr., Prof., Owner, Skilled Sales, Laborer, Deceased, Position Tech. Farm Official Worker Cler. Service Retired Totals Major Exec. 10 8 14 4 2 2 20 60 Faculty Member 10 1 10 7 3 0 15 46 AllOther 3 13 10 1 3 12 23 10 27 12 5 3 38 118 Present Position by Religion. The most interesting finding in the relationship between religion and position of doctorates is in the com- parison of Protestants with those who claimed "None" or "Other" than Protestant, Catholic, or Jew. The "None, Other" group is largely employed in teaching (61%), while the majority (56%) of Protestants are major executives. There are too few Catholics and Jews to establish very firm assertions, although considered collectively, 7 of 11 (64%) are classified as major administrators. In sum, administrators are more likely to have (or claim) a religious affiliation than are teachers. table vm. - Numbers of Positions Held by Ph.D.s by Religion Position Protestant Catholic Jew None, Other Major Executive 39 4 3 8 Faculty Member 22 3 1 14 Faculty Random Sample. The random sample of accredited library school faculty members who do not have doctorates in librarianship is different in several respects than the doctorate respondents. The data obtained from the faculty group can be summarized as follows: the 15
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP respondents produced a group which was 60 per cent female and 40 per cent male, and one half of whom were between the ages of 31 and 50. This appears to differ sharply with the group of doctoral respond- ents who were primarily male and over 50. Seventy-seven per cent of the faculty group reported their religious affiliation as Protestant, and 10 per cent as Catholic, with none reporting as Jewish and 13 per cent reporting "Other" or "No" religious affiliation. As with the doctoral respondents, 13 per cent failed to answer the question concerning religious preference. The fathers of 35 per cent belonged to the pro- fessional or technical occupational group, and the next highest occupa- tional grouping (13%) was that of managers, officials, and owners. As occurred in the responses from the doctoral group, a high percentage (29%) indicated that their fathers were deceased or retired when they entered librarianship. Four per cent of the sample reported that close family members were librarians. Of the 55 respondents, 5 hold doctoral degrees in fields other than library science, 46 hold master's degrees and 4 hold bachelor's degrees. SALARIES One of the most prominent rewards for investing in advanced educa- tion is increased income. The various ways in which this proposition properly describes the reality of doctorates and deans is presented in this section. In addition to the salaries of the group as a whole, a large number of contingencies are presented to facilitate our understanding of several variations within the group based on sex, region, and other variables. These measures may help to explain the dynamics of the distribution of doctoral degree holders, the rationale for the geograph- ical mobility of our subjects, the distinction made between the sexes for different occupational roles, and over-all, the appeal held out for doctoral study in terms of income. Salary by Age and Sex (Doctorates Only) This breakdown of salary by age and sex is quite revealing. The difference in median salaries for men and women ranges from nearly 20 per cent for the 31-40 year group to over 70 per cent for the 41-50 year olds! The small number of women involved notwithstanding, it is clear that men are not only paid far better at each age level, but also that they are much more numerous than women in groups which are receiving the highest salaries. In addition, nearly a third of the 16
Doctorate in Librarianship table ix. - Median Salaries of Doctorates by Sex and Age, Excluding Deans Age Female (N= 24) Male (N- 83) Total (107) 21-30 (Only 1 case) (0) 31-40 $13,700 (7) $16,300 (18) $15,000 41-50 11,200 (4) 19,100 (18) 18,000 51-60 15,200 (5) 19,200 (35) 18,000 over 60 14,200(7) 19,800(12) 18,000 All ages $13,800 $18,300 $17,000 women are over 60 and earn at that age less than their female col- leagues ten years younger. The differences in salaries for men by age are remarkably small. After the sharp break from the under 40 age group there is no important difference in salary. Indeed, the top of the salary range for men, $9,500- 30,000, is in the 41-50 age group. In contrast women of this age group receive the lowest median salary of all their female colleagues from ages 31-60. Salary by Position and Sex table x. - Median Salaries of Doctorates and of Deans by Present Position and Sex Position Female Male Total Major Execs. $13,400 ( 9) $21,700 ( 46) $19,700 ( 55) Faculty 14,000 (14) 16,800 ( 27) 15,300 ( 41) Other Positions (1) 13,000 ( 10) 13,000 ( 11) Deans 15,800(5) 22,300(17) 21,600(22) All groups $14,100(29) $19,600(100) $19,500(129) Lowest 1/3 Range 9,500-13,000 3,000-16,800 Highest 1 /3 range 1 5 , 000-21 ,500 21 , 000-30 , 000 Perhaps the most important findings here are that deans average higher salaries than other library scientists in any type of position, that male deans are paid on the average over 40 per cent more than their female colleagues, and that nearly one-third of the men are paid more than the highest paid female. 17
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP Salary Comparisons with Other Fields table xi. - Median Salaries of Library Scientists and of Scientists, Other Fields Library Science Scientists, All Fields (N)14 Ph.D. $16,800 (not incl. deans) $15,000 (111,000) Masters 7,925 (see text) 12,000 ( 86,000) All degrees 13,200 (298,000) Teaching 15,300 (Ph.D.) 13,000 (all degrees) ( 62,000) 13 , 100 (non-doctorate faculty sample) Library science doctorates are clearly well-off in comparison with scientists in other fields, doctorates and non-doctorates, teachers and administrators. The majority of library science doctorates are ad- ministrators, and it would be fairer if we were able to compare their salaries with administrators in their fields since administrative salaries tend to be higher generally. Also, a large proportion of our doctorates are teaching in large public university systems where salaries are higher than the average for teaching. These two selec- tive placement features of the doctorate tend to make the com- parison with "other scientists'" perhaps more favorable than would a comparison of salaries for positions more nearly alike in kind. The difference between salaries for librarians with masters degree and other occupations is frequently discussed, and it is difficult to determine just how large the difference is. According to the excellent study by Schiller,15 the median salary, 1966-67, for academic librarians, all positions, was $7,925. The great difference between doctorate and non-doctorate salaries in librarianship may be due to the very selective positions that doctorates occupy - administration and teaching at large institutions. That is, salaries were generally better for administrators and for positions in large academic institutions. Further, the number of library science doc- torates is small, the demand far outreaches the supply for such people, and the "market price" may be a direct result. Finally, the doctorates in library science are largely male, while the majority of non-doctorate librarians are female; sex alone may account for the greatest part of the doctorate-non-doctorate salary difference. Present Salary and Religion. Salaries for the doctoral group show no great variation by religious affiliation. Those who claim no religious preference earn just a few hundred dollars less than the modal Pro- 18
Doctorate in Librarianship testant group whose median salary is $17,500. The four Jews earn about two per cent more per year, and the four Catholics earn about 15 per cent a year less than the Protestant group as measured both mean and median. Among the deans, salaries are higher for those with no religious preference: the median is $24,500. Jews and Catholics are nearly identical and about $200 under the median of $21,200 for their Pro- testant colleagues. Present Salary and Region of Residence table XH. - Median Salaries by Rerion* Ph.D.s Non-doctorate Region & Deans (N) Ph.D.s (N) Deans (N) Faculty Sample (N) Northeast $16,500 (24) $15,100 (19) $22,800 (S) $16,400 (11) Midwest 17,100 (43) 16,900 (37) 21,300 (6) 12,400 (16) South 18,000 (39) 17,900 (33) 19,700 (6) 13,700 (13) West 21,000 (21) 19,700 (16) 21,600 (5) 12,900 ( 7) * (Salary data for Canada was too limited to include) The West pays better for its Ph.D.s than any of the other three regions. Salaries for doctorates in the South are better than in the Northeast or Midwest, but deans in this region are paid less than deans anywhere else. The approximately 50 per cent difference be- tween deans and non-dean doctoral salaries in the Northeast is sur- prisingly high. Compatible with the relatively high salaries for deans in the North is the higher median salary for library school faculty without library science doctorates in that region. Southern library school faculty members without the library science doctorate enjoy considerable salary advantage over those in the West and Midwest. Present Salary and One's Alma Mater It is perhaps understandable that the alumni of the University of Chicago should enjoy superior economic rewards; theirs is the school with the longest history of doctoral study and one with great dis- tinction. However, each of these institutions has a valid claim to high reputation, and the large difference in salaries, especially be- tween Michigan and Chicago, is difficult to explain. The sex ratios are very nearly the same for Chicago and Michigan, about 25 per 19
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP table xiH. - Median Salaries of Ph.D.s* by School Where Doctorate was Earned Schools Salary N Berkeley (mean: $16,150) 2 Case Western Reserve (mean: 16,200) 2 Chicago $19,800 34 Columbia 17,800 13 Illinois 18,600 23 Indiana ** 1 Michigan 15,600 30 Rutgers 16,100 12 ♦ Includes deans with doctorates in library science ♦• Not reported to preserve anonymity cent female for both schools. Columbia's salaries include propor- tionally more women, nearly 40 per cent; while only 15 per cent of Illinois' salaries are those of women. The low salaries for women may, then, partially explain the relative positions of Columbia and Illinois. Among the doctoral alumni of each school the percentage who are deans (and who reported salaries) also varies - 25 per cent for Chicago, 40 per cent for Columbia, but less than 5 per cent at Illinois and Michigan. (The chi-square test of this relationship is significant at .01.) The fact that deans earn higher salaries than other doctorates does not seem to explain the variation on average salary for each school. Vacuity Random Sample. Not surprisingly, the random faculty group reported generally lower salaries than did the doctoral respondents. (See table XII for a comparison by region.) Only one group, that of females from 41-50 reported higher salaries than their doctoral coun- terparts, but all total median salaries by age group were lower. table xiv. - Median Salaries of Faculty by Sex and Age Age Female (N=30) Male (N=22) Total (N=52) Doctoral Totals 21-30 (no cases) (no cases) 31-40 $ 9,850 ( 3) $13,400 (10) $12,925 (13) $15,000 il-50 12,850 ( 8) 15,000 ( 6) 13,250 (14) 18,000 51-60 12,700 (12) 17,100 ( 3) 13,050 (15) 18,000 > 60 13,225 ( 7) 18,750 ( 3) 14,500 (10) 18,000 Ullages $13,000 $14,000 $13,300 $17,000 Interestingly enough, there are more women than men in the age 20
Doctorate in Librarianship groups where salaries are higher among the faculty sample. In spite of this fact women reported lower salaries than the male respondents in every age group. In contrast to the doctoral group, however, the faculty respondents over 60 earned higher salaries than their younger col- leagues. Somewhat more variation in salaries by religion appeared in the data from the random faculty sample than in that received from the doctoral respondents. There were no Jewish faculty respondents, and the median salary of the 35 Protestants was much lower than the $17,500 reported by library science doctorates. It was only $13,175. In contrast, however, the salaries of the four faculty members reporting themselves as Cath- olic matched the doctoral Protestant median salary of $17,500! Among the faculty group also, salaries for those claiming no religious prefer- ence was a few hundred dollars more than the Protestant group, while among the doctoral group it was a few hundred less. FACTORS IN SELECTING A TEACHING POSITION The focus of the study on the problem of staffing schools of library science points our attention to two related sets of information. First, respondents were asked to rank six variables in order of their import- ance to them in deciding where to teach library science full-time: salary, fringe benefits, school's reputation, school's location, work load, re- search opportunities - and "other." They were then asked to indicate in which geographic region of the United States they would most pre- fer to teach and in which they would least prefer to teach. Finally, they indicated the relative importance of climate, racial/political relations, and size of community in deciding where to teach. All of these factors are of constant concern to educational admin- istrators, and while no final answers for recruiting faculty are held forth here, there are several useful clarifications of many issues. table xv. - Percentage of Respondents Ranking Each of Six Variables in Deciding Where to Teach Fringe Research Rank of Salary Benefits Reputation Location Work Load Opps. Importance Ph.D. Deans Ph.D. Deans Ph.D. Deans Ph.D. Deans Ph.D. Deans Ph.D. Deans 1st 19% 4% 1% 9% 35% 54% 26% 17% 2% 9% 17% 11% cum. 1st, 2nd & 3rd 69% 70% 19% 10% 68% 83% 65% 58% 39% 39% 53% 57% (N) (98) (23) (88) (21) (98) (24) (95) (24) (86) (23) (98) (26) 21
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP A school's "reputation" is the most important single factor taken into account in deciding where to accept a teaching position. The school's location is very important, having second most number of votes for being the most important, that is, first-ranked. Salary and research opportunities are close ties for third place in frequency of first order of choices, but salary appears only slightly less often in first, second, and third ranks collectively than does f School's reputation' '! In other words, while salary may not be the topmost factor in most minds, it is near the top for the great majority. If * 'fringe benefits" are considered with salary as a more comprehensive index of economic influence in decision-making, the importance of money be- comes paramount. The economic analysis of academic salaries by the American Association of University Professors has shown clearly that differences between compensation (the inclusion of certain fringe benefits with salary) and salary are very great among institutions. Further, it may be argued that there are additional economic dimen- sions being measured in "school's reputation." A superior library col- lection and related resources, the quality of students, and the physical plant of an institution all have significant financial aspects. There may be, indeed, a positive high correlation between "school's reputation" and the salary/compensation enjoyed by its library administrators and faculty. table xvi. - Value of Research Opportunities and Alma Mater (Doctorates and Deans with Library Science Doctorates, N = 104) * Rank Alma Mater High Middle (3rd & 4th) Low (5th & 6th) N Chicago 33% 46% 21% 33 Columbia 45 45 10 11 Illinois 41 27 32 22 Michigan 30 22 48 27 Rutgers 63 18 18 11 104 ♦ Seven with reports from Berkeley, Case Western Reserve, Indiana being too few in number, were not included The importance of research for the development of librarianship is difficult to overstate. That this importance is so apparent to our re- spondents is not certain, for only a bare majority place it among the 22
Doctorate in Librarianship first three priorities. (It might be argued that research, too, is an ele- ment in "school's reputation," but there is little other evidence for this!) There are some surprising differences in the importance of re- search to graduates of different institutions, as shown in Table XVI. Almost two-thirds of Rutgers' graduates rank research opportunities very high among their alternative factors, and considering the "High and Middle" ranks together, 90 per cent of Columbia's graduates are quite research-oriented. In contrast nearly half of Michigan's alumni rank research near the bottom and few afforded it a high priority. A few factors other than those analyzed above were considered by some respondents to be important in deciding where to teach. Some are concerned that the members of the faculty where they might teach be congenial, that they be colleagues with a similar philosophy of library education. The purpose and direction of the library school as a whole and the reputation of its dean as a scholar and as a "human being" were also noted. The atmosphere or "climate" of the institution was mentioned, and the size of the institution's library as well as the quality of the collection available for class use seemed important to several. Of concern to two of the women were opportunities for their husbands in the institution or community, and a certain flexibility in schedule in order to enhance their family ties. Geographic Region table xvii. - Regional Preference for Teaching Region MOST Preferred LEAST Preferred Northeast 24% 26% South, inch D.C. 16 54 Midwest 18 8 Southwest 6 2 West Coast, West 27 4 No preference 9 6 100% 100% (N=124) (N=119) The South is not only least preferred by a majority of subjects, but it is also most preferred by a very few as a place to teach. The West emerges as the most preferred region, although that is true for only 27 per cent of the respondents - and only five persons in- 23
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP dicated that they would least like to work there. Sentiment about the Northeast is evenly divided with a quarter of doctorates and deans disagreeing completely! The Midwest is barely preferred more often than the South as a first choice of residence, but fewer would put it at the bottom of the list as they did the South. The Effect of Birthplace and Residence. Regional preference might presumably be affected by, among other things, respondent's birth- place and his residence. Some further indication of the mobility or readiness for mobility may be gauged by these relationships. Forty per cent of those born in the Northeast elect that region as their first choice; 25 per cent, the Midwest; and 20 per cent, the West. Of the 48 Midwestern-born respondents to the question, only 27 per cent identify that region as most preferred, 25 per cent prefer the Northeast, and 19 per cent the West. Thirty per cent of those born in the South prefer that region, and an equal number prefer the West. Only nine persons born in the West responded, but six of their number prefer their native region. In terms of birthplace, at least, these librarians are a fairly mobile lot in that the majority of them feel that regions other than the ones in which they were born axe preferable for teaching. Further, the preference for the West is hardly biased by the overwhelming loyalty of its native sons - 82 per cent of those preferring that area were born elsewhere. Similarly, while 40 per cent of the Northeastern-born prefer that area, of all those rating it first, 63 per cent were not born in the area. The relationship of one's present residence to preferred region is stronger. Seventy-three per cent of those living in the Northeast prefer to remain there and 71 per cent of Westerners prefer that region most. Of the Southern residents, 41 per cent most prefer that region, but as many as 22 per cent would rather be in the West. Only a third of the 42 residents of the Midwest answering this question most prefer that region, 19 per cent would rather be in the Northeast, and 14 per cent the West. (A chi-square test indicates that the relationship between residence and region most preferred is significant at .001.) Climate, Race /Political Relations, Size of Community. Respondents were asked to indicate the degree of importance of selected factors affecting their decision as to where to teach. The results, shown in Table XVIII indicate that climate, race and politics, and the size of a community are all quite important. 24
Doctorate in Librarianship table xviii. - Relative Importance of Climate, Racial /Political Relations and Size of Community Climate Race/Politics Community Size Very Important 30.4% 45.3% 21.0% Moderately Important 52.2 31.4 56.5 Unimportant ITA 2^3 22J (N=138) Racial/political relations are of greatest concern, to be sure; but they are also of the least concern to more people than are climate and community size. All three factors, it seemed, might be related to regional preferences. Climate varies considerably from region to region, racial/political stress is popularly thought to be worse in some regions than others, and the South is generally an area of smaller, although rapidly grow- ing, communities than is the Northeast, for instance. table xix. - Relative Importance of Three Factors Related to Region Most Preferred, by Percentage Degree of Importance Factors N.E. South Midwest West No Pref. VERY Climate 18 33 12 37 0 100% IMPORTANT Race/Pol. 25 12 18 37 8 Comm. Size 25 29 25 17 4 u MOD. Climate 19 10 27 32 12 « IMPORTANT Race/Pol. 17 17 23 26 17 u Comm. Size 22 11 22 34 11 UN- Climate 44 18 12 6 20 « IMPORTANT Race/Pol. 27 31 19 19 4 Comm. Size 24 24 12 28 12 " The Southwest was most preferred by 7 additional respondents, 5 of whom rated climate as very important and 2 of whom rated climate as moderately important. N=110, not including the 7 "Southwest" responses. The relationship between racial/political relationships and region and that between climate and region is quite strong. In terms of region most preferred the most salient features are as follows: The Northeast: 44 per cent of those who consider climate not im- portant prefer this region; only 18 per cent of those who consider climate very important prefer to work here. 25
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP table xx. - Relative Importance of Three Factors Related to Region Least Preferred, by Percentage Degree of Importance Factors N.E. South Midwest West No. Pref. VERY Climate 47 44 6 3 0 100% IMPORTANT Race/Pol. 22 68 6 0 4 Comm. Size 32 52 4 8 4 MOD. Climate 18 ' 60 10 6 6 " IMPORTANT Race/Pol. 26 44 8 11 11 u Comm. Size 26 58 8 3 5 " UN- Climate 19 63 0 0 18 IMPORTANT Race/Pol. 42 42 8 4 4 Comm. Size 25 47 9 5 14 a South: One-third of those concerned strongly about climate prefer the South; only 12 per cent of those who feel strongly about racial/ political relations prefer this region; and 31 per cent of those who feel that race and politics are unimportant would make this area their first choice. West: Those who are concerned about climate and racial/political relations clearly favor the West. Interpreting the distribution of sentiment about community size by regional preference is somewhat more complex. Assuming that most library schools in the Northeast and Midwest are in large urban areas and given that 50 per cent collectively who are most interested in community size prefer these two regions, a majority may be said to want an urban life-style in the Northern and Middle states. However, 36 per cent of those considering community size unimportant would also elect these areas. Further, the modal group (29%) of respondents considering size of community very important prefers the South whose urban centers are usually neither so large nor so "cosmopolitan" as those of the North (and perhaps those of the Midwest) . In the next table outlining the relationship between the three vari- ables and the least preferred region, it is even clearer that the South is prominently and negatively associated with racial/political relations: over two-thirds of those most concerned with race and politics would prefer the South least of all the regions. The South and the Northeast share about equally the disfavor of those who consider climate very important. On the other hand, those 26
Doctorate in Librarianship who do not care about climate overwhelmingly eschew the South. The South is also evidently associated in a negative fashion with a desirable community size: over half of those who consider community size as very important or as moderately important least prefer that region. To summarize briefly, 45 per cent feel that race relations are very important and that the West and Northeast are most preferable. The South is rated generally lower in respect to all three variables, especially when the responses of "very important" and "moderately important" are combined. Climate as a factor in deciding where to teach is surpris- ingly important and only here did the South manage to find some high degree of favor over the North and Midwest. (Chi-square tests of the relationship between climate and region least preferred and between climate and region most preferred indicates significance at .05. The relationship between race/political relations ranked "very important" and regional preferences is significant at .001.) Faculty Random Sample. Again it is interesting to compare the re- sponses of the doctoral group and those of the sample of library school faculty members. As was the case with the doctoral respondents, 27 per cent of the library school faculty members preferred the West; the Northeast was the second choice, with 18 per cent of the group pre- ferring it as a region for teaching. The South was again the area of the country least preferred, with 46 per cent of the faculty group. But in comparison with the Northeast (which was the doctoral respondents' second least preferred region) , the Southwest was the next least pre- ferred region for 15 per cent of the faculty sample. As with the doctoral group a school's "reputation" is the most im- portant factor taken into account in deciding where to accept a teach- ing position. Forty-three per cent of the faculty reported that as their first consideration. School's location followed with 30 per cent of the faculty group, and again salary and research opportunities vied for 3rd place, with 14 per cent and 15 per cent respectively. In these respects then, it would seem that the doctoral respondents and those from the faculty sample were in complete agreement! In regard to climate and racial/political relations the findings from the faculty group corresponded closely with those from the library science doctoral group. Concerning community size, most faculty mem- bers felt it to be moderately important (as did the doctoral group) but more faculty respondents felt it to be very important than unim- portant. 27
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP ATTITUDES TOWARDS SELECTED CHARACTERISTICS OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP This section analyzes attitudes or opinions about several issues much discussed in library education. These include questions about the "sub- stance" of librarianship - its adequacy for the doctorate, the type of degree most appropriate ("D.L.S. or similar" vs. "Ph.D."), the em- ployment of persons with doctorates in other fields in library schools, the prestige thought to be held by non-librarians by a library science doctorate in comparison with other doctoral degrees, and the compari- son by the respondent of his doctorate in librarianship with doctorates in other disciplines. In addition data on expected maximum salaries are offered as an indication of the possible ultimate financial rewards of the doctorate. Type of Degree. Of the 132 doctorates and deans responding to this question, 86 per cent indicated that the Ph.D. is the most appropri- ate degree for the doctorate in librarianship. Eleven per cent support the D.L.S., and 3 per cent feel that either or both would be appropriate. The rather long standing argument about this problem has taken much time and energy on the part of educators; the problem and issues involved are quite complicated, but the consensus of this large and most knowledgeable group is quite clear. The additional few who offered comments on the topic indicated that the D.L.S. is more appro- priate for administration, the Ph.D. for research, and that both have a proper role in the profession. This logical distinction seems, however, not to be widely shared; and the percentages cited above hold for deans and for doctorates grouped separately as well as collectively. Substantiality of Librarianship. Fairly sharp differences between doc- torates and deans and between doctoral faculty and major executives were expressed in their feelings about the substance of librarianship table xxi. - Substance of Librarianship for the Ph.D. Doctorates Deans Total (N=118) (N=27) (N=145) Faculty Executives Total Inadequate 33% 12% 22% 15% 21% Adequate 34 63 52 44 50 More than adequate 33 25 26 41 29 28
Doctorate in Librarianship for doctoral study - its literature, research opportunities, and theory. Although 79 per cent of their number collectively (N=l45) felt that it was adequate or more than adequate, deans felt rather more strongly that the substance of the discipline is more than adequate. Conversely, fewer deans felt that it is inadequate. (A chi-square test of the difference between doctorates and deans is significant at .001.) The strongest contrast is between deans and doctoral faculty; one-third of the latter find that inadequate best describes their feeling about the substance of librarianship. Is this a possible source of strain between deans and faculty? To further complicate the picture, only 12 per cent of executives find the field inadequate. It is likely that some of the press for more doctoral programs and more doctoral students in existing programs comes from library administrators. Consequently, deans find themselves confronted with more respect for doctoral study from out- side the library school than from their faculty members. Conceivably the difference in sentiment about substantiality is rooted in the different reference groups and interests of the faculty and the administrators. Teachers are more likely than library administrators to be oriented to finding colleagues in other disciplines where there is little or no ques- tion about substance, rightly or wrongly. Their criteria for evaluating substance are likely to be largely similar to those of traditional studies - rigorous research and well-developed methodology, a fairly rich body of theories, and an elaborate and extensive literature, all relatively lacking in librarianship. Administrators, on the other hand, are more likely to be oriented to peers in other administrative roles, roles that require some level of task proficiency and grasp of major intellectual issues of their organizations, but roles that primarily are action-oriented and involving decision-making of a more practical and less reflective sort than the roles of their teaching colleagues. In the administrative set of roles, the finer distinctions of the field in which one has his de- gree, or the merits of that field are likely to be far less important than the ability of the incumbents to make decisions, and to develop suc- cessful interpersonal relationships. In other words, the standard gap between faculty and administrator in academic life is probably char- acteristic of library executives and library educators. Apart from differences between these groups, it might be considered cheering for those of us involved in doctoral programs to find more than less support on the part of our professional elite. Yet it is dis- couraging to note that as many as 30 of 145 feel that this highest aca- demic degree is not merited; a large number, indeed, to feel that their 29
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP own doctoral degrees are based on less than adequate discipline con- tent. However, such skepticism may be common to many disciplines, and the significance of the proportion of "skeptical" librarians is diffi- cult to assess without further relevant evidence. table xxii. - Substantiality and Alma Mater (Ph.D.s including Deans with L.S. Ph.D.s) Inadequate Adequate More than Adequate N Chicago (6) 15% (22) 53% (13) 32% 41 Columbia (3) 21% (7) 50% (4) 29% 14 Illinois (6) 22% (15) 56% (6) 22% 27 Michigan (8) 24% (18) 55% (7) 21% 33 Rutgers (1) 10% (3) 27% (7) 63% 11 126 (An additional 6 cases from Case, Berkeley, and Indiana, being too few in number, were not Of special interest is the distribution of sentiment about substance by the institution where respondents earned their doctorate. Alumni of Rutgers are very much sharper in their feeling about the substance of the library science doctorate. Chicago's alumni, while more conserva- tive, are about as enthusiastic if we note the Adequate and More than Adequate categories. The sizable portion of those in Table XXII who feel that the library science doctorate is inadequate in its substantiality is far more likely to consist of alumni of Michigan, Illinois, and Co- lumbia or other schools than of alumni from Chicago or Rutgers. Prestige of the Doctoral Degree. Closely related to the foregoing questions is the prestige of the doctorate in librarianship - for those outside the field and for librarians themselves. Deans and doctorates felt as follows about the way in which non-librarians consider the library science doctorate in comparison with other doctorates: 32 per cent felt that it rates "near the bottom," only four per cent "near the top," and the majority, "in the middle." It would seem that corollary to the sentiment about the substantiality of the field, about one-third feel that outsiders rate the degree poorly. Self-Prestige. In striking contrast, members of the group them- selves rate their library science doctorate much higher in comparison with other doctorates. Women, however, feel much more positive about the doctorate than 30
Doctorate in Librarianship table xxin. - Doctorates' and Deans' own Comparison of L.S. Doctorates With Other Doctorates N = 131 Male Female Total Near Top 11% 43% 18% Middle 76 46 70 Near Bottom 13 11 12 100% 100% 100% do the men, who tend overwhelmingly to see their degrees in the middle range of prestige. A significance test of the difference between males and females indicates that the relationship is significant at .001. Again, reference group theory may account for the difference. Women have fewer opportunities than men in the total range of doctoral occu- pations; their comparison is probably with education, nursing, social work, and similar essentially female occupations. These occupations are low in prestige, compared with other professions, and it is certainly plausible to argue that librarianship is quite high in relationship to them. Expected Maximum Salary. Some further useful insights about the optimism or self-confidence - and perhaps the valid understand- ing of reality - may be obtained by noting the salary that the re- spondents expect to earn, their estimate of the maximum salary they will receive in their career, and noting the relationships of "self -pres- tige' ' to both classes of salary. table xxiv. - Median Maximum Expected Salary Doctorates and Deans Non-Doctorate Faculty- Random Sample Female Male Female Male TOTAL Doctorates Deans Total Doctorates Deans Total TOTAL $19,100 $19,100 $19,100 $22,800 $25,500 $24,900 $23,500 $16,300 $20,400 $19,000 All in all, expectations of maximum salary exceed present salaries by about 25 to 30 per cent each for men and women. Considering the 31
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP large increases in academic salaries during the past ten years, this may not be a "realistic" expectation, being unduly conservative. However, the majority of our respondents are relatively old - they may well feel that they are near the peak of their earning powers in spite of potential general salary increases in education. In any event, the percentage in- crease does indicate that there is considerable confidence in gaining more income; a truly pessimistic group might well anticipate smaller increase or no change at all or possibly even a reduction! A common psychological notion, put simply, says that people with a sanguine outlook tend to have better outcomes. The following table is a rough measure of this relationship with present salary as an indi- cator of outcome and one's own felt prestige an indicator of optimism. Expected salary may be considered a measure, too, of optimism - in terms of outcome. Data for deans and doctorates are not presented separately as they tend to vary in the same way. That is, although deans earn more on the average than other doctorates and feel more sanguine about the doctorate, their salaries are directly related to their attitudes towards the doctorate - i.e., in the same way as the doctorates. table xxv. - Median Present and Expected Salaries and Evaluation of the Library Science Doctorate Self-Prestige Present Salary Expected Salary- Near the Top $16,700 $21 ,450 In the Middle 18,300 23,500 Near the Bottom 19, 200 23 , 200 The two surprising findings are that those who feel that the library science doctorate is near the bottom of the scale of prestige for doctor- ates in general earn more money than those in either of the other groups, and that the median expected salary is highest for those who feel most "conservative" about the prestige of the doctorate - that it is "in the middle" of the prestige range. The prestige which one feels one enjoys may be indicative of traits important to the development of the profession and to inculcating professional world-view to students. In general, a sense of prestige would seem to relate closely and positively to self-confidence, as well as to confidence in the profession itself to cope with the problems and goals before it. Other measures than those in the foregoing table are necessary to assess this, to be sure. While it might be argued that 32
Doctorate in Librarianship women are more self-confident than men (among librarians, about whom so much has been said about their lack of self-confidence), it is probable that women are not so unrealistic as to fail to perceive at all the relative status of librarianship doctorates within the total range of doctorates. The question is essentially whether or not their primary reference group is more selective, as described earlier, than that of men. Non-Librarians Teaching in Library Schools. From Table XXVI it may be argued that the professional elite largely welcomes the participation of other disciplines in professional education. Over 40 per cent of the deans would employ "outsiders" to the extent of one-half or more of their faculty strength. The doctoral faculty and executives would not be so generous, but only a quarter of them would eliminate the use of non-librarians or reduce them to a definite mi- nority. table xxvi. - Attitude Towards Employment of Non-Librarians in Library Education Should earned doctorates in other fields be employed in Doctorates Deans library schools? (N=109) (N=26) Total Primarily 4% 4% 04% About one-half 21 38 24 In strength 49 31 46 Definite Minority 22 27 23 Notatali 04 0 3 100% 100% 100% It might be expected that those who felt strongest about excluding doctorates in other fields also would feel that the relative prestige of the doctorate is high. Table XXVII would support this expectation, if we accept the very small marginal cells, but in the main it seems that over 70 per cent of those who vary in allowing as high a proportion of non-librarians as one-half of the faculty to those who would keep them to a definite minority feel that the library science doctoral degree is "near the bottom' ' in the prestige scale. Faculty Random Sample Attitudes. A rather startling difference was noted between the doctoral respondents and the faculty group in regard to the type of degree most appropriate to the doctorate in library science. Eighty-six per cent of those holding library science 33
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP table xxvii. - "Self-Prestige" and Employment of Non-Librarians in Library Education Should the library employ doctorates earned in other fields? How do you rank the L.S. In Definite doctorate with others? Principally About 1/2 Strength Minority None Near the Top 20% 7% 20% 22% 0% In the Middle 60 17 7 7 33 Near the Bottom 20 76 73 71 67 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% (5) (29) (59) (28) (3) doctorates felt that the Ph.D. was the most appropriate degree and 22 per cent supported the D.L.S. In contrast, the faculty respondents were almost evenly divided in favor of two degrees, with 51 per cent preferring the Ph.D. and 49 per cent preferring the D.L.S! Among the faculty group, 59 per cent felt that the substance of librarianship for doctoral study is adequate and 7 per cent that it is more than adequate. This compares with 79 per cent of doctorates and deans who felt that it is adequate or more than adequate. As was stated earlier in this section, 15 per cent of the deans felt the substance was inadequate, 12 per cent of major executives felt in this way, and 33 per cent of the doctoral faculty reported thusly. The non-doctoral faculty group com- pared similarly with the doctoral faculty group, for 34 per cent re- ported an inadequate substance, perhaps indicating the orientation to similar reference groups among faculty members, regardless of degrees earned. Further striking contrasts appeared in the data given concerning the prestige according to the library science doctorate degree. Most doctoral people felt that the prestige given the degree by ''outsiders" was "in the middle" as compared with doctorates in other fields; 4 per cent felt it was "near the top," and 32 per cent "near the bottom." The faculty sample, on the other hand, felt largely that the prestige accorded by other disciplines was "near the bottom" (63%), while four per cent felt it was "near the top" and only 33 per cent felt it was "in the mid- dle." In regard to their own feelings about the prestige of the doc- torate, most (68%) of the random sample rated the library science doctorate "in the middle" of the scale, but in contrast to the doctoral respondents only four per cent (as compared with 18 per cent for 34
Doctorate in Librarianship doctorates) felt it was "near the top," and 28 per cent (as compared with 12 per cent for doctorates) felt it was "near the bottom." Among the faculty group, attitudes towards non-library science doc- torates teaching in library school was roughly similar to those of the doctoral respondents. Fifteen per cent of the faculty group would like to see library school courses taught primarily by doctorates in subject fields as compared with only four per cent of the doctoral respondents. Twenty-five per cent felt that library school faculties should include about one-half doctorates in other fields; 41 per cent wanted subject doctorates present on faculties in strength; and 15 per cent felt that such doctorates should be included in library science faculties in a defi- nite minority. As among the library science doctorates and deans, a very small group (4%) felt that teachers with other doctorates should be excluded from faculties. Conclusion Insofar as the elite group of doctorates is exceptionally influential in library administration and library education and presents a special image of the profession at its topmost level, the characteristics of this group are critical factors in the status of the profession as a whole. Given that there are far too few doctorates for the needs of the profession, and that typically the doctorate is male, "middle-aged," from a professional or business family, and employed as an adminis- trator, three conclusions immediately arise. First, the inadequate num- ber and the selective recruitment of doctorates suggest the need for- greatly increased financial assistance for doctoral study, if only to reduce the importance of financial resources alone in attaining the doctorate - a problem particularly acute for those from less well-to-do families. Second, recruitment for doctoral study should begin at an earlier age, in order to attract productive-aged younger persons into the profession. Recruitment should focus more attention on the rewards of teaching and research if library education is to be properly staffed and if librarianship is to more fully establish its intellectual founda- tions. Third, it seems from both direct and indirect evidence that the present number of doctoral programs is not adequate. Moreover, it is urgent that doctoral study be facilitated by efficient program structures and faculty relationships; at present many of our elite group feel that doctoral study is not well-organized at even the better schools, that there are too many irrelevant barriers to early completion of the degree. Two of the most important dimensions of the general status problem 35
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP are the status of women and the status of research in the profession.16 Women constitute the large majority of the general population of librarians but a small minority of the doctorates. Is it not possible that librarianship can take steps to guarantee equitable salaries and oppor- tunities for promotion in order to encourage more women from its own population to obtain the doctorate ? This may be a far more suc- cessful strategy than appealing to men outside the profession, and it has the independent and very important advantage of enhancing the sense of distributive justice in the profession which is sorely strained because of sex-linked inequities, real and imagined. The development of research will hardly solve all other problems, but it can go a long way towards solving at least two of the large classes of problems in the profession. Research, based on and contribut- ing both to library science concepts and theories and to those in related disciplines, can gradually build a body of data and theory that will serve as a sound intellectual foundation. Only by building such a foundation will the profession move from its auxiliary status to one that clearly contributes to the general body of knowledge in our civil- ization. In so strengthening its status, librarianship can also solve some of its practical problems. That is, research in librarianship may attack the vast area of information theory, for instance, and while contribut- ing to the understanding of information production and transfer in a universal sense may also discover principles for better planning and organizing the information functions peculiar to librarianship. That the present library science doctorates are generally ready for some such development is demonstrable in their overwhelming preference for the Ph.D. (presumably a research degree), in their relatively secure feel- ing about the adequacy of the field for doctoral study, and in the importance they assign to research as a factor in selecting employment. While one might wish that their feelings were even more positively oriented towards research, given the relatively short history of research in the field (as compared with other disciplines) , the stress on admin- istration which so many respondents must work with daily, and the very limited research facilities presently available to librarians, the attitudes of the doctorates are certainly positive enough to support development of this crucial function. ASSESSMENT OF GRADUATE LIBRARY EDUCATION PROGRAMS At the time of the survey there were ten doctoral and 44 A.L.A. accredited (primarily master's) programs in the United States and 36
Doctorate in Librarianship Canada. Some of these programs have been active for many years, others are very new; some have large student bodies, some are small. There are great variations in many other respects, including emphasis on the type of library that students are prepared for, the size of the faculty and the qualifications and interests of its members, and the resources available to students and faculty. Consequently, it is assumed that these variations result in widely different reputations or prestige. How well-known are these several schools to the library profession, and what are their reputations? We assumed that doctorates in library science and deans of the accredited schools are the most sensitive and knowledgeable about the relative merits of these schools, for these are the men and women of the profession who have invested most in their professional education, who have wide-ranging contacts with graduates of many schools, and whose work makes it important that they be aware of the quality of the schools. Additionally, these very respondents feel that a "school's reputation" is so important that they rated it as their first consideration in accepting a position more often than any other factor (Table XV). Hence, it was assumed that they would have formed relatively objective judgments about the various programs. In 1966 An Assessment of Quality in Graduate Education * by Allan M. Cartter was published under the aegis of the American Council on Education. Our analysis of library education programs refers often to this study and is intentionally modelled in part on it. The Cartter study analyzed the graduate programs in basic academic fields (among the professions only engineering was included) in over 100 institutions of higher education. For each discipline half of these institutions are rated as Extremely Attractive, Attractive, or Acceptable Plus depending on the rating given to each by a national sample of graduate faculty in the field. Our study employs different labels to reach the same goal: ordinal ranking of schools on the basis of their programs and of their faculties as judged by the doctorates and deans in librarianship. DOCTORAL PROGRAMS The questionnaire asked that each of the 10 doctoral programs then active be ranked, first through tenth, on two different dimensions - the over-all effectiveness of the program and the quality of the faculty. These responses were tallied and are presented in the tables following. The ratings were then compared with the results of the Cartter study to determine to some extent the influence of a school's reputation in other fields on its library school's rating. Of particular interest is the fact that although 82 per cent of the 37
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP doctorates and deans responding considered "school's reputation" a vital consideration in deciding where to teach, only 64 per cent of the respondents rated the doctoral programs on their over-all effectiveness and an even lesser proportion (57%) rated them on the quality of their faculties. table xxviii. - Doctoral Program Effectiveness : Ranking of Programs Receiving 10% or More of Votes for each of First Three Ranks Doctorates and Deans (N=95) Faculty Random Sample 1st 2nd 3rd x 1st 2nd 3rd x Chicago 33% 20% 13% 22% 14% 29% 24% 22% Illinois 20 23 18 20 14 14 10 13 Rutgers 11 19 13 14 14 14 14 14 Columbia 10 12 17 13 29 19 24 24 Michigan 10 12 14 12 10 14 14 13 Berkeley (8) (8) 13 10 All Others 8 6 12 9 19 10 14 14 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% Chicago received the largest proportion of votes for first place by a rather large margin. However, when the votes for the first three ranks are combined, its rank and that of Illinois are very close. Rutgers, Co- lumbia, and Michigan constitute a cluster considerably below the first two choices, and all other schools combined received relatively few votes for these top three ranks. The faculty random sample shows some variation from the distribu- tion of the deans' and doctorates' votes; the primary difference is that Columbia emerges strongly as first place choice and narrowly exceeds Chicago in votes for the first three places. Further, the first place votes for Case were second in number only to those for Columbia and ac- count for the 19 per cent in the "All Others" row. The average vote for Case, however, for the first three positions is only eight per cent. Columbia and Case are clearly held in higher esteem by these respond- ents than by the "elite" group. In the following table, the assessment of the quality of faculty, Columbia's position is enhanced considerably when the votes for the top three ranks are combined, although Chicago again is unquestion- ably the raters' first choice. The response by the random faculty sample 38
Doctorate in Librarianship was too small to report in detail: Chicago placed first and Columbia, a very close second. While the over-all difference in ranking of the schools on the two dimensions, over-all effectiveness and quality of faculty, is not great, it should be noted that Columbia's position is somewhat enhanced and Case's position is greatly enhanced by the respective ratings of their faculties. table xxix. - Quality of Faculty: Ranking of Programs Receiving 10% or More of Votes for each of First Three Ranks Doctorates and Deans (N=85) 1st 2nd 3rd x Chicago 27% 18% 12% 19% Illinois 18 21 12 17 Columbia 9 20 20 16 Rutgers 17 16 9 14 Berkeley 12 10 11 11 Michigan (6) (6) 13 8 Case (4) (5) 13 7 All Others 7 4 12 8 100% 100% 100% 100% Effect of Institutional Loyalty. About one-half of the respondents place their alma mater ahead of all other institutions and another 25 per cent rank their own schools second. One major consequence, of course, is that schools with few or no alumni among the respondents might be rated too low. However, it turns out that if among doctorates and deans all first-place votes for the respondent's alma mater are eliminated, the rank order of the schools would change only in that Berkeley would move up to a tied third place with Columbia, and Rutgers would move to fifth place - for over-all effectiveness. No change would occur in the ranking of the schools by the faculty random sample when preferences for respondent's institution are eliminated. There is strong question on our part about the interpretation of such an analysis. The fact that alumni quite frequently boost their alma maters should not leave us with the conclusion that loyalty and actual quality or effectiveness are mutually exclusive or antagonistic. Indeed, one might well rank his school first or second on strong non-subjective assumptions! 39
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP Doctoral Program Improvement and Decline. Library education pro- grams change as do other programs. The introduction of new curricula or new faculty, for instance, may not be presently assessable, but raters may have some sense of impending change, for better or worse, in the several programs. In order to gauge these expectations about the programs, respond- ents were asked to list schools that they expect to improve or to decline in the next five to ten years. By and large, doctorate holders, deans, and the faculty random sample agreed on the probable future status of the doctoral programs. Of the schools that were expected to im- prove, Berkeley and Indiana received the most votes (13 each) ; Pitts- burgh and Michigan were also frequently cited. Case Western Reserve and Southern California are expected to make some modest improve- ment, and Columbia, Illinois, and Rutgers are seen making relatively little net change. The University of Chicago was the one school to receive more "likely to decline' ' than "likely to improve" votes from the total of 16 respondents who listed it. The only bias possibly intro- duced by alumni or employee votes is in the case of Michigan; if such votes were eliminated, Michigan's future status would seem to be as likely to decline as it would be to improve. Several recent doctoral programs were voted as "likely to improve." Most prominent among these was Maryland's new program which was singled out as highly favored for future development by 17 deans and doctorates. Programs at Florida State, Wisconsin, and U.C.L.A. were also mentioned as being of future promise. Comparison of Doctoral Ratings in Library Science with Ratings in Other Disciplines. There are many advantages for a library education program that is located in an institution with strong departments in other disciplines. Library schools can and do profit by using courses offered by other departments to supplement their own curricula; the importance of this strategem for computer and information science instruction is particularly great. It is also probable that superior faculty and students will be attracted to superior institutions. Programs in library science are in institutions of widely varying quality in other disciplines. Table XXX ranks the ten doctoral pro- grams in librarianship in each of eight other disciplines that represent the humanities, social sciences, and the sciences; these ranks are based on the Cartter study of graduate education. Berkeley stands at the top in all eight fields and Chicago contends for a close second place. Michi- gan, Columbia, and Illinois are not only ranked high in all fields but 40
Doctorate in Librarianship are also distinguished, as is Berkeley, for offering such a variety of disciplines for possible support or as a source of recruitment, for many schools do not have programs in engineering. table xxx. - Rank of Doctoral Program Effectiveness in Library Science Compared with Graduate Programs in Other Disciplines Lib. Pol. Elee. Mech. Baa/ Sci. Engl. Hist. Sci. Sociol. Eng. Eng. Microb. Chem. (74) (75) (64) (64) (54) (47) (75) (96) Chicago 1 2 2 2 3 nr nr 6 4 Illinois 266 + + 2322 Rutgers 3 + + nr nr nr nr 7 -f- Columbia 44334 + + + 3 Michigan 554423255 Berkeley 6 11111111 CaseW.R. 7 nr + nr nr + 4 3 -f Pittsburgh 8 nr -f nr nr -f- -f- + + [ndiana 93 5 5 + nr nr 4 6 5o. Calif. 10 nr nr nr nr nr nr + + Numbers in this table indicate the rank for each school in the order in which that school appears when institutions not having doctoral programs in librarianship are excluded. The data on other disciplines is from Cartter's An Assessment of Quality in Graduate Education. Only those ranks classed as "extremely attractive" or "attractive" are included. Numbers in parentheses indicate total number of departments included in the rating. + = schools classed in Cartter as "acceptable plus," lower than the top groups, but roughly in the top 50 per cent of rated departments nr = Not ranked in Cartter in top three classes MASTER'S PROGRAMS Respondents were asked to rate the then 44 accredited library schools as Distinguished, Strong, Adequate, Less than Adequate, or Do Not Know. Table XXXI shows the results when Distinguished and Strong ratings by doctorates and deans are combined for each school; about half of the accredited schools were so rated by 25 per cent or more of the votes they received. Most of the schools with doctoral programs appear very near the top of this list as do several schools with such programs in the planning or beginning stages. One of the most interesting results of this portion of the study is the measure of "Do not know" responses. Nearly a quarter of the master's programs are too little known by a third or more of the raters to allow them to make even the broad qualitative judgment requested, and an additional 40 per cent of the schools were "unknown" to at least 20 per cent of the respondents. 41
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP table xxxi. - Rank Order of Master's Programs by Combined Per Cent of Votes Received for Distinguished and Strong Percentage Rank Order School of Votes 1 Columbia 92% 2 Chicago 90 3 Illinois 87 4 Rutgers 86 5 Michigan 82 6 Berkeley 80 7 Case- Western Reserve 69 8 U. C. L. A. 64 9 Wisconsin 59 10 Indiana 53 11 Minnesota 52 12 Pittsburgh 51 13 Maryland 43 14 Flordia 42 15 British Columbia 40 16 North Carolina 38 17.5 Washington 36 17.5 Southern California 36 19.5 Toronto 32 19.5 Simmons 32 21 McGill 26 22.5 Syracuse 23 22.5 Catholic 23 24 Texas 21 25 Drexel 20 The remaining 19 schools received from 3-17 per cent of their votes in the Distinguished an< Strong categories. table xxxii. - Distribution of "Do Not Know" Ratings Per cent Do Not Know Ratings No. of Schools 35-50% 10 20-34% 18 15-20% 4 10-14% 4 Less than 10% 8 This high rate of "invisibility" of so many schools suggests that most schools are probably not so well-known as they think themselves 42
Doctorate in Librarianship to be. Indeed, if the elite of the profession, its doctorates and deans, are so in the dark about so many programs, what can be expected of the general population of librarians - or the population at large in academic life from which the profession recruits? (Sixteen schools were rated "Don't know" by 35 per cent or more of the faculty random sample.) Geography may "explain" some portion of this factor; three of the schools with high "unknown" ratings are Canadian, and the others are relatively new or isolated. The "Less than Adequate" rating appeared with surprising fre- quency, and it often appeared in highest proportion for schools that also received many "Do Not Know" responses. (Responses by doctor- ates and deans were very similar to those of the faculty random sample.) Eight U.S. schools were rated by 22-35 per cent of their total votes as "Less Than Adequate'9 and by 17-44 per cent as "Do Not Know." None of the three Canadian schools, although highly "Un- known," were ranked "Less than Adequate" by more than six per cent of the respondents. Another six US. schools were considered "Less than Adequate" by 15-20 per cent of their raters. This number of accredited schools rated so low constitutes a high proportion of the total, and suggests a serious problem for the profession. Relationship to Other Disciplines table xxxra. - Rank Order by Eight Fields of Institutions Offering Master's and New Doctoral Programs in Library Science* At least four departments rated Extremely Wisconsin Attractive or Attractive: Minnesota U.C.L.A. Washington North Carolina At least four departments rated Acceptable Texas Plus or higher but fewer than four Extremely Oregon Attractive or Attractive: Syracuse Maryland One to three departments rated Acceptable Emory Plus, no departments rated higher: Florida Louisiana Wayne * The ten on-going doctoral programs, similarly analyzed earlier, are not included in this table. The eight disciplines include English, history, political science, sociology, chemistry, bacteriology/ microbiology, electrical engineering, and mechanical engineering as rated in the Cartter study. 43
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP In addition to the ten schools with doctoral programs, only 13 of the possible 44 schools with accredited master's programs managed to attain some mention for quality in the Cartter study. Only nine, or about 20 per cent of the schools (in addition to the ten schools with on-going doctoral programs) are in a very strong position for support from these eight other disciplines. Several of the schools rated highest in other disciplines are planning or have recently begun doctoral programs, and some of them enjoy ratings of other depart- ments superior to those in some of the existing doctoral programs. Conclusion By the judgments of our elite respondents the merits of accredited library schools are greatly varied. Accreditation as a measure even of minimal quality is clearly questionable in the eyes of our judges, and we suspect, in the eyes also of the thoughtful among professional librarians in general. The growing emphasis on the quality of library school students adds to the dilemma: no one wants to recommend a promising student to an "inadequate" or marginally acceptable school, accredited or not. Accreditation procedures might be improved, but at best accreditation is probably only useful as an incentive and safeguard for some very basic level of satisfactoriness. The major problem lies not in accreditation per se but in the lack of resources to insure the maintenance of high quality programs and personnel. Several of the ideas for improving library school programs offered in the first section of this paper rest ultimately for their successful implementation on improved funding for nearly all basic activities in library education programs, particularly research and personnel. Fund- ing of a much higher order for new and imaginative research opera- tions, for qualified instructors (librarians and non-librarians), for at- tracting superior students is highly important. Providing programs, especially for the doctorate, that will allow the student to progress steadily and quickly is of great importance for new programs and for older programs that have lost their focus and organizational efficiency. The programs on any level, like the students, must be appropriate for the goals. Recruiting students and developing programs that are mu- tually suited and that suit the ever greater demands for sophistication in research and practice comprise an enormous undertaking for the profession. Guidance and assistance must be obtained from many sources outside the profession, but it is clear that many of our problems are internal and will require much further and repeated attention. 44
Doctorate in Librarianship References 1. Cartter, A. M.: An Assessment of Quality in Graduate Education: A Comparali ve Study of Graduate Departments in 29 Academic Disciplines. Washington, D.C., American Council on Education, 1966. 2. Dissertation Abstracts: Abstracts of Dissertations and Monographs in Microfilm. Ann Arbor, Michigan, University Microfilms, v. 1, 1938 - v. 27, 1967. 3. Cohen, N. Marshall; Denison, Barbara; and Boehlert, J. C: Library Science Dis- sertations, 1925-60; An Annotated Bibliography of Doctoral Studies. Washington, D.C., U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, Office of Education, 1963. 4. Journal of Education for Librarianship. State College, Pa., Association of American Library Schools, VIII, no. 3, Winter, 1968. 5. Hagood, Margaret, and Price, Daniel: Statistics for Sociologists. New York, Henry Holt & Co., 1957, pp. 193-195, 287-290. 6. The problem of career commitment among women, including librarians, has recently been explored in detail by Richard and Ida Harper Simpson in "Women and Bureaucracy in the Semi-Professions." The Semi-Professions and their Organization. Amitai Etzioni, ed. New York, The Free Press, cl969, pp. 196-265. 7. Greeley, A. M.: Religion and Career; A Study of College Graduates. New York, Sheed and Ward, 1963. 8. Ibid., p. 29. 9. Morrison, P. D.: The Career of the Academic Labrarían. Chicago, American Library Association, 1969, p. 6. 10. Bryan, Alice I.: The Public Librarian; a Report of the Public Library Inquiry. New York, Columbia University Press, 1952, p. 34. 11. Centers, Richard: Occupational Mobility of Urban Occupational Strata. Man, Work, and Society. Sigmund Nosow and William Form, eds. New York, Basic Books, 1962, p. 342. 12. U.S. Bureau of the Census. U.S. Census of Population, I960, Vol. I, Character- istics of the Population, Part I, United States Summary. Washington, D.C., U.S. Govern- ment Printing Office, 1964, p. 528. 13. Marco, Guy: Doctoral Programs in American Library Schools Journal of Education for Librarianship, 8:12, Summer, 1967. 14. Reviews of Data on Science Resources. Washington, D.C., National Science Foundation, December, 1968. Further, the AAUP Bulletin, June, 1969, p. 207, reports an average nine month salary of $11,760 for all ranks in 981 institutions, 1968-69. Adding 15 per cent for a summer supplement would bring this to about $13,500. 15. Schiller, Anita R.: Academic Librarians' Salaries College and Research Libraries, 30:105, March, 1969. 16. For an excellent additional discussion of these issues see Harold Lancour's "The Librarian's Search for Status" and Peter Rossi's "Discussion," pp. 369-381, as well as other essays in Library Quarterly, October, 1961, Vol. 31, no. 4. 45