Gazing the Diversity Stance in North America: Bringing Practitioner Inquiry into the LIS Classroom Vanessa Irvin Library and Information Science Program, University of Hawaii—Manoa. Email: irvinv@hawaii.edu This article is an exploration of ways in which LIS educators can consider culture, heri- tage, and identity as a framework for becoming participatory agents of their teaching practices in the LIS classroom. To support this framework, this discussion introduces the research methodology, practitioner inquiry, as a meaningful approach to studying pedagogical practice and identity in the LIS classroom as a means to LIS educators be- coming more self-reflective and aware of the impacts of their own identity construction in their teaching. In this article I am affirming the case for a diversity stance within the North American LIS curriculum. I am also posing additional questions and challenges about LIS identity construction and professional practice as we teach and learn in the classroom. Keywords: LIS educators, pedagogy, diversity, culture, heritage, identity Introduction and inclusion track within the iSchool at Maryland’s library science program and During the American Library Asso- the cultural heritage informatics concen-ciation (ALA) presidency of Leslie tration at Simmons College). But we await Berger (2006–2007), I submitted a pa- a full scale shift in our educational para- per to the ALISE annual conference that digm to be led by ALA-accreditation LIS was entitled, Creating a Seat at the Ta- standards (COA, 2015). ble: (Still) Seeking Culturally Competent There are, however, some LIS initia- Pedagogy in LIS Education. This was in tives which are seeking to address the response to Berger’s presidential theme: inequity of cultural representation and en- “libraries build communities”. Creating a gagement within the practitioner ranks of Seat at the Table was an unpublished dis- librarianship. For example, the ALA Spec- cussion piece for round table discourse at trum Scholar program continues to recruit the ALISE 2007 conference. My impetus and sponsor librarians of color and the for submitting that paper was the need I ALA Office of Literacy and Outreach Ser- saw for we library and information science vices (OLOS) had been merged with the (LIS) educators to think and talk about ALA Office of Diversity to now function ways in which we can employ culturally as a broadened unit to focus and address competent pedagogy for the purpose of cultural issues within LIS as the Office building effective learning communities for Diversity, Literacy and Outreach Ser- in the LIS classroom. Since then, the con- vices. Notwithstanding these initiatives, versation centering on LIS cultural com- I am still holding that it is LIS educators petency has continued (e.g. Mestre, 2010; who are responsible for addressing the ho- Jaeger, P., Bertot, J., & Subramaniam, mogeneous culture of LIS because of the M., 2013; Shorter-Gooden, 2013; Jaeger, ways in which we pedagogically approach P., et al., 2015). There have been some culture, heritage, and identity of not just singular strides towards innovative initia- library services to diverse populations. We tives in the LIS curricula (e.g. the diversity also need to challenge librarians (includ- J. of Education for Library and Information Science, Vol. 57, No. 2—(Spring) April 2016 ISSN: 0748-5786 © 2016 Association for Library and Information Science Education 151 doi:10.12783/issn.2328-2967/57/2/7
152 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE ing ourselves) to reflect upon their own Unpacking Who We Are, Where We culture, heritage, and identity as a vital Are: Our Multi-Cultural Selves aspect of librarian epistemology. I am in- vested in the ways in which we LIS practi- When thinking about the diversity of tioners define ourselves (or not), and how our librarian workforce, we can find it all we reflect upon the impacts of the work too easy to identify ourselves in mono- we do, based on our identity construction lithic terms. For example, we can easily as critical inquiry. For LIS educators this cite data which informs us that eight out of involves examining how we regard and fa- 10 librarians are white women, with 36% cilitate multi-layered identities within our- white librarians over the age of 55, and the selves and within our teaching in the LIS rest of the workforce are men (17%) and classroom. I am still making a call for LIS librarians of color (~12%) (ALA-APA, education to, not only help to “create a seat 2011; Office of Diversity, 2012; Bourg, at the table” of a healthy, diverse librarian- 2014; Davis, 2014). Additionally, with li- ship, but also for LIS faculty to deeply con- brarians of color, we can unpack the multi- sider who we are as teachers of LIS (cul- ple cultural groups that are self-organized turally). We need to identify what we “do” as ethnic caucuses that promote culturally- to be “better” educators with an agency of appropriate and -specific library services critical inquiry for pedagogical praxis. and professional development initiatives. In this article I am therefore “writing As library and information science (LIS) back” to Creating a Seat at the Table. I am professionals we often self-identify with a restating the case for diversity as a tenet of veneer that is “easy”: white women, white the LIS curriculum, but with added ques- men, and people of color. With these kinds tions and challenges to our thinking about of surface-oriented categories, we self- LIS identity construction and professional identify as a pretty homogenous group. practice along with our own identity con- But in reality what simmers beneath this struction as we teach in the LIS classroom. veneer is actually quite kaleidoscopic. Almost a decade into this discussion, I am When we take into consideration the di- using this presentation as an opportunity verse histories and heritages that humans to beg the question “what are we doing” possess, we can see where we must redis- when we teach LIS?. “Who are we” as we cover the diverse identities of the entire teach our students how to be librarians in a population of librarians. In order for a true, 21st century world? A world that demands authentic diversity movement to occur in inclusion for voicedness that is not just LIS, it is vital that we count the multiple present, but critically present, insisting cultural identities, constructs, and expres- on not just being seated at the table of a sions encapsulated as one representation holistic cultural paradigm for LIS, but ac- in all librarians, male, female, other-gen- tively engaged and participating in reflec- dered, and from multiple cultural and so- tive collaborative research as practitioners cial experiences. In this view, all of us are of teaching and advising emerging library multi-cultural. Thus to be “white” is much and information professionals. Thus this more complex than identifying as “Ameri- work will restate and re-problematize what can”. In turn, the question becomes: Who was said then as the issues are still pres- are we, the librarians? What are our multi- ent. It behooves us to look, and look again, cultural identities, traditions, and practices at the questions we ask ourselves and the when we don’t count color or race, but in- challenges that we still face. This needs to stead count culture, heritage, and identity? occur until the snail’s pace at which we To arrive at an understanding of our pro- address our issues, passes us over the fin- fession’s true diversity, we do need to start ish line of equity, mutual understanding at square one and to acknowledge and un- and normalization of diversity as unity. pack LIS as an overwhelmingly white pro-
Gazing the Diversity Stance in North America 153 fession (Lance, 2005; White 2012; Bourg, groups such as: 17% Hispanic, 13% Af- 2014). Adkins and Espinal (2004) look at rican American, 5% LGBTQ over the age the identity disparities within LIS with a of 18, 6.6% Asian, 1.2% Native American, realistic lens of who patrons typically see 18% physically disabled, 25% children up when they walk into the library. They posit to age 18 (of which 5% aged 13 and up are that minority patrons may not feel at ease gay), 12.5% elderly, and an elusive per- to approach a librarian of mainstream cul- centage of homeless persons due to the in- ture because of a few factors: (1) patrons sidiously transient nature of homelessness may perceive librarians as representatives (the figure teeters around the 3%-4% range of a monolithic mainstream culture that is from various sources), of which 33% are a hegemonic space of power and oppres- youth under the age of 24 years (Henry, sive authority for many minority groups, M., Cortes, A., and Morris, S., 2013; U.S. (2) thus patrons may not be attracted to Census, 2014). Concerning the homeless receiving services from the library, which school population, the U.S. Department can decrease usage, and (3) librarians of Education reports that there are 1.36 may see themselves as representatives of a million homeless children in U.S. public monolithic mainstream American culture schools as of 2014, which is an eight per- and unwittingly enact acts of power and cent increase from 2012–2013 (Crary & authority that are culturally insensitive and Leff, 2014; Layton & Brown, 2015). Suf- inappropriate (Adkins & Espinal, 2004). fice it to say that American library patrons, Given our profession’s demographics it are a pluralistic group of citizens (or not) is vital to consider: Within the nuances of in need of a variety of informational and mainstream American culture, what is the cultural resources that reflects their envi- multi-culturalism of American whites? In ronment, their traditions, and their experi- turn, what is the multi-culturalism of the ences in America, and beyond. At present, majority of American librarians (who are those services are being provided pre- overwhelmingly white)? Again, there is dominantly by American librarians who a lot of nuance to whiteness that we must are typically white and female, with the acknowledge, unpack, and add to the con- economic fortitude to be able to achieve a versation of culture, heritage, and identity. graduate level college education. We must take into account all of who Two salient issues stare us in the face we are as LIS professionals and what “cul- here. One is the reality that the American tures” are enacted within those various librarian profession is comprised of an self-identified constructs. For example, overwhelming roster of librarians (89%) what does it mean to be a queer, disabled, who more than likely subscribe to a de- academic librarian in a rural community? mographic of the mainstream American For you: what does it mean to be you in (e.g. white, middle class, 100% physically the community you currently work and/ functional, English speaking, home-full, or live? What are your multiple heritages? etc.). The second issue is that American ancestral origins? diverse reading inter- library patrons are invariably members of ests? familial cultural traditions? gender diverse cultural groups that do not neces- constructs? And how do those identities sarily subscribe to the demographic of the raise questions for you to explore how you mainstream American but subscribe to the approach, practice, and teach librarian- American idea of “other” (Apple, 2006, pp. ship? 61–62). One might posit: “Well whites go With “few candidates of color . . . at- to libraries; they are library patrons, too.” tracted to the field” this “overwhelm- Fair enough. However, the issue that raises ingly white” (Adkins & Espinal, 2004, p. its snarly head here is access; more specifi- 52) profession of librarianship currently cally, equity of access. Whites dominate services an American society of diverse mainstream culture in American society as
154 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE a homogenous group based on skin color ing the world” (Freire & Macedo, 1987) and race, not culture, heritage and identity. inform and impact our professional prac- In turn, it is a “packed” American main- tices within teaching, research, and com- stream society that holds historical and munity engagement. We cannot teach who contemporary access to informational and we are unaware we are not; we can only cultural resources whether those resources teach who we are aware of. are available in libraries or not. When we think of the prevailing issue of the “digital Studying the Gaze: Practitioner divide” we recognize this issue of equity Inquiry of access to be real and true. Libraries and schools in areas where middle and upper As information professionals, as much class Americans live invariably contain as we research and learn about the read- more resources (because higher income ing interests of the reading public to help communities can provide higher tax dol- develop their literacy practices, we must lars for community resources like librar- do the same for ourselves, as a means of ies) and more accessible technologies for a lifelong learning and professional devel- wider range of patrons. Middle and upper opment. My research with introducing class communities also have wider access practitioner inquiry to public librarians to various resources because residents can bares to show that when librarians explore afford cars, cable TV, and home computer their own reading habits to challenge how devices that provide convenient access to they ‘are just American’ or to reflect on real-time information and cultural activi- why they’ve ‘never had to consider the ties. Since most librarians are of the main- question of one’s own diversity before’, stream demographic, we can posit that embedded (albeit unintended) assump- many student librarians enroll into library tions, biases, and societal privileges ex- school from a privileged place of access acted in professional practice can be rec- and the economic wherewithal to have ognized, discussed and modified. A most convenient access to information, cultural fitting space to begin this important work and artistic activities, as well as a mirrored is in the LIS classroom. The LIS class- reality (whites serving whites) while en- room is a space where this introspective joying such social privilege. level of inquiry can be collaborative, in- As de facto members of an ever-grow- clusive, critical, and discerning, with the ing, diverse American reading public, we potential to embed a necessary commit- librarians must recognize and acknowl- ment to practitioner inquiry as an ongoing edge the diversity and holism of our own approach to a self-sustaining professional personal and professional identities and development throughout a librarian’s ca- reading habits and tastes; and I posit that reer. For LIS educators, this approach of we must do this even moreso if we are LIS re-viewing the LIS classroom as a field for educators. Bottom line, our LIS curricu- meaningful data, can reveal important new lum reflects mainstream American values understandings about how we participate and identity, and we LIS educators per- in class not just as teachers in the class- petrate the marginalization of American room, but also as learners. subcultures when we teach LIS without My research demonstrates that when a critical lens of inclusion for a variety of practicing librarians collaboratively study American experience and identity. The their professional practices on a consis- ways in which we read our lives and his- tent basis, that burnout and apathy can tories during our acts of reading text, cre- decrease because we feel more invested in ates an identity that we bring to our work the meaning and impact of our work. Iso- (Iser, 1987). For LIS educators, when LIS lation can decrease because we are more students approach us, our “ways of read- engaged with how we approach patrons,
Gazing the Diversity Stance in North America 155 colleagues, and our professional selves. ing faculty meetings, I would think). Prac- Practitioner Inquiry promotes profes- tical methods such as memo writing, data sional self-awareness, self-empathy, and collection, and leisure reading, become self-care. Professional development from profound, strategic approaches to critical- an inquiry stance can increase because we ly question and analyze assumptions, ob- are more committed to our lifelong learn- servations, and literary responses that may ing (Cochran-Smith & Lytle, 2009). Prac- disrupt and complicate instructional inten- titioner Inquiry helps us to strategically tions and objectives. Familiar practices examine who we are, who we are not, and such as class research and preparation, how we can actively sustain an ongoing teaching, facilitating, and student advis- curiosity for a holistic professional iden- ing, can become newly strange revelations tity. Practitioner Inquiry is a reflective when put under examination with group- methodology grounded in critical theory oriented critical discourse. Thus practitio- that incorporates various forms of literacy ner inquiry can be a strategically sustain- practices for the purpose of collaborative able approach to LIS educators engaging professional development, continuing ed- their students as a professional learning ucation, and lifelong learning. Thus practi- community of collaborative engagement tioner inquiry seeks to ignite professionals to “better” the ongoing development of li- to question their own professional prac- brarianship overall. tices for the purpose of more deeply un- As an example of practitioner inquiry derstanding why we do what we do, how in the LIS classroom, reading, in various what we do impacts others in the world, ways, can take center stage in the theo- and how we can be “better” at what we do retical and practicum balance of class dis- (Lytle, 2008). course amongst students and between stu- Such inquiry-based questions serve as dents and instructors. As LIS educators, I fodder for multimodal growth and devel- believe it is requisite that we examine our opment in the inquiry-based LIS class- own approach and practices to reading be- room. In a profession where questions cause rarely, if ever, do our own reading are currency, questions become tools for acts and practices come into play as a nec- instilling critical thinking in pre-service essary consideration for our pedagogical librarians. Questions are no longer chal- identity construction and constitution. Not lenges that must be overcome in the ref- only is the LIS classroom the perfect place erence interview or readers’ advisory in- for us to read with students in order to ex- teraction, but rather, questions become plore ways in which reading practices cre- portals through which uncertainty is con- ate powerful librarianship, but also, LIS fronted, explored, and made user-friendly educators can learn more deeply what it for the educational process. means to teach LIS as readers of research, assignments, and popular literature. Read- Practitioner Inquiry in the LIS ing becomes questioned, challenged, and Classroom confronted as an impetus for studying our gaze of seeking, teaching, and learning to- With practitioner inquiry for LIS edu- gether. cators, the professional becomes personal, In the LIS classroom, knowledge can the practical becomes profound, and the often be considered a privileged space for familiar becomes strange. Pedagogical the teacher to distill to the learner, particu- practices are reflected upon on a personal larly since library and information science level, but then that personal reflection is is a profession based upon meanings and exposed and explored within a group of application of knowledge, data, and in- like-minded inquirers for collective feed- formation. Practitioner Inquiry disrupts back (such practice would make for amaz- normative ideas of who is the teacher and
156 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE who is the student, and problematizes in- I have found that such student librarians structor knowledge as the non-negotiable are often disillusioned to the rigors of not framework for the learning community. just the mindset of librarianship, let alone In turn, practitioner inquiry forces us to the actual practice of the profession. Many confront our identities as educators and LIS students enter library school surprised practitioners because LIS educators are and overwhelmed by professional compe- truly “librarians to the librarians”. We are tencies we teach such as the competencies nudged to look in a mirror that is not only outlined at ALISE in 2006 (Berger. 2007). reflective but collective, to ask the ques- tion: “Who Are We, the Librarians”? • creativity• collaboration The Multi-layered, Hybrid-notic • communication skills Stance • being change agents• flexibility (able to adapt to change) To further consider the homogeneity of • decision making LIS, along with the need for a self-directed • problem solving (to be able to analyze critical inquiry stance towards our peda- and take action quickly) gogical practices in order for our ongoing • leadership skills professional development to be consistent • risk takers and sustainable, yields that we acknowl- • tech savvy edge and embrace a multi-layered, hybrid • political skills of negotiation agency to LIS education. This agency is Back then, Berger cited LIS faculty as a critical way of being and knowing be- the underscore to librarians actualizing cause we need to constantly ask ourselves these qualities. She asserted “that the big- hard questions in order to confront truths gest thing library education can do is to that point to gaps in the professional self- instill the passion, commitment and social esteem within LIS as a whole. We LIS ed- standing of the values of librarianship” ucators must accept the fact that the buck (Berger, 2006). This charge still holds true, for the health of LIS practitioners begins especially as we are now a social media with us, in the LIS classroom. world where user populations have also This agency is a vital responsibility we made it clear that they need these kinds must recognize and embrace because I of qualities from librarians so that diverse posit from my own experience as a librar- identities and diverse information needs ian educator that many student librarians of diverse populations are acknowledged, enter library school with a preconceived respected, and addressed. Additionally notion of what it means to be a librar- today, library patrons are demanding that ian and what it takes to become a librar- librarians acknowledge, respect, and ad- ian. This notion is often embedded with dress the fact that they too, are patrons of the usual stereotypes of the librarian as the libraries in which they serve. Indeed, spinster, isolated, and a voracious reader we must repeat the lesson to LIS students of books, while the technological world that we librarians are community members passes us by. I call this student assumption within our libraries, just as we LIS educa- the “patron point of view”. Student librar- tors are students in our classrooms. ians with no experience with working in Thus we have to look at who is teach- libraries come into library school with a ing library school, who is attending library patron’s point of view thinking that it is school, and who is seeking library service, going to be easy to “read” books for a year all from a cultural/heritage/identity per- or so, and then qualify to sit behind a desk spective that proactively acknowledges and answer questions to just a few, select the fact that libraries exist and operate in people, with a smile day in and day out. communities that house a variety of peo-
Gazing the Diversity Stance in North America 157 ples who are all multi-cultural in nature, and meaning that requires competencies of and are seeking information and service a social and cultural nature. Because LIS that honor and reflect who they are. We, is predominantly white and female, it be- as LIS educators serving in a global 21st hooves library schools to ensure that stu- century society, can no longer afford to dents are taught competencies that create not look at our pedagogical practices from librarians who are culturally aware of their a critical lens to consider Berger’s com- own social and cultural privilege as well as petencies, such as: Are we being creative aware of the social and cultural realities of in our teaching practices? Are we collab- fellow citizens. orative with students and colleagues? Are we change agents to be willing to discuss The Crux of LIS Educator Learning risky, challenging topics in class? Are we tech savvy to present course content in in- During IFLA’s (International Federa- novative ways that introduces contempo- tion of Libraries Associations and Insti- rary technologies? Are we LIS educators tutions)1998 General Conference in Am- still learning? Or are we just teaching? sterdam, a paper was presented by the Additionally, ongoing considerations Iivonen research team (who are librarian about demographics, immigration issues, educators from the University of Finland), public services for homeless citizens, rural that spoke to the need for librarian educa- and inner-city services or lack thereof, to tors to become culturally self-aware and technology access for persons with vari- therefore empowered to embrace and ser- ous learning and physical disabilities, and vice multicultural patron communities. In equal education for children of all languag- their paper, “Analyzing and Understand- es and socio-economic levels, all speak to ing Cultural Difference: Experiences from the imperative need of LIS to be an infor- Education in Library and Information mation- and service-oriented profession Studies” (1998), Iivonen, etal, report on a that views our philosophies, theories, and study of two library science classes, one in praxis from a multi-cultural framework Finland, and one in North Carolina, USA, that includes a focus on culture/heritage/ where they compare and contrast library identity as part of wholistic LIS teaching, best practices to come to a realization of learning, and praxis. If libraries intend to the following competencies for serving remain relevant, important and central as cultural groups in libraries: informational and cultural resources in a global society, this multi-cultural frame- It is important to pay attention to how work must be addressed, embraced, and members of various cultures see standardized in library school. Indeed, we i) the nature of people, need to ask some important questions. For example, are library schools teaching ref- ii) a person’s relationship to the external erence from the lens of servicing the glob- environment, al village? Are library science students iii) the person’s relationship to other being exposed to literature and discourse people, of a multi-cultural nature? Are LIS educa- tors and students engaged in mutual learn- iv) the primary mode of the activity, ing communities where critical inquiry is v) people’s orientation to space, and opening up space to make the comfortable vi) the person’s temporary orientation. uncomfortable? Library schools must be up to the chal- . . . In addition, [attention is paid to] lenge of igniting student librarians to the language and communication styles as a reality that our professional work, regard- dimension of cultural differences (Iivonen, less of its venue, has socio-cultural purpose et al., 1998).
158 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE The Finland team posit that librarians we educate professionals who serve in li- must come out of their shell of seeing braries, cultural institutions, and informa- themselves from a parochial point of view tion centers? When will our lens focus on where such a perspective “neither recog- how we evolve our approaches to people? nizes other people’s different ways of liv- Our ways of understanding one another ing and working nor appreciates that such and ourselves? When will we validate our differences have serious consequences” humanity and insist that such validation (Adler, 1997, as quoted in Iivonen, etal, is current, relevant, hip, cool, interesting, 1998). The Iivonen group echoes the sen- and necessary for the ongoing progression timents outlined herein that while technol- of our profession? When do we become ogy has made our world a smaller place, people-oriented again, creating a throne at it still takes the collaboration and interac- the table of LIS to ensure that culture, heri- tion of people face to face, heart to heart, tage, and identity, are always at the fore- to garner true meaning of self, others, and front of everything we think about, talk of life. Truly this is the essence of having about, and compute about? When. a practitioner inquiry-based and participa- tory-oriented learning stance that creates Getting On Par inclusive, collaborative space for explor- ing the culture/heritage/identity paradigm. I do not offer the framework of partici- Thus, librarian educators must be willing patory teaching and learning culture/heri- to recognize their own racial, ethnic, heri- tage/identity in librarianship to say let’s do tage, and cultural identity development it my way. After all, I am a newbie librarian (Carter and Goodwin, 1994), preferably educator, and librarianship is a collabora- within a collaborative environment, be- tive profession. However, I am looking for cause an educator’s internalization of their a cogent framework for identity and inqui- own diverse identity is the crux to the in- ry work in librarianship to be added to the terchange of learning for the purpose of plate of ‘our issues in library education.’ teaching. While it may not be practical for Without practitioner inquiry into how we LIS educators to go back to school to learn perceive and collaboratively explore cul- cultural competency for librarianship, ini- ture/heritage/identity, we are missing an tiation of such pedagogy in library school important tenet in our discussions of LIS can be a powerful tool through which both education; a tenet that I passionately feel teacher and student learn from one anoth- we may perhaps overlook a bit too easily er. because the work and commitment to do It all has to do with contemporariness, this work may be considered a bit too hard. relevancy, and respect for librarianship’s What I am positing is that as a profes- tradition as a humanistic profession. We sion still overly focused on technology’s have done a lot of work to focus on in- impact on praxis; we need to shift to fo- formation technology and librarianship’s cusing on the people, which includes us as place within technology (Gorman, 2003). librarians, as teachers of librarians, as cul- We have played with the buzzwords, “in- turally competent educators. We do this by formatics”, “social media”, and “design” initially unmasking our own sense of who enough to now have new courses, spe- we are, allowing ourselves to redefine our- cializations and tracks for these areas, selves from a cultural space that acknowl- throughout ALA-accredited programs and edges personal diverse heritage as the schools. I believe as a profession we’ve construct for identity formation. This is an looked at computers and have figured out unmasking that can be a powerful strategy how to validate our work with them. But for we LIS educators gaining a balanced, what about the people? When will we do unbiased, professional lens from which to the courageous, messy work to look how fortify student librarians to enter the world
Gazing the Diversity Stance in North America 159 of work as cultural competent librarians. would include a reflective lens focusing That is truly the end-goal here, an objec- on self-assessment, immersion of self into tive we can never forget. multicultural literature and other media, Such practical yet profound educational and discourse on worldviews of various experiences need to be implanted into all American and even international cultural Master of Library Science (MLS) degree groups, resources, and services. programs in North America as a required For the ALA accreditation committee core course as opposed to an elective. to require a multicultural course as part When we direct our attention to the truism of the core curriculum for all accredited that one cannot help another if one does library schools would be a serious step not possess self-knowledge; we recognize towards placing librarianship on par with that as a helping profession, librarians other helping professions such as social cannot provide evolved services that are work, medicine, and law. Indeed, social culturally literate until they are culturally workers have to be culturally competent to empowered and literate themselves. This work with the same communities libraries includes LIS educators. serve, and doctors and lawyers are con- This position leads us back to the issue versing about the importance of cultural of equitable access. I am reminded of Car- competency within their respective pro- ole Edelsky’s idea of cultural activities as fessions (Weaver, 2004; Voyvodic, 2006). “communities of practice” (2006, p. 152). Indeed, our conversation has been on- Edelsky informs us that participation is going in recent years with LIS scholars key in cultural activities as communities publishing thought-provoking and infor- of practice. She feels that “situated learn- mative articles on the topics of LIS cul- ing focuses on people” (italics mine) par- tural competency (Jaeger, P. T., Bertot, J. ticipating in cultural activities with the in- C., & Franklin, R. E., 2010; Mestre, 2010; tent of becoming members, of joining the Kumasi & Hill, 2013; Shorter-Gooden, club (p. 152). Edelsky admonishes us that 2013; Jaeger, et al., 2015), and inquiry in order for people to have membership in in the LIS classroom (Overall, 2010). My a community of practice, “they must have call in this contribution to that conversa- access to the activity; they have to be privy tion is that we need to combine the two to its enactment by those who are already conceptual methods in our teaching of LIS central members of the community of because we, too, are part of the paradigm practice (p. 152). for competent LIS professional practice. While Edelsky is speaking primarily in the context of classroom discourse for sec- References ond language learners, her advice informs librarianship quite well. For librarians are ALA Allied Professionals Association. (2011). central members of their community of Library workers: Facts and figures. Fact Sheet practice (the library). Thus, as such, if the 2011. http://ala-apa.org/files/2012/03/Library-Workers-2011.pdf. librarian is not attuned to the culture of the service community, that service com- Adkins, D., & Espinal, I. (2004). The diversity man-date. Library Journal, 129(7), 52–54. munity will not feel an entry into the li- Apple, M. (2006). Educating the “right” way: Mar- brary in which the librarian services and ket, standards, God, and inequality. (2nd ed.). invariably, manages. This is why it is vital NY: Routledge/Taylor and Francis. that as a profession we centrally position Berger, L. (2006). Discussion forum remarks. multicultural praxis into library educa- ALISE/ALA/COE Forum on Library Education. tion, so that student librarians are taught Association of Library and Information Science cultural competencies that will serve them Education with American Library Association. and their communities well throughout American Library Association Mid-Winter Con-ference. San Antonio, Texas. January 20–25, their careers. Steps to such competency 2006.
160 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE Bourg, C. (2014, March 3). The unbearable white- Diversity, inclusion, and underrepresented popu- ness of librarianship. Feral Librarian. Blog. lations in LIS research. Library Quarterly 80, https://chrisbourg.wordpress.com/2014/03/03/ 175–181. the-unbearable-whiteness-of-librarianship/ Jaeger, P., Bertot, J., & Subramaniam, M. (2013). Carter, R. T. & Goodwin, A. L. (1994). Racial Preparing future librarians to effectively serve identity and education. In L. Darling-Hammond their communities. Library Quarterly, 83(3), (ed.). Review of Research in Education, 20 (pp. 243–248. 291–336). NY: Teachers College Press. Jaeger, P., Cooke, N., Feltis, C., Hamile, M., Jar- Cochran-Smith, M. & Lytle, S.L. (2009). Inquiry as dine, J., & Shilton, K. (2015). The virtuous circle Stance: Practitioner Research in the Next Gen- revisited: Injecting diversity, inclusion, rights, eration. Practitioners Inquiry. NY: Teachers Col- justice, and equity into LIS from education to lege. advocacy. The Library Quarterly: Information, Committee on Accreditation of the American Li- Community, Policy 85(2): 150–171. brary Association (COA). (2015). Standards for Kumasi, K. & Hill, R. F. (2013). Examining the Accreditation of Master’s Programs in Library hidden ideologies within cultural competence and Information Studies. http://bit.ly/1IlDucd discourses among library and information science Crary, D., & Leff, L. (2014, November 18). Num- students: Implications for school library pedago- ber of homeless children in America surges to gy. School Libraries Worldwide, 19(1): 128–139. all-time high: Report. The Huffington Post. http:// Lance, K.C. (2005). Racial and ethnic diversity of www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/11/17/child- U.S. library workers. American Libraries, 36(5), homelessless-us_n_6169994.html 41–43. Davis, D. (2009). Planning for 2015: The recent his- Layton, L., & Brown, E. (2015, September 14). tory and future supply of librarians. Report. Of- Number of homeless students in U.S. has doubled fice for Research and Statistics. Chicago: Ameri- since before the recession. The Washington Post. can Library Association. http://wapo.st/1FIbaw2 Edelsky, C. (2006). With Literacy and Justice for Lytle, S. L. (2008). At Last: Practitioner Inquiry All: Rethinking the Social in Language and Edu- and the Practice of Teaching: Some Thoughts cation. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. on “Better”. Research in the Teaching of English Freire, P. & Macedo, D. (1987). Literacy: Reading 42(3), 373–379. the Word and the World. South Hadley, MA: Ber- Mestre, L. S. (2010). Librarians working with di- gin & Garvey. verse populations: What impact does cultural Gorman, M. (2003). The Enduring Library: Tech- competency training have on their efforts? Jour- nology, Tradition, and the Quest for Balance. nal Of Academic Librarianship, 36(6), 479–488. Chicago: American Library Association. Office of Diversity. (2012). Diversity counts. Amer- Henry, M., Cortes, A., and Morris, S. (2013). The ican Library Association. http://www.ala.org/of- 2013 Annual Homeless Assessment Report fices/diversity/diversitycounts/divcounts. (AHAR) to Congress. Office of Community Plan- Overall, P.M. (2009). Cultural competence: A con- ning and Development. Washington, D.C.: U.S. ceptual framework for library and information Department of Housing and Urban Development. science professionals. Library Quarterly, 79, https://www.hudexchange.info/resources/docu- 175–204 ments/ahar-2013-part1.pdf Iivonen, M., Sonnenwald, D.H., Parma, M., & Shorter-Gooden, K. (2013). The culturally com-petent organization. Library Quarterly 83(3), Poole-Kober, E. (1998). Analyzing and Under- standing Cultural Differences: Experiences from 207–211. Education in Library and Information Studies. Voyvodic, R. (2006). Lawyers meet the social con- Conference proceedings. Professional Group: Li- text: Understanding cultural competence. Cana- brary Services to Multicultural Populations. 64th dian Bar Review 84: 563–591. IFLA General Conference (August 16–August Weaver, H.N. (2004). Explorations in Cultural 21, 1998), Amsterdam. http://archive.ifla.org/IV/ Competence: Journey to the Four Directions. ifla64/077-155e.htm CA: Wadsworth Publishing. Iser, W. (1978). The Act of Reading: A Theory of White, A. (2012). Not Your Ordinary Librarian: Aesthetic Response. Baltimore, MD: John Hop- Debunking the Popular Perceptions of Librar- kins. ians (Chandos information professional series). Jaeger, P. T., Bertot, J. C., & Franklin, R. E. (2010). Oxford, UK: Chandos.