Are We There Yet? Results of a Gap Analysis to Measure LIS Students' Prior Knowledge and Actual Learning of Cultural Competence Concepts Kafi Kumasi School of Library and Information Studies , 106 Kresge, Wayne State University , Detroit , Ml , 48202. Email: Ak4901@wayne.edu Renee Franklin Hill School of Information Studies, 3 12 Hinds Hall, Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY, 13244. Email: refrankl@syr.edu This paper reports on the preliminary results from a pilot study conducted to examine li- brary and information science (LIS) students' perceptions of their level of preparation for becoming culturally competent LIS professionals. Students participated in an electronic survey, which contained a Likert scale measuring three areas of cultural competence: self-awareness, education, and interaction. A gap analysis technique was employed to detect discrepancies between students' prior knowledge and actual learning relative to cultural competence. This article discusses student-reported gaps in knowledge for the section of the questionnaire on "Education." Students indicated that all of the concepts introduced in this section were important to learn but their level of knowledge gained varied from no or low levels to moderate levels of actual learning. Keywords: cultural competence, diversity, gap analysis, library service, library educa- tion, multicultural Library professionals and Information are increasingly Science called (LIS) professionals are increasingly called upon to serve individuals from diverse cul- tural, ethnic and linguistic backgrounds. In order to provide culturally sensitive libraiy and information services, those entering the field must be taught about the histories, backgrounds, and literacy practices of var- ious user communities. This paper reports on a study designed to allow LIS students an opportunity to reflect on the level to which their LIS coursework has prepared them to become culturally competent li- brary practitioners. The overarching re- search question this study seeks to address is: How well do LIS students feel they are prepared - through their LIS courses - to become culturally competent practitioners who can understand and serve the needs of culturally diverse library communities? The related sub-questions for this study are: What, if any, discrepancies or gaps ex- ist between how students describe/rate a. Their prior knowledge and their level of knowledge/experience gained for a par- ticular aspect of cultural competence? b. The importance of learning and the level of knowledge/experience gained for a particular aspect of cultural com- petence? Through this study, we hope to provide baseline data that LIS faculty can use to begin to assess the LIS curriculum and their teaching in terms of cultural compe- tence preparation. Literature Review As a service-oriented profession, the LIS field has dedicated considerable scholarship and material resources to pre- paring a workforce that can meet the needs J. of Education for Library and Information Science, Vol. 52, No. A - (Fall) October 201 1 ISSN: 0748-5786 © 201 1 Association for Library and Information Science Education 251
252 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE of increasingly diverse user communities. These efforts normally fall under the broad discourse of "diversity" and "multicultur- alism." Although these two terms indi- rectly relate to this study, the focus of this inquiry is preparing culturally competent LIS professionals through LIS education. "Cultural competence" is typically seen as a sub-genre of scholarship on diversity and multicultural issues. As such, the literature review in the following section begins by exploring diversity and multicultural dis- courses within LIS. The subsequent sec- tion examines the more specific literature on cultural competence in LIS. Diversity and Multicultural Scholarship in LIS The demographic composition of the U.S. population is changing rapidly and as a result there has been a steady stream of diversity and multicultural scholarship and outreach initiatives launched in the LIS field and beyond (Balderrama, 2000). In the broad context of LIS, the focus of these initiatives centers on better prepar- ing workers to serve in culturally diverse library communities. In the specific con- text of LIS schools, there is a burgeon- ing body of work that touts the value and importance of integrating diversity and multicultural issues into the LIS curricu- lum (see e.g. Abdullahi, 2007; Henninger & Hurlbert, 2006; Kim & Sin, 2008). This body of work reflects a basic understand- ing that having a more balanced represen- tation of students from diverse cultural backgrounds will increase the likelihood that future librarians will provide services that reflect deeper cultural, linguistic, and racial understanding (Gorman, 2004; Win- ston & Walstad, 2006). Demographically speaking, there is a cultural mismatch between the LIS stu- dent body and professional workforce and the wider U.S. population. The majority of LIS students and professionals are middle aged, white, English speaking females. Meanwhile, the nation's communities have become increasingly non-white and multilingual (Lance, 200S). As a result, a default goal for many diversity initiatives in LIS educational scholarship is to help the majority white LIS student and profes- sional communities to build cultural sensi- bilities and to develop strategies for serv- ing minority communities (Overall, 2010). Ironically, whiteness as a racial and cul- tural signifier with its own privileged as- sumptions, worldviews, and lived experi- ences rarely enters into diversity discourses in education (Haviland, 2008). It would seem that the study of whiteness would be an integral facet of diversity scholar- ship in LIS, given the racial demographics of the workforce. However, discussions of whiteness and institutional racism are virtually absent in LIS literature. To help understand why this is so, Honma (2005) interrogates the epistemological founda- tions of LIS and articulates two significant issues, which he describes as "unacknowl- edged whiteness" and the superficiality of "celebratory multiculturalism" (p. 3). In the first case, Honma draws reference to the public library's role in the American- ization project and its complicity in assim- ilating a variety of ethnic groups into citi- zenship. The irony about this moment in library history is that this Americanization project did not extend to people of color, who could not reasonably be considered white. In spite of this proactive role in the "shaping of a white citizenry" (p. 6) the field of LIS, according to Honma, has re- fused to keep up with ongoing discussions of race, choosing instead to substitute the less controversial discourses of diversity and multiculturalism which inadequately represent the racial discrepancies within the field (p. 3). This call for the acknowledgment of whiteness and the normativity it implies is echoed by Pawley (2006) in her exposition on race and multiculturalism in the LIS curriculum. She contends that the use of the term multiculturalism in LIS facilitat- ed a systematic avoidance of the "R word" which remains "not only understudied, but
Are We There Yet ? 253 also poorly understood" (p. 151 ). Pawley further states: Few LIS classes include race in their titles and while some researchers - especially library historians - have indeed put race and ethnicity at the center of their re- search agendas, they are generally small in number. A search for "race" in the titles indexed in the online database Library Literature and Information Science con- firms the suspicion that the LIS community avoids overt discussion of race, while embracing multiculturalism and diversity (p. 151). In order to avoid the kind of benign plu- ralistic approach to diversity that Honma (2005) and Pawley (2006) warn against, it is essential to articulate the conceptual un- derpinnings and goals of various diversity research initiatives. To that end, Jaeger and Franklin's (2007) presentation of the "virtuous circle" provided a conceptual framework that illustrated the positive ef- fect increased faculty and student diversity would likely have on creating more inclu- sive library services. Additionally, Over- all (2009) provides a conceptual overview of what cultural competence entails in the context of LIS research and practice. The next section looks more closely at Over- all's work, which informed the design of the survey instrument used in this study. Cultural Competence and LIS Scholarship Overall has produced the most recent and in-depth scholarship on cultural com- petence in the context of LIS. Overall (2009) describes cultural competence in relation to LIS as: The ability to recognize the significance of culture in one's own life and in the lives of others; and to come to know and respect diverse cultural backgrounds and charac- teristics through interaction with individu- als from diverse linguistic, cultural, and so- cioeconomic groups; and to fully integrate the culture of diverse groups into services, work, and institutions in order to enhance the lives of both those being served by the library profession and those engaged in service (p. 190). In the article, competence is defined as abilities (rather than behaviors) devel- oped over time, which demonstrate a high degree of knowledge and understanding. Overall offers a three-part framework for understanding cultural competence, which include: self-awareness, education, and interaction. Self-awareness has to do with recognizing the significance of culture in one's own life and in the lives of others. Education has to do with fully integrating the culture of diverse groups into services, work, and institutions in order to enhance the lives of both those being served by the library profession and those engaged in service. Finally, interaction deals with knowing and respecting diverse cultural backgrounds and characteristics through interaction with individuals from diverse linguistic, cultural, and socioeconomic groups. The author points to low library usage across historically underrepresented com- munities as one of the core reasons for needing cultural competence among LIS professionals. However, she goes beyond citing low usage statistics and begins to critique the way knowledge itself if con- structed in the LIS field as problematic for some minority communities. The author argues that because the LIS field is ground- ed in objectivist notions of knowledge and behaviorist notions of learning that it can inadvertently overlook or marginalize the epistemologies embodied in some minor- ity communities. This critique has also been levied by other LIS scholars, who have argued that information literacy - which is the heart of library and information curricula - is rooted in a positivist view of learning that divorces information problems from their social and political context (Kapitz- ke, 2003). Furthermore, Kumasi-Johnson
254 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE (2007) used the context of in school li- brary instruction to illustrate the problems with mainstream approaches to informa- tion literacy instruction in the school li- brary context stating that "a student may identify a seemingly mundane, noncritical information problem such as 'how to build a garden' and never be challenged to inves- tigate important social issues such as who can build a garden and who cannot" (p. 43). In general, LIS literature has made sig- nificant strides towards including mar- ginalized perspectives on diversity and to articulate what it means to be culturally competent. The time is ripe to expand the conversation even further and to conduct empirical studies that capture various el- ements of culturally sensitive library ser- vice and teaching practices. This study is one small effort toward this end and will potentially help bridge the divide between theory and practice that often stagnates di- versity discourses in LIS. Methods Instrumentation The researchers developed a web-based survey instrument that was designed to col- lect information about the extent to which LIS students felt that their programs have prepared them to effectively serve library patrons from a variety of cultural back- grounds. Prior to distributing the survey, the researchers pre-tested the survey on students and colleagues at their universi- ties. The questionnaires were approved by the institutional review boards at both uni- versities and contained informed consent and language that allowed participants to end their survey participation. The survey instrument itself was mod- eled after LibQUAL+®, which is an instru- ment designed to measure library service qualify. LibQUAL-H® itself was modeled after SERVQUAL, a pioneer instrument used frequently in the private sector to measure customer satisfaction (Crossno, et al., 2001). Whereas the LibQual+® survey asks users to reflect on the quality of library service, this study asks students to reflect on the levels of education they receive in terms of cultural competence preparation. Although other studies have implemented cultural competence instruments to evalu- ate students' cultural knowledge and abili- ties, these studies did not measure the kinds of learning outcomes and abilities that cor- relate to LIS practice (see e.g. Brathwaite & Majumdar, 2006). What attracted us to the design of the LibQUAL+® instrument was its ability to utilize the gap analysis technique to inter- pret the results. A gap analysis involves using surveys to help detect discrepan- cies between customer expectations of an organization and that organizations ability to deliver on those expectations (Eldridge, 2004). At its core are two ques- tions: "Where are we?" and "Where do we want to be?" In the context of libraries, the gap analysis has been used to help libraries answer the questions: "What are the ser- vice qualify issues identified by our users as most important?" and "Which of these services are in need of most attention?" (Cook, Heath, & Thompson, 2001). Similarly, the gap analysis technique can be translated into the context of LIS education to help answer the questions: "What aspects of cultural competence do students identify as being most impor- tant to learn in their LIS coursework?" and "To what extent do students feel that the important concepts to learn are being taught?" We found the gap measurement model to be intuitively appealing because the scores on a given item are interpreted using different ratings of the same item. For example, in the 41 item LibQUAL-H® par- ticipants respond to the 41 service criteria by rating each criterion with regard to: • The minimum level of service that is deemed acceptable • The perceived level of service seen as being offered • The desired level of service (Thomp- son, Cook, & Heath, 2000, p. 166)
Are We There Yet? 255 Likewise, the cultural competence in- strument features a side-by-side matrix design giving students the ability to rate each of the 16 items with regard to • Their level of prior knowledge about a particular aspect of cultural compe- tence; • Their determination of the importance of learning a particular aspect of cul- tural competence in LIS courses; • Their level of knowledge/ experience gained regarding a particular aspect of cultural competence through their LIS courses. Unlike the 41 item LibQUAL+® in- strument, the cultural competence instru- ment contains only 16 core items. These items were grouped into one of three ar- eas of cultural competence outlined previ- ously in Overall's work, including: self- awareness, education, and interaction (see appendix A for sample survey). A more in-depth comparison of the features of the LibQUAL+® survey that were translated into the cultural competence instrument is described in Table 1. Participants During the Fall 2010 semester, the re- searchers conducted the web-based cul- tural competence survey simultaneously at their respective ALA-accredited insti- tutions. The survey questionnaires were sent to LIS students who were currently enrolled and who had earned at least IS credits. This credit hour criterion was put in place to ensure that students would have completed at least one semester of classes and be able to adequately evaluate their learning experiences in their program. Wayne State University Profile Wayne State University is Michigan's only urban research university, located in the heart of Detroit's University Cul- tural Center. The Wayne State University School of Library and Information Sci- ence (SLIS) enrolls approximately 600 students. The School offers certificates in traditional areas of librarianship including public, academic, school, and archives. Recently, the School established a cer- tificate in urban librarianship, as part of a broader mission of WSU and the school to play a role in the revitalization of Detroit. The urban library certificate can assist this goal by preparing library and information professionals who understand and can ef- fectively serve the literacy needs of the culturally diverse communities in and be- yond Detroit. Syracuse University Profile Syracuse University is a large, private university located in central New York State. In addition to offering a bachelor's degree in Information Management and Table 1 : Comparison of Survey Instruments. LibQUAL+® Instrument Cultural Competence Instrument Measures library users' perceptions and expecta- Measures library students' perceptions, learning tions of library service quality expectations, and actual learning experiences around cultural competence Employs a gap analysis technique Employs a gap analysis technique Uses a Likert-Scale Measurement Uses a Likert- Scale Measurement Nationally-normed based on data compiled from Pilot study based on data from two institutions over 10, 000 respondents from multiple libraries totaling less than 200 respondents combined. Allows for peer comparisons about library service Allows for single-institution benchmarking helping being provided nationally establish goals and direction for curriculum development.
256 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE Technology, its School of Information Studies (iSchool) enrolls approximately 650 master's students in its Library and Information Science program (which in- cludes the option for a School Media spe- cialization). Students earning master's degrees in LIS are exposed to coursework and experiential learning that emphasiz- es information provision to diverse user groups. Data Analysis Determining the Gaps Building on the LibQUAL+® instru- ment and analytical framework, the gap scores for this study are calculated using a formula that calculates the difference between prior knowledge and knowledge/ experience gained and between the impor- tance of learning and knowledge/experi- ence gained responses. We focused our preliminary analysis on the scores from the former formula, which yielded what we have termed knowledge gaps. A knowledge gap is an indicator of the extent to which faculty are teaching stu- dents more than they already know about a given aspect of cultural competence. It is calculated by subtracting the "prior knowl- edge" score from the "knowledge gained" score on any given question for each stu- dent respondent. A negative knowledge gap score indicates that students perceive that the amount of knowledge they've gained is below their prior knowledge on a given aspect of cultural competence. Study participants were instructed to rank their responses using a seven point Likert scale where one indicated no/low knowledge or level of importance; four indicated moderate level of knowledge or importance; seven indicated high level of prior or gained knowledge or importance of learning a particular aspect of cultural competence. It is important to note that the knowledge gaps were calculated us- ing the mode, or highest frequency, of a Likert scale number reported for each item by the largest number of students. This approach gave us the opportunity to look at overarching trends across the students' responses as a preliminary analysis rather than attempt to interpret individual scores for each item. Consequently, we used the highest frequency of students who indi- cated the same Likert score (e.g. 7) to cal- culate the knowledge gaps. This paper dis- cusses the knowledge gaps that students reported for the education section of the questionnaire. Findings and Discussion Participant Demographics A total of 672 students were determined eligible to participate in the survey at both institutions and were sent links to the on- line questionnaire; 151 students submitted questionnaires' yielding a response rate of 22%. Approximately 84% of the respondents were female and 15% percent were male; two respondents (representing less than two percent of all participants) chose not to answer this item. In terms of race/eth- nicity, about 84% of the respondents iden- tified as White, 8.5% as African Ameri- can, and 0.5% as Asian/Pacific Islander, American Indian or Alaskan Native. The remaining participants either chose not to reveal their ethnic background or chose the option "Other." Summary of Responses The survey instrument was designed to allow respondents to reflect on the depth of their self-awareness, education (or knowledge), and personal interactions before and after entering an LIS master's program. Specifically, students were asked to respond to items with respect to ( 1 ) how much they knew about specific cultural 'Because of Institutional Review Board mandates at both universi- ties to include "opt-out" language for participants, the researchers accepted and analyzed questionnaires in which respondents did not answer all items; this resulted in variances in the number of responses for each questionnaire section.
Are We There Yet? 257 competence elements before entering their LIS program, (2) how important it was for them to learn about certain aspects of cultural competence during their LIS pro- grams, and (3) the knowledge they gained through their LIS coursework that would allow them to be culturally competent li- brary practitioners. The education section of the question- naire contains items that present students with a range of concepts related to the provision of culturally responsive library service to which they may have been ex- posed in their LIS programs. We focus our analysis on this section of the survey questionnaire because doing so is most in- structive for the kind of content that LIS educators could or should incorporate into the curriculum. Knowledge Gaps Knowledge gaps were determined by calculating the frequency scores in the specified questionnaire area. As men- tioned previously, a knowledge gap is a measure of how students compare what they knew about specific cultural compe- tence concepts before entering their LIS program with their knowledge level at the time they completed the survey after hav- ing been exposed to multiple semesters of coursework. Scores of 0 to 7 indicate that knowledge level remained the same or in- creased. Scores of -1 to -7 indicate that a student's prior knowledge or experience exceeded what they had actually learned in their coursework. Table 2 provides a representation of the data for the knowl- Table 2: Knowledge Gaps Gap Scores for Cultural Competence: Education Area. Knowledge Prior Gained (KG) Knowledge ( PK) Level Chosen Level Chosen Gap = Topic/Item no. Most Frequently Most Frequently KG - PK EDUCATION Item 1 - Understanding of the term 'literacy' includ- 4 4 0 ing cognitive and socio-cultural perspec- tives. Item 2 - Knowledge of the cultural differences 3 4-1 among ethnic populations in the U.S. Item 3 - Familiarity with the history of library service 4 1 3 to individuals from various cultures. Item 4* - Recognition of how individuals from vari- 4 1/3 3/1 ous cultures access information. Item 5 - Recognition of barriers to information ac- 4 4 0 cess and use that may exist for individuals from various cultures. Item 6 - Collection development strategies that 5 1 4 reflect the information wants and needs of individuals from various cultures. Item 7 - Recognition of the role libraries play in 4 4 0 providing outreach and specialized services to various cultural groups in the U.S. Item 8 - Considering the impact that recruiting 5 1 4 library professionals from various cultural backgrounds has on library service. •Indicates items that resulted in a mode of more than one number.
258 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE edge gaps for the Education section of the questionnaire. This section of the survey includes eight items that contain statements, which students rated according to their prior knowledge, the importance of learning the concept presented, and the knowledge they gained about the concept through their courses. The knowledge gaps in the area of education had a range of variance. In examining the knowledge gaps for education, students rated their prior knowl- edge of the concepts in the education sec- tion between low (a score of 1) to moder- ate (a score of 4) on the Likert scale. These relatively low to average self-ratings are understandable when one considers that the respondents were all matriculating in LIS programs in which they presumably enrolled in order to become introduced to or better educated about library issues. To further explain the knowledge gaps in this section, it is helpful to group the scores and examine them by the statements in each item. No or Low Knowledge Gain The one item that resulted in the major- ity of respondents rating their prior knowl- edge as superior to what they were taught was item 2. This item instructed partici- pants to reflect on their "knowledge of the cultural differences among ethnic popula- tions in the U.S." Even though the major- ity of students (n = 45) rated their prior knowledge as moderate (a score of 4), they rated what they learned in their courses as slightly less than moderate (a score of 3) resulting in a gap score of -1. In this in- stance, students did not have exposure to this particular concept to the extent that it increased their knowledge level. The items with statements for which the majority of respondents indicated that they had the same amount of knowledge before and after entering an LIS program were items 1, 5, and 7 respectively: • Understanding of the term 'literacy' including cognitive and socio-cultural perspectives; • Recognition of barriers to information access and use that may exist for indi- viduals from various cultures; and • Recognition of the role libraries play in providing outreach and specialized services to various cultural groups in the U.S. In all three items, the majority of stu- dents (n = 44, 47, and 33 respectively) rat- ed themselves as having a moderate level of prior knowledge (a score of 4) and also determined that they had exactly the same level of knowledge following the course- work they had completed at the time they participated in the survey, resulting in a knowledge gap score of 0. Knowledge Increase Two items (6 and 8) called for respon- dents to consider their level of knowledge about • Collection development strategies that reflect the information wants and needs of individuals from various cultures and • Considering the impact that recruit- ing library professionals from various cultural backgrounds has on library service. For these items, respondents (n = 37 and 39) most frequently rated their prior knowledge level as low (a score of 1 ) and the knowledge they gained as just above moderate (a score of 5). Items 3 and 4 which asked respondents to rate their • Familiarity with the history of library service to individuals from various cultures • Recognition of how individuals from various cultures access information. Students most frequently rated their prior knowledge level for item 3 as low (a score of 1 ) and the knowledge they gained as moderate (a score of 4) resulting in gap
Are We There Yet? 259 scores of 3, or slightly less than moder- ate. The frequency scores for prior knowl- edge were tied in item 3 with the same number of respondents indicating a prior knowledge ranking of 1 in the education section (n = 38) as those who rated their prior knowledge as just below moderate (a score of 3). To contextualize the overall picture presented by the scores discussed above, it is important to note that the majority of the study participants rated each of the items in the education section as highly important to learn (a score of 7). Thus, it is concerning that the highest knowledge gap score that was received for this sec- tion was 4 (moderate) and that in many instances students' coursework and class interactions did not help them to learn more or was less than what they already had been exposed to. While course objectives and instruc- tors vary widely, it is not unreasonable to expect that students will learn a great deal more than they knew when they en- tered the class. No amount of coursework can substitute for actual experience, but it is the theoretical knowledge delivered via classroom interactions that help to prepare students to become competent practitio- ners ready to serve patrons with varying information needs. Recommendations for Future Research and Action This pilot test represents a first step in creating an instrument that effectively as- sesses LIS students' cultural competence levels. The data collection process and study findings point to several areas for additional research and action. Future re- search possibilities include: 1 . Testing the validity of the cultural com- petence data collection instrument by conducting ancillary analyses of the existing data set including tests for ran- dom responding, degrees of aberrance, and overall integrity of the data. 2. Conducting the survey at more ALA- accredited institutions once the data collection instrument has been validat- ed and refined. 3. Conducting an analysis of standard deviations for the responses across all three areas of the survey. The re- sults would help paint a picture of the intra-individual response variability. Relatively small differences would help identify the standard deviations for the three sets of ratings for the aggregate dataset. 4. Surveying library employers to exam- ine their satisfaction with the level of cultural competence their employees have upon entiy into the field. Potential actions that might be taken as a result of the research: 1. LIS program administrators could cre- ate a curriculum map that consists of the 1 6 items on the survey instrument. Doing so will serve as a guide to help instructors effectively insert cultural competence concepts into their courses. 2. LIS faculty and administrators can create a correlational document that contains cultural competence learning outcomes for all classes in the MLIS degree. 3. LIS programs can use findings to craft certificate programs that focus on cul- tural competence education. Conclusion LIS programs share a common goal of educating information professionals who are equipped to serve patrons from a variety of educational, social, ethnic backgrounds. This pilot study helped to uncover how prepared two groups of LIS students feel they are being equipped to deliver the kind of culturally responsive li- brary services that faculty, employers, and community stakeholders desire. The results of this study suggest that
260 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE there is a need to better infuse cultural competence learning objectives into the LIS curriculum. While students reported experiencing some minimal increases in their knowledge about various areas of cultural competence, this study clearly showed faculty and students would benefit from having a more deliberate and stream- lined set of cultural competence curricu- lum standards so that student learning out- comes can improve and be measured more concretely. A beginning step toward this end might be for LIS faculty and adminis- tration to have preliminary conversations about how well they think their programs are currently teaching the cultural com- petence concepts presented in this study. Such conversations can lead to the kind of strategic planning and curriculum align- ment that would help push cultural compe- tence education beyond rhetoric and into action. Acknowledgements The authors wish to thank Scout Cal- vert, Delicia Greene, Marcele Haddix, Paul Jaeger, William Walker, and Dian Walster for their assistance and thought- ful critique. A special thank also goes to John Henrichs and Paul Beavers for their guidance in helping with the statistical and conceptual aspects of the gap analysis technique that was employed in this study. References Abdullahi, I. (2007). Diversity and intercultural is- sues in library and information science (LIS) edu- cation. New Library World, 1 08(91X0), 453-459. Balderrama, S. S. R. (2000). This trend called diver- sity. Library trends, 49( 1), 194-214. Brathwaite, A.C. & Majumdar, B. (2006). Evalu- ation of a cultural competence educational pro- gramme. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 55(4), 470-479. Crossno, J.E., Berkins, B., Gotcher, N., Hill, J.L., McConoughey, M., & Walters, M. (2001). As- sessment of customer service in academic health care libraries (ACSAHL): an instrument for mea- suring customer service. Bull Med Libr Assoc, 89( 2), 170-176. Cook, C., Heath, F., & Thompson, B. (2001). The search for new measures: The ARL LibQUAL+ project: Preliminary report. Libraries and the Academy, /(l), 103-112. Eldredge, J. (2004). Inventory of research methods for librarianship and informatics. Journal of the Medical Library Association, 92(1), 83-90. Gorman, M. (2004). What ails library education? Journal of Academic Librarianship, 30(2), 99- 101. Haviland, V. (2008). "Things Get Glossed Over": Rearticulating the silencing power of whiteness in education. Journal of Teacher Education, 59(1), 40-54. Henninger, E., & Hurlbert, J. M. (2006). Using the seven principles for good practices in undergrad- uate education: A framework for teaching cultur- al diversity in a management course. Journal of Business & Finance Librarianship, 12(2), 3-15. Honma, T. (2005). Trippin' over the color line: The invisibility of race in library and information studies. InterActions: UCLA Journal of Educa- tion and Information Studies, 1(2), 1-28. Jaeger, P, & Franklin, R. (2007). The virtuous circle: Increasing diversity in library faculties to create more inclusive library services and out- reach. Education Libraries, 30( 1 ) 20-26. Kapitzke, C. (2003). Information literacy: A posi- tivist epistemology and a politics of outforma- tion. Educational Theory, 53(1), 37-52. Kim, K., & Sin, S. (2008). Increasing ethnic diver- sity in LIS: Strategies suggested by librarians of color. Library Quarterly, 78(2), 153-177. Lance, K. C. (2005). Racial and ethnic diversity of U.S. library workers. American Libraries, 36(5): 41-43. Overall, P.M. (2010). The effect of service learn- ing on LIS students' understanding of diversity issues related to equity of access. Journal of Education for Library and Information Science, 5/(4), 251-66. Overall, P.M. (2009). Cultural competence: A con- ceptual framework for library and information science professionals. Library Quarterly, 79(2), 175-204. Pawley, C. (2006). Unequal legacies: Race and multiculturalism in the LIS curriculum. Library Quarterly, 76, 149-168. Thompson, B., Cook, C., & Heath, F. (2000). The LibQUAL+ gap measurement model: the bad, the ugly and the good of gap measurement. Perfor- mance Measurement and Metrics, 1(3), 165-178. Winston M., & Walstad, K. (2006). Recruitment and diversity: A research study of bilingualism and library services. Library & Information Sci- ence Research, 28, 390-406.
Are We There Yet? 261 APPENDIX A: Cultural Competence Survey Items Explanation: Please note that the term "culture" (and variations of the term) is used throughout the questionnaire. For the purposes of this study, culture is defined as "The belief systems and value orientations held by various individuals that influence customs, norms, practices, and social in- stitutions." This survey is being conducted to col- lect your personal opinions related to is- sues of culture; there are no right or wrong answers. Section I. SELF AWARENESS This section of the questionnaire con- tains items related to your level of per- sonal awareness about general cultural issues. Please read each statement below then select a number in EACH column. (1) In the first column, select the number that best describes your level of knowledge, understanding, and/or experience PRIOR to beginning the LIS program. (2) In the second column select the number that best describes the level of IMPORTANCE that you assign to developing knowledge, understanding, and/or experience in this area through your LIS education. (3) In the third column, select the number that best describes the level of knowledge, un- derstanding, and/or experience you have GAINED as a result of being enrolled in LIS courses. Importance of Prior Knowledge Learning Knowledge Gained 1 Awareness of ways that my culture has 1 (No or low level) 1 (No or low level) 1 (No or low level) shaped my life. 2 2 2 3 3 3 4 (Moderate level) 4 (Moderate level) 4 (Moderate level) 5 5 5 6 6 6 7 (High level) 7 (High level) 7 (High level) 2 Awareness of cultural differences that 1 (No or low level) 1 (No or low level) 1 (No or low level) may exist between myself and others. 2 2 2 3 3 3 4 (Moderate level) 4 (Moderate level) 4 (Moderate level) 5 5 5 6 6 6 7 (High level) 7 (High level) 7 (High level) 3 Awareness of ways that my cultural 1 (No or low level) 1 (No or low level) 1 (No or low level) beliefs impact my understanding of 2 2 2 individuals from other cultures. 3 3 3 4 (Moderate level) 4 (Moderate level) 4 (Moderate level) 5 5 5 6 6 6 7 (High level) 7 (High level) 7 (High level) 4 Awareness of ways to provide library 1 (No or low level) 1 (No or low level) 1 (No or low level) service to patrons from various cultural 2 2 2 backgrounds (for example race, eth- 3 3 3 nicity, socioeconomic status, and/or 4 (Moderate level) 4 (Moderate level) 4 (Moderate level) sexual orientation). 5 5 5 6 6 6
262 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE Section II. EDUCATION This section of the questionnaire con- tains items that ask you to indicate your level of understanding about terms and concepts related to providing service to patrons of various cultural backgrounds. Please read each statement below then select a number in EACH column. (1) In the first column, select the number that best describes your level of knowledge, understanding, and/or experience PRIOR to beginning the LIS program. (2) In the second column select the number that best describes the level of IMPORTANCE that you assign to developing knowledge, un- derstanding, and/or experience in this area through your LIS education. (3) In the third column, select the number that best de- scribes the level of knowledge, understand- ing, and/or experience you have GAINED as a result of being enrolled in LIS courses. Importance of Prior Knowledge Learning Knowledge Gained 1 Understanding of the term 'literacy' 1 (No or low level) 1 (No or low level) 1 (No or low level) including cognitive and sociocultural 2 2 2 perspectives. 3 3 3 4 (Moderate level) 4 (Moderate level) 4 (Moderate level) 5 5 5 6 6 6 7 (High level) 7 (High level) 7 (High level) 2 Knowledge of the cultural differences 1 (No or low level) 1 (No or low level) 1 (No or low level) among ethnic populations in the U.S. 2 2 2 3 3 3 4 (Moderate level) 4 (Moderate level) 4 (Moderate level) 5 5 5 6 6 6 7 (High level) 7 (High level) 7 (High level) 3 Familiarity with the history of library 1 (No or low level) 1 (No or low level) 1 (No or low level) service to individuals from various 2 2 2 cultures. 3 3 3 4 (Moderate level) 4 (Moderate level) 4 (Moderate level) 5 5 5 6 6 6 7 (High level) 7 (High level) 7 (High level) 4 Recognition of how individuals from 1 (No or low level) 1 (No or low level) 1 (No or low level) various cultures access information. 2 2 2 3 3 3 4 (Moderate level) 4 (Moderate level) 4 (Moderate level) 5 5 5 6 6 6 7 (High level) 7 (High level) 7 (High level) 5 Recognition of barriers to information 1 (No or low level) 1 (No or low level) 1 (No or low level) access and use that may exist for indi- 2 2 2 vidua Is from various cultures. 3 3 3 4 (Moderate level) 4 (Moderate level) 4 (Moderate level) 5 5 5 6 6 6 7 (High level) 7 (High level) 7 (High level)
Are We There Yet? 263 Importance of Prior Knowledge Learning Knowledge Gained 6 Collection development strategies 1 (No or low level) 1 (No or low level) 1 (No or low level) that reflect the information wants and 2 2 2 needs of individuals from various 3 3 3 cultures 4 (Moderate level) 4 (Moderate level) 4 (Moderate level) 5 5 5 6 6 6 7 (High level) 7 (High level) 7 (High level) 7 Recognition of the role libraries play 1 (No or low level) 1 (No or low level) 1 (No or low level) in providing outreach and specialized 2 2 2 services to various cultural groups in 3 3 3 the y 5 4 (Moderate level) 4 (Moderate level) 4 (Moderate level) 5 5 5 6 6 6 7 (High level) 7 (High level) 7 (High level) 8 Considering the impact that recruit- 1 (No or low level) 1 (No or low level) 1 (No or low level) ing library professionals from various 2 2 2 cultural backgrounds has on library 3 3 3 service 4 (Moderate level) 4 (Moderate level) 4 (Moderate level) 5 5 5 6 6 6 7 (High level) 7 (High level) 7 (High level) Section III. INTERACTIONS This final section of the questionnaire contains items that ask you to indicate your level of personal interaction regarding indi- viduals from various cultural backgrounds. Please read each statement below then select a number in EACH column. (1) In the first column, select the number that best describes your level of knowledge, understanding, and/or experience PRIOR to beginning the LIS program. (2) In the second column select the number that best describes the level of IMPORTANCE that you assign to developing knowledge, understanding, and/or experience in this area through your LIS education. (3) In the third column, select the number that best describes the level of knowledge, un- derstanding, and/or experience you have GAINED as a result of being enrolled in LIS courses. Importance of Prior Knowledge Learning Knowledge Gained 1 Having personal interactions with 1 (No or low level) 1 (No or low level) 1 (No or low level) individuals from various cultural back- 2 2 2 grounds. 3 3 3 4 (Moderate level) 4 (Moderate level) 4 (Moderate level) 5 5 5 6 6 6 7 (High level) 7 (High level) 7 (High level) 2 Visiting libraries that are patronized 1 (No or low level) 1 (No or low level) 1 (No or low level) by users from a variety of cultural 2 2 2 backgrounds. 3 3 3 4 (Moderate level) 4 (Moderate level) 4 (Moderate level) 5 5 5 6 6 6 7 (High level) 7 (High level) 7 (High level)
264 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE Importance of Prior Knowledge Learning Knowledge Gained 3 Collaborating with others to de- 1 (No or low level) 1 (No or low level) 1 (No or low level) velop library services, programs, and 2 2 2 outreach efforts for individuals from 3 3 3 various cultural backgrounds. ^ (Moderate level) 4 (Moderate level) 4 (Moderate level) 6 6 6 7 (High level) 7 (High level) 7 (High level) 4 Knowledge of professional devel- 1 (No or low level) 1 (No or low level) 1 (No or low level) opment events designed to share 2 2 2 information about various aspects of 3 3 3 culture 4 (Moderate level) 4 (Moderate level) 4 (Moderate level) 5 5 5 6 6 6 7 (High level) 7 (High level) 7 (High level) Section IV. OPTIONAL COMMENTS Please use the area below to include comments about the survey questionnaire and/or the survey topic.