Popular Culture Studies and Library Education GORDON STEVENSON A COURSE in popular culture was offered at the School of Library and Information Science, State University of New York at Albany, for the first time in the summer of 1972. The course provided an unusual opportunity to explore certain dimensions of communica- tions processes, librarianship, and the cultural environment of libraries which, though not necessarily new to the curriculum, needed a sharper focus. After several experimental versions, Lib. 617: Popular Culture and the Library was added to the curriculum as a regular elective course. In the school's printed catalog, it is described as follows: "Lib. 617. The nature and social functions of the contemporary popular culture as disseminated by the mass media; the relationship between the popular culture and the library. Bibliographic sources, selection and acquisition problems." 1 Among other things, the course asks students to seriously consider the proposition that the information transmitted by such popular cul- ture figures as Rod McKuen, Aretha Franklin, the Beatles, Tarzan (and Jane), Archie Bunker and Georgette Heyer is as important as the information which flows through channels serving scientists and scholars. Some of my colleagues have responded to this suggestion with interest and sympathy, others with bemused silence or stunned incredulity. The following account of some of the thinking that went into the course at Albany will try to demonstrate that popular culture is a profoundly significant part of the total informational environment in which we all live and work, and that a study of popular culture can Stevenson is Associate Professor, School of Library and Information Science, State Univerity of New York, Albany. 235
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP provide a useful framework for a consideration of several important issues relating to the social functions of libraries. The Popular Culture Studies Movement. It is not likely that it would have occurred to anyone to offer a library school course in popular culture if there had not already been a widespread and vigor- ous attempt within higher education to establish popular culture studies as a clearly defined and legitimate area of academic research and teaching. This movement, which has been gathering momentum for the past ten years, was not mentioned in the professional library literature until J. A. Clarke published his article in 1973.2 Although a certain legitimacy has been achieved, and scholars of considerable academic standing are contributing to the field, popular culture is still not entirely respectable in all quarters of higher education. Nor is it yet a clearly defined discipline. However, it continues to have a tremendous vitality, and its recent progress has been spectacular. An examination of a back run of the Journal of Popular Culture and programs of the annual meetings of the Popular Culture Associa- tion will show that the study of popular culture today is a vast, sprawling movement going in many different directions and originat- ing in other disciplines as diverse as literature, American studies, sociology, journalism, economics, and architecture. It has established at least a modest foothold at all levels of education from high school to postgraduate studies. The need for educational innovation and change accounts at least in part for the interest generated by the study of popular culture. It deals with lively and pertinent topics which in one way or another are intimately related to each student's experience of the world in which he lives. What is most intriguing about the current popular culture studies movement is the approach to the materials. For the most part, the approach is non-critical, as opposed to the value-laden approach char- acteristic of earlier academic encounters with current popular culture. Unencumbered by an aesthetics of popular culture, research centers on its historical, structural, functional, and behavioral dimensions. One of several concerns of popular culture studies is the use of mes- sages, artifacts, and rituals in the communication of culture. The messages relate to the structure of such institutions as family life and religion, to political ideologies and myths, and to personal value sys- tems. The artifacts are as diverse as comic books, Coke bottles, and sound recordings. The rituals are as mundane as watching television or going to a movie or to a shopping center. 236
Popular Culture Studies The Course at Albany. There are many ways of studying popular culture and many reasons for studying it. Obviously, not all of these are relevant to education for librarianship. The following description, drawn from one of several handouts distributed to students prior to registration, outlines the general approach to these issues at Albany: Popular Culture. The purpose of this course is to examine the social func- tions and meaning of popular culture {i.e., the meaning of the message in such diverse popular forms of communication as gothic novels, comic books, TV, advertisements, and the other junk that clutters up our lives). We will look for broad fundamental principles in a few selected examples. First we will make a quick survey of the material by media: print (gothics, SF, west- erns, and crime), sound recordings (C&W, blues, rock), pop magazines (such as My True Story and the like), etc. Then we will pick a few basic themes that cut across all or most media, themes such as: women in popular culture, religion, and the alienated hero. We will be interested in images, life styles, role models, values and ideologies which are presented in popular culture. We will touch only briefly on aesthetic and technical aspects of the pop arts. Students will be expected to read, watch, and listen to examples of popular culture, think about it and analyse it, and take part vigorously in class discussions. In so far as possible, we will study the bibliographical control of the ma- terial in each area, with suggestions for collection building, etc. However, the central point is whether or not libraries should assemble, organize, and disseminate popular culture materials. The course will not aim at a con- sensus in answering this question, but each student is expected to defend his own conclusions.3 This is a reasonably accurate description of the external framework of the course and its purpose as conceived by the instructor and students. There is, however, a hidden agenda and other unstated aims which are somewhat more subtle than is evident from this description. Assumptions. The basic assumption of the course is that popular culture is a series of communications systems and that these systems play an important role in the organization and structure of political, cultural, and economic institutions which control society. An analysis based on traditional academic critical techniques labels most popular culture as "trash," and dismisses it as irrelevant. Trash it may very well be, but irrelevant it is not. "Bonanza" and "The F.B.I/' are morality plays, the Super Bowl is a ritual celebrating the fundamental beliefs and ideals of democracy, and popular song lyrics provide the 237
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP young with images and role models from which they construct their fictional selves. Another assumption of the course questions widely-held beliefs about the social significance of the production, distribution, and con- sumption of knowledge in the United States. Here we are dealing with sacrosanct assumptions that have influenced library education for more than a decade. The course explores the hypothesis that, contrary to what we have been led to believe, modern, industrialized, urban socie- ties (at least as they are presently constituted) require not more and more information of most of their individual members, but less and less information. This hypothesis draws in part on ideas such as those articulated by C. W. Mills4 in his analysis of mass society and by H. I. Schiller5 in his study of the relationship between private enter- prise and the mass media. The implications of this hypothesis go far beyond the immediate issue of the functions of popular culture. It raises such questions as these: How much information does a person need to function in modern society? How are needs created? What types of information are needed? What conflicts emerge from a lack of congruence between needs as conceived by the individual and as established by social custom and tradition? How is information ac- quired? How is it generated and diffused? We have to assume that much popular culture is the most subtle form of propaganda (in Jacques Ellul's definition of that term6) . The mass media systems to which most people are exposed provide care- fully structured messages, all of which are of cultural significance and most of which are directly or indirectly related to the economic system. The purpose of these messages is to control behavior, and in toto they constitute a pervasive informational environment from which escape is next to impossible. It is an area full of paradoxes. For example: messages designed for one purpose (e.g., to assemble an audience to advertise a product) may have certain non-economic externalities which are socially undesirable (e.g., crime, alienation, violence) ; mes- sages heretofore thought to be harmless escape mechanisms (e.g., gothic novels) may in fact be symbolic affirmations of current social roles and structures. The ultimate impact of mass-produced popular culture on the qual- ity of life in the United States is not known. The idea that there is even a connection between the two is relatively new. When social indicators were first introduced, social scientists developed measure- ment tools which could conceivably give high positive ratings to a 238
Popular Culture Studies society which at the same time could be a living nightmare. A some- what more humanistic way of measuring the quality of life is emerg- ing from the development of cultural indicators. In studying television programs as a demonstration case for the source of such indicators, George Gerbner wrote: "we know next to nothing about the trends in the composition of mass-produced message systems that govern men's lives and inform men's minds in urbanized societies/' 7 Gerbner is interested in studying the "prevailing symbolic environment." And this is the crossroads where popular culture studies, mass communi- cations research, sociology, librarianship, and other disciplines meet in the common enterprise of trying to understand how information flows through society, what factors shape this flow, and how it inter- acts with individuals and institutions. Information Needs. The symbolic environment, particularly as per- petuated in the popular culture of the mass media, is a major factor - though certainly not the only factor - in shaping the structure of information needs as conceived by the individual in the social milieu. Both the terms "information" and "needs" have to be defined within the context of popular culture The first term, information, really defies definition and we can only construct tentative working definitions appropriate for specific contexts. For the purpose of a study of popular culture, it seems useful to begin by defining information in terms of how and why people use it, rather than by objective categorizations based on content. Of course, sooner or later, content has to be catego- rized and techniques of content analysis must be used. Hard or factual information is not a problem. But most popular culture does not deal with hard or factual information (though it may appear to do so), and we have to assume that most of it has a second level significance. It is at this second level that basic human drives and fears can be exploited, created, or manipulated. One of the most overworked clichés of librarianship is the state- ment that libraries exist "to serve the needs" of users. This is not the place to examine the full ramifications of this statement. However, it is clear that we have to consider who is defining these needs, and make a distinction between the librarian's definition of needs and the needs of individuals as evidenced in their behavior - that is, in their own selection and use of information sources. This is not to say that librarians can not or should not make subjective judgments about what they think the needs of people should be. But this is another matter. I am only saying that popular culture, no matter how debased or 239
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP corrupt we may think it is, does indeed fulfill some needs of those who consume it. Specific Goals. There are a number of legitimate goals which could be established for a library-oriented course in popular culture. One could, for example, think of it as an Alternate or Counter Humanities Literature course with goals comparable to those of traditional hu- manities literature courses, but dealing with popular materials. In part, the course at Albany uses this approach. However, the important issues deal with students' attitudes towards the materials and the people who use the materials. The goals of the Albany course are: (1) to force students to look objectively at their own popular culture milieu, examine how they have used popular culture, and try to determine how it has affected them; (2) to understand something of the nature of public communica- tions in relationship to democratic myths and values, and from a study of popular culture draw inferences about the nature of these beliefs and values; (3) to develop approaches to other systems of popular culture, particularly those of minority groups, with a view to understanding what values and life-styles they mirror; (4) to develop criteria for determining the relationship between libraries and popular culture materials. Central to several of these goals has to be an attempt to convince students that their perception of the good and the beautiful is en- tirely a product of factors in their own lives. The students are them- selves products of as much as 20 years of concentrated exposure to popular culture disseminated through the mass media. For them to study this phenomenon objectively creates tremendous problems. Students who, for example, "like" to read science fiction usually be- lieve that gothic novels and western pulp fiction are quite inane. Their assumption is that they themselves have made some sort of rational choice in preferring the one genre over the others; they would attrib- ute this to what B. F. Skinner has identified as the "autonomous man." 8 The assumption of Skinner and of the course is that the autonomous man is a self-delusion. In teaching the course, I assume that my students, for the most part, do not know in any rational sense the very culture in which they are immersed and which has played a part in shaping their own individual images of themselves and the world in which they live. The popular culture process is a subtle play 240
Popular Culture Studies of symbols and meanings which are experienced. One does not think about popular culture, one responds to it, and in the process behavior is reinforced and values strengthened. I assume that my students are products of informational environ- ments over which they have had little or no control, and that most of their education, both formal and informal, has been advertising or propaganda pure and simple. I assume that what they are and what they conceive themselves to be are largely fictions, fabrications con- structed from a vast array of message systems to which they have been exposed. Whether or not one agrees with this - and my own experience in teaching lends credence to Skinner's behaviorism - it is a useful stance to take in encouraging students to consider their future roles. They need to think about where they, as unique individuals, fit into an information transfer process that involves the cultural milieu of libraries, the structure of the world as experienced by a variety of potential library users, and the library as a socio-political institution. I suggest to students that they seriously consider the possibility that in the real world no one cares one way or another what they happen to personally like or dislike except to the extent that their values facili- tate or inhibit communication. Foundations. Popular culture message systems have to be considered within the framework of several conceptual models. One way or another, some of the basic concepts outlined in standard texts (e.g., Berlo9 or Lin10) must be known to students. J. H. Shera's work11 provides a fine foundation with the added advantages of the author's bibliographical perspective and searching discussions of information, culture, and libraries. But what is done here and how it is done obviously depends on the nature of a school's required courses and what is taught in other communications courses to which students have access. At the library school in Albany, for the past several years, the same instructor has taught both the popular culture course and a course called The Communications Process, thus permitting a nice alignment of two approaches to public communications systems. Ideally, the course in the communications process would be a pre- requisite for the popular culture course, but this is not possible. And since both courses are electives, it is necessary to examine some funda- mental principles in both courses, while at the same time keeping duplication to a minimum. The general communications course is described in the school's catalog as follows: "Lib. 613. The Communi- cations Process. Study of several models and points of view of com- 241
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP munications; agencies engaged in the production and distribution of knowledge; comparison of media; analysis of content; characteristics of audiences; effects of exposure. Emphasis on the role of reading and libraries in the communication complex, and the problems of intellectual freedom." 12 This is essentially correct except that the emphasis is not on reading. This course emphasizes theory and deals in some detail with mass communications with a more-or-less traditional approach. As William Stephenson has pointed out: "from its beginning, in 1924, mass com- munication theory has concerned itself primarily with how the mass media influence attitudes, beliefs, and actions of people" 13 But a clear distinction was made between types of messages studied. As E. Katz and D. Foulkes wrote: "It is a most intriguing fact in the intel- lectual history of social research that the choice was made to study media as agents of persuasion rather than entertainment," 14 thus eliminating most popular culture from mass communications research. This dichotomy, apparently deeply ingrained in academic tradition, is obviously false, or misleading at best, and would not stand up under close scrutiny. In any case, a course in popular culture communications systems could deal with the material identified by Katz and Foulkes as "entertainment" and still be firmly based on the general principles that currently are used in mass communications studies. Practical Matters of Teaching. As A. A. Berger has pointed out: "There are two basic methods of studying popular culture: you can see what others have written about it or you can analyze it yourself." 15 And R. S. Denisoff wrote that "popular culture can and should be approached in many different ways. There is no one technique which is notably superior to another." 16 Yet, the special aims of library edu- cation and the general characteristics of students currently attracted to library schools can obviously provide a general framework for establishing appropriate approaches to the material. At a fairly superficial and practical level, we can identify certain traditional functions of libraries which require types of knowledge and skills related to the work of collecting, organizing and disseminat- ing knowledge: familiarity with basic reference sources, experience with current and retrospective bibliographical tools, techniques of collection building, problems of organization, and knowledge of user characteristics. I have to assume that students have already acquired or will soon acquire skills and knowledge in other courses which will provide approaches to these problems as they relate to popular culture. 242
Popular Culture Studies On the other hand, I have discovered that the students' goals in taking the course are sometimes different from my goals in teaching the course. Their goals are practical and pragmatic. Some attention to the practical dimensions of popular culture helps to counterbalance what they take to be an overemphasis on its theoretical dimensions. Without wanting to suggest that I have found solutions to the more difficult problems of teaching the course or that procedures which work for me will work for other instructors, I will briefly com- ment on my own approach and some of the problems which I have had in trying to achieve my goals. I have used as a textbook Russell Nye's The Unembarrassed Muse,11 and required that students read about two-thirds of it, omitting sections on young adult literature and types of popular culture which are clearly beyond the purview of the library. It is not always possible to coordinate the Nye readings with my lectures. In any case, Nye's historical and descriptive approach is intended as background reading and we seldom discuss it in class. After introductory lectures devoted to defining the field and the purpose of the course, I try to demonstrate how values and beliefs are manifested in popular culture. Then, in so far as possible, each example of popular culture which we subsequently examine is considered from the point of view of values. Whatever unity the course has emerges from the continual reference to value systems. Early in the course, I have asked students to read one gothic novel, analyzing it from the point of view of Joanna Russ' study of gothics,18 and two novels each from the genres of the western, science fiction, and crime, in each case using analytical reference points drawn from the literature about popular fiction. I have had a unit on popular magazines and required that students make an analytical study of one of the popular supermarket or drugstore type of magazines. This involves some preliminary discussion of advertising, and for this there is a considerable amount of good background material. (I have used required readings by Berger19 and B. H. Nelson20.) In the earlier versions of the course, I tried to avoid placing any special emphasis on one area in which I have had a long-standing interest: recorded music. However, I am now convinced that, given the proper theoretical underpinnings and a solid conceptual frame- work, the fundamental aims of the course can be achieved with any one of a variety of different approaches in regard to the choice of material: (1) a heavy emphasis on a limited number of media, (2) 243
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP a concentration on the messages disseminated by one medium (e.g., recorded sound or print), (3) no emphasis on any specific medium, but with a strictly thematic approach. By "thematic approach" I mean the identification of some rather specific topics or perspectives fol- lowed by the analysis of a variety of popular culture artifacts from different media. A few such themes are: the role of women (e.g., in the gothic novel, in country and western music, in television soap operas, in advertising, eie.) ; the concept of authority; crime, criminals, and victims; the nature of work in society; romantic love; and the nature of success. The thematic approach has much to recommend it, and I have never considered the approach by media to be anything more than an expedient. However, I am reluctant to abandon a media perspective entirely because there is so much that students need to know about media processes. They need to consider the complex relationship be- tween media and content and the extent to which each specific medium imposes its own laws on the nature of content and the extent to which each has its own system of interacting with the human mind. Another advantage of the media approach is the opportunity to examine the specific economic backgrounds of the different media - that is, the peculiar chemistry of economic processes that in the end accounts for what messages are actually produced and disseminated. This, it seems to me, is extremely important, for the competitive marketing system which influences production may have cultural spinoffs which are completely antithetical to the cultural aims of a specific library. By and large, the extent to which the course is successful does not seem to depend on some of the details of content or approach. At least this seems to be the case from the point of view of the students. Since my own goals are less tangible and more difficult to measure than those of the students, I generally finish the course with a certain frustration. I have experienced some difficulty in presenting to my students some of the basic sociological concepts. I find, for example, that P. L. Berger's work on social knowledge21 and H. D. Duncan's work on symbolic transformation22 to be quite relevant to the course. Yet if such material is to have any meaningful impact on students, it seems it must be related to their experiences. In other words, what does it have to do with Bob Dylan or Carly Simon? Since the bulk of my students seem to lack a broad, ongoing interest in sociology and are not particularly enthusiastic about abstract thinking, it seems best to 244
Popular Culture Studies introduce a limited number of these concepts in relation to specific examples of popular culture. What can be done here, and how it is done, are entirely dependent on the background, resources, and inter- ests of the instructor. At various times in teaching the course, I have drawn very selectively on concepts and theories of democratic myths and ideologies,23 behavior in public places,24 authoritarianism,25 prop- aganda,26 the achievement motive,27 and the sociology of the absurd.28 I have found much relevant material on popular images in the works of D. J. Boorstin29 and K. E. Boulding;30 and of course in the work of M. McLuhan, particularly The Mechanical Bride*1 and E. Carpen- ter, whose book, They Became What They Beheld?2 fascinates students. Some problems emerge when one begins to take students outside of their own symbolic environment. I am convinced, however, that this experience should be part of their education. Students cannot fully appreciate the extent of which their responses to their own popular culture are automatic and mindless until they have made an attempt to unravel the significance of symbol systems from outside of their own environments. For this reason, I have generally tried to make at least two excursions outside of the current, main-stream cultural milieu. These have been studies of the "race records" {e.g., commer- cial sound recordings for black minorities) of the 1920's and 1930's, and early commercial country and western music. It is in examining these materials (which, though historical, are clearly related to cur- rent popular cultures) that the students are confronted with message systems that are emotionally alien to them. Real communication breaks down immediately. Messages which are deadly serious are thought by the students to be funny. When the material is humorous, the students laugh at the wrong things for the wrong reasons. In dealing with these materials, one point has consistently emerged with shattering force: the students are prejudiced towards systems of com- munication of cultural minorities. Their initial reaction, for example, to blues and gospel music of Willie Johnson33 has been frightening in the extreme, exposing deep, pervasive ignorances of monumental pro- portions. I take it that this is not necessarily an insensitivity to human emotions, but rather an unfamiliarity with the idiom, style, and sym- bols which surround the messages. It is comparable to exposing students to Chinese opera, but with one important difference. Chinese opera is so alien that about all that is transmitted is a disorganized mass of noise. In the case of popular culture of minorities, there are 245
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP some common symbols, but the whole message is distorted grotesquely as it is filtered through the students' life-time conditioning by mass- media culture. The inescapable conclusion is that the students' reac- tions to the artifacts and messages of their own cultural milieu are purely spontaneous and irrational. An examination of these historical documents also provides excel- lent material for the comparative analysis of value systems and can also be used to demonstrate the impact of technology on the evolution of popular culture during the past four decades. Content Analysis. Some form of content analysis obviously is in- dispensable in any library school curriculum (how could one classify or subject catalog without analyzing the content of documents?), but formal content analysis techniques as used in communications research are another matter. By and large, it has been my experience that when first introduced to content analysis, most students are quite intrigued. But his fascination begins to dissipate rather rapidly when one begins to deal with quantitative research The study of popular culture, how- ever, is hardly possible without at least some knowledge of content analysis. My own aims are to make students reasonably intelligent consumers of content analysis research and introduce them to its broad outlines and a few specific techniques. The construction of categories, for example, seems to be one of the most immediately use- ful techniques, and there are several good introductions to these techniques (T. F. Carney34 and O. R. Holsti,35 for example) . Through- out the course, whenever possible, I include required readings from related content analysis research. Non-quantitative content analysis studies, however, prove to be more attractive to students, and these are no less valuable because they are not quantitative. Such works as L. Chenoweth's examination of Jimi Hendrix and the Jefferson Airplane36 and W. Mellers' study of the Beatles37 are good examples of indispensable non-quantitative content analysis. The Good and the Beautiful. A problem that has to be dealt with is the academic criteria for evaluating literature. Most students bring to popular literature a whole set of a priori assumptions about what is "good" and what is "bad." In their discussions of popular literature, they like to demonstrate their critical facilities and high standards by making such statements as these: "the plot is weak," "the book is poorly written," "the characters are one-dimensional stereotypes." Such comments are completely irrelevant to the course, for they say 246
Popular Culture Studies nothing useful about why millions of people read popular fiction, the systems of values which it projects, or its symbolic significance. Thus, developing an approach to popular literature involves training stu- dents to avoid falling into the trap of responding with meaningless undergraduate clichés, which, in any case, are a poor substitute for thinking. But in the end, the issue of popular versus elite culture (essentially the "good" versus the "bad") cannot be avoided. A dis- cussion of salient points in this long controversy provides effective issues around which to summarize the course and consider the role of the librarian and the library in relationship to current mass culture. Towards the end of the course, after having held aesthetic judg- ments in abeyance while trying to understand the processes and functions of popular culture, it is good to return to the literature which variously attacks and defends popular culture. Here one can discuss basic issues while students bring into play their own concepts of the good and the beautiful. As background reading, I have used material by W. H. Gass,88 J. Ortega y Gasset,39 E. van den Haag,40 J. G. Cawelti,41 and R. Hoggart.42 Other Approaches. In studying popular culture, nothing is sacred, least of all a commitment to any single syllabus. The field is vast, the equipment any single instructor brings to such a course is usually a unique one with special possibilities and limitations, and the students themselves are variously equipped with intellectual tools and attitudes necessary to study popular culture. There is probably no other area of higher education that lends itself to such a variety of approaches and methods. An indispensable sourcebook for the instructor planning a popular culture course for the first time is Popular Culture and Curricula, by R. B. Browne and R. J. Ambrosetti.43 The quarterly publication of the Popular Culture Association, Popular Culture Methods, will keep one informed of recent developments in teaching various aspects of pop- ular culture. A course for librarians devoted exclusively to popular literature could be built around one of the anthologies of primary source material. The Popular Culture Explosion, by Browne and D. Madden44 is excellent. The more recent anthology by D. McQuade and R. Atwan45 could also serve as a text, but would involve com- mitting the entire course to the printed word. Both of these texts have fine instructor's manuals which I have found most useful in framing my own questions about popular culture. Finally, A. Gowans* book, The Unchanging Arts,4* deals with contemporary pictorial arts within 247
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP the framework of the author's remarkably persuasive arguments about the role of the popular arts in contemporary society. The work would serve as a fine text, but in any case should be read by anyone teaching a course in popular culture. Conclusion. Education for librarianship has managed to survive for a long time without the use of studies in popular culture, and doubt- less this will remain the case in many library schools for a long time to come. Many of the goals of the course at Albany could probably be achieved in other courses and by other means. On the other hand, teaching some of the fundamentals of communications processes within the context of popular culture and using it as a vehicle to get at more subtle issues of librarianship can be a very rewarding experi- ence both for the instructor and the students. Within the context of popular culture communications, one can discuss the profoundest of sociological concepts and raise basic theoretical and practical issues about the cultural functions of libraries. One can do this while work- ing with subject matter that fascinates students and in an atmosphere that encourages both introspection and empathy. References 1. State University of New York at Albany. School of Library and Information Sci- ence: Bulletin: 1975 (in press). 2. Clarke, J. A.: Popular Culture in Libraries. College & Research Libraries, 34:215- 218, May 1973. 3. State University of New York at Albany. School of Library and Information Sci- ence: Special Courses. Mimeographed. Spring 1974. 4. Mills, C. W.: The Power Elite. New York, Oxford University Press, 1956, pp. 298-324. 5. Schiller, H. I.: The Mind Managers. Boston, Beacon Press, 1973. 6. Ellul, L: Propaganda. New York, Alfred A. Knopf, 1965. 7. Gerbner, G.: Cultural Indicators: The Case of Violence in Television Drama. An- nals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science. 388:70. March 1970. 8. Skinner, B. F.: Beyond Freedom and Dignity. New York, Alfred A. Knopf, 1971. 9. Berlo, D. K.: The Process of Communication. New York, Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1960. 10. Lin, N.: The Study of Human Communication. Indianapolis, Bobbs-Merrill, 1973. 11. Shera, J. H.: The Foundations of Education for Librarianship. New York, Becker and Hayes, 1972. 12. State University of New York at Albany. School of Library and Information Sci- ence: Bulletin: 1972-74, p. 40. 13. Stephenson, W.: The Play Theory of Mass Communication. Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1967, p. 1. 248
Popular Culture Studies 14. Katz, E., and Foulkes, D.: On the Use of the Mass Media as "Escape": Clarification of a Concept. Public Opinion Quarterly, 26:379, Fall 1962. 15. Berger, A. A.: Pop Culture. Dayton, Ohio, Pflaum/Standard, 1973, p. 10. 16. Denisoff, R. S.: A Short Note on Studying Popular Culture. In: Browne, R. B., and Ambrosetti, R. J., eds.: Popular Culture and Curricula, rev. ed. Bowling Green, Ohio, Bowling Green University Popular Press, 1972, p. 101. 17. Nye, R.: The Unembarrassed Muse. New York, Dial Press, 1970. 18. Russ, J.: Somebody's Trying to Kill Me and I Think It's My Husband: The Mod- ern Gothic. Journal of Popular Culture, 6:666-691, Spring 1973. 19. Berger, A. A.: Critically Comprehending the Commercial. Popular Culture Meth- ods, 1:16-19, Spring 1973. 20. Nelson, B. H.: Seven Principles of Image Formation. Journal of Marketing, 26:67- 71, January 1962. 21. Berger, P. L., and Luckmann, T.: The Social Construction of Reality. Garden City, N.Y., Doubleday, 1966. 22. Duncan, H. D.: Communication and Social Order. New York, Oxford University Press, 1968. 23. Monsen, R. J.: Modern American Capitalism: Ideologies and Issues. Boston, Houghton Mifflin, 1963. 24. Goff man, E.: Relations in Public: Microstudies of the Public Order. New York, Basic Books, 1971. 25. Adorno, T. W.; Frenkel-Brunswik, E.; Levinson, D. J.; and Sanford, R. N.: The Authoritarian Personality. New York, Harper & Row, 1950. 26. Ellul, op. cit. 27. McClelland, D. C: The Achieving Society. New York, The Free Press, 1967. 28. Lyman, S. M., and Scott, M. B.: A Sociology of the Absurd. New York, Appleton- Century-Crofts, 1970. 29. Boorstin, D. J. The Image: A Guide to Pseudo-Events in America. New York, Harper & Row, 1964. 30. Boulding, K. E.: The Image. Ann Arbor, University of Michigan Press, 1956. 31. McLuhan, M.: The Mechanical Bride: Folklore of Industrial Man. Boston, Beacon Press, 1967. 32. Carpenter, E.: They Became What They Beheld. New York, Outerbridge & Dienst- frey/Ballantine Books, 1970. 33. Johnson, W.: Blind Willie Johnson-. 1927-1930. Edited with an introduction by Samuel Charters. Phonodisc. RBF-10, 1965. 34. Carney, T. F.: Content Analysis. London, B. T. Batsford, 1972. 35. Holsti, O. R.: Content Analysis for the Social Sciences and Humanities. Reading, Mass., Addison- Wesley, 1969. 36. Chenoweth, L.: The Rhetoric of Hope and Despair: A Study of the Jimi Hendrix Experience and the Jefferson Airplane. American Quarterly, 23:25-45, Spring 1971. 37. Mellers, W.: Twilight of the Gods: The Music of the Beatles. New York, Viking Press, 1974. 38. Gass, W. H.: Even if, by all the Oxen in the World (a Polemic). In: Browne, R. B., et al., eds.: Frontiers of American Culture. West Lafayette, Indiana, Purdue University Studies, 1968, pp. 194-199. 39. Ortega y Gasset, J.: The Revolt of the Masses. New York, W. W. Norton, 1957. 249
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP 40. van den Haag, E.: A Dissent from the Consensual Society. In: Rosenberg, Bernard, and White, David Manning, eds.: Mass Culture Revisited. New York, Van Nostrand Rein- hold Co., 1971, pp. 85-92. 41. Cawelti, J. G.: Beatles, Batman, and the New Aesthetic. Midway, 9:49-70, Autumn 1968. 42. Hoggart, R.: The Uses of Literacy. Boston, Beacon Press, 1961. 43. Browne, R. B., and Ambrosetti, R. J., ed.: Popular Culture and Curricula, rev. ed. Bowling Green, Ohio, Bowling Green University Popular Press, 1972. 44. Browne, R. B., and Madden, D.: The Popular Culture Explosion. Dubuque, Iowa, Wm. C. Brown, 1972. 45. McQuade, D., and Atwan, R.: Popular Culture in America: The Interaction of Style and Audience. New York, Oxford University Press, 1974. 46. Gowans, A.: The Unchanging Arts: New Forms for the Traditional Functions of Art in Society. Philadelphia, J. B. Lippincott, 1971. 250