A WHITE LIBRARIAN IN BLACK HARLEM Betty L. Jenkins' Ernestine Rose (1880-1961) was a pioneer in providing library services to blacks in Harlem at the 135th Street Branch of the New York Public Library from 1920 to 1942. She galvanized the resources of the community and applied the prestige of the New York Public Library to plan, execute, and promote library services at a time when blacks were moving in large numbers to New York after World War I. Under Rose's leadership, the branch became a model of public library services to an underserved minority. The purpose of this study is to chronicle and assess her work during the Negro Renaissance, a dynamic period of the community's history. A 1928 survey of library services for blacks in eight southern and nothern cities singled out the 135th Street Branch of the New York Public Library for promoting reading as a wholesome cultural and leisure-time activity and for providing the community with story hours, free public lectures by outstanding men and women, exhibits of black artists and sculptors, and a reference collection on black literature [ 1, p. 228]. The person responsible for these services was Ernestine Rose, the branch librarian from 1920 until 1942. Rose played an important role in making the branch an intellectual and social center for the community by hiring black professional staff, by using community leaders to help plan policy and programs, and by ensuring that the branch serve as both teacher to and affirmer of the community it served. In the first two decades of the century blacks moved in large numbers to cities. From the south and from overseas they came to New York City and settled in Harlem, making it one of the largest concentrations of black people in the world. Since Rose had worked with European immi- 1. Morris Raphael Cohen Library, City College of the City University of New York, New York, New York 10031. [Library Quarterly, vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 216-231] ? 1990 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-25 19/90/6003-0002$0 1.00 216
WHITE LIBRARIAN IN HARLEM 217 grants on the Lower East Side in the years before World War 1, she was considered the right person to administer the branch in Harlem and to alter its services to meet the needs of the newcomers. After more than a decade of working with disadvantaged peoples, Rose came to Harlem predisposed to helping minorities adjust to a new life and gain acceptance. Working in the black community, however, Rose was faced with the intractable problem of racial segregation and prejudice. She persisted, nevertheless, in working with her staff, com- munity leaders, and library professional organizations to promote an understanding of black people, their contributions to American life, and their rights as citizens to exemplary public library services. The story of Rose's inspiration, vision, and participation in the devel- opment of the branch and its activities and her commitment to fighting racial prejudice have been overshadowed in time. Her legacy to re- searchers who are now beginning to put her contributions into historical perspective is the rich store of articles, speeches, reports of meetings, pamphlets, and a book, The Public Library in American Life (1954), which chronicle her public life as branch administrator, teacher and trainer of librarians, and activist in professional library associations. This article is a study of her career as a pioneer in the development of urban library services to blacks. Early Life, Education, and Career Ernestine Rose was born on March 19, 1880, in Bridgehampton, New York to Stephen E. and Anna Chatfield Rose. Her mother, descended from an old English family on Long Island, was a teacher and principal and for a time taught at Bridgehampton Academy, where Rose went to school [2, p. 36]. The academy, founded before the Civil War, was considered one of the best schools in the area and had a reputation for preparing its students for the professions [3, p. 181]. It was expected that upon graduation students would continue their education at col- lege. Rose went to Wesleyan University and then enrolled in the New York State Library School in Albany, completing the required course of study in 1904 [4, p. 64]. Before graduating, however, she worked as a summer substitute for the New York Public Library [4]. Assigned to a branch in an immigrant neighborhood on New York City's Lower East Side, Rose met librarians who were sympathetic to immigrant life and who appreciated their culture. This association probably helped to determine the thrust of her career as a librarian whose interest would always be, both in her everyday work in the branches of public libraries and in her volunteer
218 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY work with professional or staff organizations, with the underserved or disadvantaged. Unlike some librarians whose outreach services to these newcomers were designed to "Americanize" them as quickly as possible, Rose worked with librarians, who like the social workers in the community, emphasized the importance of the neighborhood and focused on pro- grams which not only helped the immigrant to adjust to a new country with mothers' clubs, English classes, and the like, but also encouraged an acceptance and maintenance of the immigrants' customs and culture [5, pp. 288-92). Rose returned to the New York Public Library as a librarian after working one year at Wesleyan University and was once again assigned to the branch libraries which served immigrant populations [4]. After becoming head of Seward Park Branch, located in a Russian-Jewish section, Rose became well known for her work with the foreign born. In 1917, she wrote a warm account about her experiences, Bridging the Gulf: Work with the Russian Jews and Other Newcomers [6]. In Rose's view, it was the obligation of the library to help the immi- grant "bridge the gulf" between his culture and the American way by maintaining an appreciation for his own culture while learning the skills necessary for citizenship, namely, literacy and language. She en- couraged her library staff to be knowledgeable about the users' tradi- tions and customs so that they could serve them with sympathetic under- standing. She wrote: "One must be as familiar with Jewish holidays as with Christian. Nothing must be alien to you, 'peculiar,' or even pictur- esque, in the sense of a curiosity" [6, p. 21]. She would later adapt these approaches of work with immigrants- such as a knowledge of the language and literature of the community, the foreign language book collection, and activities celebrating the im- migrants' cultural heritage-to her work in Harlem. Fifty years later, Rose recalled those days on the Lower East Side with fondness and pride. She wrote, "Earnest young people sought work in the slum areas as nurses, teachers, pastors and social workers. Some of them drifted to libraries, feeling that in these also lay an opportunity to reach the submerged masses" [7, p. 38]. Work with the foreign born was the first phase in Rose's long career as a librarian and a teacher. She devoted herself to groups with special needs not only on the Lower East Side and in Harlem but during World War I as director of hospital libraries for the American Library Associa- tion and with the Army of Occupation in Coblenz, Germany [8]. Jean Blackwell Hutson, who worked with Rose at the 135th Street Branch, recalled that while in Germany, Rose came in contact with large numbers of black soldiers [9]. Many of them were illiterate and in need of reme-
WHITE LIBRARIAN IN HARLEM 219 dial work [10, p. 199]. Perhaps Rose saw in these young men the desire for learning and recognized that opportunities for education at home had been denied them because of their race. On her return to New York City, Rose was appointed branch librarian at the 135th Street Branch near Lenox Avenue, a main thoroughfare in Harlem. The branch opened in 1905 to serve a genteel, middle-class Jewish community. But by the time Rose arrived in 1920, the community had changed. A White Librarian in Black Harlem The great migration prior to and following World War I brought thousands of southern blacks along with those from the Spanish and British West Indies and South America to Harlem. Harlem was, by now, "New York's black city" [11, p. 255]. Among the black newcomers there was as much national, political, and class diversity as one would expect to find in the city as a whole. Rose described them as "black and yellow, stately Hindoo, proud West Indian, mulatto American . . . porter, college professor, nursemaid, student" [12, p. 75]. Moreover, she wrote, "the Americans, Africans and West Indians who made up this great city of black people are rich and poor, learned and illiterate, patriotic and nationalistic" [12]. Unlike other black communities in the north, Harlem in the 1920s was unique. It had become a meeting place of blacks from all over the world, giving them an opportunity to see themselves as members of a world community with a common heritage [13, p. 14]. Many sought to define themselves in new ways. This meant giving additional emphasis to a rediscovery of their heritage through studying and celebrating their folklore, history, arts, and letters. A "new Negro" was born out of the social ferment of the times. The black intellectuals of the 1920s, with Alain Locke as one of their spokes- men, sought to define their new status and their sense of self in The New Negro, a collection of essays edited by Locke [14]. Thus began a decade of intellectual and cultural activity, known as the Negro Renaissance, in which the library was to play a significant role. Soon after she arrived at the 135th Street Branch Rose noted, with some concern, the increasing self-segregation of Harlem's institutions. Its churches, theaters, newspapers, and social service organizations were increasingly black sponsored, staffed, and managed. Although Harlem was a cosmopolitan city, it was an all black one, "divided," Rose wrote, "by many conflicting lines of thought, belief and hope" [11, p. 255]. Furthermore, she recognized the paradox of Harlem's existence (in
220 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY contrast to the European immigrant ethnic communities she extolled in Bridging the Gulf) as being due to the legacy of slavery and the persistence of racial prejudice [11, p. 256]. Nevertheless, she was dismayed by blacks' thrust for cultural separatism. "It is an interesting commentary on race conditions in the North that the trend today is all toward such segregation. The new note that is being struck comes from the colored race, which is joining now with the white in its cry for race integrity" [ 15, p. 468]. To her credit, Rose addressed the issue of race integrity head-on with her customary optimism by acknowledging that this separatist attitude need not be all negative. She continued, "Many accompaniments of this new note are valuable ones, including efforts towards greater knowledge and intelligence regarding the past history of the Negro and towards a development of the Negro's own peculiar racial gifts and powers. No race can take its proper place in the world until it knows itself and learns to develop itself, depending on no one's charity" [15, p. 468]. Thus, as Rose saw it, the 135th Street Branch library had a twofold task: to "bridge the gulf" between the races and to make the library an integral part of the community. Its programs and book collection had to stimulate, guide, and promote racial pride for blacks themselves, and they were necessary to educate whites about the history and culture of black Americans. Racial understanding, for Rose, could be achieved through knowledge. The branch was to be a center where "diverse paths may meet and clashing interests find union" [12, p. 76]. She was equally determined that the library should not follow other institutions in the community and become a segregated library. It was not easy to reconcile her belief in the public library as a place that encouraged rational thought and provided the books and ambience for the discussion of issues which divided the races when social and economic forces pulled the races apart. Nevertheless, she resisted the role of the branch as "an element in race segregation," just as she had resisted a library in a Russian-Jewish community becoming entirely Jewish [15, p. 470]. One way to achieve her goal was to integrate the library staff. Black staff members would serve the same purpose in the Harlem community as the foreign assistants did for branches which served European immi- grants. In explaining her hopes for a Spanish-speaking staff member and one from the British West Indies, Rose noted the "intimacy" they provided which aided the library's outreach and effectiveness. "One of the services which the colored assistants render the library is the knowl- edge of neighborhood affairs and people which they gain far more quickly than the members of an alien race, even if they entered the
WHITE LIBRARIAN IN HARLEM 221 district as strangers at the same time. This intimacy has been of great advantage in making the library better known" [11, p. 257]. In addition, Rose may have harbored some misgivings about the community's acceptance of her leadership because she was white. (The first black librarian within the New York Public Library system was hired in 1921.) Because she anticipated that the community would be pleased to see blacks in frontline positions, she placed some black staff in visible public service roles. Nella Larsen Imes, a novelist, was a children's librarian, and Pura Belpre White, a Puerto Rican, was hired to address the needs of the Spanish-speaking population. Not only were black assistants likely to be more sympathetic to black users' needs, but the "experiment" of an interracial staff was one of the ways the library could demonstrate its allegiance to democratic principles. In addition, Rose believed that when white and black staff worked together for the service of the community both groups learned to appreciate racial and cultural diversity. She arranged a staff exchange program between a branch in a predominantly white neighborhood and the 135th Street Branch. The benefit of this experiment, she explained, was that preconceived notions about race would disappear if black and white staff worked together [ 16, p. 207]. Library Governance with Community Leaders Since she was a white librarian in the race-charged atmosphere of the period, Rose's position was potentially precarious. But she was serious in her belief that the 135th Street Branch was the library for all in the community, and she worked to make it so by involving black community leaders, who knew it best, to plan, organize, and promote programs. Throughout the twenty-two years she worked in Harlem, a knowledge- able and committed group of civic leaders, librarians, and scholars guided Rose with ideas and resources. Rose's political and practical awareness of her situation made this symbiotic relationship a hallmark of her leadership and success. For example, soon after her arrival prominent citizens were called together to plan the first of several library-sponsored exhibits of black artists [ 17]. Committees were also formed to set up the Division of Negro Literature, History, and Prints; to advise on policy and program for the privately funded Harlem Adult Education Project; and to plan for the renovation and expansion of the branch during the 1930s. Regarding her work with members of the community she wrote, "The negro editors are among the best friends of the library and it is thru them, the social
222 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY workers and other prominent individuals that the library is extending its influence slowly but surely thru the various strata of negro life.... The library must gain the interest and support of this social and professional, often wealthy, group before it can hope to become an integral part of negro life" [11, p. 257]. Within six months of Rose's arrival, the library had become the vital, popular community center which prompted comparison and praise in Woofter's study. Rose encouraged community groups such as the John Brown Historical Society, the Odd Fellows, the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), the Harlem Community Forum, and the Liberty League of Negro Americans to hold their meetings at the branch. Art exhibits, music recitals, book talks, forums for discussion of current topics, and lecture courses given by educators were all regular fare [18, p. 240]. As a result of the branch's open door policy and outreach, the pro- grams were successful almost immediately. So many people came to the library that Rose reported an increase of 18 percent in circulation for the half year July-December 1920, and registration of new readers placed the 135th Street Branch among the five largest branches in Manhattan [18, p. 239]. The branch held a rather undistinguished book collection, although Rose found that the general books on history, sociology, philosophy, and the useful arts appealed to many users. She noted that people were hungry for knowledge and eager to educate themselves: "The applica- tion desk of a public library serves as a doorway into the 'other half' of many lives, the half which lives while not working for a living, the half which thinks, aspires and endures" [12, p. 75]. This expression of em- pathy demonstrates an important ingredient of her work with and for black populations. Rose's accomplishments after so short a time were praised by her superior, Franklin Hopper, who said in the annual report for the year that the (interracial) staff experiment and the "change of spirit of the administration of the branch had a marked effect" on the influence of the branch throughout the community [18, p. 240]. Division of Negro Literature, History, and Prints In 1921 Rose recognized that the increasing race consciousness of the times was reflected in an intense interest in books by and about black people, so she set about replenishing the book collection [ 19, p. 1]. Some titles were irreplaceable because they were out of print; others were available only in private collections, and there was little money to replace
WHITE LIBRARIAN IN HARLEM 223 those that could be purchased. Rose borrowed some books from scholars and community leaders and called together a group of them to consider ways to strengthen the collection. This committee, which included the Puerto Rican-born bibliophile Arthur A. Schomburg, decided to set up a permanent, noncirculating collection of books about black people [20, p. 188]. This small collection became the nucleus for a "worthy Negro department." On May 8, 1925, the collection was dedicated as the Division of Negro Literature, History, and Prints in a ceremony attended by library officials, community leaders, and the public [21, p. 16]. At the time of its establishment, the division was the only one of its kind in any public library. Rose's comments about the collection at the presentation were prophetic [21]. She recognized the importance of this reference collec- tion not only for black people, for whom it would give a sense of place and history, but also for whites as well who, she believed, needed to know more about black people so that their prejudices "would die of malnutrition." Above all, she thought this reference collection was im- portant because it would be "available equally to scholars, to the man in the street and to school children of all races" [21]. Two years after the division was established, a grant of $10,000 from the Carnegie Corporation was negotiated by the National Urban League, and encouraged by Rose and the committee, to enable the New York Public Library to purchase the private collection of books, manu- scripts, pamphlets, and etchings by and about black people assembled over a lifetime of collecting by Arthur A. Schomburg [20, p. 188]. Schomburg (1874-1938) was a zealous collector of black history and literature. The international nature of his collection, the variety of materials, and the rarity of some of them made it a valuable and presti- gious purchase. Schomburg was appointed curator of the division in 1932 where he remained until his death, after which the division was renamed the Schomburg Collection [22, p. 432]. Rose's prophecy about the value of this collection and its use was illustrated one year after its purchase. She commented, "As public interest, curiosity and sincere desire for information [about the Negro] have grown, there has been an opportunity to disseminate accurate facts, and a growing demand for them by readers" [23, p. 1013]. It was through the dissemination of this information that Rose believed race relations would be served: "This is the library's big opportunity for it may help to inform both groups. It has the channels of information and it may find the services, and so do its bit toward the righteous adjustment of America's least understood and most serious social situation" [23, p. 1014]. White and black students and scholars came to use the library and to
224 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY attend its programs. The library served as a clearinghouse for informa- tion about publishing. It exhibited paintings by black artists and pro- vided space for the production of plays by black dramatists. The staff prepared and distributed reading lists about all facets of black life as needed or requested. Black and white scholars gave lectures on black history and literature and special programs for children were held [23, pp. 1013, 1014]. This encouragement and support for writers were especially ap- preciated. Langston Hughes, the noted poet, who first came to Harlem in 1921, remembered Rose as "a warm and wonderful librarian ... [who] made newcomers feel welcome" [24, p. 62]. Work with Negroes Round Table, American Library Association Rose recognized that the prevailing attitude among most librarians to- ward library service for blacks was one of indifference, or, when faced with community demand, most librarians saw it as a problem. Rose did not consider working in the interest of blacks a problem; she saw them as people who should be treated as human beings who expressed the same desires for social and personal acceptance and intellectual growth as any other people [16, p. 207]. Rose convened the first meeting of a group of librarians within the American Library Association for the purpose of exchanging ideas and discussing issues about working with blacks [25, p. 201]. The group, Work with Negoes Round Table, met annually for three years at the association's convention. Rose was temporary chairman at the first meet- ing in 1921. The minutes, taken by Rose, stated that there was "consider- able demand" for such a discussion and the members present voted unanimously to set up a permanent round table. In preparation for the meeting in 1922 and to obtain information about the status of library work with blacks in other cities, Rose and the staff at the 135th Street Branch sent a questionnaire to 122 public libraries [26, p. 362]. Ninety-eight libraries responded to the survey, which asked five questions: the percentage of blacks in the population, the status of open or restricted access to the library on the basis of race, the provision of specialized services such as book collections about blacks, the means of training black assistants, and the participation of blacks on governing boards. The replies showed that public library service to blacks varied greatly depending on a given city's geographical location and the size of the black community in that city. Large cities with nonsegregated libraries in the north, east, and west with sizable black communities reported
WHITE LIBRARIAN IN HARLEM 225 greater efforts than in prior years to provide specialized services and to hire black assistants. On the other hand, library services to blacks in southern cities were segregated and inadequate compared to library services elsewhere. Neither southern nor northern libraries reported black participation on governing boards. The report concluded that public library services for blacks overall needed development and that there was a pressing need for professional training of black library workers [26]. From the first meeting of the round table, it was evident that widely differing methods of operating and standards of service existed among the various libraries. The report bore this out. Further, individual re- ports from librarians from other parts of the country who attended the meetings reflected the social and cultural prejudices of their regions. The regional differences in attitudes toward black people and the kind of library service they wanted and needed was a point of disagreement among the members of the group. Rose's presentations of the record of the 135th Street Branch and her humanitarian support of black people's rights to the kind of library service her branch offered clearly differed from those of the southerners. As a northerner and a liberal she was a dominating presence. Rose viewed herself as an advocate and authority on library services to blacks and was justly proud of her accomplish- ments with an integrated staff, shared governance with community leaders, and a unique collection of books about blacks. Thus, it is not surprising that the round table met for the last time in 1923. Most of the librarians agreed that the "negro question is a sectional one, and that the South must approach it from its own angle" [27, p. 279]. In this statement lies the key to the discontinuation of the round table. One can only surmise that a catalyst for the group's demise was Rose's method of fighting prejudice-her militant and confrontational style. Nevertheless, Rose continued to be an active participant in American Library Association activities in the interest of improving race relations and adult education. In 1940 she was one of a team selected by the president of the American Library Association to study the merits of reconsidering a council resolution passed in 1936 which required that conference hotels agree to provide equal access to all members regard- less of race [28, p. 296]. They recommended no change in the resolution [29, p. 530]. As a member and chairman of the ALA Adult Education Board, she presented the first Library Bill of Rights to the 1939 annual conference in San Francisco [30, p. 549]. The Library Bill of Rights expressed views that fueled the work that Rose had done in Harlem during the 1920s and which she continued until her retirement in 1942. This manifesto stated that library collections should be selected for the interest of the
226 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY people in the community regardless of their race or nationality; that library materials should represent all views; and that as an institution with the mission to educate for democratic living, the library's meeting rooms should be open to all regardless of beliefs or affiliation [31, p. 175]. Harlem Experiment in Adult Education For ten years, Rose's enterprising leadership with the assistance of com- munity leaders had made the 135th Street Branch famous and respected as a social, cultural, and educational center. This was recognized again in 1931 when the branch was selected by the American Association of Adult Education as one of two public libraries (the other was the Au- burn Branch of the Atlanta Public Library) for an experiment in adult education. Both were supported by funds from the Carnegie Corpora- tion and the Julius Rosenwald Fund [32, p. 19]. This grant was a boon for Rose and her staff. The economic depres- sion had curtailed branch library budgets and support for programming [33, p. 317]. Faced with an aging building and cutbacks in staff, Rose was allowed to augment and remotivate the staff and to redefine the branch's programs to meet the community's needs at a time of deepening social and economic malaise. That these funds were addressed specifically for adult education gave an additional aura of prestige to the branch. Programs for the education of black adults fell far behind adult education for whites [32, p. 17]. Even programs under black auspices such as those in churches, schools, and social and civic organizations had failed to turn around some of the problems of blacks in urban areas-high illiteracy and dropout rates and maladjustment to city life [32, p. 161. One reviewer of the experiment explained that the public library with its reputation for coordination of group activities and community acceptance would be a worthy agency for urban adult education for blacks [ 32, p. 20]. The first project of its kind, the experiment was given national cover- age in the black press. For example, the Chicago Defender hailed the experiment with the headline: "Harlem Launches Big Adult Education Program" and described the organization of the project as a cooperative relationship between the public library and the community [34, p. 1]. Rose as both branch librarian and executive director of this new venture worked with fourteen men and women from the community who made up the Harlem Adult Education Committee. Its purpose was to set policy and give counsel to the staff which included two field secretaries, a
WHITE LIBRARIAN IN HARLEM 227 readers' adviser, a curator, and a secretary. The field secretaries set up educational programs in cooperation with other groups and organiza- tions and directed the library-sponsored programs such as the forums on public affairs, parenting institutes, art and theater workshops, a community chorus, and the outdoor street forums. The readers' adviser, responsible for the clearinghouse function of the project, maintained a list of educational opportunities throughout the city. She provided read- ing lists for individuals, study groups, and classes and wrote a column, "What to Read," carried by several black newspapers [35, p. 54]. As a recognized authority on the Negro, Schomburg interpreted and pro- moted the collection through reference work and lectures [35, p. 55]. His presence further enhanced the appeal of the program to a broad spectrum of people in the community. Rose faced a number of problems, not the least of which was how effective the public library could be as an agency of adult education. She wrote, "Libraries to be sure, have always been active in educational service to adults, but it is library service, not the education of the adult, which has been prominent in the minds of librarians, as well as in those of the public at large" [32, p. 21]. Looking back on the experiment and putting herself in concert with the committee she continued, "The librarian and the advisory committee responsible for guiding the policies of this experiment had themselves to learn the character of adult educa- tion, and how it might best be conducted from a library background, while setting up a program of adult education" [32]. She and the committee were faced with appealing to a broad spectrum of users-the working class and the middle class, the illiterate and the educated, those who would never think of coming to the library and those who made frequent use of its resources. Finally, they had to decide whether to stress cultural, educational, or vocational programs. The decision to "reach every group that needed help and to give it the particular help it wanted," Rose admitted later, could not be fulfilled. But rather than err by limiting outreach to a particular group or to stress one kind of activity over the other, the committee was bold enough to try them all [35, p. 54]. This overexpansion, however, was a major weakness of the program. With so much going on, the programs duplicated themselves and over- lapped others in the community. Many programs did not appeal to the masses, and there were not enough trained teachers [32, p. 32]. The cultural programs, Rose said, "held the balance of power in the pro- gram" [35, p. 54]. Even those critical of the program agreed that the creative, informal, and practical activities in arts, crafts, music, and dramatics were the most successful because they boosted morale [36, p.
228 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 163]. The grant period ended in 1935, but Rose kept the committee and the staff and integrated the activities into the general program for adults at the branch. Ever mindful of changing community needs, Rose pressed for the renovation of the old Carnegie building in order to ensure improved library services. Once again she enlisted the aid of a Citizens Committee which negotiated with the city administration for ten years. Finally, the annex to the 135th Street Branch was completed and dedicated at a ceremony attended by city officials, librarians, publishers, writers, artists, and friends on May 28, 1942 [37, p. 2]. This modern addition to the old building with its spacious community rooms, a gallery for exhibits, and an auditorium, was a monument to Rose's presence, her ability to work with groups, and her accomplish- ments. Associates, friends, and professional colleagues acknowledged her leadership on behalf of Harlem in letters to her on the occasion of the dedication. Her longtime friend Alain Locke addressed her as "My dear Miss Rose" and wrote, "My best wishes for the occasion and for the continued success and expansion under your devoted leadership of the community work of the Harlem Library Center. For years it has been an outstanding and pioneering public service" [38]. And from the noted Negro Renaissance author Claude McKay: "You have accomplished a great educatonal work in Harlem and I'd like to congratulate you upon this final achievement to which always your name will be linked " [39]. And from Florence Rising Curtis, formerly director of the Hampton Library School, came a telegram with regrets that she could not attend: "Regret unable [to] join you in celebration of such important event in library's record of service to city and nation" [40]. Conclusion Rose was a pioneer during the 1920s and 1930s in providing library services to the black community of Harlem. She accomplished this by helping to develop a book collection about the literature and history of black people, by encouraging the hiring and training of black librarians, and by working with community leaders to plan and implement cultural and social events and adult education programs in the library. Although other public libraries in urban black neighborhoods used similar patterns of service, the 135th Street Branch in the largest and most famous black community was the cultural center during the Negro Renaissance when art, music, drama, and writing by blacks flourished. Rose exploited this convergence of creative and intellectual expression in the Harlem of the 1920s and 1930s. She reached out to writers, artists,
WHITE LIBRARIAN IN HARLEM 229 and playwrights, supporting and nurturing their creativity with discus- sions, exhibits, and productions of their work. Behind Rose's public promotion and activism was a sincere belief in the library as a "social intelligence center," open to all regardless of race, nationality, or class [7, p. 103]. Students, intellectuals, scholars, and laymen were attracted to the programs organized and promoted under her leadership. Rose's insistence on racial inclusiveness extended to the staff and to the advisory committees as well as to participants in the library's public affairs programs. Rose's concern with the reform of society by means of an educated citizenry free of racial prejudice was not without its problems. Although a former librarian at the branch remembered Rose as having "a true feeling for and interest in groups that were discriminated against" [41] her overbearing manner on issues of racial discrimination was some- times irritating to her colleagues and to those who sought her counsel. Louis Shores, librarian at Fisk University in the 1930s recounts an incident in Nashville during the dedication of Fisk University's library in 1931. At this interracial gathering, Rose antagonized several of the southern white librarians by her position on race relations so that Shores was forced to "disengage her from a prominent place on the dedication program" [42, p. 154]. Even if her commitment to the ideals in which she believed made her somewhat strident, Rose's legacy of sincerity and honesty in her work and of giving unstintingly of herself is unblemished. It was only fitting that the memorial service for Rose on June 5, 1961, be planned by a citizens committee and held at the library building for which she was largely responsible. Officials from the New York Public Library and the Urban League, members of other citizens' committees, former staff, and friends of the library paid homage to Rose and remembered her as "Librarian Friend of Harlem." REFERENCES 1. Woofter, T. J. Negro Problems in Cities. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1928. 2. Curts, Paul H., ed. Bridgehampton's Three Hundred Years. Bridgehampton, N.Y.: Hamp- ton Press, 1956. 3. Adams, James Truslow. Memonrals of Old Bnidgehampton. Bridgehampton, N.Y.: Hamp- ton Press, 1916. 4. New York State Library School Register, 1887-1926. New York: New York State Library School Association, 1928. 5. Dain, Phyllis. The New York Public Library: A History of Its Founding and Early Years. New York: New York Public Library, 1972. 6. Rose, Ernestine. Bnrdging the Gulf: Work with the Russian Jews and Other Newcomers. New York: Immigrant Publication Society, 1917.
230 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 7. Rose, Ernestine. The Public Library in American Life. New York: Columbia University Press, 1954. 8. War Libraty Bulletin 1 (June 1918): 8. 9. Telephone conversation with Jean Blackwell Hutson, July 1986. 10. Hunton, Addie W., and Kathryn M. Johnson. Two Colored Women unth the American Expeditionary Forces. Brooklyn: Brooklyn Eagle Press, 1920. 11. Rose, Ernestine. "Serving New York's Black City." LibraryJournal 40 (March 15, 1921): 255-58. 12. Rose, Ernestine. "Books and the Color Line." Survey 48 (April 15, 1922): 75-76. 13. Huggins, Nathan I. Harlem Renaissance. New York: Oxford University Press, 1971. 14. Locke, Alain L., ed. The New Negro: An Interpretation. New York: Boni, 1925. 15. Rose, Ernestine. "Where Black and White Meet." Southern Workman 51 (October 1922): 467-7 1. 16. Rose, Ernestine, "A Librarian in Harlem." Opportunity I (uly 1923): 206-7, 220. 17. Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York Public Library. Records, box 12, folder 11. 18. "Report of the Director." Bulletin of the New York Public Library 25 (April 1921): 239- 41. 19. Biddle, Stanton F. "A Partnership in Progress." Schomburg Center Journal I (Spring 1978): 2-3, 12. 20. Bontemps, Ama, "Special Collections of Negroana." Library Quarterly 14 (July 1944): 187-206. 21. "Move to Preserve Negro Literature." New York Times (March 15, 1925), 16. 22. Hutson, Jean Blackwell. "The Schomburg Collection." Freedomways 3 (Summer 1963): 430-33. 23. Rose, Ernestine. "Books and the Negro." Library Journal 52 (November 1, 1927): 1012-14. 24. Hughes, Langston. "My Early Days in Harlem." In Harlem, a Community in Transition, edited by John Henrik Clarke. New York: Citadel, 1969. 25. "Work with Negroes Round Table." Bulletin of the American Library Association 15 (July 1921): 200-201. 26. "Work with Negroes Round Table." Bulktin of the American Library Association 6 (July 1922): 361-66. 27. "Work with Negroes Round Table." Bulktin of the American Library Association 7 (July 1923): 274-79. 28. "Racial Discrimination." Library Journal 65 (April 1, 1940): 296. 29. "A.L.A. Resolutions." Libraty Journal 65 (June 15, 1940): 530. 30. "Library's Bill of Rights." Library Journal 64 (July 1939): 549. 31. Geller, Evelyn. Forbidden Books in American Public Libraries, 1876-1939: A Study in Cultural Change. Westport: Greenwood, 1984. 32. Reid, Ira deA. Adult Education among Negroes. Washington, D.C.: Associates in Negro Folk Education, 1936. 33. Monroe, Margaret E. Library Adult Education: The Biography of an Idea. New York: Scarecrow, 1963. 34. "Harlem Launches Big Adult Education Program." Chicago Defender (December 26, 1931), p. 1. 35. Rose, Ernestine, and Tommie Dora Barker. "Racial Development and Cooperation." Journal of Adult Education 5 (January 1933): 53-57. 36. Stern, Bernhard J. "The Negro in Adult Education." In The Negro in American Education: A Research Memorandum, by Doxey A. Wilkerson. 3 vols. New York, 1940.
WHITE LIBRARIAN IN HARLEM 231 37. "Public Library's New Branch on 136th St. Opens with Exercises." New York Age (June 6, 1942), p. 2. 38. Alain Locke to Ernestine Rose, May 21, 1942, in the files of the Archives, Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture. 39. Claude McKay to Ernestine Rose, June 1, 1942, in the files of the Archives, Schom- burg Center for Research in Black Culture. 40. Telegram, Florence Rising Curtis to Ernestine Rose, May 27, 1942, in the files of the Archives, Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture. 41. Priscilla E. Morton to Betty L. Jenkins, November 10, 1986. 42. Shores, Louis. Quiet World: A Librarian's Crusade for Destiny. Hamden: Shoe String Press, 1975.