LABOR MARKET SEGMENTATION AND LIBRARIAN SALARIES' Nancy A. Van House2 Librarian earnings functions have been found to differ by type of library and by sex within library type. The present study uses segmented labor market the- ory to explain how the structure of the library labor market may determine salary differences by type of library. Data on the public, academic, and school library labor markets are used to show that the library labor market is segmented by type of library; that this segmentation contributes to the observed differences in earnings functions by type of library; and that the segmentation of the library labor market reflects segmentation of the labor market generally. A secondary result of this study is that it shows the value of intraoccupational studies like this one for a full understanding of labor market segmentation. By finding evidence of labor market segmentation at the intraoccupational level, it shows that the more usual approach to segmented labor markets, comparing entire occupations or industries, may obscure important differences. To attract and retain qualified people, an occupation must offer ade- quate and equitable salaries. Research has found that librarians' salaries, however, are relatively low [1] and differ markedly by sex [2-41 and by type of library [2]. Not only do salary levels differ, but the factors that determine librarians' earnings, and the influence of each factor on salary, differ by type of library [2, 3] and by sex within library type [2]. Librarians are generally considered to belong to a single occupation: they are (for the most part) trained in the same ALA-accredited library 1. The data reported are drawn from the Career Profile of American Library Association Personal Members, based on a survey conducted by Leigh S. Estabrook and Kathleen M. Heim for the American Library Association, Committee on the Status of Women in Librarianship, with support from a Bailey K. Howard ALA Goals Award. This assis- tance is gratefully acknowledged. 2. School of Library and Information Studies, University of California, Berkeley, Berke- ley, California 94720. [Library Quarterly, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 171-189] X 1987 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-251 9/87/5702-0002$0 1.00 171
172 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY schools and receive the same M.L.S. degrees. Yet the type of library in which a person is employed is a key determinant of his or her career earnings. And men and women differ in their career earnings partly because they tend to be employed in different types of library. At least two possible explanations for differences in earnings func- tions across library types can be proposed. First, the work and/or work- ing conditions may differ, resulting in a need to pay higher salaries to get librarians to take some jobs. Filer [5], for example, proposed com- pensating differentials to explain part of the male-female wage gap in the work force as a whole: men may be working in jobs that are more difficult, less pleasant, or otherwise less desirable and so may demand higher salaries to compensate for the lower nonmonetary utility of their jobs. Clearly, librarians in different work settings perform somewhat different functions; but they receive their basic training together in M.L.S. programs, implying marked similarities in their work as well. Nevertheless, differences in work and/or working conditions may ex- plain at least part of the type-of-library differences. Second, the structure of the library labor market may help to explain the differences. Although librarianship appears to be a single occupa- tion, it may not be. If the library labor market is divided into segments that are insulated from each other, preventing the free movement of employees from one to another, differential compensation schemes can develop and persist, resulting in different earnings for people with similar qualifications performing similar work in the different segments. In this case, earnings differences would stem not from differences in worker qualifications or the work performed (although these factors may operate as well) but from the sector in which a person is employed. Both of these explanations merit investigation. The present study is concerned only with the second: the structure of the library labor mar- ket and its effect on earnings differentials across types of libraries. The causes of earnings differences by sex within type of library, and the possibility of compensating differentials across library types, must also be addressed as part of a comprehensive inquiry into the determination of librarian salaries but are beyond the scope of the present study. The present study addresses the following questions: Is the library labor market segmented by type of library? If so, what are the character- istics of the different markets that contribute to earnings differences? How do the characteristics of these segments affect earnings? And finally, does segmentation within the library labor market reflect seg- mentation in the economy as a whole? Segmented labor market theory has been proposed to explain differences in labor market outcomes as a result of the structure of the labor market. This study will examine the
LIBRARIAN SALARIES 173 implications of this theory for librarianship, as well as the implications of the data on librarianship for the theory. A major point of discussion in segmented labor market (SLM) re- search is the basis on which labor markets are segmented. Empirically, this translates into a question of the appropriate unit of analysis: indus- try, occupation, industry-occupation cell, or something else entirely. A secondary purpose of this study is to look for evidence of segmentation at the intraoccupational level-in this case, within librarianship. If li- brarianship is segmented, then the more usual approach to SLM re- search, comparing entire occupations or industries, may obscure impor- tant differences, and intraoccupational studies like this one will be shown to be necessary for a full understanding of labor market segmen- tation. Segmented Labor Market Theory Segmented labor market theory attempts to explain group differences in earnings and occupation (specifically but not exclusively by race and sex) that remain after human capital variables such as education and experi- ence are taken into account. SLM theory posits that the labor market is divided into segments or sectors with different employment and wage- setting processes. Barriers to movement prevent workers from crossing segments and so allow these differences to persist. A key point of SLM theory is that these sectors differ on some measure of job quality or desirability, including but not necessarily limited to earnings, and that workers are not randomly distributed across the sectors [6]. The result is that workers with similar qualifica- tions performing the same or similar work will be paid differently; that is, the coefficients on the relevant worker characteristics in the earnings functions will differ. In contrast, neoclassical labor market theory would say that workers have complete information and mobility. Differences in earnings functions within an occupation would draw workers from the low-wage to the high-wage sector, eventually eliminating the differences. Salary differences would be due to differences in worker qualifications (assuming that the work performed is similar), not to differences in how those characteristics are evaluated [7]. SLM theory began by assuming that there were two labor market segments (dual labor markets), one primary, the other secondary [8]. In the primary sector, worker skill is important to the production process. Employers encourage worker attachment and try to reduce turnover; training and experience are valued. The primary sector is characterized
174 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY by high wages, good working conditions, employment stability, rewards for training and experience, opportunities for advancement, and higher status. In the secondary sector, worker skill is less important. Thus, this sector offers lower wages, poorer working conditions, less opportunity for advancement, higher turnover, and less status. SLM research continues to grapple with the question of the basis on which markets are segmented and, hence, with the ultimate number of segments. The primary-secondary duality has become more of a con- tinuum, with a varying number of segments in between, depending on the researcher. Part of the confusion arises from the lack of theoretical development and inconsistencies in conceptualization and taxonomies [9, 10]. The two major theoretical approaches are dual economy, which says that industries are segmented, and dual or segmented labor market, which says labor markets are segmented. Empirically this translates into debates over the unit of analysis and the measures used to define the sectors and to test for segmentation. Various researchers have used or proposed as the appropriate unit of analysis the worker [11], job [12], industry [13], firm [10], and occupation [14]. The measurement prob- lem is that of avoiding redundancy between the measures used to define the sectors and those used to test for segmentation. An equally important question that has received less attention is how and why workers are assigned to segments. Although SLM theory began as an attempt to explain race and sex differences in occupational out- comes, the choice of these particular characteristics as the bases on which workers are channeled into segments is not necessarily inherent in SLM theory. The theoretical development and empirical testing of SLM theory continues amid much controversy. However, in a recent survey of re- search directions in the economics of education, Blaug [6] identified labor market segmentation as a key challenge. Internal Labor Markets The concept of internal labor markets is closely related to that of seg- mented labor markets. An internal labor market (ILM) is a set of bu- reaucratic rules and procedures that govern how people get access to jobs and the reward systems of those jobs relative to one another [7, 8]. An ILM creates a job ladder; advancement is generally facilitated by some combination of education (formal and informal), on-the-job train- ing, and seniority. ILMs create motivation and commitment by reward- ing performance, longevity, and investment in human capital [15]. At the same time they bar newcomers from entering the market at any but the lowest level, thereby erecting barriers to movement across labor market segments.
LIBRARIAN SALARIES 175 Factors that have been identified as contributing to the development of ILMs include tasks that require a high degree of firm-specific knowl- edge; tasks that are high in uncertainty and low in routine, with a high reliance on employee discretion and judgment; and high competition for labor [16]. Althauser and Kalleberg [7] have argued for a broadening of the concept of the internal labor market to create a taxonomy of five kinds of labor market: Firm internal labor market (FILM): The FILM is a job ladder internal to a firm. Entry is limited, generally to the lowest-level jobs, and once employed a worker tends to move up within the organization. This is the traditional ILM as defined by most research. Firm labor market (FLM): The FLM also operates within a firm and offers job security and shelter from external competition but has no job ladder. Once employed by a firm the worker remains, but the rewards are only for seniority (if that), with little or no increase in skill or responsibility. Occupational internal labor market (OILM): An OILM operates within an occupation, not a firm. It has a job ladder, with rewards for increased skill and experience, but it crosses firms. People tend to move from organization to organization within the occupation. Occupational labor market (OLM): An OLM also occurs within an occupation, not a firm. Entry requires specialized skills or knowledge acquired only by education or training. However, the occupation has no ILM, that is, no career ladder. For example, many health occupations require certification, limiting entry, but offer few or no prospects for advancement. Employees move laterally among firms within the occupation. Secondary labor market: The secondary labor market lacks job ladders, devel- opment of skills or knowledge, and investment in training by either employee or employer. Salaries are relatively low, entry is fairly easy, and workers tend to move in and out of the labor market and from one firm to another. Approaches to Research on SLMs Two methods have been used to test for the existence of segmented labor markets [17]. The first is factor analysis of job and/or worker characteristics, which empirically clusters jobs or workers, looking for underlying dimensions (that, presumably, reflect the segmentation pre- dicted by SLM theory). The second and more common method consists of dividing occupations and/or industries into two or more sectors and testing for differences in their wage equations that are consistent with SLM theory. The problem with this approach is in defining the sectors while avoiding redundancy between the factors used to define the sec- tors and to test for segmentation [9, 10]. Several researchers have suggested that it is necessary to use a more disaggregated unit of analysis than either industry or occupation. Baron and Bielby [10] have proposed the firm, Althauser and Kalleberg [71 the occupation-industry cell (that is, people employed in the same occupa-
176 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY tion within a single industry). Althauser and Kalleberg, as well as Baron and Bielby, argue that it is not necessarily true that all members of a given occupation or industry are in the same labor market segment. Analysis at either the firm or industry-occupation cell level would avoid the related problems of determining the appropriate unit of analysis (industry vs. occupation) and of redundancy in the measures. Baron and Bielby [10] also argue for the importance of context in understanding the meaning of the independent variables in a salary function. The same variable may represent different processes in differ- ent contexts. For example, education may represent training in one situation and credentialing (for example, this person has the self- discipline to come to school every day) in another. The more aggregated the data, the more likely such confusion. This may account for some of the inconsistencies in the empirical findings of segmented labor market research [9]. The Present Study The implications of the above discussion for the present research are as follows. First, segmentation of the library labor market by type of library would mean that movement across the segments is limited, interfering with the adjustment of supply and demand and creating salary in- equities. Librarians with the same training performing similar work could be paid differently in the different sectors. Librarian surpluses and shortages could develop in the different segments; barriers to worker movement would prevent the market from making needed ad- justments. The mere identification of the existence of such market barriers would be helpful in understanding the dynamics of supply and demand in librarianship. Second, if the library market is segmented, it would be useful to describe more clearly the reward processes within each segment. Alt- hauser and Kalleberg's taxonomy, with its explicit treatment of both occupation and firm, would seem an appropriate taxonomy to use to describe the library profession. If the library labor market is segmented, and if its pattern of segmen- tation reflects that proposed by segmented labor market theory, this would simultaneously add to the evidence for that theory and suggest that SLM theory may increase our understanding of the library labor market. If the library labor market appears to be consistent with the predictions derived from SLM theory, then we may be able to draw further inferences from SLM theory to librarianship. In particular, within librarianship, differences in earnings between men and women are due to a large extent to differences in the types of library in which
LIBRARIAN SALARIES 177 they are employed, with women concentrated in the lower-paying sec- tors [2]. What remains to be explained is the process by which the sexes differentially choose [2] or are assigned to types of library. SLMs may offer some insight to this problem. Finally, research at the type-of-library level can contribute to the debate within SLM research over the appropriate unit of analysis by demonstrating the usefulness of industry-occupation cell. Instead of assuming that occupations and/or industries are homogeneous, the pres- ent study tests for heterogeneity within librarianship at the occupation- industry level. The problem of redundancy between the criteria used to classify industries and/or occupations and those used to measure seg- mentation is eliminated. The present analysis uses evidence on intraoccupational movement among librarians to test for segmentation. It also uses the librarians' earnings functions developed by Van House [2] to test for differences in wage equations that are consistent with SLM theory. The earlier study was concerned with the effect of worker characteristics, or supply fac- tors, on earnings. It developed earnings functions by sex and type of library and tested a human capital (supply-based) explanation of distri- bution of librarians by sex and type of library. The present study uses the earnings functions developed previously to investigate the possibility of a segmented library labor market and to test the effect of labor market structure, or demand factors, on earnings. The two studies together address the two sides of salary determination, supply and demand. The Data The data are drawn from Estabrook and Heim's 1980 survey of 3,000 ALA individual members, excluding lay (that is, nonlibrarian), student, and trustee members [3]. They received 1,987 usable responses (1,552 from women, 435 from men) for a 67.1 percent response rate. Librarians who belong to a professional association may have a higher degree of career commitment and be in higher-level jobs than those who do not, but no data on this exist.3 Only white M.L.S.-degree holders employed full time in public, aca- demic, and school libraries are included in the present analysis. The sample size varies because data were not present for all variables for all respondents. Table 1 shows descriptive data and sample sizes for the cases included in the earnings functions: this sample size was 536. Male 3. See Van House [2] for a more comprehensive discussion of the data and the implica- tions of using a professional association sample.
n~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~r In 00 Coc) iD m 8 V t t- -> o --- en - an CD 8~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~t ox an _- C4 00 - _l k _- oI_ n 0~~~~~~~~~~~7 v 0-0 c _6 _ _ ...4 ~ ~~~ _ eX b ? < E ,, ~~cqxv '_e *- <:~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~C 3: xn 0 ^ P~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ )C Ct - b N~~~~~~~~~~~~~ - 0+ X a e e O o ? t e z O X ? O O~~~~~~ >-s:a:; v! V _ r- 1 o cs o ~ ~ o - - ! S E ,, ot t__ xrz _-4u 178
or Lq wq aS) VZ wq - ~ al) 1 -i CW Lq nCJ 13a C! v, t C4 - - - - - c c D G4 - > d t- (c 0 * _ .* * _ * _ * _ -_ * _ .* _ C~~~~~~IC t, in - O 0 a A N C14 CD ce) 1- (M C) X0 - f cN L> t - C4l . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . O t On C4 w0 in - V N t - - -C CS)O cn o 14 r _ _* -* -.. -* - -*C - _ _ ~~~~~~~~~~~- _ _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . N t- iM-CMn - ( D - C s D 04 V S-C N t- 00 0 0 o o . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 00 ce an 10 O Lte) C4 cr- ( ) :7~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~e _o -~ _7 C> t-1 J t- Csl - Lo 00 r- oe t- xL M w- 0 0 ( O . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . t~~~~~s - _ VP -4 O - -) 1- Lo U.- Cu~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ ~~~.. o .2 ~ ~ ~ ~ b c. >_6 b O - O~~~~~~~ q: *C - Cu C A V 0 0 ~~~~~~ V ~ ~ > - : 0 17V9~ 0 ~~ z ~ ~ ~ ~ . I 179E
180 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY school librarians and respondents in other work settings (for example, special libraries) are excluded because of their small numbers. Minorities (including blacks, Asians, and Hispanics) are excluded because there were few of them and because they may have different earnings func- tions from whites [ 18]. Segmentation of the Library Labor Market Among the three library labor market sectors that are the subject of this analysis (academic, school, and public), I hypothesize a continuum that generally reflects a primary/secondary division. Librarians are, by most definitions, members of the primary labor market because of their education. Presumably, education represents both an investment in hu- man capital and a barrier to entry. (Osterman [ 19] classified librarians in the lower tier of the primary sector in his three-segment categorization: primary sector, upper tier; primary sector, lower tier; secondary sector.) One would not expect, therefore, to find a true secondary labor market within libraries. However, if the different types of library correspond to different labor market segments along a continuum that generally reflects the primary-secondary division, we would expect to find the following. Zucker and Rosenstein [9] have reviewed and summarized the hypotheses that commonly result from segmented labor market theory; these hypotheses are adapted from theirs. First, if the library labor market is segmented, there should be little movement across types of library [17]. Second, there should be differences in earnings determination. Wages should be higher in the type of library most like a primary sector [17]. The earnings functions should also differ: a key tenet of SLM theory is that the returns to human capital-related variables will be less in the secondary sector. The primary sector should evidence greater returns to additional education [11, 14, 19] and higher rewards for experience in the profession and for tenure in one organization [13, 17]. Differences in worker characteristics should also appear. Librarians in the primary sector should show more experience, tenure, and education [9]. The career patterns of workers in the two sectors should also differ, with those in the primary sector showing higher upward mobility [11, 13]. Segmented labor market theory has been used to explain segregation by race and/or sex, although labor markets may be segmented without segregation: the question of how workers are assigned to segments is separate from that of whether segments exist. Nevertheless, it is gener- ally assumed [9] that women and minorities are more often employed in the secondary sector. We would therefore expect to find fewer women in
LIBRARIAN SALARIES 181 the segment more like a primary market, although this is not a necessary condition of segmented labor markets. Findings The first question is whether librarians are limited in their ability to cross segments. Table 2 compares respondents' current employment with the type of library in which they held their most recent previous job. The results indicate little movement across sectors. Similar findings are re- ported in the library human resources study [20, p. 49]. Once a librarian enters a labor market segment he or she is unlikely to change. The next question is whether earnings levels and functions differ as predicted. Because the segments have already been defined as corre- sponding to types of libraries, the question is, Do the earnings functions differ by type of library? and if so, Do the different segments show the differences expected between primary and secondary labor markets? Salary functions (table 3) were developed by sex and type of library (except for men employed in school libraries, of whom there were too few). The dependent variable was annual salary. The independent vari- ables were worker characteristics, including number of children and several measures of human capital (experience, tenure in present job, and additional degrees beyond the M.L.S.); job characteristics, including level in the organization, number of professionals and nonprofessionals supervised, and publications and professional activity; and size of or- ganization. These were the variables, drawn from a slightly larger origi- nal set, that proved to be significant for more than one type of library. Details on the development of the salary functions can be found in Van House [2]. All possible pairs of regressions were tested and found to be statistically significantly different from one another at the 95 percent level. Mean salaries for men and for women are highest in academic librar- ies (see table 1). For men, academic libraries show higher returns on experience and additional education than do public libraries. For women, the differences between public and academic libraries are fewer, with additional education significant for women in public libraries and professional activity and publications for those in academic libraries. The earnings function for women in school libraries, however, shows rewards only for tenure in current job and for number of nonprofes- sionals supervised. Turning to the characteristics of the workers in the different types of library (table 1), men in academic libraries have more experience, longer tenure in their current jobs, and more education than those in public libraries. Women in school libraries have less experience than their colleagues in either public or academic libraries, but somewhat longer
1k o V > in tL) U,t C 1 i t~~~~~~~~~~~~~4 ~ ~ 4 182'~
z w tll oq 0 m iZ, ;z C,4 :z r- ; 'n LO Q ci C C,4 ci P. (7; 1.6 I' __:_ 06 C; --z V' dei V' c- LM an t- on 00 .n -n an V in r- r- o LLI) ko an r- 00 Ln rl a; v m " 00 00 go L* on iZ, o oo i;; 0, 'D OR N C4 . . . . . . . . . 0 C4 UD0 r- C4 V) W WI M c r- on 0 to OD r- 9 ko, or) 00 v on m N on 04 C'A an C4 an on 00 llq LO c- n 00 C4 CD an kn CIA 0 OD OF) or) Of) C) v 00 LO Ln C14 4m W C14 C'A z > oo at, ON in an v o6 o6 4 r- 00 kn VV go C4 ulV ul knVW to Or) m V) 00 W csi J*m r- Ln an on t- cf - - v orv 00 r- 0 Om V) 00 OD C4 (M v - Ln - C) 0 km C4 Ln z 0 W cn UD 04 to -r, -go Ev C V! an m an in xn C14 to z W 0 PL > 0 3 0 V V 50 m r. 00 r- to -co 0 - v 0 z 8 183
184 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY tenure in their current job. Academic women are the most profession- ally active, have published the most, and have more education in addi- tion to the M.L.S. degree. The results point toward a continuum of library types. Academic libraries appear to be the most like a primary sector, more inclined to have an internal labor market, with higher salaries, greater rewards for experience and human capital, and more experienced and profession- ally active employees. School libraries are most like a secondary segment, with few rewards for human capital investment or achievement. Public libraries are somewhat in between but lean toward primary-sector-like behavior. (The differences between academic and public libraries are more striking for men than for women.) The relative numbers of men and women employed in the different sectors follow this same pattern, with fewer women in academic libraries and more in school libraries. Firn and Occupational Labor Markets The factors discussed in the preceding section test for the existence of library labor market segments reflecting a primary-secondary con- tinuum. It appears that academic and public libraries are structured more like the primary sector, with internal labor markets, than are school libraries. The analysis can be carried further, however, using Althauser and Kalleberg's taxonomy [7]. Table 2 has shown that librarians rarely move across type-of-library lines, contributing to differences in type-of-library markets. The more freely librarians move across organizations within library types, however, the more homogeneous the type-of-library mar- ket is likely to be. If, however, librarians tend to stay within an organiza- tion (for example, school librarians may move between the positions of teacher and librarian in one school or district), then the market within which they are operating may not be the library occupation but, rather, the industry within which their libraries are situated. The next question, therefore, is whether the mobility patterns of librarians reflect one or more of Althauser and Kalleberg's types of markets [7]; and whether these differ by type of library. Given that all of our subjects are librarians with M.L.S. degrees, we have by definition no pure secondary labor market. However, it is possible that within a type of library there exists an occupational labor market (OLM). An OLM would show no signs of an internal labor market, that is, little or no upward mobility or returns to experience, tenure, or education. On the other hand, an occupational internal labor market (OILM) would show upward movement within the occupation (but not within a single library), with returns to experience and educa- tion. A sector consisting of firm internal labor markets (FILMs) would
LIBRARIAN SALARIES 185 show little or no movement across organizations, but upward movement within the organization and returns to experience, tenure, and educa- tion. Similarly, a firm labor market (FLM) would show low worker turnover (that is, continuing employment within one organization) but no upward mobility and no returns to experience, tenure, or education. In contrast to the OLM, workers in an FLM should show a relative tendency to stay in one organization. Estabrook and Heim [3] did not formulate their study with Althauser and Kalleberg's [7] taxonomy in mind. However, respondents were asked to typify their career patterns over time, and the choices presented to them correspond rouighly to Althauser and Kalleberg's market types. Table 4 presents the results. "Same position, same organization" denotes a stagnant career pattern. "Similar position, same organization" repre- sents lateral movement within the same organization: that is, at best a firm labor market, with no upward mobility. "Different position, same organization" includes FILMs: that is, movement, presumably some of which is upward, within the same firm. "Similar position, different organization" includes occupational labor markets; that is, movement across organizations but without upward mobility. "Different position, different organization" represents movement both hierarchically and organizationally: that is, an occupational internal labor market. (Of course, not all such movement is up a career ladder, but some portion of it is.) Among school librarians, 57 percent report working in the same or similar position within one or more organizations-that is, possibly an TABLE 4 CAREER PATrERN BY TYPE OF LIBRARY AND SEX (%) ACADEMIC PUBLIC SCHOOL CAREER M F All M F All F PA-I1ERN (144) (266) (410) (74) (294) (368) (151) Same position, same organization 10.4 7.5 8.5 12.2 10.9 11.1 15.2 Similar position, same organization 7.6 7.9 7.8 2.7 10.2 8.7 11.3 Different position, same organization 16.7 19.9 18.8 14.9 21.4 20.1 9.9 Similar position, different organization 14.6 18.0 16.8 17.6 15.3 15.8 29.8 Different position, different organization 50.7 46.6 48.0 52.7 42.2 44.3 33.8 NOTE.-Numbers in parentheses equal sample size.
186 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY occupational labor market and/or a firm labor market, but no upward mobility, no OILM. In contrast, 67 percent of academic librarians report holding different positions in either different or the same organizations. To the extent that these different positions reflect upward movement, these responses reflect an OILM, especially since the number reporting "different organization" far outnumber those reporting "same organiza- tion." Public librarians are almost as likely as their academic colleagues to report a similar movement; that is, different positions in the same or different organiiations. This indicates that for public librarians, as well, an OILM may be operating. Discussion Why does it matter whether the library labor market is segmented? Because if the library profession is divided into segments with relatively impermeable boundaries, it will operate differently from one fairly homogeneous market. Segmentation affects salary determination by preventing people from moving from lower to higher salary segments. Librarians with similar qualifications may be paid differently for per- forming essentially the same work. Furthermore, workers are less able to move from segments with surplus labor to those with surplus jobs, interfering with the adjustment of supply and demand [21, 22]. Finally, although the present study has not addressed how workers are assigned to segments, SLMs have been used to explain differences in employment and earnings by sex and by race. One of the reasons that female librari- ans earn less than male librarians is that women are concentrated in the lower-paying sectors [2]; whatever the cause of this difference, the inability of librarians to cross segment boundaries will perpetuate it. This study has found that movement across types of library is limited. This comes as no surprise to a reader of library job ads; the library labor market places a premium on type-of-library experience. More important is the evidence that segmentation is not a case of separate but equal; the earnings functions in the different sectors differ substantially. Once a librarian enters a type-of-library labor market, his or her earning power and, more important, his or her ability to influence earnings through human capital investment is severely constrained by the inability to change sectors. Salaries, librarian characteristics, and labor market operations seem to reflect a primary-secondary market continuum among types of library, with academic libraries most like a primary market, school libraries like a secondary market, and public libraries in between but more primary- like. Within this occupation, therefore, the basic premises of SLM theory hold.
LIBRARIAN SALARIES 187 Althauser and Kalleberg's taxonomy [7], which distinguishes occupa- tional and firm markets with and without internal labor markets, is a useful expansion on ILMs that helps us further to describe and under- stand the different segments. The evidence on earnings functions and on librarian mobility indicates that academic and public libraries func- tion as occupational internal labor markets with job ladders that cross organizational boundaries. These job ladders serve to insulate the seg- ments from one another by limiting entry and regulating salaries and advancement. School libraries, however, show no evidence of job lad- ders. They appear to be an occupational labor market, with barriers to entry (the M.L.S. or equivalent, and in some cases teaching or school library credentials) but with little hierarchical movement once past the barrier. These findings are significant in several ways for our understanding of the library labor market. First, primary sector jobs are more finan- cially rewarding over the employee's working life. They pay more and offer the worker greater opportunities to increase his or her earnings potential through human capital investment such as education and training. Therefore, sector assignment is an important determinant of lifetime earnings differences. Research into librarian salary differences must address the issue of how librarians come to choose or to be assigned to sectors. This is especially important to an understanding of male- female salary differences since the sexes are distributed disproportion- ately among library types. Second, librarianship is shown to follow the pattern of segmentation in the labor force as a whole. The continuing research into labor market segmentation, therefore, is relevant to the study of the library labor market. The basic premise of SLM theory is that occupational attain- ment is a result not solely of individual qualifications and effort but also of labor market structure. This is an important point in understanding librarians' occupational outcomes. Third, the differences in reward structures and in the extent of ILMs in the different types of library may reflect a difference in the work performed. If, as Kantor [16] and others suggest, ILMs develop in situations requiring a high degree of firm- (or occupation-) specific knowledge, relying heavily on employee discretion and judgment and competing for labor, the corollary is that the lack of an ILM may be evidence of an absence of these conditions. School libraries' apparent lack of ILMs may indicate differences in the work performed and/or the skills required from those in the other library sectors. (Teaching is often considered a secondary market because it lacks career ladders [23, p. 48]; school libraries may be part of the teaching market.) This possibility merits further investigation. These results do not tell us why or how the sexes differ in their
188 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY assignment to types of libraries; however, the observed differences are consistent with the distribution of library types on the primary- secondary continuum, with fewer women in the more primary-like sec- tors. Further research is needed on the process by which librarians are initially assigned to a market segment. Current research indicates that most library school students have already sorted themselves by type of library [24]; what remains to be seen is how this comes about. Previous research [2] has refuted the hypothesis that male and female librarians sort themselves by type of library based on their family circumstances and labor force attachment. The finding of labor market segmentation within librarianship is also a contribution to segmented labor market research and the debate over industry versus occupational segmentation. By finding differences in salaries, employee characteristics, and labor market functioning consis- tent with a segmented labor market within an occupation with substan- tial educational prerequisites, this study shows that research at the level of entire occupations may obscure important differences. The industry- occupation cell is clearly an appropriate unit of analysis for investigating labor market differences. Within librarianship, not all members of the occupation are governed by the same labor market. This needs to be tested in other occupations as well that cross industry boundaries. By the nature of the data, this study was limited to ALA members in public and academic libraries; in school libraries, it was further limited to women. Special libraries cross virtually all industry categories and so would be particularly useful for further investigation, but because they are so widely distributed they are difficult to study. A more detailed analysis of the relationship between school librarianship and teaching would also be useful for a fuller understanding of the library market as a whole; it is likely that school librarians are operating in a totally different market, the teaching market. Research is also needed on possible differences in the work performed by librarians in the different sectors, and the effects of these differences on earnings and on worker assignment. This research has shown that the library labor market is heterogeneous in its salary determination; other differences may contribute to the dynamics of the library labor market. REFERENCES 1. Van House, Nancy A. "Return on the Investment in Library Education." Library and Information Science Research 7 (January-March 1985): 31-52. 2. Van House, Nancy A. "Salary Determination and Occupational Segregation among Librarians." Library Quarterly 56 (April 1986): 142-66.
LIBRARIAN SALARIES 189 3. Heim, Kathleen M., and Estabrook, Leigh S. Career Profiles and Sex D'scrzmination in the Library Profession. Chicago: American Library Association, 1983. 4. Seibert, W. S., and Young, A. "Sex and Family Status Differentials in Professional Earnings: The Case of Librarians." Scottish Journal of Political Economy 30 (February 1983): 18-41. 5. Filer, Randall K. "Male-Female Wage Differentials: The Importance of Compensating Differentials." Industrial and Labor Relations Review 38 (April 1985): 426-37. 6. Blaug, Mark. "Where Are We in the Economics of Education?" Economics of Education Review 4, no. 1 (1985): 17-28. 7. Althauser, Robert P., and Kalleberg, Arne L. "Firms, Occupations, and the Structure of Labor Markets: A Conceptual Analysis." In Sociological Perspectives on Labor Markets, edited by Ivar Berg. New York: Academic Press, 1981. 8. Doeringer, Peter B., and Piore, Michael J. Internal Labor Markets and Manpower Analy- sis. Lexington, Mass.: Heath Lexington Books, 1971. 9. Zucker, Lynne G., and Rosenstein, Carolun. "Taxonomies of Institutional Structure: Dual Economy Reconsidered." American Sociological Review 5 (December 1981): 869- 84. 10. Baron, James N., and Bielby, William T. "Bring the Firms Back In: Stratification, Segmentation, and the Organization of Work." American Sociological Review 45 (Octo- ber 1980): 737-65. 11. Wanner, Richard A., and Lewis, Lionel S. "Economic Segmentation and the Course of an Occupational Career." Work and Occupations 10 (August 1983): 307-24. 12. Rosenberg, Sam. "Male Occupational Standing and the Dual Labor Market." Industrial Relations 19 (Winter 1980): 34-49. 13. Cohen, Yinon, and Pfeffer, Jeffrey. "Employment Practices in the Dual Economy." Industrial Relations 23 (Winter 1984): 58-72. 14. Meng, Ronald. "An Empirical Test for Labor Market Segmentation of Males in Canada." Industrial Relations 24 (Spring 1985): 280-87. 15. Pfeffer, Jeffrey, and Davis-Blake, Allison. "Determinants of Salary Inequality in Or- ganizations." Paper delivered at the Academy of Management annual meeting, San Diego, California, August 1985. 16. Kantor, Rosabeth Moss. "Variations in Managerial Career Structures in High Tech- nology Firms: The Impact of Organizational Characteristics on Internal Labor Market Patterns." In Internal Labor Markets, edited by Paul Osterman. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1984. 17. Dickens, William T., and Lang, Kevin. "A Test of Dual Labor Market Theory." American Economic Review 75 (September 1985): 792-805. 18. Corcoran, Mary, and Duncan, Greg J. "Work History, Labor Force Attachment, and Earnings Differences between the Races and Sexes."Journal of Human Resources (Win- ter 1979), pp. 3-20. 19. Osterman, Paul. "An Empirical Study of Labor Market Segmentation." Industrial and Labor Relations Review 28 (July 1975): 508-23. 20. King Research, Inc. Library Human Resources: A Study of Supply and Demand. Chicago: American Library Association, 1983. 21. Van House, Nancy A. "Projections of the Supply of Librarians." Library Quarterly 54 (October 1984): 368-95. 22. Cooper, Michael D. "Projections of the Demand for Librarians in the United States." Library Quarterly 54 (October 1984): 331-67. 23. Treiman, Donald J., and Hartmann, Heidi L., eds. Women, Work and Wages: Equal Pay for Jobs of Equal Value. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 1981. 24. Van House, Nancy A. "MLS Students' Choice of a Library Career." May 1986. Typescript.