Let s Get the Most Out of Comprehensive Examinations EDMUND R. ARNOLD AND ROBERT T. BOTTLE Our once and docile student, On examination comprehensive, Though circumspect and prudent, Has objections most extensive. - B. E. Z. Podpisi THE PAST FEW YEARS have witnessed the growth of "stu- dent power" - the rise of student demands for "relevance," and perhaps more important, an active voice in determining the nature and scope of the curriculum and in its administration. Library schools, though somewhat behind the trend, are still no strangers to this phenomenon which during the past year has produced stormy sessions at the Ameri- can Library Association annual meeting, and at those of several state and other associations. It is not our purpose here to treat all aspects of the problem, but rather to focus attention upon one feature of many accredited library school curricula which is beginning to receive more concerted attention by students. Not a few brickbat broadsides have been leveled at the Comprehensive Examination, its concept and its administration. In just over half of our accredited library schools, a Comprehensive Examina- tion is used as a final test of fitness for the library profession - a final This article was prepared while Arnold and Bottle were at the School of Library Science at Syracuse University where both served on the School's Com- mittee on Comprehensive Examinations. Arnold is now Director of Library Serv- ices at Cornell College, Mount Vemon, Iowa, and Bottle is a Lecturer at the University of Bradford in England. Ill
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP test which in some cases has all but washed out otherwise highly re- garded students. Recently one bright student appended a brief essay to an examina- tion paper (which, incidentally, was passed with flying colors) in which the principle of the examination was challenged, and a charge of insult to the student was levelled. Surely, it was felt, such a test, upon which so much is based, is unfair, for to be admitted to the examination the student must have passed satisfactorily all courses, and must have main- tained at least a certain minimum grade average. And what of those highly regarded students who fail ? Their degree is postponed at best, never awarded at the worst, and they may be deprived of a position for which they possess all other qualifications simply because they did not clear that one last hurdle, die Comprehensive Examination - of what? These are serious charges. To some extent they may be justified. Certainly they are worthy of consideration. This paper then will essay a commentary on the Comprehensive Examination in which examina- tions in general, their concept, their purpose, and their ever-present reality will be discussed to some extent and to propose some measures for improving the drafting and administration of comprehensive exam- inations for the betterment of librarianship as a whole. What is an examination? Essentially it is a process of careful scrutiny, an investigation, an inspection, or more properly an assay. Usually the term is associated with some set of questions, written and/or oral, to which a student must supply a set of satisfactory answers. As such, they may be referred to as examinations, tests, quizzes, and possibly other fond epithets. In a larger sense, however, it may well be said that all of us are daily undergoing examinations the grades for which are recorded in an infinite variety of ways. A poor grade for the li- brarian may be the angry user put off by an apparent lack of concern for his problem; a good grade may be the light in a child's eyes as he or she is introduced to a fascinating new idea, or the firm commitment of the mayor, or president of the board to increased support of the library program as the result of a fine presentation of purpose, goals and needs. The promotion received or not, the raise in pay or lack of it, are, to all practical purposes, grades received on a long series of daily comprehensive examinations - comprehensive because in each case de- cisions are made based upon the whole of what one has done - or failed to do. This is not to say that these examinations are objective or even ac- 112
Comprehensive Examinations curate or valid measures of achievement. They exist, however, and are quite likely to remain as long as "productivity" and "competence" are requirements of our economic and social life. They exist as a continuum of life-measures with points, for and against, accumulating daily with the ratios of credits and debits being assessed in a multitude of ways by a multitude of persons for a multitude of reasons. The problem, then, would seem to be less a question whether there should be such a thing as a comprehensive examination in library schools (or anywhere else for that matter) than it is a question of whether a) comprehensive examinations, as they now exist, measure what they are supposed to measure, b) whether such an examination can serve as a final test of a person's fitness for the profession and c) if the answer to "b)" is yes - how? It might be well at this point to consider the present status of the Comprehensive Examination as it exists in the A.L.A. accredited schools. In the fall of 1969 we wrote to the dean, or chairman, of each of the A.L.A. accredited schools of library science in the United States request- ing copies of their latest catalog and any statements of policy concern- ing comprehensive examinations and theses. Information was obtained from 41 of the 43 U.S. schools and this is summarized in Table I where a further breakdown by region is given. (Replies were also received from three Canadian schools, only one of which offered a master's de- gree, and none of which required a comprehensive examination. We did not include these three in the final tabulation because of the dif- ficulty of determining the equivalence of their programs to those on the south side of the border; nor did we include the two non-responding schools because, although their catalogs were subsequently examined, no definite statments either way concerning comprehensive examinations could be discerned.) An impression gained from perusal of our information is that while 22 per cent of the schools offer a thesis option, such option is not ac- tively encouraged. In effect, then, 56 per cent of our respondents require a Comprehensive Examination, thus tacitly agreeing that this is a legiti- mate final test - at least up to this point. The percentage of the "top ten" schools requiring comprehensive examinations, however, did not differ significantly from the over-all figure. (These "top ten" were somewhat arbitrarily determined from an informal survey of opinion of nine Syracuse University Library School faculty.) Some regional variations are apparent, for example, the northeast appears less strin- gent in this requirement than the average. 113
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP North- South- Mid- South- West TOTAL % cast cast west west N-10 N-7 N-12 N-4 N-8 Comprehensive Examination only- Required 12 29 2 3 5 0 2 Comprehensive Examination OR Thesis-Required 9 22 1 1 1 3 3 Comprehensive Examination AND Thesis- Required 2 5 0 0 110 Thesis only - Required 12 0 0 10 0 Neither Required 17 42 6 2 3 0 3 ( ) - Thesis optional in lieu of two courses +(1) +(1) -HI) No. Accredited Schools: 43 No. Responses: 41 Figures Based on Responses table I. - Comprehensive Examination and Thesis Requirements at the Master's Degree Level in US. Accredited Library Schools Some schools, however, did indicate that they are involved in a re- assessment of their entire program, including the Comprehensive Ex- amination and the thesis requirement. Beyond supporting our original guess that more would require the examination than would not (though the "race" was tighter than we had supposed), we hesitate to assign any great significance to these figures. What was hoped for really was some statement or statements concerning the philosophy behind, or the rationale for either the Comprehensive Examination or the thesis. Alas! Though there were several statements on length, nature, and adminis- tration, no statement of principle was discovered. It is evident, how- ever, that several schools are giving thought to this problem, if not to a published declaration available to their students, certainly to the ques- tion of "is it valid" - "should we? or shouldn't we?" It almost seems as if the purpose and philosophy of examinations in general, and Comprehensive Examinations in particular is taken to be self-evident and not in need of exposition. If true, such a point of view 114
Comprehensive Examinations would not be inconsistent with our earlier comment on the ever-present reality of examinations, yet there would seem to be a virtue in looking closely at what we are doing, and to state clearly legitimate reasons why, so that we may clearly understand the purpose to be served by this measurement, and that we may develop criteria both for what needs to be measured, and for testing the test itself. Comprehensive Examinations are not popular with students. We don't need a Dale Carnegie to tell us this but perhaps we do need to spell out to students, as they enter library school, a rationale for Com- prehensive Examinations. The Comprehensive Examination should not be regarded as the final hurdle in an obstacle race but rather as a touch- stone, the assaying qualities of which will impel the student to inte- grate into a unified whole the ideas and information which he acquires whilst making up that patchwork quilt of courses which we call his program. Too often students, particularly the part time student or dil- letante (and there are indeed many of the latter), will take courses on a catch-as-catch-can basis regarding each course as a purchase for which they receive a trading stamp. When their card is filled with trading stamps they expect to graduate. This is no new analogy as witness the rather critical view of American education for librarianship taken by Roy B. Stokes in his article "The Trading Stamp Mentality." * If the Comprehensive Examination were abolished without being re- placed by some other integrative touchstone it would, in our opinion, only strengthen this view of American library education. As we re- marked earlier, the basic question is: Do our Comprehensive Examina- tions, as they now exist, measure what we think they do? To this question we have no answer. In those schools presently involved in re- assessment, it would appear that this question, or a similar question has already been asked. In order to answer the question one must first ask - What needs to be known? What is the ratio of specific knowledge to integrative process which we ought to expect? And how much? We ought also to ask which elements can we quantify, and for which ele- ments must we rely on our intuition for evaluation ? We have no an- swers here - only questions. But these are some of the questions which need to be asked locally, regionally, and nationally, and this despite our fundamental belief that the Comprehensive Examination in concept is legitimate, and in practice can contribute to the total educational de- velopment of the student, and even further to serve as an instrument for the betterment of librarianship as a whole. Can - should - such an examination serve as a final check on a person's fitness before sending 115
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP him into the field? Is there really any other way? Stokes's view has al- ready been mentioned; but consider another analogy which we will call the Magpie syndrome. How else can we diagnose whether a student is a Magpie who has collected various bright and sundry things with which he can do nothing, or whether, having collected his courses, the student has welded these into a useful functioning tool? We do not presume here, either, to specify how such examination can be made to measure what needs to be measured. Such a specification can only arise out of the answers to the other questions. We do, however, see a way in which these examinations can be used to improve the standards of librarianship and library education. As well as serving as an integrating educational experience, then, the Comprehensive Examination could also be used to raise and unify the standards of American library schools. In the United Kingdom, external examiners are used to insure uniformity of standards between various universities. These examiners, serving at the request of the department, not only provide authoritative judgment unbiased by local considera- tions, but also stand as public evidence that such standards are so up- held. The British practice is for a department to appoint one or more professors from other universities who are authorities in different branches of the subject, and who read the draft examinations and nor- mally have the power to change up to two questions on each. After the examinations have been set and have been marked by the regular fac- ulty, the external examiners visit the university and give oral examina- tions to a sample of the students. (Normally the students who are in- terviewed are on the borderline between a first, second, or third class Honours Degree; these divisions are analogous to an A or a B or a C over-all average.) This procedure is, we feel sure, relevant for the current scene in American Library Schools. We would suggest that two external examiners be appointed by each school holding Comprehensive Examinations. Perhaps one examiner would represent the information sciences and the other the school/public library and other more tradi- tional library activities. Since it was long ago decided that four years was an optimum period for a President to remain in office without fear of dismissal, these external examiners should, we feel, be placed on four-year contracts and, like the President, could be re-elected by the faculty a finite number of times. (In cases where a faculty had regretted their choice, maybe they could get some advice of impeachment pro- cedure from the local John Birch Society.) The widespread use of senior library science faculty in this way would, we feel, very quickly lead to 116
Comprehensive Examinations an improvement and desirable uniformity in the academic standards of American Library Schools and should be debated at the next AALS meeting. Reference 1. Stokes, R. B.: The Trading Stamp Mentality, library Journal, 92:3595-600, Oct. 15, 1967. 117