Introduction This speculative essay evolved over a year and a half as an attempt to reconcile the scholarly discourse on “the library as place” with my experience of work in a science and technology library under resource pressure of progressively increasing intensity. As a person of profound and professional enthusiasm for the aura of the archives and the recombinant potential of digital networks, I have tried here to extract from the fields of library and information science an essential course that avoids the pitfalls of willful misconception and bad faith. Invoked expansively, place invites us to bracket our sensitivities, momentarily considering, with attention undivided, the situations by which we are involved in life. An a priori notion of the “user” is too abstract for the immediacy of place; here we are all involved in a self‐sustaining imperative to weave together sense [4]. The information scape we are weaving is dynamic in its organization, imperfectly visible from any perspective, and without a coherent end state. We will create, traverse, respect, and enforce its boundaries according to unpredictable principles. Place reminds us to tailor our professional work to the shifting concerns, and indeed the shifting criteria, of our shifting constituencies, rather than to a placeless professional vision of what librarianship, society, and literacy should be. The places of libraries in the lives of people are places we evolve together; otherwise the library is a site of domination or a hopeless utopian dream, literally “no place.” The villains of the place story, in librarianship and elsewhere, are technologists and capital, but what librarian serves people who enjoy freedom from a salary and whose relationship with technology is a matter of personal whim? Narrowly construed, the library as place has served as an ideological touchstone, a reservoir of semantic potential available to obscure complicated and specific relationships among the body of people and things that constitute the life (and whose deterioration prefigures the death) of a library. Myths William Birdsall already contended in 1994 that friction between factions organized around “the library without walls” and “the library as place” had been decades in the making and that these phrases stood in for competing views about how society should organize its relationship with knowledge [5]. With respect to the two “contending myths within librarianship,” Birdsall claims that “the first, the myth of the library as place, emerged in the last quarter of the nineteenth century and is in decline,” while “the second, the myth of the electronic library, emerged in the last quarter of the 20th century and is becoming more prominent” [5, p. xii].3 The characteristics assigned to the library in each myth are adapted in the following lists: Library as place • The organizational and theoretical basis is the public library. • The core resource is a collection of predominantly print material. • The objectives of the library are multiple and ambiguous. • The community served by the library is inclusive. • Knowledge is considered as a public good. • The knowledge base of librarianship is the humanities and the social sciences. Electronic library • The organizational and theoretical basis is the corporate special library or the “library without walls.” • The library is an electronic environment with access to information from anywhere. • The library is oriented toward the narrow objective of providing information to the researcher. • The library serves a community defined by business needs. • Information is viewed as a commodity. • The knowledge base of librarianship is information science. In several chapters, Birdsall reconstructs the maneuvers through which the electronic library has come to seem inevitable, but he pays less attention to the genealogy of the library as place. Cultural geographer Edward Relph helps fill in the gap: A concern with place and sense of place … has become an important theme in several different professions and academic disciplines since the early 70s. … From one perspective, the interest in place is a desperate rearguard action first mounted as the full force of modernism became apparent in the late 1960s and early 1970s. … In a second, more compliant sense, the recent concern with place has been an attempt to improve the products of the environment machine by making pleasant, arresting spaces … instead of the dreary angular ones that were often built in the 1950s and 1960s. … A third, more radical concern with place has attempted to come to an understanding of its existential importance and has been critical of the instant environmental machine. The aim has been to reclaim the specificity and originality of places by thinking carefully about their nature and the ways in which it might be possible to make new types of places without simply copying outdated approaches.4 [6, pp. 32–33] Relph’s comments point to a rich discourse of place in human geography, a discourse that is homologous, instructive, and confluent with respect to the LIS notion. According to one popular strain, the instant environment machine responds to tensions in a global “space of flows” of power, money, and information [7, pp. 407–59]. The lifeblood of the machine circulates through supermarkets, airports, highways, hotels, chain restaurants, and train stations [8]—standardized “nonplaces” augmented by communications technology—displacing the authentic and instituting a prevailing sense of “placelessness” [9, preface]. Against this “world of over‐arching, almost God‐like ‘global’ organizations,” the siege flag of place is raised, not only in librarianship but in many sectors, in defense of the human and the parochial, of tradition and local turf [10, p. 101]. 3.  By “myth” Birdsall means a “cluster of values, images, and concepts … a largely subjective set of beliefs offering … an explanation of change, a new rationale for librarianship, a better future” [5, p. xii]. 4.  Relph attributes the phrase “instant environmental machine” to Lewis Mumford and uses it to mean “a mega‐machine … comprised of the interacting components of ideologies, economic linkages, institutions and corporations, methodologies for planning and design, huge organizations and communications systems, and a veritable panoply of technologies. It is fueled by money and lubricated by the personal gratifications that come with increasing levels of comfort and leisure. It is steered by an unswerving conviction in growth and progress. Places, landscapes, buildings, and cities seem largely incidental to its purpose; new or old, distinctive or ordinary, they are treated like other economic resources” [6, p. 28]. Technology Most American adults take the ability to read and write for granted, but for the illiterate King Thamus in the epigraph, the merits of the alphabet are dubious. We can hardly doubt that the techniques of literacy lead us in the direction of a certain placelessness. Encoding experience in written signs divorces it from its context [11], disrupts the genius loci, and facilitates the imposition of abstract mechanisms of control on people who may not have the wherewithal to apprehend them. Perhaps toddlers resistant to the charms of reading are struggling against just these oppressive influences; at any rate, day cares and history are harassed by traces of people on the wrong side of the alphabetical divide. The point seems clear, without telling stories about toddlers and ancient gods, to people who steward developing information technologies. According to one prominent computer designer, “What people mean by the word technology is anything invented since they were born.” To another, “What people mean by the word technology is the stuff that doesn’t really work yet” [12, p. 16]. I recall video games from the 1980s and 1990s with something comparable to, if not precisely commensurate with, the awe attached to significant early literary experiences [13–15]. “As technologies of mobile privatization remove the constraints of having to be in one place at the one time and our sense of place becomes postgeographical, we become attached to the culture and technologies of extension that displace the worlds in which we had former attachments” [16, p. 43]. My affection for an already vintage entertainment system is no more an indication of its intrinsic value than someone else’s romantic attachment to the classic automobiles that paved the way to suburbia. In general, modern humans give little indication that we will calcify our cultural practice to suit the nostalgia of anyone in particular. Perhaps it is true that “the human race with technology is just like an alcoholic with a barrel of wine” [17, p. 93]; technology seems an essential enough aspect of modernity (if not humanity) to be taken for granted, even if in its concrete instances it is always new. As far as we are concerned, technological change is uneven, unpredictable, and certain [18]. Under such circumstances, every place maker must make do, make sense, and make place in an environment that is technologically heterogeneous and in which the potential for novelty as well as recurrence is a persistent feature. Every place maker, that is, including librarians, for whom the idea that a choice must be made between “libraries without walls” and “libraries as places” seems more and more like an artifact of divisive and outmoded agendas. Says Michael Gorman in Our Enduring Values, “The conflict between ‘traditional’ libraries and ‘virtual’ libraries turns out, under examination, to be an elaborate kabuki dance choreographed carefully by those who think that real libraries are obsolescent” [19, p. 32]. The inherently transportable character of the written word notwithstanding, “the library without walls” is, in Gorman’s view, “a silly term that implies current library service is contained entirely within the walls of library buildings” [19, p. 33]. Indeed, Roger Chartier suggests in The Order of Books, the union catalogs of the sixteenth century already bore the fruit of bibliotechnical visions fed and watered by contemporaneous “technology” [20]. It is hardly necessary to mention, here, the theory, practice, or aims undergirding the MARC (machine‐readable cataloging) standard, the Anglo‐American Cataloguing Rules, or the Interlibrary Loan Code. In a 2001 Library Quarterly article, Robert F. Nardini narrates a historical case of professional debating points overmatching their pertinence. Nardini’s survey covers the panoply of metaphors employed in the profession’s early identity formation (1876–1926), over the course of which cemeteries, museums, schools, churches, public works projects, businesses, and machines were each held up as images after which to model libraries. In a striking analogy to the current situation, the success of Arthur E. Bostwick in promoting a businesslike image of the library impelled critics of his vision (notably Mary Salome Cutler Fairchild) to respond with a counterimage of the businesslike library as a dehumanizing machine. In Nardini’s rhetorical history, “Fairchild and Bostwick were advocates for those who divided on questions about the library’s nature. Their choice of words and use of metaphor sharpened the argument by simplifying it, giving opposing sides clear rallying points. Was the library a business? Was it a machine? When put this way, questions about the nature of the library would yield an instinctual response, overmatching any shades of meaning. Words themselves came to be the substance of arguments, and the words in question in this debate acted as metaphors do act, revealing certain aspects of the library, while concealing others” [21, pp. 130–31; 22]. It has been suggested in these pages and files that “the user in the life of the library” has lost its vitality as an organizing principle [23, 24] and that “the library in the life of the user” will prove a more appropriate paradigm. This may be a matter of choice or of necessity; a loosening of the coupling between location and function has brought libraries into close and sometimes uncomfortable overlap with formerly distinct spheres of activity [25] and scrambled the boundaries of the library as place. What a vital library becomes under such hypergenerative circumstances is born out of the patterns in which the lives of its users and communities weave disparate and novel experience into spaces of communal infrastructure, linguistic and material. Phenomenological Approach What can we say about phenomenology? According to one influential interpretation of phenomenological method, “It is not so much that we see the objects and things but rather that we first talk about them. To put it more precisely: we do not say what we see, but rather the reverse, we see what one says about the matter” [26, p. 56, quoted in 27, p. 234]. Standing in the library, this leaves us with rather a lot of options, and if phenomenology is indeed an appropriate epistemological anchor for library studies, this accounts well for the polyglot discursive tendencies of library scholarship. Classifying librarianship among the professions and disciplines is a favorite pastime among LIS scholars, but in a suitably broad sense of the word, all discourses pass through libraries, even if every library they pass through is not necessarily one of ours. Key in phenomenological method are issues of scope and authority. In “seeing what one says” about place and the library, who are we permitted (or required) to consult? Under what circumstances are statements legitimate input to our discussion [28]? Whose experience, conveyed under what circumstances, is valid or valuable? In investigating the “library,” should we give priority to degreed librarians? Tenured professors? To “users”? To nonusers? To practitioners in other disciplines? Which ones? Approaching the library, we find ourselves distracted by its contents, as anyone who has done any sustained reshelving will understand. As scholars, we take our starting points, assiduously and perhaps in significant correlation with our sympathies, with (by way of example) JC 11–605: Political Theory, the State, Theories of the State; HT 101–395: Urban Groups, Urban Sociology, the City; T: Information Technology; and BD 143–260: Epistemology and Methodology. As an epistemic style, phenomenology allows for flexibility and requires self‐awareness and discipline with respect to our methodical inclusions and exclusions. In terms of the phenomenological canon, we can repeat that “implicit in the essential nature of all genuine method as a path towards the disclosure of objects is the tendency to order itself always toward that which it itself discloses” [29, p. 238, quoted in 27, p. 227]. The scholarship on libraries, then, has phenomenological grounds for exercising a field as labyrinthine and variegated as the library itself, although the wages of such freedom risk madness and incomprehensibility [30]. There is something to be said for periodically touching our home base in the Zs. Our common interest is in the order of libraries; what libraries order is only a means to and justification of our common interest. Some will ask: What is phenomenology? Most pertinently, it is an approach to knowing that takes experience seriously. Experience is recalcitrant with respect to scientific description, and whether because of this fact or simply as a matter of preference, we tend to approach phenomenological problems interpretively [31–33]. We bring our agenda to a discussion. Respecting established meanings as we exploit openings for novel interpretation, we attempt to prune a problematic term to features that can pass as essential. We make a series of rhetorical moves designed to provoke a change that we consider auspicious. With transformation an acknowledged goal, our phenomenological enterprise is, from top to bottom, a social enterprise. This interpretation relies, for its validity, realization, and amplification, on the sense making of interlinked communities that may accept, reject, incorporate, modify, challenge, elaborate, refine, or ignore it in assessing its significance to their action in place [34]. It is not indifferent, then, to the vicissitudes of power nor to the common sense of its readership. This phenomenological alchemy attempts to channel a received past, through the media of discourse and distributed experience, into a course that by virtue of its collective production cannot be fully specified in advanced. Spaces and Places The literature of place and space is somewhat complicated by terminological variety [35–37]. Geographer Tim Cresswell, in his useful Place: A Short Introduction, maps an outline of his discipline’s approaches. In addition to the more or less commonsense “descriptive” approach to place, Cresswell imparts a “social constructionist approach to place” and a “phenomenological approach of place”; this latter “seeks to define the essence of human existence as one that is necessarily and importantly ‘in‐place’” [38, p. 51]. Just as we are looking at the library from inside of libraries, for phenomenological geographers “place stands for both an object (a thing that geographers and others look at, research, and write about) and a way of looking” [38, p. 15]. So it is that Cresswell can speak of a phenomenological approach of place. As we are concerned with it, space implies the possibility of direct manipulation and control.5 “Space is a resource that yields wealth and power when properly exploited” [40, p. 58]. In engineering, we speak of “problem spaces” and “solution spaces”; large design projects compare the relative merits of features in a “trade space.” Mathematics habitually frames its problems in terms of spaces, and conversely, according to philosopher Edward Casey, “it is characteristic of the Western mind to conceive of space in terms of its formal essence—hence the insistent search for mathematical expressions of pure spatial relations” [41, pp. 19–20]. The primary mode of engagement with space is visual—ideally, we take in space’s possibilities at a glance and manipulate them abstractly. Life as seen from an airplane is profoundly spatial. “When space feels thoroughly familiar to us, it has become place” [40, p. 73]. The primary mode of our engagement with place is tactile (or perhaps olfactory); whereas we manipulate space at a distance, we engage with place immediately. The “interanimation” of body and place drives the “dynamicism” by virtue of which places “gather … radically disparate and quite conflictual” elements—bodies, thoughts, experiences, memories, and things [41, pp. 22–25]. Places are not static; the movement of eccentric bodies through places ensures that boundaries and contents are continually rearranged. Postmodern discussions of space do not abandon the possibility of control; rather, they complicate the conditions of its emergence. Spaces (and mechanisms of control) are noted for their heterogeneous and dynamic instability. Even as all our place making unfolds in composite spaces inherited from the moment before, our projections into the future, whether we are a president planning for war or a homeless person planning for sleep, spring from a fundamental situation. This relationship between inherited and projected space via immediate place, between situation and intentional action, is not merely dialectical. When we consider multitudes of humans, all continuously taking stock of the cultural spaces that are their inheritance, engaging them momentarily as part of their ongoing stories [10, p. 125], and projecting tomorrow’s spaces at a scale more or less proportional to the resources at their disposal, we find ourselves face‐to‐face with a theoretical complexity that is nearly worthy of the experience of everyday life [42]. 5.  The tactic of organizing these ideas about space under the rubric of “control” was inspired by a passage from John Fraser Hart’s The Look of the Land [39] reproduced in Gloria J. Leckie and John E. Buschman’s essay “Space, Place, and Libraries: An Introduction” [36]. The Libraries of Places It is difficult to imagine a place unmediated by symbolic interaction: “The very existence of natural places (and any other kind) requires a cultural act involving both meaning and social relations” [43, p. 82]. Conversely, “Whatever else modern anthropology asserts,” wrote Clifford Geertz thirty years ago, “it is firm in the conviction that men unmodified by the customs of particular places do not in fact exist, have never existed, and most important, could not in the very nature of the case exist” [44, p. 35]. No people without places; no places without people and their symbols. Here, then, is our dialectic again, slightly modified, and still a close cousin to the “social construction of reality.”6 In this light, the irony of the library as place trope, insofar as it positions itself as against technology, is that, in the first place, libraries are a profoundly mediating influence. The written symbol already represents a significant break with place, such as it were; the preservation of symbols in exogenous repositories only strengthens the transcendental hand of the virtual, which is to say the cultural. That a historically specific type of library, the outcome and agent of a historically specific spatial expansion, has come to be regarded, cherished, fetishized, and lamented as an important type of place attests to the fundamental inherence of place making in human existence; once again, as humans, “we become attached to the culture and technologies of extension that displace the worlds in which we had former attachments” [16, p. 43]. “To speak of the dematerialization of the library is to suggest that it, the real library, was ever truly material in the first place” [46, p. 59]. Here I agree with Jeffrey Garrett, that what is essential about the library is not a particular physical configuration [46], and with John Budd, that “at its core the library exists to collect, organize, and provide access to information” [33, p. 306]. I see the library, essentially, as closely related to the Foucauldian archive, “the general system of the formation and transformation of statements” [47, p. 130].7 If, with apologies to our friends who maintain “real” archives, both digital and physical, we take Foucault’s metaphorical appropriation as operative, then we have a reasonable criterion of success for ourselves: to what extent is our “library,” in whatever professional sense we assign that word, connected to the archive? To what extent is it an exemplary node of access to the archive? To what extent is it a vital site of the archive’s reshaping of itself? These are questions best asked of a specific library’s situation with respect to specific constituencies defined by a specific institutional mission. The way they are answered will obviously be very different for a library commissioned to serve the international astronomy community versus for a library mandated to serve all the citizens within the political boundaries of a neighborhood or county. 6.  “Since society exists as both objective and subjective reality, any adequate theoretical understanding of it must comprehend both these aspects. As we have already argued, these aspects receive their proper recognition if society is understood in terms of an ongoing dialectical process composed of the three moments of externalization, objectivation, and internalization” [45, p. 129]. 7.  I take this reference as refracted through the literature of science and technology studies, in which it is, for the most part, made very clear that statements do not operate in a vacuum. For a classic example, see [48]. For an overview of science and technology studies, see [49]. Placing the Library The library as place, construed as attached to the archive, is the library as a nexus of shifting trajectories lived by its shifting constituencies. In his Introduction to Actor‐Network Theory, Bruno Latour lays out an argument that can help us extend this insight, if indeed insight it is. Critical of the brittle explanatory machinery of dialectical social theory, Latour contends that macro or structural or systemic phenomena are not ethereal, free‐floating effects nor simply the emergent effects of individuals acting according to straightforward rules of social interaction but rather that social phenomena can, through laborious effort, be traced to the situations that generate the streams of influence that converge in their realization. Such generative situations are still not strictly “local.” The complex connections that sustain them are themselves collected in a linguistic and material infrastructure that has come from somewhere else, somewhere specific: “This local site has been made to be a place by some other locus through the now silent mediation of drawings, specifications, wood, concrete, steel, varnish, and paint … locals are localized” [50, p. 195]. Latour’s “double move” of “localizing the global” and “redistributing the local” is an antidote to totalizing mythologies of the global; each place constitutes a dimension of linkage to all the others, so that “there exists no global all‐encompassing place where, for instance, the control room of the Strategic Air Command, the Wall Street floor, the water pollution map, the census bureau, the Christian Coalition and the United Nations would be gathered and summed up” [50, p. 191]. Rather, these loci of control involve each other in webs of action and representation, games played according to rules that are always subject to debate, on boards whose shape depends on the vantage of the player. No one is in possession of the perspective to describe the totality, “and if someone tries to do so—as I am doing here in this paragraph—it is another place, another circuitous route loosely connected to the others with no claim to ‘embed’ or ‘know’ them” [50, p. 191]. Instead, it instantiates yet another “star‐shaped” or “networky” intersection, another dimension of action and meaning. A library, too, is an intersection of connectivity. The pertinent question: Is it active or not, is it vital or not, and is it essential to the lives of other places? At its best, the library of a place is an active repository of potential (i.e., virtual, almost‐but‐not‐yet‐made) connections. As a rich residue of the past and a matrix (in the sense of birthplace) of the future, the library is a site of transformation, always on its way to becoming many different places and absorbing the experience of many different places, according to the transversal movement of books, people, electronic impulses, and who knows what else. Vitalizing a library requires us to step outside the sphere of our habitual familiarity and to explore other places. How can we prepare a place for other people if we do not know where they are going and where they have been? Perfunctory surveys of the landscape may be inadequate to genuinely expand the network of our acquaintance. To proactively situate the library involves proactively collecting the experience of others. How we go about doing this is a matter of methodology. I do not mean methodology as a received set of methods preformatted for the optimal registry of truth. Many interesting methodologists [4, 34, 50, 51] emphasize the importance of formatting the approach to match the problem. Methodology, analogous to other philosophical “ologies,” is the study of method, not its rote implementation. The trouble is that careful formulation of situationally appropriate methods requires resources that many libraries do not have to spare, in particular as they battle to maintain the status quo against hostile actors. There is, fortunately, a version on the cheap: it involves bracketing preconceptions about what a library should be and making a good faith effort to ascertain, through interaction and observation, what people are doing, what they need, and how it is possible to help them. This includes receptiveness to situated epistemologies, ethics, and practices. If a prior conception of place interferes with the absorption of these details of ethnomethod, it should be bracketed at least until the practitioner can grasp the place that already exists. However, if the practices, ethics, or ways of knowing of a place are irremediably opposed to the values of a librarian, that is, if the search for pragmatic vehicles to realize a personal/professional agenda in situ fails decisively, a librarian should consider work elsewhere. Tension between personal ethics and the practical contingencies challenges the creativity of many conscientious working professionals, and I know of no one solution that fits all shapes and sizes of the dilemma. We are fortunate in that the field of librarianship offers substantial opportunities for diverse lateral career moves to those who approach it with the commitments of time and energy that professional status entails. At present it falls largely upon students entering the field and upon librarians engaging their professional responsibility to identify and navigate the skills required to get where we want to go. Making sense of libraries is a vital and open problem that each of us must engage on our own terms. Conclusion The rampant combinatorics of Jorge Borges’s infamous library are more at home in the nimble circuits of a string of central processing units than fixed in a honeycomb of immobile hexagons [30]. Does this render the library more or less terrifying? Traditional libraries, no less than our view through the glass, strike many of us as “awesome” [52, pp. 209–10]. If some authors lament the passing of a certain mysterium tremendum et majestas in the figure of the grand library (a passing, whether in secular or religious garb, by no means certain or complete) [53], perhaps they mistake the texture of existential dread. At the terminus of every deconstruction, at the end of every technological rainbow, at the nadir of every nostalgia, there are humans making sense and making place of their strangely familiar inheritance. They are appropriating, repurposing, sorting, assessing, and synthesizing their place because there is no apparent option and no graceful exit. If the whole of history is the production of a library, a set of cultural reference tools available to help us deal with the present, we are forever dealing with its inadequacy, on its own, to make sense or even to delineate a proper set of rules for sense making. Great masses of unspecified make novel interpretation feasible from the most unexpected perspectives [50, pp. 241–46].