Because the “information science” that evolved in the last years of the twentieth century “constitutes an arena of study in which the technology to which it is harnessed defines the field,” I argued in a 1999 Library Quarterly article, library and information studies (LIS) lacked “a solid body of scholarship that critically analyzes the multiple roles that libraries of all types have played and are playing in their host communities.” One “gets the impression of a profession trapped in its own discursive formations,” I hypothesized, “where members speak mostly to each other and where connections between power and knowledge that affect issues of race, class, age, and gender, among others, are either invisible or ignored. One also gets the impression of a profession much more interested in process and structure than in people.” The result is, I concluded, a professional discourse and a research base characterized by “tunnel vision and blind spots” (Wiegand 1999, 24). Fifteen years have passed since that article was published, and to examine the validity of its conclusions for the present day, I decided to use my newly published book, “Part of Our Lives”: A People’s History of the American Public Library, as a test case (Wiegand 2015). My research question was simple: From a historical perspective, why do Americans love their public libraries? It is an indisputable fact that they do; evidence to support this abounds. First, there is the rhetoric. “The three most important documents a free society gives,” wrote author E. L. Doctorow in 1994, “are a birth certificate, a passport, and a library card” (quoted in Hadad 1994). “Right here, in this room,” Pulitzer Prize–winning historian David McCullough said as he swept his arm around the auditorium of Tulsa’s central library in 1995, “we are at dead center in the absolute heart of the best institution in our society” (quoted in Walker 1995). “The America I loved still exists,” said Kurt Vonnegut in 2005, “if not in the White House or the Supreme Court or the Senate or the House of Representatives or the media. The America I love still exists at the front desks of our public libraries” (Vonnegut 2005, 103). Then there is the research. A 2013 report by the Pew Research Center’s Internet and American Life Project, for example, noted that in the previous decade “every other major institution (government, churches, banks, corporations) has fallen in public esteem except libraries, the military, and first responders.” The study also found that 91% of those surveyed over the age of 16 said libraries are “very” or “somewhat” important to their communities, and 98% identified their public library experience as “very positive” or “mostly positive.” Another Pew study found that 94% of parents believe libraries are important for their children, 84% said because libraries develop a love of reading and books (Pew Internet and American Life Project 2013). Although three decades ago many evangelists of information technology predicted the demise of public libraries by the turn of the century, as of this writing their numbers have not dropped. In fact, in 2011 the United States had 17,110 public libraries (including branches and bookmobiles). Although the number of visits had declined slightly in 2011 to 1.52 billion (likely because a recession forced public libraries to reduce hours of opening by 1.7% and more patrons “checked out” library e-books from their home computers), the decade nonetheless showed an increase of 23%. In 2011 libraries also offered 3.81 million programs. Circulation showed gains; in 2011 public libraries circulated 2.44 billion items (including audio and video materials and print and e-books)—a 47% increase from 2004 (Institute for Museum and Library Services 2014). Although statistics show that Americans use their public libraries heavily, the statistics do not explain why. Despite the fact that “as a nationwide phenomenon” the American public library has been “strongly identified with the national ethos of equality of educational opportunity,” note Redmond Kathleen Molz and Phyllis Dain, it is still hard to prove that American public libraries are essential to democracy—the cornerstone of the narrative the profession uses to justify their existence. For the most part the public library’s alumni are “anonymous, invisible, and unenlisted,” says historian Daniel J. Boorstin, and “given the almost totally voluntary nature of public library usage,” argue Molz and Dain, “it is hard to counter his descriptors. The kinds of aggregate statistics assembled by schools and colleges … elude the library profession, leaving” LIS “dependent on anecdotal accounts and largely input-oriented statistics, which simply cannot quantify the impact of public library service” on the public. Government officials sometimes criticize librarians for their “soft data,” but, lacking the kind of data schools and colleges generate to measure performance, “any other approach seems unlikely” (Molz and Dain 1999, ix, 122). Part of Our Lives is an attempt to bolster the “soft data” by tracing the American public library’s history, not so much by analyzing the words of its founders and managers, but mostly by listening to the voices of its users. To identify my perspective, I shamelessly plagiarize two phrases used by my former University of Wisconsin–Madison colleague Doug Zweizig in his 1973 dissertation. Rather than analyzing the “user in the life of the library”—a “top-down” view that largely mirrors LIS discourse—Part of Our Lives adopts a “bottom-up” “library in the life of the user” perspective that allows me to follow the example of Howard Zinn, whose pioneering A People’s History of the United States (Zinn 1980) takes this approach. It also invites me to feature in my narrative the voices of generations of public library users. As a humanist, I am most concerned with what Andrew Piper calls “the production of subjectivity,” or “what it means to be a person in the world” (Piper 2012, 132). I want to offer a historical analysis of how the public library has contributed to that process. Largely because of recent technologies, uncovering these voices was easy. Some are in published memoirs, autobiographies, and biographies of the famous, some in manuscript collections and public library archives across the country. The vast majority, however, are fixed in hundreds of US newspapers and periodicals digitized since the 1990s into huge, easily searchable databases. By using “public library” as a search term, I found thousands of voices in letters to the editor and thousands more quoted in stories written by reporters about their local libraries. As I analyzed the data, I was surprised at how quickly the evidence was organized. History shows, I argue, that the reasons Americans have loved their public libraries fit into three main categories: (1) for the useful information they made accessible, (2) for the public space they provided, and (3) for the reading materials they circulated that helped users make sense of phenomena in the world around them. This discovery also dictated my approach and led me to employ three literatures to highlight my findings. Information The first I inherited from library and information studies—the professional discourse in which I have worked all my adult life and which, until recently, governed my own approach to American library history. What do I mean by “discourse”? Most scholars trace the concept to French philosopher Michel Foucault, and, as Wikipedia explains, humanities and social science scholars in particular harnessed this concept to describe not only a culture’s “formal way of thinking that can be expressed through language” but also “a social boundary that defines what can be said about a specific topic” (“Discourse” 2012). In many respects a professional discourse functions like a big intellectual sandbox—plenty of room to play with ideas but one nonetheless with limits (“a social boundary”)—in which leaders employ “a formal way of thinking” to educate and enlighten members of a profession who implement what they learn to improve service for the public’s greater benefit. For public libraries, that translates into the services they institute and maintain and the collections, spaces, and resources they make accessible. The roots of contemporary LIS discourse trace back to Benjamin Franklin, whose first order of books for the new Library Company of Philadelphia in 1732 emphasized “useful knowledge” but ignored fiction (Lyons 2014). By the time the American colonies declared their independence in 1776, Western nations were rapidly industrializing under capitalism. Unlike their rural counterparts, industrial workers found their day divided not by sunrise and sunset and their year not by seasons but by a clock their employers used to determine when “work” occurred. To capitalists, “work” time was always more important than “nonwork” time, which evolved its own set of descriptors, including “leisure.” Capitalists consistently privileged “useful knowledge” generated to improve “work” above any information considered to be “leisure.” Libraries serving the information interests of business and government naturally mirrored these priorities. Western states operating with capitalist economies also privileged “work” information but to that added “public information” and “stories” the state regarded so essential to the social order that they constituted a canon of relevant literature (fiction and nonfiction) to be communicated to citizens and taught in schools and colleges. Libraries serving state interests also collected and preserved these kinds of public information and stories. Thus, by the mid–nineteenth century, when Boston Public Library founders, funders, and managers developed an institutional set of goals and objectives we now call a “mission statement,” it was based on their cultural priorities and a set of library traditions they inherited that celebrated “useful knowledge.” Grounded on a belief shared with Thomas Jefferson that democracy could not exist without informed citizens, the founders rationalized the existence of public libraries as essential to creating that citizenry. Ever since, in the profession’s rhetoric (one component of its discourse), public libraries have been depicted largely as neutral agencies whose primary responsibility is to make accessible the kinds of information thought essential to democracy—itself a legacy of the Enlightenment’s faith in the power of knowledge. The vast majority of library history literature that I inherited addresses the mission statement as historical fact and uses that discourse—an orthodoxy fixed in the profession’s literature—to describe the institution’s history largely through the words of public library founders and managers. Although Jesse Shera recognized that “the library is distinctly a social phenomenon and as such is susceptible to all the influences that react upon our social structure” (Shera 1933, 352–53), he also argued in his widely cited Foundations of the Public Library that “the modern public library in large measure represents the need of democracy for an enlightened electorate, and its history records its adaptation to changing social requirements” (Shera 1949, vi). Sidney Ditzion titled his analysis of the nineteenth-century public library Arsenals of a Democratic Culture (Ditzion 1947). Wayne Bivens-Tatum nicely summarizes the evolution of this professional discourse—and the debates taking place within this particular intellectual sandbox—in Libraries and the Enlightenment (Bivens-Tatum 2011). As I discovered in previous research, however, in the late nineteenth century the emerging profession of librarianship adopted that mission statement as a professional imperative and through its discursive formations constructed a unique set of practices (e.g., cataloging and classification, reference, collection development, and management of the institution) and the tools to support them (e.g., the Dewey Decimal Classification, Booklist magazine, Fiction Catalog) that separated it from other professions forming about the same time. American public library history literature builds on these assumptions and largely chronicles this evolution with a “top-down” focus that concentrates on particular libraries; the biographies of library organizers, managers, and donors; the growth and development of collections over time; and professionalized activities such as reference, cataloging and classification, and services to youth. Thus, library history literature replicates and echoes the profession’s discourse. By the first decade of the twenty-first century this discourse had isolated primarily on “information” as the profession’s “formal way of thinking,” thus imposing “a social boundary” within library and information studies on “what can be said about a specific topic.” These parameters are evident, for example, in the steadily decreasing number of dissertations written since 1980 that contain library keywords in their title, thus demonstrating “general empirical support for the long-held anecdotal assertions that libraries are no longer the primary research focus at the doctoral level of LIS” (Finlay et al. 2012, 29). Ironically, however, the same LIS experts so enamored of newer information technologies that they predicted the public library’s demise were still steeped in a professional discourse that privileged the stories and information that state and cultural authorities found essential and prioritized the information that capitalism thought useful by making it all more accessible. Admittedly, American public library history abounds in examples that comfortably fit the category of “information” as LIS currently defines it. While sitting at a Cincinnati public library desk in 1867, for example, Thomas Edison compiled a bibliography on electricity (Israel 1998, 37). “Many times Edison would get excused from duty under pretense of being too sick to work,” a contemporary recalled in 1878, “and invariably strike a beeline for the Library, where he would spend the entire day and evening reading … such works on electricity as were to be had” (“A Night with Edison” 1878, 88). “By the time I was twelve or fourteen,” Harry Truman said, “I had read every book in the [public] library, including the encyclopedias. … Those books had a great influence on me” (Truman 1958, 99). In 1899 Wilbur and Orville Wright came upon an ornithology book in the Dayton Public Library “that rekindled their interest in human flight” (Howard 1987, 28). In 1971 10-year-old Barack Obama returned to Honolulu from Jakarta. “The first place I wanted to be was in a library,” he later recalled. Often he had a specific information need. “One Saturday … , with the help of a raspy-voiced old librarian who appreciated my seriousness, I found a book on East Africa.” Obama wanted information about Kenya, birthplace of his father, a Luo tribe member. “The Luo raised cattle and lived in mud huts and ate corn meal and yams and something called millet,” the book said. “Their traditional costume was a leather thong across the crotch.” Shocked by what he read, Obama “left the book open-faced on a table and walked out without thanking the librarian” (Obama 1995, 59–60). But my historical research shows that “information” is only one of the reasons Americans have loved their public libraries. Because people do not have to use it, the American public library is a unique civic institution. To attract patrons, founders and managers had no choice but to allow the public to influence the process of defining what this civic institution would become. LIS discourse, however, does not address in any comprehensive way the library in the life of the user and thus denied me additional opportunities to deepen my understanding of why Americans loved their public libraries from that perspective. The word information as we use it in contemporary LIS discourse certainly has historical roots, but because of the poverty of LIS’s professional vocabulary it is also greatly limited in its ability to explain what my research was uncovering about “library as place” and the power of the reading patrons obtained from public libraries by the billions over the years. So to explain my findings in records teeming with examples of users whose lives were changed and shaped by the American public library, my challenge became how to expand beyond the professional discourse, how to see outside the limits of LIS’s sandbox of ideas, and how to craft a theoretical framework that accommodates, explains, and enfranchises the voices of library users I uncovered in my research. Two literatures that took root outside LIS discourse—ironically about the time the “information” priesthood was predicting the public library’s turn-of-the-century demise—speak directly to library as place and the power of commonplace reading to transform lives. In Part of Our Lives I rely heavily on each. Library as Place At the Atlanta Public Library’s African American Sweet Auburn branch—one of the few places in Atlanta’s 1930s segregated society where blacks felt safe and welcome—director Annie Watters recalled one summer when 10-year-old Martin Luther King Jr. “came to the library many times during the week.” She later recorded their interactions: “He would walk up to the desk and … look me straight in the eye.” “Hello, Martin Luther,” she would respond, always calling him by his first and middle names; “what’s on your mind?” “Oh, nothing, particularly.” For Watters, that was the cue that King had learned a new “big word,” and they then initiated a conversation in which King used the word repeatedly. Another game involved poetry. Again, King would stand by the desk, waiting. “What’s on your mind, Martin Luther?” Watters asked. “For I dipped into the future, far as the human eye could see,” he responded. Watters immediately recognized the poem and finished the verse: “For I dipped into the future, far as the human eye could see; saw a vision of the world and the wonders that would be” (McPheeters 1992, 54–56). When the Cincinnati Public Library opened a “piano room” in 1955, among its first visitors was a 12-year-old “Jimmy Levine,” as he wrote his name in pencil on the room’s sign-up sheet. Eight visits later he changed his signature to “J. Levine” and finally “James Levine.” When he gave a concert for 150 children in the Children’s Room in 1957 he had already performed as a Cincinnati Symphony soloist. As of this writing he is the New York Metropolitan Opera’s artistic director (Fleischman 2003, 77, 107). In 1969 the Gary (Indiana) Public Library sponsored a local talent contest at which a group soon to be known as the Jackson Five competed. Although they didn’t win, little Michael was an audience favorite (Bornstein 1994). In 2005 the Washington Post carried an article by Eric Wee that focused on a District of Columbia branch library in one of Washington’s poorest neighborhoods. Wee reported that every Tuesday night a homeless man named Conrad Cheek entered the library and set up his chessboard on one of the tables in the children’s room. Wee immediately noticed a transformation. “No more ignored pleas” for this homeless man, “no averted glances. During the next hour, people will look him in the eye. They’ll listen to his words. In this down-at-the-heels library he’s the teacher.” Among his students was 9-year-old Ali Osman. As Wee watched this interaction, Ali’s mother explained that her son’s confidence had soared after playing with Conrad, that he was now bragging to friends about being a chess player. “We owe it all to Mr. Conrad,” his mother said. “We love him.” Wee reported that inside the library “they call him Mr. Conrad” (Wee 2005). All these very meaningful experiences occurred in a place we call “library.” To categorize them as “information” gathering, however, fails to capture their significance in the lives of each of these individuals, so to ground my analysis of library as place I had to turn to a second sandbox of ideas—a scholarly literature often labeled “public sphere” that Wikipedia defines as that “area in social life where individuals can come together to freely discuss and identify societal problems, and through that discussion influence political action” (“Public Sphere” 2012). Jürgen Habermas—the concept’s pioneering guru—argues that during the eighteenth century the growing middle classes sought to influence government actions by assuming control of an emerging “public sphere” of deliberation that found an influential niche between forces exercised by governments and marketplaces. Within this public sphere people created their own institutions and sites and in them articulated a discourse reflecting a “public interest” governments and markets dared not ignore (Habermas 1992). Once Habermas laid the theoretical groundwork, others began analyzing institutions and sites where groups not primarily concerned with political ideologies or marketplace activities practiced this discourse. Out of these analyses a refined concept of the role of public space as “place” emerged. In civic institutions such as libraries, for example, people routinely “exchange social capital”—a common phrase in public sphere thinking. These institutions also provide spaces that help people develop a tolerance of and appreciation for differences and enable them to engage in what Henry Jenkins calls “participatory culture.” By having “low barriers to artistic expression and civic engagement, strong support for creating and sharing with others, and information mentorship whereby experienced participants pass along knowledge to novices,” Jenkins observes, members of a participatory culture “believe their contributions matter and have some degree of social connection with one another” (Jenkins 2009, 86). Within public sphere thinking I also like James Gee’s concept of “affinity spaces”—in twenty-first-century America, semiotic social spaces that people self-select and find comfortable and in which they interact. “Based on their own choices, purposes, and identities,” Gee says, users and occupants of affinity spaces “can each get different things out of the space.” Affinity spaces, he argues, “are an important form of social affiliation today, places where effective learning occurs” outside institutions of formal education (Gee 2005, 227). I especially like this concept because it deepens our understanding and complicates the meaning of a third place, a term coined by Ray Oldenburg that many librarians have adopted to explain “library as place” (Oldenburg 1989). More than a third place, Chip Ward argues, the public library—as “a place where dissent is respected, tolerance is shown, and open-minded behaviors are modeled”—is “the civic commons that contains the cultural commons in all its wide-ranging diversity” (Ward 2014, 136–137). But because public libraries also function as institutions in a robust civic commons that spreads across communities, services provided outside the library’s central physical space have become an important part of the mix. Since the 1960s librarianship has referred to these services as “outreach”—a term of professional discourse that assumes from a “user in the life of the library” perspective a civic institution’s service center and periphery and a word that helps explain why libraries tend to favor services at the center as higher priorities during budget crunches (Smallwood 2010). That users see “outreach” from a different “center” is evident every time an urban public library system attempts to close branches and reduce outreach services in tough economic times. For Part of Our Lives I adopt the vocabulary of “public sphere” literature—“public interest,” “exchange social capital,” “participatory culture,” and “civic commons”—to narrate the history of the American public library “as place.” It’s easy to see the public library as a player in this theoretical framework. Generations of users demonstrated that they valued the public library as a place by voluntarily visiting it again and again. In fact, for many Americans, visiting a public library constituted the first place in the public sphere where they enjoyed adult privileges and, by obtaining a public library card as a child, formally accepted a civic responsibility to respect public property. Although this literature offers much to address my research question, it lives outside LIS discourse and, with a few exceptions, has largely escaped the attention of LIS researchers (Buschman and Leckie 2007). Only in recent years has the library profession begun counting on a national level the number of people attending library programs or listing library exhibits in public library space. And only recently have researchers surveyed users as “consumers” of library space to determine perceived need. At the same time, however, LIS research has seldom attempted to measure how library spaces function as agents in the interactions of public library users as individuals or as members of larger groups in order to see what and how much they learned. Yet from a “library in the life of the user” perspective, knowing how and why patrons used library space and what they learned there (formally and informally) is essential to understanding why Americans love their public libraries. Reading To explain the reading of stories, contemporary “information” discourse viewed from the “top down” tends to look at readers as passive recipients of the messages authors locate in printed texts. It also often harnesses metaphors that have dominated library rhetoric for generations. For example, reading is often considered like a ladder; readers are expected to “elevate” their reading “tastes” by climbing from lower to higher forms of literature (as judged by those who claim authority to distinguish between the two). Or reading is like eating, where overindulgence in its less desirable forms (again, determined by people claiming authority to know what these are) is assumed to effect harm, made obvious in use of words such as “escape” and “addiction” (Ross 1987). The most enduring example of this mind-set is the profession’s traditional attitudes toward series fiction for youth. If youthful public library patrons did not “improve,” such literatures should be discouraged, youth librarians often argued. Through its discursive professional practices (bibliographies such as Booklist and Fiction Catalog and Children’s Catalog) the library community consistently encouraged its users to adhere to the moral authority of learned professions. But users had other ideas. Because they did not have to use public libraries, users automatically applied pressures public library managers could not ignore. By force of demand—vox populi—users insisted that their public libraries acquire particular kinds of stories. As a result, they effectively shaped the library into a popular place that addressed their literary tastes. Within limits acceptable to the community—the public library performs an important community service by helping to mediate these limits—they eventually defined a style of literacy that helped them make sense of their worlds. Stories are “interactive” and constitute “recipes for the imagination,” Richard Nash writes. They are born and thrive in “the swirl and giggle of idea and style” and know no particular home among textual forms (Nash 2013, 27). Like reading (whether printed or electronic text), the acts of listening and viewing bring with them the same story-sharing benefits. “Transmedia stories,” Henry Jenkins argues, are “at the most basic level … stories told across multiple media.” Although a culture’s core stories are captured in different cultural media (drama, art, music, literature) and different cultural forms (books, periodicals, films, recordings), the latter may change over time (Jenkins 2009, 254). “If you watch television, go to the movies, read popular magazines, and look at advertisements,” argues Richard Keller Simon, “you are exposed to many of the same kinds of stories as someone who studies the great books of Western civilization. You have simply been encouraged to look at them differently” (Simon 1999, 1). Media cannot “be isolated analytically from one another,” Ted Striphas argues. “Relationships among media are socially produced and historically contingent rather than given and necessary”; they “rarely if ever share one-dimensional, causal relationships” (Striphas 2009, 16). American public libraries have always played a primary role in making transmedia stories accessible to millions of users. Ever since the Boston Public Library opened in 1854, fiction (i.e., “stories”) consistently averaged between 66% and 75% of materials circulated. Every generation of public library users insisted on stories containing messages (good and bad) that they wanted to hear. A century and a half later, as statistics cited earlier show, they still do, albeit in increasingly different cultural forms. For most patrons of all ages, stories have always been the oxygen of public library services. When the library profession organized in the late nineteenth century, however, dominant groups—business, government, and cultural authorities who assumed responsibility for educating the next generation—celebrated the “learned reading” they modeled and consistently trivialized as a “leisure” activity the stories people wanted most, no matter their cultural form. As a result, librarians were made uncomfortable about supplying the kinds of stories contained in commonplace reading that less-powerful groups wanted. But to justify funding, library managers also had to monitor circulation numbers as a measure of use and thus had to address the “leisure” needs of public library users. Through demand alone, the latter forced public library funders and managers to accommodate their cultural priorities. At some public libraries they were more successful than others. Over time (especially in the twentieth century) librarians developed a willingness to serve (if not always to endorse) the democracies of culture evident in multiple cultural tastes. Although they did this without much fanfare or gratitude from cultural authorities, their professional services not only enabled millions of users to construct multiple canons unique to their own cultures but also freed them from the prescriptions of authorities whose own “knowledge” was hardly disinterested. In fact, loyalty to their own stories that grounded their own knowledge communities often constituted a form of protest against these prescriptions. But beyond arguing that users as taxpayers had a “right” to their stories (within acceptable community standards), beyond satisfying people’s “leisure” needs in order to get them in the door, or, in the twenty-first century, beyond advocating for voluntary reading (exemplified by posters of famous people on thousands of public library walls admonishing viewers to “read”), with but few exceptions (Pawley 2006; Beard and Thi-Beard 2008; Dali 2014) LIS discourse seldom analyzes why stories are essential to the everyday interactions millions of public library users have with social peers—almost as if it is none of the profession’s business. To understand why people love their public libraries, however, I argue that it is the profession’s business. For most of American public library history, those stories have appeared in print, and a major print container—one that preoccupied LIS discourse through the late twentieth century—has been the book. Because I wanted to know why Americans love their public libraries, I was not much concerned with the book as object. Instead, I focus more on how the stories carried by books function as agents in the everyday lives of public library users, and in particular I concentrate on the commonplace reading libraries supplied, which I here define as everything not “learned reading,” including the reading of publications such as Police Gazette, National Enquirer, romances, Westerns, comics, and pornography. Showing how patrons interacted with the commonplace reading materials public libraries supplied over the generations not only demonstrates that these stories have been transformative for readers but also reveals how public libraries helped define the acceptable boundaries of a community’s literary and cultural values—boundaries that public libraries sometimes publicly mediated but more often intuitively recognized on the basis of traditions and demand they inherited from a community’s previous generation of public library users. Stories that passed from oral to manuscript and then into print cultures were humankind’s attempts to explain phenomena in the surrounding world; for most they constitute pedagogies of daily life carrying codes of behavior and having great potential to stir fundamental emotions and foster a sense of unity. Once these stories were fixed in print, to assimilate them one either had to read or be read to. Thus, understanding behaviors encompassing the act and the social nature of reading the stories that people get from their public libraries is essential if we are to understand why they love these ubiquitous civic institutions. To explain this I harness a third sandbox of ideas—a humanistic literature on the subject of reading that allows me to see stories less as objects (which is how librarianship has traditionally treated them) and more as agents in the everyday lives of American public library users. Several texts are germinal. Janice Radway’s Reading the Romance: Women, Patriarchy, and Popular Literature is an ethnographic case study describing how romance stories (always highly popular in public libraries willing to circulate them) functioned as agents in the everyday interactions of suburban women in the late 1970s. Radway demonstrates the multiple ways in which these women used their reading to claim mental space and to “escape”—if only temporarily—the demands of being wife and mother. Many of her findings complicate the definition of “escape”—far beyond the simplistic definition the word carries in LIS’s lexicon (Radway 1991). Benedict Anderson’s Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism has been equally influential. People organize themselves into large and small “imagined communities,” he argues, to orient and affiliate with each other. Cultural texts of all kinds function as agents to help construct these imagined communities by providing common sets of experiences, including the reading of shared stories. Anderson adds another dimension to the sociability of reading—sometimes this reading and story sharing takes place in groups, on public property, and in cultural spaces—cultural spaces such as public libraries, I would add (Anderson 1983). Story sharing works in many ways. For example, “in view of reading’s extraordinary capacity for opening up imaginative experience,” argues reading historian James L. Machor, “the world of print may in fact have been one of the few places where people of different classes and culture could encounter one another across boundaries, boundaries of imagination if no other” (Machor 2011). Reading is more than the consumption of stories; it is also communion with others. “No matter the vehicle of communication,” says literary historian Gillian Silverman, story reading “continues to occasion an escape from the confines of limited subjectivity, allowing us, like our nineteenth-century forebears, to invest in forms of oneness with each other” (Silverman 2012, 156). “Reading is never purely an act of isolation,” argues Andrew Piper. “When we read, we enter into a world of commonality, whether of language, story, or material object.” In serving “as a space to lose one’s sense of place,” reading cultivates a “sense of intimacy” at the same time that it “socializes” the reader (Piper 2012, 84, 112, 113). In Book Clubs: Women and the Uses of Reading in Everyday Life, Elizabeth Long analyzes reading’s capacity to stimulate imagination, construct community through shared meaning, and demonstrate moral achievement. In the free will act of reading, Long argues, readers “move into and out of the text” and thus “appropriate” meaning relevant to their own lives. Because readers can control it, the act of reading stories becomes dependably pleasurable, empowering, intellectually stimulating, and socially bonding. And it is in the act of reading stories that social and cultural acts of defiance—sometimes overt, sometimes covert, sometimes conscious, sometimes subconscious—take place. If cultural authorities lack the power to check commonplace reading for an interpretation they determine is legitimate, readers can and do construct their own meanings, sometimes as groups, sometimes as individuals (Long 2003, 9). Reading also occurs within a social framework of received opinion. “Meanings depend on the interactions among readers, texts, and environments,” argues book historian Barbara Sicherman. “They are constructed through the practices of communities of readers and refracted through individuals. How one reads as well as what and with whom are of central importance to the enterprise, even to the act of interpretation.” Unlike the ideology of learned reading grounding formal education, the institutional study of literature, and the culture of intellectuals, however, commonplace reading by design has emotional impact (Sicherman 2010, 4–5). “Fictional narrative has its impact primarily through emotions,” argues psychologist Keith Oatley. Once emotional engagement occurs in “contexts of understanding,” reading can be transformative and “affect a person’s whole identity” (Oatley 2002, 39, 65). This is especially true for youth. Developmental psychologists suggest that the stories found in fiction “are so appealing because they relate to issues in readers’ lives in emotionally powerful ways,” notes Sicherman. “Starting even before they can read, fiction helps boys and girls sort out and control their fears and desires in fantasy; work out their relationships to the world through identification with hero or heroine; gain insight into the meaning of life; and, later, develop analytic thinking” (Sicherman 2010, 2). Anne Haas Dyson shows how reading superhero comics bonds youthful readers in play. Because they know the stories and understand the genre, they share a frame of reference that identifies their social roles and the rules of social interactions. By adopting these roles and following these rules, they know how to connect with people around them (Dyson 1997). One reason cultural authorities objected so vehemently to series fiction in the twentieth century, Deirdre Johnson argues, is that it gave young people agency in a way canonical literature did not. “Traditionally, in the more acceptable children’s literature of the period, adults give children necessary advice and impose restraints on them. In series fiction, however, adolescents make their own crucial decisions,” she notes. “They demonstrate intelligence, capability, and freedom from adults, in violation of this tradition. Children, not adults, become the moral arbiters and shapers of their fate. They willingly enter the adult world and compete on an even footing—fantasy, certainly, but one that appeals to almost every child” (Johnson 1993, 165). Emily Hamilton Honey argues that in the pages of series fiction “children act like adults, make responsible decisions under their own power, and have voices and opinions that are often ignored in real life. Series books give young men and women a chance to make choices about who they wanted to be, what they wanted to do with their lives, outside of adult authority” (Honey 2012, 773). While not directly connected to humanistic “reading” literature, recent neuroscientific research has demonstrated how narrative activates particular parts of the brain, including the sensory and motor cortexes. In her summary of this research, Annie Murphy Paul notes: “The brain, it seems, does not make much of a distinction between reading about an experience and encountering it in real life; in each case, the same neurological regions are stimulated.” One researcher, she reports, found that fiction offered readers “the opportunity to enter fully into other people’s thoughts and feelings.” Another saw “substantial overlap in the brain networks used to understand stories and the networks used to navigate interactions with other individuals, in particular, interactions in which we’re trying to figure out the thoughts and feelings of others.” Other researchers suggest that reading fiction “is an exercise that hones our real-life social skills” and that regular fiction readers “seem to be better able to understand other people, empathize with them and see the world from their perspective.” Fiction, notes Keith Oatley, “is a particularly useful simulation because negotiating the social world effectively is extremely tricky, requiring us to weigh up myriad interacting instances of cause and effect. Just as computer simulations can help us get to grips with complex [scientific] problems, … so novels, stories and dramas can help us understand the complexities of social life” (Paul 2012). A recent study by Washington University’s Dynamic Cognition Laboratory shows that fiction readers “mentally simulate each new situation encountered in a narrative. … Details about actions and sensations are captured from the text and integrated with personal knowledge from past experiences.” Nicole Speer, the study’s lead researcher, notes that the brain regions that fiction activates “closely mirror those involved when people perform, imagine, or observe similar real-world activities” (Speer et al. 2009, 995). Other research analyzing differences in the act of reading digital media and printed material suggests that when reading text on the Internet or on a smart phone, readers tend to lose concentration and read superficially. Not so with the printed texts that contain stories, however, which apparently foster closer reading and enhance concentration (Myung-bok 2013). Escape, imagined communities, appropriate, reading as social practice, validate existence, socialized through reading. These words and phrases now function as part of a new vocabulary within the humanistic reading literature to explain how reading stories helps construct community, even if the act of reading is done in solitude. In order to find reasons why people love their public libraries, humanistic reading literature offers much. It reveals how complex and deeply meaningful the act of story sharing is, and for centuries has been. The importance this observation has for understanding the role public libraries have played by providing access to the stories in commonplace reading that their users have checked out by the billions over the generations is incalculable. In public library history, examples abound. In Glendale, California, Marion Morrison (later known as John Wayne) “spent hours reading in the solitude of the library” in the 1920s, his biographers note, “losing himself and his troubles in romantic adventures” such as Zane Grey novels and biographies of Kit Carson, Buffalo Bill, and Jim Bridger (Roberts and Olson 1995, 41–42). About the same time in Dixon, Illinois, young Ronald Reagan visited his public library twice a week, mostly to check out Frank Merriwell stories, Tarzan novels, and books by Horatio Alger, Zane Grey, Arthur Conan Doyle, and Mark Twain, many of which he read on the library’s front steps. “I’m a sucker for hero worship,” he later admitted (Griswold 1981). And in Grand Rapids, Michigan, a young Gerald Ford read every Alger novel he could find. “To achieve, one must have goals and be well organized,” he recalled 60 years later (Husted 1998). In a 2008 interview, 88-year-old Pete Seeger recalled an early-life reading experience. “At age 7, a librarian saw that I could read fairly well and recommended me a book written for teenagers. … The one I got was ‘Rolf in the Woods’ [Seton 1911], about a teenager who runs away from his stepfather—who’s beating him—and is adopted by a middle-aged Indian whose tribe was massacred, and whose wife was sold into slavery, and is living alone.” That he remembered this so vividly eight decades after reading it is testimony to the power of commonplace reading, and in Seeger’s case, a New York Times editor noted upon his death in 2014, “fitting for someone who went on to engage issues of conscience” (“Seeger’s Heavy Reading” 2014). For Oprah Winfrey, reading stories became “an open door for freedom in my life” and “allowed me to see that there was a world beyond my grandmother’s front porch” in Mississippi, “that everybody didn’t have an outhouse, that everybody wasn’t surrounded by poverty, that there was a hopeful world out there and that it could belong to me.” To Winfrey reading became her “comfort,” her “solace, to commune with and learn something about myself, to learn something about other people, to learn something about the world” (“Oprah on ‘the fire for reading’ at the AAP” 2003, 16). In a small Milwaukee apartment she shared as a 9-year-old in 1963 with her half-brother and half-sister, she read A Tree Grows in Brooklyn—her “first all-night book—the story of Francie Nolan whose life was full of humiliation and whose only friends were in books lining the public library shelves. … I felt like my life was hers.” Seven years later Winfrey read Maya Angelou’s I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings. “I read it over and over. I had never before read a book that validated my own existence” (Johnson 1997, 44). After her father died in 1963, 9-year-old Sonia Sotomayor buried herself in reading at her Bronx library and the apartment she shared with her mother and brother. “Nancy Drew had a powerful hold on my imagination,” she remembered. “Every night, when I’d finished reading and got into bed and closed my eyes, I would continue the story, with me in Nancy’s shoes until I fell asleep.” Her mind, she noted, “worked in ways very similar” to Nancy’s. “I was a keen observer and listener. I picked up on clues. I figured things out logically, and I enjoyed puzzles. I loved the clear focused feeling that came when I concentrated on solving a problem and everything else faded out.” Her reading that summer, she admitted, was her “solace and only distraction” that got her through this “time of trouble” (Sotomayor 2013, 47). Conclusions Part of Our Lives attempts to give “information,” “place,” and “reading” equal attention. By harnessing core ideas from three literatures and focusing them on the history of the American public library in the life of the user in order to answer the question “Why do Americans love their public library?,” the book shows that for more than a century and a half the information, reading, and places that public libraries provided helped fuse diverse groups into communities (large and small, imagined and real) and gave millions of individuals a sense of belonging. After going through the data for this book from a bottom-up perspective, I come away with a new appreciation for this civic institution, which, because it built a tremendous record of achievement serving people who used it in so many different ways, deserves much more credit than it has heretofore been given. If the research I did for Part of Our Lives is accurate, however, then I also have to conclude that LIS’s traditional discourse and current research agenda do not have the capacity to identify many—perhaps even most—of the contributions American public libraries make to their communities. For example, the history I see suggests that increased support for American public libraries will not necessarily lead to a more informed citizenry. There, I did it—directly challenged the cornerstone of the narrative librarians use to justify support of these ubiquitous civic institutions. At the beginning of the twenty-first century, communications scholars Michael X. Delli Carpini and Scott Keeter noted that the “mean level of knowledge among Americans is about the same today as it was fifty years ago.” A half-century earlier, less than half (and in many cases less than a quarter) of the public (1) knew “definitions of key terms such as liberal, conservative, primary elections, or the Bill of Rights,” (2) had “knowledge of many individual and collective rights guaranteed by the Constitution,” (3) recognized the names of public figures “below the level of president or governor,” (4) could identify candidate and party positions “on many important issues of the day,” (5) knew “the unemployment rate or the percentage of the public living in poverty or without health insurance,” or (6) had knowledge of “how much of the federal budget is spent on defense, foreign aid, or social welfare” (Delli Carpini and Keeter 2002, 135). And despite heavy use of the Internet, Delli Carpini noted, in 2005 these numbers had not improved (Delli Carpini 2005, 29). In a 2013 New York Times op-ed article titled “America the Clueless,” Frank Bruni points out that 65% of Americans could not name one Supreme Court Justice; that after 3 years of constant attention by politicians and the 24-hour news cycle, 40% were unaware that Obamacare was law; and that 30% did not know who was vice president (Bruni 2013). “The more I read and the more I listen,” former Supreme Court Justice Sandra Day O’Connor told an Idaho audience in 2013, “the more apparent it is that our society suffers from an alarming degree of public ignorance” (“Retired Justice Sandra Day O’Connor” 2013). If Americans care to be better informed, the 17,110 public library facilities available to them (up 14% from 1980) will provide this information free. Still, if surveys are accurate about how poorly informed most Americans are, one has to question whether the public library’s rhetoric as an institution essential to democracy holds up against the evidence. Yes, some of the 210 million Americans who visit a public library every year go there for information as LIS discourse currently defines it, and American public library history boasts thousands of patron success stories that prove many did. But more, many more, are apparently using—and loving—their public libraries for other purposes. To unearth reasons why, we have to expand LIS discourse beyond “information.” Because people do not have to use a public library, what patrons want—and, by their definition, what they need—gives them a power other civic institutions deny them and forces public libraries to mediate competing community desires. What a public library “is”—what I try to describe in Part of Our Lives—reflects these compromises. Since the mid-nineteenth century the American public library has been an essential public sphere institution providing many kinds of informal but important learning experiences to millions of Americans. Over time public libraries multiplied, survived, and regularly prospered, in large part because they perpetuated practices or eventually embraced changes upon which their users insisted. They have been public places of performance where users displayed moral progress and achievement. They have operated as a robust commons where members of the public discussed in a variety of ways issues that concerned them. They have functioned as centripetal forces to craft a sense of community (local, state, and national) among disparate populations and evolve community trust between its multicultural elements. They have acted as key players in constructing group identity through the stories and places they provided. And they have started neighborhood conversations, welcomed the recently arrived into their midst, and served as community anchors. Through the public spaces they provided, public libraries have functioned as incubators for the kinds of social relationships that resulted in personal happiness. Public libraries also functioned as sites where communities displayed the social harmony they helped generate, like naming a branch after an accomplished African American writer decades after the same library system denied him use of the facility. And for cultural minorities of all kinds, public libraries helped break the bonds of self-segregation. Some accepted newcomers more quickly than others; some used their buildings as community space more than others. Still, the evidence presented in Part of Our Lives shows what many accomplished and thus identifies public sphere traditions heretofore seldom recognized and therefore not much acknowledged in LIS discourse or its research. The public library’s mediating traditions have also been central to its existence and over the years have helped define the parameters of its community’s acceptable cultural and literary values. Public libraries make statements all the time in their collections, services, decorations, and physical plant, but they do it within acceptable boundaries defined by local communities. When a public library appears to violate that trust, community members force mediation. Analysis of the solutions over time also demonstrates the shifting center of a community’s value system. Through the stories, songs, films, and videos they make available, American public libraries provide social knowledge and models for ethical behavior that users appropriate for their everyday lives. Tools such as stereopticons may have disappeared, but the stories they contained have remained a public library’s stock-in-trade, albeit in newer packages, newer cultural forms. American public libraries also allowed users to manifest cultural tastes that personalized the formation of morals and self-discipline and, within a larger cultural environment, contained enough room for most people to be selective in the kinds of stories and cultural forms they want. Not all public library users became as successful as Sonia Sotomayor, but like her they experienced the kinds of emotions and sentiments stories provide to enhance life’s good times and help weather the bad. The American public library also stands as one of the few civic institutions resistant to the centralizing tendencies that federalism has characterized in the last century. Although it has sought and accepted federal money (and made very good use of it), it has nonetheless resisted federal control. Because 85% of their funding comes from local taxation, public libraries are local organisms living within the social and cultural environments their communities create for them. No matter how hard ALA’s Office of Intellectual Freedom tries to protest what it calls censorial practices and thus influence cultural values in communities across the nation, the American public library still makes decisions at the local level. And at that level it acts as a platform to mediate community values to the satisfaction of most in a bloodless but often messy and sometimes public way. History also shows that since the early twentieth century every generation of librarians experiencing budget pressures engaged in crisis discourse to predict disaster for—and in recent years even the demise of—the American public library. Yet Part of Our Lives clearly shows that these predictions have little basis in history. But that does not stop librarians from a birdsong that predicts disaster at every budget cycle—a birdsong that relies on replicating the discourse and reinforcing a stereotyped history, thus overlooking the primary experiences that generations of public library users identify with these civic institutions. In many cases, librarians’ lack of knowledge about their own history is evident from statements such as “Public libraries are not just warehouses of books anymore.” Part of Our Lives shows that they never were. For effect and contrast, journalists often parroted and reinforced this myth by drawing on these stereotypes and their own limited public library experiences. Much of this shortsightedness can be traced to tunnel vision brought about by the limits of LIS discourse. Reasons for looking past place and reading stories can be traced to two professional positions. First, librarians participate in the dissemination of information and misinformation but refuse to be held accountable for the latter. This refusal not only helps explain a relative lack of professional power (lawyers and doctors are accountable for the information they provide), it also shows why librarians share power with public library users to shape public library collections and services. Second, ALA’s Office of Intellectual Freedom has carefully cultivated an ethos that what people read is a privacy “right” that librarians need to protect. This ethos encourages libraries to destroy records of public library transactions immediately after an object is returned. In effect, however, this practice deprives researchers of valuable data that could be studied to improve services and deepen understanding of the public library’s community value. Conventional social science research methods that comply with state confidentiality laws (librarians do not enjoy the “privilege” status of medicine and law) easily accommodate analyses of these records, all of which are public transactions for which librarians are publicly accountable. Perhaps within these public library transaction data sets—if librarians preserved and opened them to analysis—future scholars will discover that voluntary reading—the kind of self-directed informal education that American public libraries have quietly enabled since the middle of the nineteenth century—may do more to increase literacy of all types than the mechanics of reading forced by formal education, No Child Left Behind federal programs, and Common Core State Standards that focus on “close” reading, nonfiction, and text complexity measured by reading formulas. The testimony of hundreds of public library users (especially recent immigrants) cited in Part of Our Lives strongly suggests that this may be so, but we need research to test this hypothesis. This kind of data could also become central to social science and humanities scholars now building a new research arena often called culturomics, an umbrella term describing quantitative inquiries into cultural phenomena using technology to research massive data sets (Jockers 2013). “Humanities is an area ripe for exploiting big data,” argues Alice Meadows in a September 9, 2013, Wiley Exchanges blog (Meadows 2013). Two days later the United Kingdom’s Institute of Education issued a report—“believed to be the first to examine the effect of reading for pleasure on cognitive development over time”—that found “children who read for pleasure made more progress in maths, vocabulary and spelling between the ages of 10 and 16 than those who rarely read” (“Reading for Pleasure” 2013). Another recent study of American children enrolled in public library summer reading programs showed that they scored higher on reading achievement tests in the subsequent school year than those who did not participate (Roman, Carran, and Fiore 2010). Finally, recent research also suggests that reading Harry Potter books can help reduce prejudice toward minority groups such as recent immigrants and gays (Jacobs 2014). Given the fact that circulating commonplace stories read, heard, and viewed by users continues to be what public libraries do most, I have to wonder why inquiries like these are not central to LIS research. Unfortunately, most professional library education programs seem willfully blind to the importance of reading and place. As these programs evolved over the past 30 years, some stayed close to “library”; others privileged a focus on “information” defined by the discourse they inherited and married largely to the storage and retrieval properties of developing communications technologies. Among the 17 “I-schools” (12 ALA-accredited) that met for the first time in 2005, almost none had courses analyzing “reading” and “place” from a “library in the life of the user” perspective. Unless ALA through its Committee on Accreditation—also steeped in a “formal way of thinking” manifesting a “social boundary”—insists that reading and place are part of librarianship’s “domain,” professional programs will likely continue to replicate the discourse and manifest the same tunnel vision I spoke of 15 years ago. If Part of Our Lives proves that reading and place have been as important to the American public library as information, then not having a core course in either at ALA-accredited programs is the equivalent of an American Bar Association–accredited law school without a core course on the Constitution or civil procedure. Although in 2010 the 31,932 librarians holding a master’s degree in library and information studies made up 23% of 140,000 public library employees, the overwhelming majority of those graduates was no better prepared by their professional education to understand the role of reading and place in public libraries than their colleagues without LIS degrees. Part of Our Lives proves to my satisfaction that public libraries are much more than “information.” Based on my findings, I argue that LIS needs systematic longitudinal studies of the impact of reading on users and the roles of library as place to deepen understanding of the public library’s impact and effectiveness. Absent these studies, 30 years from now someone is going to “discover” yet again that the American public library is a “community center,” and the next J. K. Rowling phenomenon will be rationalized as “Reading Is Essential” rather than investigated for reasons why readers want these stories and what they learn from them. And without research that expands the profession’s discourse to analyze the effects, impacts, and roles of the American public library as a public sphere institution that provides its community with—in addition to information—essential reading experiences and public spaces, contemporary policy-makers will continue to be greatly handicapped in efforts to plan its future. If the LIS community chooses to listen to the voices of users across the generations cited in Part of Our Lives, it must expand its professional discourse by elevating its focus on library as place and initiating a serious investigation of the impact of voluntary reading. Most of my argument so far has addressed tunnel vision in LIS discourse. What about blind spots? Evidence suggests that they still exist in the twenty-first century. “Libraries are simply institutions that tell a story,” said Winnebago tribal member and Huntington Park (California) public librarian Michael McLaughlin in a 2005 Native American Times article. “It is the community that decides what that story is and how it is told.” To McLaughlin, however, it was clear that librarianship’s practices placed Native Americans at a distinct disadvantage in the story public libraries told about them. For example, neither the Library of Congress nor the Dewey Decimal Classification “adequately addresses the histories and contemporary realities of American Indians.” Neither had a category for “tribal sovereignty” that enjoyed equal status with other systems of government. Similarly, although Picasso and Monet were classified “Art,” Indian sand paintings, pottery, and basketry were classified “Crafts” or “Primitive Art,” and although Protestantism and Catholicism found comfortable niches in “Religion,” Indian spiritualism was found in “Mythology,” “Folklore,” and “Other Religion.” “In short,” McLaughlin concluded, “every American Indian perspective, accomplishment, or cultural belief, practice, or material product, according to these classification systems, is of a subordinate or inferior nature” (McLaughlin 2005, 8). Although public libraries cannot be all things to all people, Part of Our Lives shows that they have been more things to more people than most cultural authorities—including many librarians—have realized. With an understanding of this past, American public libraries might see opportunities to exploit possibilities made visible by playing outside their conventional sandbox of ideas to be even more things to more people than they have in the past. “It’s all on the Internet,” hype evangelists of information technology. “Libraries are dinosaurs,” grouse officials looking to cut budgets. Part of Our Lives demonstrates that these statements are based on a greatly limited understanding of what public libraries do, and are. As this article goes to press, I just finished reading Susan Pinker’s The Village Effect: How Face-to-Face Contact Can Make Us Healthier, Happier, and Smarter (2014). By harnessing research in the fast-developing field of social neuroscience, Pinker finds that those who experience high levels of face-to-face contact accrue substantial benefits, including an improved vocabulary, an increased ability to empathize, a deeper sense of belonging, and—most important—a longer life span. As I pondered her conclusions, I wondered whether American public library users lived longer, happier, and healthier lives than nonusers. And if they do, why? Answering that question requires librarianship to expand its traditional discourse in order to explore the community-building benefits of public library as place and the sociability that reading fosters. One final observation. In my lifetime of research into American library history, I’ve read hundreds of sweeping predictions concerning the future of these ubiquitous institutions. Of those grounded largely on a particular definition of useful knowledge in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, on best books in the nineteenth and twentieth, and on information in the twentieth and twenty-first, none proved true that did not also give equal consideration to library as place and the power of reading. If history is a teacher, we all have to keep that in mind as we ponder today’s predictions about and plans for tomorrow’s public library.