A PLAN FOR A COMPREHENSIVE MEDICO-HISTORICAL LIBRARY: PROBLEMS OF SCOPE AND COVERAGE WILLIAM JEROME WILSON DEVELOPMENT OF A MICROFILM ACQUISITION PROGRAM D _OCUMENTARY photography, espe- cially in the form of microfilm, microprint, and the microcard, has worked its way gradually, almost in- sidiously, into the techniques of the mod- ern library and has confronted librarians with possibilities and problems not dreamed of in their earlier philosophies. Nowhere, perhaps, have the effects been more revolutionary than in the rare-book field. Here photography was at first mainly an aid to the reference service. Presently, it was employed also to fill out defective copies of old and rare volumes, many of which had been partly worn out with use. In this sort of work the Army Medical Library was something of a leader. During World War II, when it set up its History of Medicine Divrision in Cleveland as the depository for its rare books, a systematic "missing pages pro- gram" was established, in order to fill out mutilated or defective books by means of photostats or photoprints from copies in other libraries. But if there could be a "missing pages program," why not also a "missing books program"? Why might we not by micro- photography obtain from other libraries copies of whole works, or of whole sets or senes of works, which they possessed and we did not? In the year I948 the History of Medicine Division undertook a pro- gram of this sort, with a view to rounding out the Library's collection of early medi- cal works. Since the subject area was fairly restricted, it seemed reasonable to hope that we thus might acquire all the available early literature in the field-or, if not all, at least most of it. In our more sanguine moments we talked openly of our plan for a complete medico-historical library, but usually we spoke of it dis- creetly as "comprehensive" rather than "complete." Or, in a still more noncom- mittal mood, we called it simply our "microfilm acquisition program.." As a practical measure, to divide the project up into manageable sections, it was de- cided to take up one century at a time, beginning with the sixteenth. THE ACQUISITION DIIEMXA OF TE RARE-BOOK IUBRARY Experience seems to show that there is nothing so appealing to the users of a library or so stimulating to the staff as an active acquisition program. Even the use of the collections for reference and circu- lation does not have quite the vitalizing effect that comes from the steady influx of additional materials. It provides a constant challenge of fresh intellectual problems and lessens the temptation to regard the library as an inert mass of books. Unfortunately, theseprinciples, though admirable in theory, are not always easy to apply. In a historical library with fixed chronological limits, an active program of acquisitions is increasingly difficult to maintain. New books, in the strict sense of the word, are unobtainable. Acces- sions, in such a library, consist usually 248
A COMPREHENSIVE MEDICO-HISTORICAL LIBRARY 249 of copies of additional old books that ap- pear from time to time in the auction catalogs and in the offerings of second- hand dealers. The prices are high, and, because of the increasing rarity of the items, they seem destined to go higher and higher. Only extraordinary endow- ments or appropriations can stand the strain of a really active acquisition pro- gram in any of the rare-book fields. Efforts have been made to establish co-operative acquisition programs, but in historical libraries their success has been limited. In the nature of the case they can be little more than agreements to di- vide the field according to subject interest while maintaining a union catalog and an interlibrary loan system. The main point is that each institution in the group shall specialize in its purchases and thus re- lieve to some extent the competition for books in other fields. This is a sort of vol- untary rationing, which tends to reduce the demand for the commodity in ques- tion but does nothing to increase the sup- ply. For the fundamental acquisition problem this type of interlibrary co-op- eration is obviously no real answer. MICROPHOTOGRAPHY AS A PARTIAL SOLUTION A better answer, though not a perfect one, is possible through the photographic reproduction of books. For years it has been evident that the photocopying of texts in other libraries had important possibilities not only for the reference di- vision but also for the acquisition divi- sion of a historical library. As yet, how- ever, its possibilities as an acquisition tool have not been fully exploited. For this fact there have been various reasons, among them the conservatism of librari- ans, an understandable coolness of rare- book dealers toward such innovations, and, most important of all, the amount of preparation necessary for a compre- hensive program of photocopying in a particular historical field. The conservatism of librarians is prob- ably no stronger than that of other pro- fessions, but it naturally makes them re- gard a photocopy as a poor substitute for a book. Such, in many respects, it is. Most of the sentimental values and many of the artistic and craftsmanly qualities of the original are lost in the facsimile. And yet, the basic use and purpose of the book, namely, the conveying of informa- tion from mind to mind, remains. For historical study of the text an accurate facsimile is just as good as the book itself. As for the rare-book dealers, they have had relatively little influence on this mat- ter, but their economic interest has nat- urally aligned them with the more con- servative librarians in disparaging the photocopy as compared with the book. In reality, the threat of the facsimile to the dealer's monopoly is not very great. The lure of the "first edition in perfect condition" will continue to be strong, though the "cripples" may become a little more difficult to sell. Moreover, in the long run, the technique of photo- copying, by spreading the knowledge and appreciation of historical treasures, should widen the rare-book market and so help to maintain values. PROBLEMS OF SCOPE IN A MEDICO- HISTORICAL LIBRARY Neither the conservatism of librarians nor the economic concern of dealers has kept the facsimile from being fully ex- ploited as an acquisition tool in historical libraries. The real hindrance is the large intellectual effort necessary for its effec- tive use. The first problems to come up when such a program is launched are those of scope and coverage-what range of subjects to include and how complete-
250 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY ly to represent the existing literature on each subject. Such problems are especially hard for an institution like the Library of Con- gress, which is presumed to take all knowledge for its province. In the Army Medical Library, confined, as it is, to medicine, the question of scope is sim- pler; yet, even so, there is considerable difficulty in delimiting the field and de- ciding how many of the fringe subjects should be included. The question of the completeness of coverage is equally baf- fling. Manifestly, not every medical and near-medical record can be collected, even with the aid of microphotography. What degree of completeness, then, ought to be attempted? Shall the library try to cover with equal thoroughness the early centuries when books were copied by hand, the first hundred years or so of printing when the scribes and the print- ers still competed with each other, and the more recent centuries in which the printing press reigns supreme and its out- put is overwhelming? Finally, after these questions of policy are settled, there are practical difficulties. A comprehensive program of facsimile acquisition faces an almost limitless problem of "searching." The obvious tool would be a complete medical bibliogra- phy, if such a thing existed. Since it does not, the only recourse is to use all avail- able national, regional, and other bibli- ographies, as well as the catalogs of im- portant libraries. THE BASIC LITERATURE, PRACTICAL AND THEORETICAL Defining the scope of a medico-histori- cal collection involves a number of close distinctions. Medicine, it is commonly said, is both a science and an art. "Art" in this case, however, denotes not an es- thetic but a technological aspect., It is what the medieval writers commonly called "practica," as distinguished from "theorica." A generation just past would have called it an "applied," as opposed to a "pure," science. The two things- call them science and art, theory and practice, or what you will-constantly react upon each other and actually can- not exist without each other. And, yet, medicine proper in its most characteristic aspect would seem to be a technology. It has concerned itself, in all ages and all countries, with such matters as diseases and wounds, symptoms and diagnosis, treatment and remedies. These consti- tute the great main core of a medico-his- torical collection. They are medical sub- jects in the most typical sense, and on them an institution like the Army Medi- cal Library must concentrate its primary attention. These subjects tend to divide under numerous subheads, all of which are still unmistakably medical. Surgery is one of the great main branches, and dentistry is an important branch of surgery. Trea- tises on the fitting of eyeglasses, the training of deaf-mutes, and the correc- tion of posture or foot defects all deserve to be included in a medico-historical col- lection. What, however, of veterinary science? Is animal medicine a medical subject? Put in this form, the question answers itself. In practice, the matter is simply one of definition. If a collection is dedicated to the records of human medi- cine only, then animal medicine is ex- cluded. If it is dedicated to medicine generally, then veterinary science is a part of it. The Army Medical Library I Henry E. Sigerist's paper on "The Historical Aspect of Art and Medicine" in Buletin of the Insti- Sute of the History of Medicine, IV (1936), 271-97, seems to equate the artist's "art" and the artisan's "art," in order to put artist and physician closer together than I think they are.
A COMPREHENSIVE MEDICO-HISTORICAL LIBRARY 25I has followed the latter interpretatioin. Plant pathology, on the other hand, is excluded. Wheat rust, the boll weevil, and other plant diseases belong more logically to agriculture. Next to the straight medical works, and equally indispensable in such a col- lection, are books on what are frequently called the medical sciences. These are in- tellectual disciplines, sometimes culti- vated for their own sake and capable of standing by themselves in the hierarchy of knowledge, which have, nevertheless, so direct a bearing on the art of healing that they are often thought of as intrinsi- cally medical. Anatomy and physiology, for example, are now, and have been for centuries, a universal requirement in a medical education. Physicians have made most of the advances in these sciences, and marked advances in them have been promptly followed by im- provements in medical practice. Some other sciences, notably botany, were cultivated for centuries from a simi- lar point of view. The Greek lore regard- ing medicinal plants was handed down through Dioscorides to the scholars of the Middle Ages and led to a long suc- cession of herbals. Thege fascinating vol- umes, often profusely illustrated, set forth the appearance and habits of doz- ens of plants, followed regularly by in- formation as to their medicinal uses. But with the establishment of the Lin- naean classification the science of botany presently broke away from medicine, and at the end of the eighteenth and begin- ning of the nineteenth century some herbals began to appear without mention of the medicinal values. These, accord- ingly, fall outside the scope of a medico- historical collection. There is a certain irony about such decisions, since the later herbals, from a scientific standpoint, are better than the medical herbals that pre- ceded them. Nevertheless, the later and better treatises are clearly out of scope. Chemistry and physics had a some- what similar development, though the details were different. Their periods of special medical cultivation are marked by the schools, long since obsolete, of iatrochemistry (sixteenth century) and iatrophysics (seventeenth century). Even the knowledge of the stars was considered by many in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries to be a handmaiden of medi- cine. Works on "judicial astrology" and "critical days" were consulted by some physicians in an effort to determine in advance the course of an illness and the prospects of recovery. In the words of the Catalan mystic Ramon Lul, reputedly a medical man, "The astronomer can give as true a judgment about a sick person as can the physician." 2 In the then state of medical knowledge this may, alas, have been true. In these and other medical sciences the decision as to whether a particular work is in or out of scope cannot be made me- chanically or on the basis of chronology only. It is necessary to examine the book itself and determine its purpose and point of view. In strictly modern times the great sciences have become so vast that each has developed many specialties of its own, and some of these have close medi- cal affiliations. In the field of chemistry, for example, the biochemists are con- stantly passing on new knowledge to the pharmacologists, and in the field of physics the radiologists are doing the same for medicine, especially for military medicine. Both biochemistry and radi- ology rely on the hospitals and the phy- sicians for much of the experimentation 2 Ramon Lul, Arbor scientiae (Barcelona, August, 1482), fol. 280v: "Astronomus potest dare ita verum iudicium de homine infirmo sicut medicus."
252 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY on which their scientific progress de- pends. Circumstances may change, but at the moment these subsciences are in about the same position as was botany before 8oo. THE FRINGE LITERATURE, NEAR-MEDICAL AND PART-MEICAL There is another end to this spectrum. All the older sciences had crude and magical beginnings, and the medical sci- ences were no exception. Back of the herbals-and for several centuries con- temporaneous with them as well-there were elaborate treatises in Greek on the "virtues" of plants, of stones, of anximals, of birds, and of fishes. One of the best- known compilations of this sort acquired the peculiar name of the Kyranides; it was widely circulated also in Latin and Arabic translations. In such works the effort toward dassification may be rec- ognized as a rudimentary manifestation of the scientific spirit, but the alleged virtues or powers (Greek 6wA&MELs, Latin virutes or, less commonly, poteniae) are on the order of magical charms. Thus, a certain stone worn as an amulet may ward off weapons in battle, a certain fish properly prepared and eaten restore the memory, the juice of a certain plant pro- tect from the plague, etc. The student of historical developments will see here the background of the later sciences of botany, mineralogy, zoology, ornitholo- gy, and ichthyology and will admit a slight medical slant in some of the so- called "virtues"; but one can hardly ac- cord to such compilations the dignity of medical science. They have a little medi- cal interest, and a comprehensive medi- co-historical library ought probably to contain representative samples; but they are far from being its primary concern. In the same category are most of the works on alchemy, predecessor of chemis- try. This was a two-sided science, which sought in one of its lines of endeavor to find the philosopher's stone, a perfect medicine which should cure all the ills to which mankind is heir. Here, to some ex- tent, is the language of physicans, but the content is almost pure magic. The same is true of most treatises on astrolo- gy, whose predictions are on the sooth- sayer's level, although some of them, as noted above, were employed in medical diagnosis. Not essentially different are chiromancy and physiognomy, which seek to foretell human fortunes from the lines of the hand or the shape of the head. Diseases are sometimes included among their predictions of disaster, but these are examples of soothsaying, not of med- icine. For all such pseudosciences, as well as for the compilations of "virtues," per- haps the best designation would be "near- medical." In a medico-historical collect- ion they are, at best, only fringe subjects. Magic in its prescientific and pseudo- scientific manifestations is not the only source of near-medical works. Sermons and theological treatises sometimes dis- cuss problems of health and sickness, es- pecially during epidemics. In 1468, for example, Domenico Dominic, bishop of Brescia, composed a closely reasoned tract on the duty of the clergy in time of pestilence.3 Was a prelate bound to stay with his people while a plague was raging, or might he flee to some safer place? Here is a matter with undoubtedly medical implications, but it is treated from an ec- clesiastical point of view. The same prob- lem is present with respect to the lives of St. Roche and other patrons of physi- cans and of their patients. Liturgical works also often indude special prayers to be said for the sick. s Cf. D. M. Schullian, "A Manuscript of Domi- nici in the Army Medical Library," Journal of Ike History of Medcine and AUied Scinces, III (1948), 395s9.
A COMPREHENSIVE MEDICO-HISTORICAL LIBRARY 253 Philosophy, likewise, makes its contri- butions. Petrarch's Medicina utriusque fortunae was a work frequently published and widely read, but let no one be misled by the title. This is not a treatise on medicine but a philosophical discussion of good and bad fortune. The Preface states the purpose of the work in terms suggestive of modern psychiatry. "Nor am I unaware," says the author a bit de- fensively, "that just as in the case of hu- man bodies, so also in the case of minds suffering from various emotional effects, the medicaments of words will seem in- efficacious to a great many persons. And yet this also does not escape me, that just as there are invisible diseases of the mind, so there are invisible remedies; persons trapped by false notions must be set free by correct ideas, in order that those who through hearing have fallen down may through hearing stand up again."4 In the two parts of the work, Joy and Pain, re- spectively, give expression to the feelings of confident happiness or despondent un- happiness resulting from hundreds of dif- ferent circumstances in life, and Reason in each case gives the "correct ideas" to counteract such feelings. In the cast of characters, Joy has Hope as an occasion- al replacement, and Pain has Fear. The discussion of gout (Book ii, chap. 84) is one of the most striking. Short, sharp utterances of anguish by Dolor-- "I am tortured by this vile gout," "I am weakened by gout," "I am made useless by gout," "I cannot stand on my feet"- are met with suave, platitudinous para- graphs by Ratio. Another striking pas- sage is that on wisdom (Book i, chap. 1 2), in which Gaudium supplements his first declaration, "I have pursued wisdom," with such variants as "I am wise" and "Wise am I," while Ratio tries, by a suc- cession of arguments, to puncture his self-satisfaction. As one reads, one be- comes doubtful indeed as to the efficacy of these medicamenta verborum, either against gout or against intellectual pride. In spite of its preface the work falls not so much into the psychiatric dass as into that popular and perennial genre which it is the fashion nowadays to call the "peace-of-mind books." As far as medical interest goes, it is out on the fringes of the subject. Somewhat different is Sebastian Brant's Ship of Fools. This is an interest- ing forerunner of today's illustrated "comics." It would seem, at first sight, to be completely out of scope, and yet it happens to contain a famous picture of a librarian wearing eyeglasses, one of the earliest known illustrations of those aids to poor vision. A medico-historical li- brary is certainly justified in including at least one copy of the book. Instances might be multiplied. What, for example, of the encyclopedias, uni- versal histories, and other general works? Many of these contain one or more sec- tions on medicine or physicians, and, while seldom of large historical signifi- cance, these tell something of the pro- fession as seen from an outside or gen- eral point of view. What also of military science, cookery, sports, architecture, farming, law? Works on the art of war are likely to have sections on the care of wounds and the sanitation of camps. 4 Francesco Petrarca, De remediis utriusque fortunac (in his Libri impressi [Venice, 15o0!), Liber I, "Epistolaris praefatio," in the section with marginal designation M (fol. ffiiv): "Nec me fallit: ut in corporibus hominum: sic in animis multiplici passione affectis: medicamenta verborum mult is inefficacia visum iri. Sed nec illud quoque me pre- terit: ut invisibiles animorum morbos: sic invisibilia esse remedia falsis opinionibus circumventi: veris sententiis liberandi sunt: ut qui audiendo ceciderant: audiendo consurgant." For a somewhat laudatory exposition of the work, in opposition to expressed opinions of Lynn Thorndike, see George Sarton, "In Defense of Petrarca's Book on the Remedies for Good and Evil Fortune," Isis, XL (1949), 95-99-
254 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Works on the culinary art may touch on matters of diet, and those on gymnastic training may give remedial exercises. Works on architecture often describe the construction of hospitals. Works on agri- culture usually take up, at some point, the care of domestic animals, their dis- eases, and how to cure them. Compen- diums of law sometimes deal at length with medical jurisprudence, attempting to set forth the legal rights and responsi- bilities of the practitioner. In all such texts there is some portion with genuine- ly medical subject matter, though it may not constitute a very large fraction of the whole. If one were seeking for them a different label from "near-medical," it might perhaps be "part-medical." PROBLEMS OF COVERAGE FOR EARLY PRINTED BOOKS Like the well-known apple-sorter, the director of a comprehensive acquisition project is faced with intellectual decisions all day long. After deciding which sub- jects to cover, he must decide how com- pletely to cover them, and he soon learns that in such work no rules can be applied woodenly to all types of records and all chronological periods. The era of manu- script transmission requires different treatment from the era of printed books, while some peculiar problems beset that century or so during which scribes and printers competed for the business of cir- culating the organized thought of the Western world. Coverage will also differ as between medicine and the medical sci- ences, on the one hand, and the near- medical and part-medical works, on the other. Finally, there is the practical prob- lem of choosing between the two forms of acquisition, the expensive book and the cheaper facsimile, if both are available in any given instance. Selection is easiest, by far, for books printed in the fifteenth century, for there is one simple rule: "Include everything." Incunabula are not very numerous, and it may be assumed that every genuinely medical item that has survived from the fifteenth century possesses some histori- cal value. Many of the more popular works, however, were printed not once but several times. Shall a comprehensive collection aim to include, either in book form or on film, all known editions? What, furthermore, of translations into other languages, and what of condensa- tions, paraphrases, and commentaries quoting part or all of the original work? All of these, in a sense, are new editions, and the general problem here being raised may, for convenience, be called the problem of "edition-coverage." How complete ought this to be? COMPLETE EDITION-COVERAGE FOR THE BASIC LITERATURE For fifteenth-century books that are strictly within its scope, the Army Medi- cal Library is attempting to apply a rule of complete edition-coverage. The case for it is strong. If a new edition is revised, corrected, or enlarged, it obviously con- tains new historical matter and ought to be represented in a comprehensive col- lection. An edition in another language is also important. Three points of historical value in a translation are obvious: (I) If it does not actually add any new mat- ter, it at least will give the translator's understanding of doubtful or ambiguous points in the original. In this respect ev- ery translation is a critical interpreta- tion. (2) To compilers of medical dic- tionaries it is always interesting and in- structive to see what happens to new technical terms in another tongue. Some are merely transliterated, others actually translated. (3) An edition in a foreign language is clear evidence that a medical
A COMPREHENSIVE MEDICO-HISTORICAL LIBRARY 255 work has extended its influence into a new national or linguistic area. Con- densations, paraphrases, and commen- taries bear similar testimony to an au- thor's widening influence, in addition to recording new information or shifts of interest and emphasis. But what of the simple reprint? Of all types of new edition this is the most diffi- cult to justify under a principle of com- plete coverage. By hypothesis, the text is the same as that of the original edi- tion. If so, why bother to secure a copy? The point is arguable, but I think that it is well, at least for the early centuries, to extend the edition-coverage to include mere reprints. If they can be obtained in microfilm form, the added trouble and expense is not very great. Three con- siderations seem to favor such a policy: (I) Even a reprint testifies to the breadth of the author's influence and thus makes a slight contribution to his biography. (2) While the text remains the same, the introductory matter often changes. (3) There is always the possi- bility that a painstaking biographer will find minor but historically significant variants in an edition that has previously been considered a mere reprint of the original. It may be permissible, at this point, to cast a wary eye toward that murky mo- rass in which bibliographers-usually working in centuries after the fifteenth- struggle with vaguely identified "issues" and "variant states" and belabor one another with arguments about cancel title-pages, reissues, simultaneous issues, broken type, and such formidable ab- stractions as "the ideal copy" and "the consistent unit." There is, of course, no cheaper humor than the merriment of a novice over a form of intellectual investi- gation which does not happen to appeal to him. I mention the difficulties and complexities of descriptive bibliography not to scoff but to classify. The basis of such studies is the fact that typesetters in all ages have made mistakes and that early printers often caught misprints and corrected them while a work was going through the press. Also, publishers at times made deliberate variations in title- page or text. The attempt to determine, from such corrections and changes, which copies of a given edition were issued first and which later is a perfectly le- gitimate exercise of human ingenuity, though some bibliographers have doubt- less evolved more elaborate theories as to "the first issue of the first edition" than the evidence will support. The point of present interest, however, is this: Such investigations are of value for the history of typography, but never, I think, for the history of medicine. It fol- lows that a medico-historical collection may stop its coverage with the edition. It is under no logical obligation to go fur- ther and try to secure copies of all alleged issues. Issue-coverage-if the term is not too barbarous-may be left to the his- torians of printing and to any library catering especially to their needs. SAMPLE COVERAGE FOR FRINGE MATERIALS For strictly medical treatises, includ- ing those in the medical sciences, the edi- tion is the lower limit of coverage, but for near-medical and part-medical works even edition-coverage seems more than can be justified. In a comprehensive li- brary on the history of medicine one may reasonably expect to find all the fif- teenth-century editions, let us say, of Bernard de Gordonio's Lilium medicinae, which was the most widely used general compendium on the subject in that peri- od. The Army Medical Library, having already the other four incunable editions of this important work, was proud to be
256 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY able to secure in book form, about two years ago, the original edition of I480. It plans, as soon as possible, to secure film or book copies of the French and Spanish translations as well. Quite differ- ent must be one's attitude toward a gen- eral encydopedia of the sciences, such as Bartholomaeus Anglicus, De proprietati- bus rerum. This contains some significant passages on medicine and a good deal of background material of value to the medical historian. The work went through a dozen incunable editions in the onrginal Latin, and there are a dozen more in oth- er languages. The Army Medical Li- brary now has three of the Latin editions but none of the French, Dutch, Spanish, or English versions. How much of the total printed record of this work may it reasonably be expected to provide? Cer- tainly not all of it. The logical place in which to look for the whole series would be a universal library like the British Museum or, better still, some historical library aiming to cover comprehensively the history of the natural sciences. Of all the early near-medical or part- medical works, probably the outstanding example is Pliny the Elder's Historia naturalis. It may fairly be classified in both those categories. The quantity of medical information in this compendium is very considerable, though the quality may leave something to be desired. In general, it reflects not the higher levels of medicine, as derived by the Romans from the Greeks, but the popular levels, well mixed with superstition and magic. There is also a great deal of information -and misinformation-regarding plants and herbs, minerals and metals, stars and planets, and others of our fringe subjects. Edition-coverage for such a work ought to be as generous as for any part-medical or near-medical treatise that can be named. As a matter of fact, at the Army Medical Library it is quite generous. Of the fifteen incunable edi- tions recorded by Arnold C. Klebs in his Incunabula scientifica et medica, four are represented here in book form: the fifth, eighth, ninth, and fifteenth. Of the three incunable editions of the Italian trans- lation, the first and second are present, and there are copies also of seven later editions, including English and German translations, bearing dates of I587, I593, 1778-9I X178I-88, I835-36, I855-57, and i856. Is this sufficient, or ought an effort to be made to secure in book form or on film the remaining twelve incunable editions? Here again is a question that is end- lessly arguable. On it I offer suggestions rather than decisions. The real question is not, I submit, "what it would be nice to have" or "what some scholar might some day ask to see" but, rather, "what it would be logical to expect in a compre- hensive library on the history of medi- cine." If Pliny were a medical writer, we should want the entire printed record in order to illustrate the ramifications of his influence and the various additions and alterations that have been made in his text. Since he is not a medical writer but has only illustrative and background val- ue for the history of medicine, it would seem sufficient, as a practical working solution of the problem, to content our- selves with two things: (i) an early edi- tion, preferably the first, if it is available, and (2) the best modern critical edition in existence. Those two would appear to be the in- dispensable minimum. If there is to be any extension beyond this coverage, it ought obviously to be in the second cate- gory rather than the first. As will be brought out more clearly below, the piling-up of successive incunable editions will hardly bring us nearer to the original
A COMPREHENSIVE MEDICO-HISTORICAL LIBRARY 257 wording of Pliny's text-which is usually what the medical historian wants when he consults a copy of the HIistoria natura- lis. On the other hand, the precise pur- pose of a modern critical edition is to get back of all the variants that have crept into the manuscripts and the early un- critical editions and to recover, as nearly as possible, just what Pliny wrote. If any new-and presumably better-critical text is ever published, the Army Medical Library ought to secure it. Here, rather than among the incunabula, is the place for complete edition-coverage of near- medical and part-medical works. INCREASED SELECTIVITY FOR THE LATER CENTURIES For the genuinely medical literature of the fifteenth century, then, it is not too ambitious to say: "Include everything that has survived." As a matter of fact, the same principle may reasonably be applied to the sixteenth century as well. Beyond that point, if a comprehensive acquisition project still seems a feasible undertaking, there will inevitably be a tightening of the principles of selection. For one thing, scope will probably be de- fined more narrowly, and the fringe sub- jects will be more and more rigidly ex- cluded. In the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, medicine and its subsidiary and allied subjects were pretty much in- terrelated, not to say confused. In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the disciplines became much better dis- tinguished. In the nineteenth and twen- tieth, the trend toward specialization be- came acute. Although even today the sciences interact on one another about as much as they ever did, thinkers and writers, when they deal with such inter- actions-as, for example, between medi- cine and subatomic physics or between medicine and aviation-show greater skill at concentrating on the precise points of medical concern. The result is sharper contact and less confusion be- tween the disciplines than formerly. To put the matter a little differently, the di- rector of a comprehensive medico-histori- cal library, when he comes to take over for historical purposes the materials of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, will find the scope already determined for him through the refined specialization of science itself. What will not have been so well done for him is the segregation of the histori- cally significant from the insignificant. Here is a problem for archivists and li- brarians alike. If the archivists have faced it a little longer and more con- sciously than have librarians, this is doubtless because archival documents contain a higher percentage of trivial and routine matter than do books. Certain events or persons in history stand out for their special contributions; they mark a new discovery, an improved method, a critical insight, an important change of direction. On the other hand, the great generality of events and of persons is routine and trivial. These the historian can only treat statistically, ignoring in- dividual differences and contenting him- self with generalizations as to the nature and significance of thousands or millions of similar persons or circumstances. In documenting the outstanding events of the past, the archivist or the historical librarian will make few mistakes. The records of a Vesalius, a Harvey, or a Jenner will be well chosen and carefully preserved. But what of the ephemera, the trivia, the routine and repetitive publi- cations? For example, the medical schools publish not merely annual catalogs and lists of courses but also a varied promo- tional literature, all of it bearing, though often slightly, on the history of medicine.
258 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Shall it, as far as it is available, be as- sembled either in print or on film? Shall it be assembled for the mnedical schools of Europe, Asia, Africa, Australia, and oth- er American countries as well as for the United States and Canada? Again, what of the medical journals and the reports of associations? Shall only those of na- tional significance be collected or those of purely local significance as well? And what about those in foreign countries? Many other questions of similar im- port might be raised. What of the re- prints of separate artides? If the library already has the article in the journal in which it was published, then the reprint may probably be rejected as not worth the trouble and expense of separate cata- loging and shelving. On the other hand, groups of reprints which someone has or- ganized to illuminate a particular topic or to represent the work of an indivridual author may be well worth processing. And what about biographies of physi- cians, their portraits, their obituary no- tices? If these are systematically collect- ed, shall all medical men be induded or only the most eminent? Shall the collec- tion extend to all countries or be limited to the United States and Canada? Since, as now constituted, the History of Medicine Division is not greatly con- cerned with the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, I refrain from asking any more such questions or from suggesting any of the possible answers except one. This one is a device invented by the archivists, who call it the "timed disposal." For a considerable mass of routine and ephem- eral material they sometimes name a specified retention period of, say, one, two, or ten years, after which it shall be disposed of automatically. Such a scheme might be of service to historical librarians in dealing with medical catalogs, an- nouncements, local journals, routine re- ports, and the like. The retention period might need to be longer, perhaps twenty- five or even fifty years, after which the disposal of the material would be auto- matic. The plan can be logically defend- ed. If historians, it is argued, are to use such material at all, they will use it with- in the specified time; interest in such rec- ords fades rapidly, and after a quarter- or a half-century the chance of their being used for historical purposes will approach zero. Whatever one may think of the "timed disposal," it is evident that the problems of book selection for a comprehensive collection will vary from century to cen- tury. The basic reason is the varying pro- ductivity of the printing presses. The output of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries was relat'ively small, and every medical item that has survived may be assumed to have some historical interest. In later centuries the output increases enormously, and recently the press has been supplemented by the mimeograph, the multilith, and other near-print proc- esses, with staggering results. Here is an example of what the economists call the shift from an economics of scarcity to an economics of plenty-not to say of sur- feit. With this shift new forces come into play, and new principles must be devised to control them. From such a necessity the historical librarian is by no means exempt. SPECIAL PRINCIPLES OF SELECTION FOR MANUSCRIPTS Back of the invention of printing lie the long centuries when all written rec- ords were copied by hand. Many of these have survived-probably about a million volumes in all-and for the director of a comprehensive historical library they offer a number of special problems. Manuscript texts of medical works are
A COMPREHENSIVE MEDICO-HISTORICAL LIBRARY 259 sometimes offered for sale by dealers, and copies of manuscripts preserved in pub- lic libraries can usually be secured on microfilm just as readily as the texts of printed books. In some ways their selec- tion, whether on film or as originals, fur- nishes more trouble and more misunder- standings between dealers and librarians than ordinarly arise in the acquisition of printed books. Because there are some manuscripts that command phenomenally high prices when they come on the market, the im- pression at times prevails that a manu- script as such is necessarily important. This is far from true. After printing was fully established, hand-copying became distinctly a second-rate technique, and anything which failed to be printed is likely to have been a second-rate work. There were exceptions, pre-emi- nent among which are the notebooks of Leonardo da Vinci. By and large, how- ever, what was not printed probably did not deserve to be. We sometimes think of the accidents of history and the rav- ages of time as having exercised a random and unfortunate selection on the records of the past. There were accidents and there were ravages, yet after the inven- tion of printing there was, through the day-by-day decisions of editors and pub- lishers, probably more rational choice than accident in determining what rec- ords should survive through the medium of print. It may be profitable first to consider some of the types of manuscript pro- duced after the invention of printing, particularly after the process of printing became common. MANUSCRIPTS WRITTEN AFTER THE INVENTION OF PRINTING One interesting type of modern manu- script is the preliminary draft of a book that subsequently appeared in print. It may be the author's first draft, with cor- rections. It may be the copy as it went to the printer-usually, in recent times, a typescript. Such manuscripts, if the pub- lication is justly famous, are frequently regarded as collector's items, and to them are sometimes added the proof sheets as they came from the printer. Not long ago the Library of Congress, for ex- ample, featured in a public exhibit "the display on panels of the vanrous steps in the production of General Dwight D. Eisenhower's Crusade in Europe ... sheets of the manuscript, galley, page, and stone proofs of pages, the original art work for the jacket and some pre- liminary sketches and rough layouts of the maps."5 The Army Medical Library has some manuscript drafts and even some proof sheets of important books that have appeared in the field of medical history. In all such cases the importance of these preliminary stages depends on the importance of the publication itself. In the case of a very famous work they have a good deal of interest, though this is obviously more sentimental than his- torical. They are like the mold in which a bronze statue has been cast or the scaf- folding which has helped to support a beautiful building. It is the finished work of art that is important; the mold or the scaffolding is usually thrown away. If kept at all, it has a secondary or derived value. Unencouraging also are the manu- scripts containing lecture notes. Of these the Army Medical Library has quite an array, most of them from the seventeenth to the twentieth century. Some are ex- amples of the professor's own outline of his course; others, of a student's record (in the nature of things not too reliable) s Library of Congress, Informal"cm Bule$tin, March 29, 1949, p. 2.
26o THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY of what was said. It is, of course, a com- monplace in university circles that class- room lectures represent books not yet well enough organized to print. When recorded in a student's notes, they are likely to be even less well organized. Such manuscripts usually are significant only if the professor was very illustrious or the student became so. A particularly disappointing type of manuscript is the simple copy of a printed book. This is likely to have origi- nated toward the end of the fifteenth or the beginning of the sixteenth century, though some instances occur much later. In the Greek-speaking or Russian-speak- ing world they are fairly common down to the eighteenth or even nineteenth cen- tury, since in those parts of Europe the rise of printing was long delayed. At the time when scribe and printer were in competition and printed books, though cheaper than manuscnrpts, were still costly, an impecunious scholar sometimes thought it better to transcribe a book than to buy it for his own use. Such a transcript is obviously less valuable than the book from which it was taken, since it is bound to contain some errors in copying. As a matter of fact, those manuscript copies of printed books are among the most annoying that modern librarians have to deal with. Since the copyist was seldom, if ever, a professional scribe but was a private scholar making the tran- script for his own use, he was apt to be careless about identifying the work. He was quite likely to omit place and date of printing and fairly likely to omit the author. Of all the means of identification, the title is the one most commonly pre- served, but this by itself is not much of a clue. There is always a chance, when such a manuscript comes on the market, that it may be a hitherto unknown treatise on the subject. With this kind of hope which dealers seem to do little to dis- courage-more than one librarian has bought the piece, only to find after pains- taking research that the entire text had been previously printed. Unless the manuscript copy contains additions to the published work which are significant on their own account, both the money and the investigative effort spent on the volume have been largely wasted. MANUSCRIPTS WRITTEN BEFORE THE INVENTION OF PRINTING In its own proper period, before the in- vention of printing, the manuscript is a very different thing. Here it is the medi- um, practically the sole medium, for ar- ticulate records from the past. Pictures, statues, buildings, even monuments with inscriptions on them, tell but little re- garding the actual thinking of earlier peoples. Manuscripts tell a great deal. If an early writer's own autograph copy has survived, we have his ideas preserved in his own language just as accurately as if the work had been issued in print, though it may be much harder to read. If the autograph has disappeared, later copies may have survived, but these, especially if several times removed from the origi- nal, may vary considerably. There are sure to be errors in wording, probably some omissions, and possibly some inter- polations as well. The degree of variance does not depend mathematically on the number of recopyings. One really careless scribe can do more damage to a text than a succession of a dozen skilled copyists. Students of these matters sometimes make a distinction between "protected" and "unprotected" texts. The protection can only be accorded by some interested and continulng profession or organiza- tion. Thus the government and the courts were concerned for the preserva-
A COMPREHENSIVE MEDICO-HISTORICAL LIBRARY 26I tion of books of law, and the church and the monasteries had the same anxiety re- garding the Bible. Alchemical or astro- logical texts, on the contrary, were no- toriously unprotected. Here every fresh copyist seems to have felt almost like a new author, at liberty to select, omit, or alter at will. Medical manuscripts may be of either sort. After the rise of the medical schools, toward the end of the Middle Ages, the texts of such eminent authorities as Hippocrates and Galen, Rhazes and Avicenna, received a good deal of protection. On the other hand, works of popular medicine, as well as texts in the various fringe subjects, were more or less rewritten at every recopying. One of the prodigious efforts of modern historical scholarship has been to recover the original texts of the ancient and medieval writers. In the case of unpro- tected texts this is often an impossible goal; each new rewriting, though some- what dependent on the earlier, has the practical value of a revised and enlarged edition or of a paraphrase or condensa- tion and contributes little to the recovery of the original author's words. But where the text tradition has had a reasonable degree of protection, critical study has accomplished a great deal, thanks pri- marily to the Germans, who, in general, have showed more aptitude for this mi- nute and painstaking kind of scholarship than their French, English, Italian, or American colleagues. The task is far from finished; many minor writers and even a few important ones still await the so- called "definitive" edition. Nor has the work done been always completely suc- cessful; some passages in even the most carefully edited texts remain conjectural. In the early days of modern textual criticism a scholar had to travel from library to library in Europe, seeking manuscripts of an author or a treatise in which he was interested. At a somewhat later period he no longer needed to travel but merely selected his manuscripts from the printed catalogs of libraries and ordered photostats of the needed pages. Nowadays, as a rule, he uses microfilm copies instead. For his purpose, a fif- teenth-century or an early-sixteenth-cen- tury edition has often as much value as a manuscript, since it was, of course, copied from some manuscript, which in many cases was thereupon thrown away. At any rate, no matter what his medium, the critic collates his manuscripts word by word and letter by letter with some basic text, preferably that of an early printed edition, and draws conclusions from the variants as to the interrelations and relative textual values of the differ- ent codices. Such criticism is a field for specialists. In any generation there are not likely to be, in the entire commonwealth of schol- ars, more than half-a-dozen real authori- ties on the text of the Aphorisms of Hip- pocrates or on the Canon of Avicenna. There may not be more than one. There may even be none. Obviously, in fields so acutely specialized, casual judgments as to the "textual value" of a given manuscript are practically worthless. Its date is, of course, some indication, but it is far from conclusive. An early manu- script, if copied by an unreliable scribe, may have a worse text than a late manu- script that has been well "protected" at all stages in the transmission. In this respect there is an evident dif- ference between a collated and an uncol- lated codex. If a manuscript of Hippoc- rates, let us say, has already been used by Littre in his critical edition, then its pre- sumable value for the text is known and can be reported on by anyone who can read and understand Littr6. One need merely say: "This is Codex A in Littr6's
262 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY list."' Of course, the collated manuscripts are usually in public libraries and will not again be offered for sale. On the other hand, an occasional Hippocrates manu- script, hitherto preserved in a private collection and as yet uncollated, may come onto the market. How can this be appraised as to textual value? A reliable appraisal cannot come from a dealer, no matter how renowned, or a librarian, no matter how expert, or a cataloger, no matter how meticulous, or a historian, no matter how learned, unless the appraiser is also in his own right a specialist in text criticism. In fact, he must be a specialist in Hippocratic text criticism. An ap- praisal of an Hippocrates manuscript by an Avicenna text critic can be little more than an inspired guess. Anyone aware of these facts must view with misgiving most of the hints and suggestions in sales catalogs as to the textual importance of as yet uncollated manuscripts. One type of early manuscript, not an extremely large group and yet of some importance, contains minor unpublished treatises. The major medical works, one may assume, have all appeared in print at one time or another. Occasionally, however, a manuscnrpt will contain a hitherto unrecorded tract on anatomy or veterinary science or some other medical topic. This any medico-historical library may well acquire, if it can afford it, in the hope that members of its staff or some other interested person may analyze the contents and perhaps publish the text of the piece. To do so will be a service to scholarship, though the chances are slight of finding in such a manuscript any his- torical pearl of great price. All things considered, however, this seems to be the type of manuscript on which the Army Medical Library would do well to con- centrate its present program of acqui- sitions. MANUSCRIPTS AS MUSEUM PIECES For the acquiring of manuscripts there are, fortunately, several reasons besides their textual value. Any university li- brary or other center of culture is justified in buying as many as it can afford, in order to illustrate visually the develop- ment of the scroll, the codex, and other forms which the book has taken, as well as the different styles of script. A beauti- fully illuminated manuscript, especially one with miniatures, has also a high aes- thetic appeal, which somehow has a way of getting itself reflected in the price. Any library seeking to acquire manuscripts for such reasons as these will naturally try to secure a variety of languages, al- phabets, and subjects, with almost no re- gard for textual values. For this part of its collection there will be many lookers but few readers, and the reference service will not be heavy. The manuscripts will have essentially the quality of museum pieces. The assembling and aggrandizement of such literary museums is a legitimate and praiseworthy form of library activi- ty, the extent of which is likely to be lim- ited by availability of funds. It is more properly the concern, to be sure, of a large general institution like the Library of Congress, or of a university library with a wlde sweep of interests, than of a specialized institution like the Army Medical Library. Nevertheless, whatever its main purpose, any collection of early manuscripts inevitably takes on some- thing of a museum-like aspect, and the institution owning it will be tempted to make at least a part of its acquisitions with a view to enhancing that aspect. 6 Emile Littr6, 2Eu-vres completes d'Hippocrake, II (Paris, I840), 378. This editor at first designated his manuscripts by their library numbers, but a list of letter symbols is found in the middle of the second volume.
A COMPREHENSIVE MEDICO-HISTORICAL LIBRARY 263 Microfilm copies, unlike "live" manu- scripts, are not show-pieces. No one leans over a display case and exclaims at the beauty of a roll of film. Occasionally, a lecturer on illustrated books or on il- luminated manuscripts may enliven his remarks by showing a few films, expecial- ly colored films, in a projection machine, but, ordinarily, they are used by histori- ans for reading purposes only. If the hlis- torian is also a paleographer, he can read for himself the often difficult writing of a filmed manuscript. If not, he must de- pend on printed editions prepared for him by the textual critics. LIMITATIONS ON THE MASS COPYING OF EARLY MlANUSCRIPTS Here emerges an important distinction for the director of a medico-historical li- brary. Film copies of printed books are collec,ted for the use of historians gen- erally. The clientele may be small and select, but at least it is world wide and more or less continuous. Film copies of early manuscripts, on the contrary, are collected for the text critic individually. In fact, they are usually collected not for the critic but by him. He pores for days over the published catalogs of the manu- script holdings of the various libraries. He selects promptly such manuscripts of his special author or title as he can recog- nize in the index. He reads pages of (le- scriptions thereafter, in the hope of (le- tecting other manuscript copies that con- tain works of his author but do not me:n- tion the author's name. He then pur- chases the necessary films or photostats, studies the texts, constructs his edition, and wonders at the end what ought to be done with the facsimiles on which he has worked so long. In American universities it has become the custom for a scholar of this sort to deposit with his library the final collection of his films or photostats. In some instances the library has pur- chased them in the first place, at his re- quest, and merely takes them over when the work is done. All this is instructive for the formula- tion of acquisition policies. Films of printed books may be "stocked," where- as films of early manuscripts should be secured only "on order." Such is the pre- vailing practice, and there is no apparent reason to change it. With the develop- ment of the microfilming technique and the realization of its possibilities in the acquisition field, the question of the coverage of early manuscripts was bound to anrse. Reasons have been advanced for the complete edition-coverage of fif- teenth- and sixteenth-century medical books. Why not, then, complete manu- script-coverage for the centuries preced- ing? Plausible though it seems, the analogy will not hold. There are too many differences in the quality of the product, in the difficulty of its selection, and in the nature of its use. As for the quality, there is no question that print is superior. Manuscript copy- ing became a second-rate technique as soon as the printing press was fairly es- tablished, and this was true not only of manuscripts that happened to be made after the invention of printing but also of those made before. At once the world of scholarship began trying to provide every important author with a printed edition. When it became evident that manuscnpt texts of early works varied in reliability, the laborious processes of critical evaluation began, with the obvi- ous purpose of providing an ancient or medieval author with such an edition as he might have had if he had lived in the age of pnrnting and had had direct access to a publisher. Textual criticism, in ef- fect, tries to overpass the whole period of manuscript transmission and give the
264 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY author, at long last, the protection of the printed edition. It took presumably less than a year to get into print exactly what General Eisenhower wanted to say about the Crusade in Europe. It took nearly three thousand years to do the same for Homer's account of the war before Troy. From this point of view, all the manu- scripts of the Iliad, all the photographic copies that have been made of them, and all the textual critics' collations and preparatory drafts take their place along- side the author's copy and the printer's proofs as being mere preliminary stages toward the production of the definitive edition. The difficulty of selecting medical manuscripts for filming, if any large- scale program were attempted, is mani- fest. No librarian, even in a specialized historical library, would be capable of covering the field. Such selection can be properly made only by acute specialists working on particular authors or in lim- ited subject fields. There is no better illustration of this kind of work than the project to which Dr. Sigerist has already devoted many years of his life. While directing the In- stitute of the History of Medicine at the Johns Hopkins University, he spent sev- eral summers in Europe, carrying a Leica canera and visiting vanrous libraries in which medical manuscripts were known or suspected to exist. He was seeking sig- nificant copies of early medieval texts that antedated the introduction of Ara- bic influences. The story of his researches is fascinatingly told and illustrates in vivid detail the methods and the vicissi- tudes of manuscript study-here an un- important copy of a well-known work, there a text requiring to be photographed for further investigation, yonder a col- lection of nonmedical texts erroneously cataloged as medical, and, occasionaRly, the finding of a hitherto unknown work that must be published.7 Dear to his heart though the Welch Medical Library doubtless was, he was hardly seeking to add to its collections by these manuscript researches. He was gathering materials for Henry E. Sigerist to use in a projected three-volume work. I hope that I shall not be misunder- stood as deprecating manuscripts on their own account. The million or so of early manuscripts in the libraries of Europe and America contain some of the most precious records which the human race possesses. But they are not suitable for mass microfilm acquisition on a broad subject basis by an institution like the Army Medical Library. Such microfilms are not historical sources in the ordinary sense of the term. They would be used by practically no one but textual scholars in preparing critical editions of ancient or medieval works. They could be prop- erly selected for a comprehensive collec- tion only by a succession of such special- ists. After they have been so selected, however, and after the text critic has used them, they may with propriety be deposited in such a library as this, where later scholars may, at times, consult them to verify details in the texts as published. OTHER CONTRIBUTIONS OF THE FILM TO MANUSCRIPT RESEARCH There are, it should be added, other contributions which the film technique might make toward library facilities for manuscript study, but they are of a gen- eral nature. The first and most obvious 7 Henry E. Sigerist, "The Medical Literature of the Early Middle Ages," Bullein of the Instite of the History of Medicine, II (1934), 26-5o; also "A Summer of Research in European Libraries," ibid., pp. 559-6IO. From time to time the travelogue is interrupted by a systematic discussion of some prin- ciple of manuscript study. If a sequel to these re- ports was ever published, it has escaped me.
A COMPREHENSIVE MEDICO-HISTORICAL LIBRARY 265 would be to organize a comprehensive finding medium for manuscript collec- tions by copying the printed and hand- written catalogs, both those in book form and those on cards, many of them at present available only in the library to which they pertain. This is far from being a new suggestion.8 It could not profitably be carried out for medicine alone or for any single subject but would have to cover the manuscript field as a whole. It is doubtful if any other library project could be attempted which would contrib- ute more than this to the ease of manu- script researches. But it would need to be a co-operative undertaking. For it the Library of Congress would be a more natural center of operations than the Army Medical Library.9 Another contribution to such studies would be the mass copying of the manu- scripts themselves. This, I am persuaded, is not at present feasible on a broad sub- ject basis, whether for medicine, law, music, geography, or any other such field. The labor of sorting out the materials would be prohibitive. The manuscript collections in European libraries are too heterogeneous. In many cases the manu- script volumes themselves are also het- erogeneous, and even the individual texts frequently have a bearing on more than one of the major subjects. The only prac- ticable program for the systematic micro- filming of manuscripts would seem to be by libraries and collections. To be sure, the largest single effort ever made to microfilm book manuscripts, namely, the War Emergency Program for Microcopy- ing Research Materials in Britain, oper- ated on a selective basis. Scores of Ameri- can scholars sent in requests for copies of particular items in which they were in- terested, and some ten thousand films were made, about half of them after the end of hostilities. Under stress of the emergency the selective prnciple may have been justified, but the miscellaneous character of the resulting collection has certainly added to the cost of handling and cataloging it.Io If, on the other hand, the European libraries could be dealt with as units one after another, there would be a great saving of effort. All the larger libraries and most of the smaller ones have pub- lished catalogs of their manuscripts and have used some system of numbering to refer back and forth from the volumes to the printed descriptions. In the large li- braries there are usually several collec- tions of manuscripts, each with a pub- lished catalog of its own. If the filming were done library by library and collec- tion by collection and the films were simply marked with the proper numbers, then a copy of the published catalog or catalogs would serve at once as a guide and finding medium to the collection of films. If, finally, all pertinent catalogs, whether printed or written by hand, in book form or on cards, could also be 8 See W. J. Wilson, "Manuscripts in Microfilm," Library Quarterly, XIII (I943), esp. pp. 304-9, with a quotation from Seymour de Ricci's "Proposals for a Bibliography of Catalogues of Manuscripts." He offered his suggestion in I939 but proposed merely a central record of such catalogs, not a facsimile reproduction of them. 9 Since these words were first written, the Li- brary of Congress has taken steps toward the realiza- tion of such undertakings by appointing Dr. Lester K. Born as special assistant on the Microfilm Pro- gram, with responsibility "to plan for the photo- reproduction of materials for addition to the collec- tions of the Library of Congress." See his article, "Microfilming Abroad," CoUege and Research Libraries, XI (July, 1950), 250-58. lo Wilson, op. cit., pp. 218-20. It will be noted that a still larger undertaking, the famous Project A of the Library of Congress, discussed on pp. 224- 26, had to do chiefly with archival materials. As far as book manuscripts are concerned, the Emer- gency Program, to the best of my knowledge, is the largest ever attempted.
266 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY filmed and brought over here, the result would be a complete reproduction in America of the contents and apparatus, let us say, of the Department of Manu- scripts in the British Museum. Whether that institution would ever consent to the making of such a replica seems doubt- ful. Considerations of prestige would cer- tainly arise, and the ultimate decision might depend on the degree of danger of destruction that appeared to threaten the originals. The matter has been men- tioned here only to complete the theo- retical discussion and not in the expecta- tion that such a program will be under- taken in the near future. The main point is that any large-scale project of manu- script microcopying would do better to proceed by libranres and collections than by major subject groups.