Professional Values and Ethics as Defined by "The LIS Discipline" Wallace Koehler The library and information science literature suggests a growing theoretical congruence in professional values and ethics. These values and ethics may be interpreted and applied in a variety of ways and through a variety of institutions. The library and information science (LIS) community has perhaps not been as responsive as it might be to these issues. LIS ed- ucators should first seek to identify the scope of the issues and then help students engage in what may become one of the more controversial domains of our time.* Introduction Ethics and values are important topics for the information professions. We as library ed- ucators must be concerned with providing our students with a sound footing in our pro- fessional ethics. We are faced first with identifying what our professional ethics and our core values are, then by how to instill these principles and values into our students. If, indeed ethics and values are important topics for the information professions, why is it possible to count on one hand the number of programs in North America or the world that offer a concentration in information ethics? Indeed, the number of schools that offer even a single comprehensive course that focuses on information or professional ethics or core values is not much greater. Ethics and Values Defined We must first seek to identify what these principles and values are. Ethics are gener- ally perceived to derive from and serve as the application of moral principles. Morals represent a set of mores, customs, and traditions that may have been derived from so- cial practice or from religious guidance. Information ethics are perceived to be a sub- set of applied ethics, or ethical principles that are both broad and theoretical but also have specific application.1 Ethics necessarily, at least in their applied form, undergo metamorphosis as underlying conditions change. Thus, for example, as technology changes the conditions of practice, these change the ethics that guide the practice.2 Our professional organizations are one set of sources for both values and ethical principles. Many professional organizations have published codes of ethics.3 The American Library Association (ALA), for example, took an early lead in defining a set with its Code of Ethics, first enunciated in 1938. Many other organizations have since The author wishes to acknowledge and thank the three anonymous reviewers for their very useful comments on an earlier draft of this paper. *An earlier version of this paper was presented at the ALISE 2001 Annual Conference. Journal of Education for Library and Information Science, Vol. 44, No. 2- Spring 2003 ISSN: 0748-5786 ©2003 Association for Library and Information Science Education 99
1 00 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science About the Author Wallace Koehler is Associate Professor and Director, MLIS Program, Valdosta State University (wkoehler@valdosta.edu). Ms. received 6/01; accepted 11/01; revised 12/01. developed codes of ethics. These vary in content and purpose dependent in large part on the responsibilities of the organization and the purposes the organization addresses.4 Values are a subset of morals. Rokeach offers the following definitions: A value is an enduring belief that a specific mode of conduct or end-state of existence is personally or socially preferable to an opposite or converse mode of conduct or end- state of existence. A value system is an enduring organization of beliefs concerning preferable modes of conduct or end-states of existence along a continuum of relative importance.5 The application of values is ethics. Gorman defines the application of values as: In application values are useful and usable because they are standards by which we as- sess what we do; measure how near we are to, or how far we are from, an objective; and compare our actions and our state of being to those of others and to ideals represented by our values.6 Codes of ethics and value statements are very recent phenomena for the informa- tion professions. In the United States and with the single exception of the ALA Codes of Ethics, information professional associations did not begin developing codes until 1969; in fact more than 80 percent of American information association codes of ethics were created after 1980. The International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions (IFLA) has defined a set of core values in its proposed revisions to its Statute.7 In addition, the library profession in the United States has witnessed a recent debate within the ALA over the identification and adoption of a Core Values Statement (CVS) as both a guide for training practitioners and as a standard for its members.8 At its July 2000 meeting, the ALA Council declined to accept the proposed CVS draft. In the months preceding the July 2000 ALA meeting, an interesting debate emerged from a num- ber of ALA constituencies favoring or criticizing the CVS draft. The tenor of the de- bate suggested that the CVS as written failed to capture or adequately define the scope and intensity of ethical concerns within the profession.9 ALA is reported to have begun reconsidering another CVS draft by 2003. The purpose of this paper is not to document and explain the ALA CVS debate, to discover some ethical malaise, to prescribe courses in information or professional ethics, or even to define what the ethical values of the professional should be. In- stead, drawing upon research done with others,10 the author proposes to outline the
Professional Values and Ethics as Defined by "The LIS Discipline" 1 0 1 ethical precepts librarian and information professionals acknowledge through schol- arly commentary, their professional associations, and personal beliefs. Once identified, these different principles and precepts can be pointed to not as "what should be" but what practitioners actually prescribe to as the core values and ethical practices of the profession, and to the commentary on values and ethics. These then can be incorporated into courses and, at minimum, used as points of de- parture of discussion. Information as Practice Not only do we have to wrestle with the ethics and values of the information pro- fessions, we must also acknowledge issues of definition in the information and library sciences.11 For each definition of information and information and library science do we need different sets of ethics and values? Or does a single set cover all? Capurro has raised for us some very challenging questions at the nexus of the infor- mation professions and ethics. For example, he argues: The question 'what is information?' asks for substantial characteristics of something. But information, taken as a dimension of human existence, is nothing substantial. Instead of asking: 'what is information?' we can ask: 'what is information (science) for? . . . The aim of information science is to thematize this con-textual dimension taking into considera- tion primarily all technical forms of communication as parts of other forms of life. Taking into consideration the unity of boths [sic] aspects, the methodological and the pragmatic, information heuristics and information hermeneutics, information sci- ence can be considered a sub-discipline of rhetoric.12 As Capurro points out for us, the intersection of Aristotlean rhetoric, politics, and ethics underpin the information professions. Capurro argues further that: The question 'what is information for?' leads to the question 'what is information sci- ence for?' since information science, conceived as a hermeneutic-rhetorical discipline, studies the con-textual pragmatical dimensions within which knowledge is shared pos- itively as information and negatively as misinformation particularly through technical forms of communication. These are not just an instrument but a "way of being." This conception of information science is important if we want information systems to be- come part of the background of various forms of living.13 Our value systems and ethical practices become a part of that "... the background of various forms of living." We must also understand the well known dictum that "where you stand depends on where you sit." Values and ethics may be colored by one's perceptions of information and the professions. Core Values and Ethical Practice Core values and ethical principles are often perceived as one and the same but, as we have seen, are in fact somewhat different in definition and application. They
1 02 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science may be deduced from at least three sources. These are the literature that addresses professional ethics, the codes of ethics of professional associations, and the values reported by practitioners. The Literature Many writers have identified some or all of the following values as core profes- sional values (see e.g., Intner and Schement; Stichler and Hauptman; Hauptman; Rubin; Asheim; Baker; Devlin and Miller; Johnson; Ford; Hisle; and Symons and Stoffle):14 intellectual freedom protecting library users' right to privacy/confidentiality intellectual property rights professional neutrality preservation of the cultural record equity of access There have been several noteworthy papers that seek to enumerate core values and ethical precepts in the information professions. In 1996, Rubin and Froehlich offered nine values and ethical principles: (1) privacy, (2) selection and censorship, (3) refer- ence, (4) intellectual property rights, (5) administration, (6) access, (7) technology, (8) loyalties, and (9) social issues.15 Again, Froehlich in a very interesting paper in 2000, enumerates six professional values and five ethical principles. The six professional values he lists are: (1) free- dom and self-determination, (2) protection from injury, (3) equality of opportunity, (4) respect for patron privacy, (5) minimal well-being, and (6) recognition for one's work. The five ethical principles are: (1) respect for the autonomy of the self and others, (2) seek justice or fairness, (3) be faithful to organizational, professional, and public trust, (4) seek social harmony, and (5) act in such a way that the amount of harm is minimized.16 Koehler and Pemberton suggest the following: (1) Patron or Client Needs, (2) Skill and Competence and the Roles of the Information Practitioner, (3) Support the Profession, (4) Responsiveness to Social Responsibilities, and (5) The Rights of Users, Fellow-Professionals, the Profession, and Society.17 They found that while there are many different and very specific provisions published by each of the organizations, they can essentially be reduced to six general categories. Gorman offers eight: (1) stewardship, (2) service, (3) intellectual freedom, (4) ra- tionalism, (5) literacy and learning, (6) equity of access to recorded knowledge and information, (7) privacy, and (8) democracy.18 Koehler et al.,19 drawing on Branch's work,20 surveyed librarians worldwide and asked them to rank eleven values: (1) service, (2) equality of access, (3) information lit- eracy, (4) intellectual freedom, (5) preservation of the intellectual record, (6) literacy, (7) professional neutrality, (8) diversity of opinion, (9) confidentiality, (10) cultural diversity, and (11) copyright issues.
Professional Values and Ethics as Defined by "The US Discipline" 103 Table 1 Mapping of Ethical Principles and Values Koehler and Pemberton Gorman Rubin and Froehlich Client/Patron Rights and Privileges Privacy Privacy Service Rationalism Selection Issues Intellectual Freedom Selection and Censorship Stewa rdsh i p Reference Professional Practice Intellectual Property Rights Administration Access Issues Equity of Access Access Technology Employer Responsibility Loyalties Social Issues Democracy Social Issues Literacy and Learning Koehler and Pemberton and Gorman differ from Rubin and Froehlich not in their general conclusions, but rather in emphasis. Koehler and Pemberton, for example, subsume technology issues under access issues. They further subdivide professional practice into nine groups. These are: (1) personal and professional beliefs, (2) asso- ciation and legal regulation, (3) skills, (4) professional image, (5) conflict of inter- est, (6) professional practice, (7) relationships with professional organizations, (8) treatment of peers, and (9) task/ethics conflicts. They also divide the access category into five: (1) resources, (2) education, (3) offsite information providers, (4) source acknowledgement, and (5) information/skill quality. Koehler and Pemberton also identify 78 specific provisions that comprise the grouping and sub-groupings they identify. These are listed in Appendix 3. Association Codes of Ethics A second source of ethics and values is to turn to practice, that is to explore the codes of ethics published by information associations. There are hundreds of asso- ciations for the information professions. Most do not promulgate much less publish codes of ethics. There are, however, a growing number of the organizations that do. The author maintains a web site where he attempts to track these associations. The site, Ethics Links to Librarian and Information Manager Associations WWW Pages can be found at http^/books.valdosta.edu/mlis/ethics/EthicsBibOrg.htm. The idea that the various professions should be guided by a general code of ethics is long-standing and has been with us for thousands of years. Perhaps the best known is the Hippocratic Oath. It is an oath that guides the medical profession. It specifies that first the physician should do no harm. The other professions have followed with their own codes and over time each code has become an integral part of the practice of that profession. These codes of ethics and codes of practice describe for practi- tioners the range of acceptable behaviors. These, according to Frankel, may take one or a combination of three basic forms: regulatory, aspirational, or educational.21
1 04 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Regulatory values can be both prescriptive and prescriptive. These rules define in explicit detail acceptable or unacceptable behavior norms. They tend to be lengthy and legalistic. They may take one of two forms. The first lists specific required or prohibited activities. The other, the "small-1 liberal codes" define the parameters of acceptable behavior. Behaviors between the defining norms are considered accept- able. The greater the "distance" between the norms, the more liberal is the system. Aspirational norms are defined by abstract goals. These are the ends that profes- sionals seek to emulate. They provide moral guidance. Educational norms provide both guidelines for behavior as well as instruction and explanation to the reasons for the value or norm. In a way, regulatory values pre- scribe or proscribe behavior, aspirational values provide targets to quest toward, and educational values describe the reasons for prescriptions and proscriptions but also the map toward desired ends. One reason codes of ethics take different form is that professional organizations do not all serve the same purposes: Different purpose - different code of ethics. Li- brary associations perform a number of different roles in different societies and for different groups. These roles can be divided into five basic types. The first type is the association of associations and/or of libraries. Perhaps the best known of these is IFLA, drawing its membership from national library associ- ations and from member libraries. IFLA has a limited category for individual mem- bers, but their ability to participate in the functions of the organizations is restricted. There are also a number of national level library associations that limit membership to institutions and organizations. These include the Russian Library Association and the Association of College and Research Libraries (ACRL) in the United States. Others are comprised of individuals, but limit membership to ex officio participa- tion. These include organizations for library directors, directors of state libraries, and so on. The second type is the regulatory association. Many library associations, particu- larly those in Central and South America, have a legal mandate to regulate the pro- fession. These associations, sometimes called colegios or colleges, establish mini- mum professional qualifications, license professionals, sanction those professionals for transgressions of the regulations and of the code, and provide general associa- tional functions. These services include publication of newsletters and journals, the convening of meetings and conferences, and so on. Library associations that serve as trade unions to represent their membership to library management are the third type. These associations negotiate labor contracts, help establish work rules, and sometimes administer the retirement programs for their members. These organizations are typically found in the Nordic countries of Europe. The fourth type is general membership organizations. These organizations repre- sent librarians and other information professionals within a given country, region, state, province, and so on. They provide a wide range of services for their member- ship, including the convening of conferences, the publication of newsletters and journals, and represent their membership at regional and international organizations. Many, but by no means all, publish standards of practice and codes of ethics for their membership.
Professional Values and Ethics as Defined by "The US Discipline" 1 05 The fifth is a combination on or a variation on some or all of the first four. These are organizations for individual segments of the library professions. These can be separated into three basic categories. There are those that represent a library specialty (medical librarianship, academic librarianship, records management, cata- logers, and so on), those that represent librarians with certain interests (Chinese collections, toy libraries, children's librarians), and those that represent librarians with specific characteristics (racial, cultural, gender, sexual orientation). A first rule might be that the kind of ethics code an organization promulgates, if indeed it promulgates one, depends in large part on the kind of organization it is and the constituency it represents. We believe these codes can present the basis for the development of a model syn- cretic and synthetic code. Koehler and Pemberton examine the codes of ethics of thirty- seven professional associations in Africa, the Americas, Asia, Europe, and Oceania.22 These associations are both general (e.g., ALA) and specific (e.g., Canadian Informa- tion Processing Society). They find 78 specific provisions that can be reduced to six major or basic elements. These are: (1) client/patron rights and privileges, (2) selection issues, (3) professional practice, (4) access issues, (5) responsibilities toward the employer, and (6) social issues. They also find that some ethics codes are largely deontological, while others are more abstract. Librarian Values Several surveys of librarians' values have been performed in recent years. These can be grouped by discipline and region. There have been several studies of li- brary schools, students, and directors in North America, Australia, and the United Kingdom.23 These studies usually find similarities in the values held by library science students and faculty. Similarly Hovekamp studied the work values of unionized and non-unionized librarians in Association of Research Libraries and found no significant differences in the work values of librarians in unionized ver- sus non-unionized libraries.24 On the other hand, Allen investigated the work val- ues of library science students as compared to those of business students and found differences in their attitudes toward work.25 Others have explored the values of working practitioners in various settings and countries. These include Kupiec's work on collection development in France, Branch's survey of United States (U.S.) academic librarians, Savard's study of North American librarianship, Dole and Hurych's focus on U.S. and Common- wealth of Independent States (CIS) academic librarians, Flinner or Johnson in refer- ence, Strauch and Strauch in acquisitions, Bellardo in teaching, Bazirijan for dese- lection, Anderson in management, as well as the general considerations expounded by Froehlich, Hauptman, and Kostrewski and Oppenheim.26 It is also possible to identify professional values by surveying practitioners. In recent years, Dole et al. and Koehler et al. have taken a wider approach. They sur- veyed almost 300 and nearly 1,900 librarians and other information workers throughout the world using a simple one-page survey instrument. Respondents were asked to rank order the three most important of the values listed. Dole et al. conclude:
1 06 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science We demonstrate that there is differentiation of values among the librarian and infor- mation professions. We believe this differentiation to be a function of the roles and responsibilities of the various professions. We are not suggesting that function dictates ethical values for library professionals. Rather, function specifies emphasis and order.27 Following the second survey, Koehler et al. conclude: Without doubt and almost without exception, librarians of all kinds, in all positions, in all regions, and of both genders identify service to the client or patron as the most im- portant of their values. Differences in the order of the importance of values are found at the second and third levels. Where differences occur among library professions, these are probably a function of the different information roles and responsibilities of these information professionals. Where differences occur among library professionals in different countries and regions, these differences are probably a function of the responsibilities and concerns generated by the social and economic development status of the region or country.28 Selected data from the Koehler et al. survey are shown in Appendix 2. Table 2 indicates the eleven values presented to respondents. Respondents were asked to rank order the first three most important to themselves. The row labeled "Rated" indicated the percent of the sample that ranked each value as one of the top three. Thus, almost three-quarters of the sample identified "service to the patron" as their first, second, or third order value. The row labeled "First" indicated the pro- portion of the sample that identified each value as their first order value. Those rows labeled "Second" and "Third" are those values so identified. That some proportion of the sample did not rate a given value as among the top three ("Not Rated"), can- not be interpreted to mean that the respondents found them to be unimportant. In- deed these values are recognized as part of the information professionals' culture. The ranking simply reflects priorities. Table 3 shows the distribution by regions. Again, patron service is rated and se- lected first by librarians in all regions. Variation occurs for the second and third most frequently rated and first selected values. But these tend to be variations among a small set of the values - information literacy, equality of access, preservation of the intellectual record, literacy, and information literacy. Table 4 shows the distribution of values by "librarian type." Librarians are employed in a variety of settings. The terms in the table may require some defi- nition. "Government" librarians are those employed by official government agencies and ministries, but exclude most independent libraries including na- tional libraries. "K-12" librarians are librarians working in primary and second- ary schools. "Special" librarians are employed in the private sector to support corporate interests and professional practices. These are librarians employed by companies, etc. For purposes of this table, "special" librarians do not include medical or legal librarians. These two groups of special librarians are listed separately.
Professional Values and Ethics as Defined by "The US Discipline" 1 07 1 II -8 t Í I Í •c* <> ^o p -- ^r J> <> ò evi i ^t co 1 | #g 00 xj CO O CNI ^ $ CO r- CN ^t >- da * è '"i ^ - ^r (> >q è u» .E CN ■- >O ^O CO .£ O r- od .2 g K . r- ^i ; co ^ oo g "5 r- r-' ^' <j CO mS ¿ ^- CO S z 0 LO IS . >O CN I IO 0) (><)<)<)Ò A •- CO P S (> <) IS IO r- 5 « d - : <) cm' a' 8? « co - -- o SÍ 1 E ■53 0 uq co co co io Jì "S Q* OÌ CO OÍ Ò -5 d> co - r- •- O e O o IS .00 •- 0s ; CO I© a' a <) co o ,2 3 co ^ r- o D <f LO 00 r- LO ^f .« N . O co ^ ; co ~o 1 co "sT co - - <) "5> "8 c^ J o e 8 à -S 11 8 Q¿ Ll_ CO I - Z. C 00
1 08 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Table 3 Values By Region First Second Third Africa Rated Service Information Literacy Equal Access First Service Information Literacy Intellectual Freedom Asia Socialist Rated Service Information Literacy Preservation First Service Preservation Information Literacy Asia Market Rated Service Information Literacy Equal Access First Service Information Literacy Preservation Europe East Rated Service Information Literacy Equal Access First Service Intellectual Freedom Information Literacy America Latin Rated Service Intellectual Freedom Preservation-Equal Access First Service Preservation-Equal Access America North Rated Service Equal Access Intellectual Freedom First Service Intellectual Freedom Preservation Oceania Rated Service Equal Access Intellectual Freedom First Service Intellectual Freedom Equal Access Europe West Rated Service Equal Access Intellectual Freedom First Service Equal Access Intellectual Freedom All Rated Service Equal Access Information Literacy First Service Intellectual Freedom Preservation Source: Koehler et al. In table 4 that there is some differentiation based on librarian type. Not surprisingly school librarians are concerned with literacy issues and archivists with preservation of the intellectual record. It is interesting that librarians employed by national libraries list equality of access as first among their values, until one realizes that much of their emphasis as national librarians is on that concern. Finally, although intellectual prop- erty issues are not reflected on this table, law librarians rate them higher than do other librarians. These findings suggest that there is indeed a core set of values recognized by li- brarians and other information workers. Different library and information profes- sions and librarians in different parts of the world order different elements of these core values over others. Thus, while there appears to be general agreement over what the core values are, there is not agreement over which is more important or how they should be applied or defined.
Professional Values and Ethics as Defined by "The US Discipline" 1 09 Table 4 Librarian Type First Second Third Academic N = 744 Rated Service Information Literacy Equal Access First Service Preservation Intellectual Freedom Archivist N = 1 3 Rated Equal Access Service Preservation First Preservation Service-Intellectual Freedom Government N = 1 37 Rated Service Equal Access Intellectual Freedom First Service Intellectual Freedom Preservation K-12 N = 152 Rated Service Information Literacy Equal Access First Service Information Literacy Literacy Law N = 1 7 Rated Service Equal Access Information Literacy- Preservation First Service Information Literacy- Preservation Medical N = 31 Rated Service Equal Access Intellectual Freedom First Service Intellectual Freedom Preservation Nat'l Lib N = 1 1 Rated Equal Access Service Intellectual Freedom First Equal Access Service Information Literacy- Preservation-Literacy Public N = 364 Rated Service Equal Access Intellectual Freedom First Service Intellectual Freedom Equal Access Special (Other) N = 365 Rated Service Equal Access Information Literacy First Service Intellectual Freedom Preservation Source: Koehler et al. Conclusion Because of differences in goals and in the basic principles that underlie the various disciplines represented in the information profession, it is difficult, if not impossi- ble, to express a single set of values across the information professions. For exam- ple the medical and legal professions are often pointed to as holding uniform values and ethical codes of practice. Medicine, it is said, extols the virtues of human life and its protection. Nevertheless, there is a wide debate within the medical profes- sions concerning the virtues of euthanasia, abortion, and cloning, not to mention equal access by patients to gold standard low cost medical care, orphan drugs, etc. The legal profession often differs on theoretical and practical matters. Consider
1 1 0 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science differences in legal practice that result from common law and civil code traditions. There is an assumption, for example, in most common law countries that the ac- cused is presumed innocent until proven guilty; but once convicted, presumed guilty until proven innocent. In most civil jurisdictions, the accused is presumed guilty. In the United States, it is generally ethical for those not directly associated with a given case to discuss it before it is decided, in the United Kingdom, the discussion of any case subjudici by anyone is unethical. And, even where a single set of values might be expressed, the emphasis or order placed on those values is necessarily different. Instead, society is well served by study and analysis of existing ethics codes and published studies of the ethical codes and precepts of professionals and the professions. These findings have two-fold significance in the training of LIS professionals. The first is to recognize that a set of core values exists and that LIS professionals worldwide recognize similar values. On its face, this statement is somewhat contro- versial. For example, Berleur and Brunnstein argue no specific set of ethical princi- ples exists internationally for the computing community.29 On the other hand, Rubin and Froehlich, and Froehlich have enumerated ethical principles of the library com- munity.30 Koehler and Pemberton argue that if codes of ethics are sufficiently ab- stracted, a syncretic code can be created. Dole et al. and Koehler et al. point to a core set of core values but also demonstrate that there are differences in the order and application of those values.31 The second significance is to stress that, as in many other things, the order in which these core values are recognized is a case of form following function. There is a good deal of variability and it is important that emerging new LIS professionals recognize and appreciate these differences. Based on the work of the authors cited in this paper, and many others; we should perhaps not seek to inculcate a specific, rigid code of ethics, but rather to expose our students to the range of thinking in the field. To that end, we can expose our students to important writings in the field and to the various codes of ethics of professional organizations. References and Notes 1 . Martha M. Smith, "Information Ethics," in Annual Review of Information Science and Technology, ed. Martha E. Williams, 32 (1997): 339-66. 2. See for example, Nicholas Negroponte, Being Digital (New York: Knopf, 1996); Joel Rudinow and Anthony Graybosch, Ethics and Values in the Information Age (New York, 2002); or Readings in CyberEthics, eds. Richard A. Spinello and Herman T. Tavani (Sudbury, Mass.: Jones and Bartlett Pub., 2001). 3. For a list of professional organizations with links to ethics codes, mission statements, and statutes, see Ethics Links to Librarian and Information Manager Associations WWW Pages. Available at: httpV/books.valdosta.peachnet.edu/mlis/ethics/EthicsBibOrg.htm. 4. Wallace C. Koehler and J. Michael Pemberton, "A Search for Core Values: Towards a Model Code of Ethics for Information Professionals," Journal of Information Ethics 9 (2000): 26-54. 5. Milton Rokeach, The Nature of Human Values (New York: Free Press, 1973). 6. Michael Gorman, Our Enduring Values: Librarianship in the 21st Century (Chicago: American Library Association, 2000), 7.
Professional Values and Ethics as Defined by "The US Discipline" 1 1 1 7. International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions [IFLA, Revised 9 February 2000], Proposed Revised Statutes of IFLA, Available at: http://www.ifla.org/III/misc/ pro-stat.htm#6. 8. For a discussion, see American Library Association Core Values Task Force, dated March 27, 2000. Available at: http://www.ala.org/congress/corevalues/. 9. See for example, John Buschman, "Editorial: Core Wars," Progressive Librarian 17 (2000). Avail- able at: http://www.libr.org/PL/17_Editorial.html; or Core Values, Library Juice 3, no. 14 Supple- ment (April 12, 2000). Available at: http://www.libr.org/Juice/issues/vol3/LJ_3.1 4.sup.html; or ALA Council, 2000 Annual Conference, American Libraries. Available at: http://www.ala.org/ alonline/news/acOOcouncil.html. 10. Wallace C. Koehler and J. Michael Pemberton, "A Search for Core Values;" Wallace C. Koehler, Jitka M. Hurych, Wanda V. Dole, and JoAnna Wall, "Ethical Values of Information and Library Professionals - An Expanded Analysis," International Information & Library Review 32 (2000): 485-507; and Wanda V. Dole, Jitka M. Hurych, and Wallace Koehler, "Values for Librarians in the Information Age: An Expanded Examination," Library Management 21 (2000): 285-97. 1 1 . According to Schrader, there are more than 100 definitions of information in the information field. Alvin M. Schrader, "The Domain of Information Science: Problems in Conceptualization and in Consensus-Building," Information Services & Use 6 (1986): 169-205. 12. Rafael Capurro, "Foundations of Information Science Review and Perspectives." Available at: http://www.capurro.de/tampere91.htm. Originally published as "What is Information Science For? A Philosophical Reflection" in Conceptions of Library and Information Science: Historical, Empirical and Theoretical Perspectives, eds. Pertti Vakkari and Blaise Cronin (London: Taylor Graham, 1992), 82-98. 13. Ibid. 14. Shelia Intner and Jorge Reina Schement "The Ethic of Free Service," Library Journal 1 12 (1987): 50-52; Ethics, Information and Technology: Readings, eds. Richard Stichler and Robert Hauptman (Jefferson, NC: McFarland and Co, 1988); Robert Hauptman, ed., Library Trends 40 (1991); Richard Rubin, "Ethical Issues in Library Personnel Management," Journal of Library Administration 14 (1991): 1-16; Lester Asheim, "Ethics In Academic Librarianship: The Need For Values," in The In- formation Environment: A Reader, ed. Geraldene Walker (New York: G.K. Hall, 1992); Sharon Baker, "Needed: An Ethical Code for Library Administrators," Journal of Library Administration 16 (1992): 1-17; Mary Devlin and Heather Miller, "Ethics in Action: The Vendor's Perspective," Seri- als Librarian 25 (1995): 295-300; Wendell G. Johnson, "The Need for a Value Based Reference Pol- icy: John Rawls at the Reference Desk," Reference Librarian 47 (1994): 201-11; Barbara Ford, "ALA President's Message: Visions, Values, and Opportunities," American Libraries 29, no. 1 (1998): 54; W. Lee Hisle, "Values for the Electronic Age: Crossroads of Profession," College and Re- search Libraries News 59, no. 7 (1998): 504-05; and Ann Symons and Carla J. Stoffle, "When Val- ues Conflict," American Libraries 29, no. 5 (1998): 56-58. 15. Richard Rubin and Thomas Froehlich, "Ethical Aspects of Library and Information Science," in Encyclopedia of Library and Information Science, eds. Allen Kent and Carolyn M. Hall (New York: Marcel Dekker, 1996), 58, supplement 21: 33-52. 16. Thomas Froehlich, "Intellectual Freedom, Ethical Deliberation, and Codes of Ethics," IFLA Journal 26, no. 4 (2000): 264-72. 17. Wallace C. Koehler and J. Michael Pemberton, "Librarians, New Information Realities, and the Challenge to Professional Ethics," Proceedings, Libraries and Associations in the Transient World: New Technologies and New Forms of Cooperation, Sixth Crimea Conference (1999). Available at: http://www.gpntb.ru/win/inter-events/crimea99/doc2/Doc 1 23.html. 18. Gorman, Our Enduring Values, 26-7. 19. Koehler, Hurych, Dole, and Wall, "Ethical Values of Information and Library Professionals." 20. Katherine Branch, "Librarians Value Service Most," College and Research Libraries News 59, no. 3 (1998): 176-77.
1 1 2 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 21. Mark Frankel, "Professional Codes: Why, How, and What Impact," Journal of Business Ethics 8 (1989): 109-15. 22. Koehler and Pemberton, "A Search for Core Values." 23. A. Neil Yerkey, "Values of Library School Students, Faculty, and Librarians: Premises for Under- standing," Journal of Education for Librarianship 21 (1980): 122-34; Joyce Kirk and Barbara Post- Anderson, "Life Values of Library and Information Students and Faculty," Education for In- formation 10 (1992): 3-15; and Dale Lonsdale and Charles Oppenheim, "Attitudes Toward Ethi- cal Issues: A Survey of U.K. Reference Librarians and Schools of Librarianship and Information Science," Journal of Information Ethics 4, no. 2 (1995): 69-78. 24. Tina Hovekamp, "Work Values among Professional Employees in Union and Nonunion Research Library Institutions," Journal of Applied Social Psychology 24 (1994): 981-93. 25. Gillian Allen, "Work Values in Librarianship," Library Information Science Research 20, no. 4 (1998): 415-24. 26. Anne Kupiec, "Elements de Reflexion pour une Deontologie Profesionnelle," Bulletin des Bib- liotèques de France 44, no. 4 (1999): 8-12; Branch, "Librarians Value Service Most;" Réjean Savard, "La Formation des Bibliotécaires en Amerique du Nord: Modernité et Valeurs Profes- sionelles," Bulletin des Bibliotèques de France 45, no. 1 (2000): 42-9; Wanda Dole and Jitka Hurych, "Values for Librarians in the Information Age," Journal of Information Ethics 10, no. 2 (Spring 2001): 38-50; B. Flinner, "Academic Libraries and Reference Ethics," The Reference Librarian 4 (1982): 151-55; W. G. Johnson, "The Need for a Value Based Reference Policy: John Rawls at the Reference Desk," Reference Librarian no. 47 (1994): 201-11; Trudi Bellardo, "Teach- ing Professional Ethics," Education for Information 10 (1992): 82-6; Rosann Bazirjian, "The Ethics of Library Discard Practices," in Strauch and Strauch, eds., Legal and Ethical Issues in Acquisitions (New York: Haworth Press, 1990), 135^6; Arthur J. Anderson, "How Do You Manage," Library Journal 118, no. 2 (1993): 55-6; Thomas Froehlich, "Ethical Considerations of Information Profes- sionals," in Annual Review of Information Science and Technology, ed. M.E. Williams, 27 (New York: Learned Information, Ine, 1992), 291-324; Robert Hauptman, Ethical Challenges in Librari- anship (Phoenix: Oryx Press, 1988); and B.J. Kostrewski and Charles Oppenheim, "Ethics in Infor- mation Science," Journal of Information Science 1 (1980): 277-83. 27. Dole, Hurych, and Koehler, "Values for Librarians in the Information Age." 28. Koehler, Hurych, Dole, and Wall, "Ethical Values of Information and Library Professionals." 29. Jacques Berleur and Klaus Brunnstein, eds. Ethics Of Computing: Codes, Spaces For Discussion And Law (London: Chapman & Hall, 1996), on behalf of the International Federation for Infor- mation Processing. 30. Rubin and Froehlich, "Ethical Aspects of Library and Information Science;" and Froehlich, "Intellectual Freedom, Ethical Deliberation, and Codes of Ethics." 31. Koehler and Pemberton, "A Search for Core Values;" Dole, Hurych, and Koehler, "Values for Librarians in the Information Age;" and Koehler, Hurych, Dole, and Wall, "Ethical Values of Information and Library Professionals."
Professional Values and Ethics as Defined by "The LIS Discipline" 1 1 3 i í 1 | I 2 -8 1 -= è 1 a. -5 -g -= o 1 S -E> ?. -g _ > "' •s « ° c o- e.y "' •s JÉ « I» ° i c P ^J o- I e.y ^ <B B,"E^$ gj-5ai P 8 > E " "5 -E 2 O Í JO CD O I E IHfj " -E I Í I -li JO è I o 1 ? S 51 i i ¿ I! í i ^ i f -s il -§ ! i n i ^ i 5§ ¡lili il^ii li ■- S É- g. g. g.g. g. g. g. gg. g. g g X 3 _í= _c_c_c_c_c _c_£=_c:_£=_c _c_£: c g JO 3 i S I § J lií^ S| lili S.íí I Ji 1 ¡|!í fi U O U U UU uj U .2 UU ¿75 U (75 Q ."i Is O O _ (o ~ O .Q i I O í! si _ 1 I 1 -g ,|| ! 1 » rt s< í í <3<3 61 sjá^^ ü l|l lllslIIIÜlHü üiíi O >< -- c • c ce ^^ O w << co v-/ to u_ co co -<c co e¿. co w co D "^ C ^ CCCZCco cococococo coco
1 14 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science J I «a i Ì § i\ e |1 1 J 1 1 1 11 il 1 n "* Ì ^, > && <l il Ì J f f i £ H 11 £U Ill ^ i ut || |i :i- £ I I £ i o^ o.a. _g^ 1 D D U => <C O DO-QU U-9 c \ \ \ \ \ \ w w w \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \\ \\ \\ \ 'à a- 'á s- a- a- s-a- a-s- 'as- a- _c_c_c _c _c_c_ci_c_c:_r:^c_c_c: CO I -^ _,_ CD -= c .y _íq _Q «^ CD o o c ^E 12 CD - ^ O "io íR O E °~> .Q § ^ • *| ^ .1 «8 SJ =3 n eccoci m ^3c/)n~ ¡ ¡ 1 li i 1 ¡i Jsilí 5 O O "O OE CD O OCD O O O O O O CD CD CD O -te fe 0 CD fe 00^0.^.^ O O O Oc D O OD OO°OO O U U U U oo U U Cñ UU UU U co s gis ¡^ j a c „ jé -OR-2c"a5 08o oo^ o-£ >o= «-2 ¿o -OR-2c"a5 II 1 1 1 ^fli 08o lig^i o-£ ¡í I ^ ¿o JÍPIllíflÍílHI «¡ ÍÍ 1 iÍijiillsriill^JiiJlíJ^iíj O^O0O^^ - -)AoCDoc-i=-i=Jí2"^cocCD7c:i00 <<< 3 <<<<cü(JUUU
Professional Values and Ethics as Defined by "The US Discipline" 1 1 5 "1 Je Ú i I "1 I _ _8 -^ \ E ~o -7= CO -5= C <q <d ~e -^ o J <q I <d ~e J u J < o I KM I 1 1 I e "8-Y>bí .B ^ < J> e I 8 i rfi ^ i ì ^ < ì K I i i ¡ì H III 11 \ \ \ \\ \ \ \ \ \ W \ \ \ \\ \ \ \ \ \ \\ È f Í 11 11 111 11 £ l*i*l 1 jj j Uri*! iì :gs^oi>-g ^ -g-g -g -go^-g^-g -g-g U (J 3 UU U U U U UU ■i § s^ £ Sol «i» 1 HI §•§ |? § Ili li « PI 15 1 i ! ¡li <i 1! Ili fi 1 S I 111 IL _O-§ B » j? 9> J •£ JL^ É? g "6 o $ ^ "§ o o S
1 1 6 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Appendix 2 Librarian Values Tables These tables are adapted from Wallace C. Koehler, J. Michael Hurych, Wanda V. Dole, and Jo Anna Wall, "Ethical Values of Information and Library Professionals - An Expanded Analysis," International Information & Library Review 32 (2000): 485-507. Table A2-1 Sample Distribution by Country and Region Asia Asia Europe America Middle America Europe Africa Socialist Market East Latin East North Oceania West Total N 100 134 27 62 31 1 1189 126 223 1893 Table A2-2 Librarian Gender First Second Third Female Rated Service Equal Access Information Literacy First Service Intellectual Freedom Information Literacy Male Rated Service Intellectual Freedom Equal Access First Service Preservation Intellectual Freedom Table A2-3 Librarian Role First Second Third Administrator Rated Service Equal Access Intellectual Freedom First Service Intellectual Freedom Preservation Practitioner Rated Service Equal Access Information Literacy First Service Intellectual Freedom Preservation Paraprofessional Rated Service Equal Access Intellectual Freedom First Service Equal Access-Intellectual Freedom Lib School Faculty Rated Service Intellectual Freedom Equal Access First Service Intellectual Freedom Preservation
Professional Values and Ethics as Defined by "The US Discipline" 1 1 7 Appendix 3 Specific elements of codes of ethics The following specific elements are found in the codes of ethics of information pro- fessional associations. These provisions are offered as examples rather than as pre- scriptions. None of the codes of ethics contain all these provisions. Some contradict or appear to contradict provisions found in other codes. Some of these provisions are more appropriate to one type of code - aspirational, educational, or regulatory - than another. These tables were first published in slightly different form as Appen- dix 2 of Wallace C. Koehler and J. Michael Pemberton, "A Search for Core Values: Towards a Model Code of Ethics of Information Professionals," Journal of Infor- mation Ethics 9, no. 1 (2000): 26-54. Table A3-1 Rights and Privileges of the Patron/Client 1 Place the interests of the patron/client first 2 Provide non biased client service 3 Recognize the rights of patrons/clients to information access without discrimination. Forms of discrimination include ability to pay as well as ethnicity, gender, age, race, social standing, faith, sexual orientation, and other criteria 4 Apply where required, legal or proprietary considerations that may limit patrons' rights of access to information 5 Protect patron/client privacy 6 Maintain patron/client confidentiality 7 Avoid interfering in the personal affairs of patrons/clients 8 Inform patrons/clients of errors 9 Explain services provided the patron client 1 0 Do not withdraw from the provision of service except where there are conflicts with professional practice or law 1 1 Provide clients/ patrons with information that is as current and as accurate as is possible 1 2 Inform clients of all relevant materials of interest 1 3 Explain limits of data and methodology to client/patron 14 Minimize the amount of information gathered about patrons/clients. Retain it only so long as it is necessary 1 5 Inform clients/patrons that actions shall be consistent with the ethics code 1 ó Advise clients of potential ethical/legal conflicts of an activity Table A3-2 Selection Issues 1 Maintain current and appropriate collections 2 Refrain from promoting discriminatory material but assist those seeking to study the proscribed phenomena 3 Avoid censorship in the selection of materials 4 Where censorship or filtering exists, inform clients of their limits 5 Identify source and authenticity of resources ó Provide as widely as possible a selection of all types of information and media 7 Abhor inappropriate use or concealment of information
1 1 8 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Table A3-3 Access Issues Resources 1 Maintain free or low cost access to online information 2 Protect the status of confidential materials Education 3 Promote public education that enhances information use 4 Support all professional means that promote information dissemination 5 Promote education and information use Offsite Information Providers ó Respect the rules of access of information providers 7 Acknowledge and respect different information systems' rules and protocols Acknowledge Sources 8 Protect individual intellectual property rights 9 Avoid even the appearance of plagiarism Information Skills/Quality 1 0 Accurately represent oneself and the information systems one has available Table A3-4 Professional Practices and Relationships Personal and Professional Beliefs 1 Separate personal beliefs from professional service 2 Distinguish clearly between personal beliefs and professional obligations 3 Preserve the liberal and humanistic basis of the profession 4 Maintain objectivity in the practice of the profession Association and Legal Regulation 5 Comply with association bylaws or charter and appropriate statutes ó Report your own action or that of others which might reflect badly on the profession 7 Comply with association investigatory or disciplinary organs and their sanctions 8 Observe, as appropriate, the ethical standards of related professions 9 Counsel fellow professionals on ethical standards of behavior 1 0 Seek guidance from the association when faced with an ethical dilemma Skills or Technical Competencies 1 1 Maintain professional skills and competence 1 2 Avoid performing tasks where skills are lacking Professional Image 1 3 Avoid conduct that would reflect negatively on the profession or the association Conflict of Interest 1 4 Avoid undisclosed potential conflicts of interest 1 5 Avoid acceptance of fees above standard compensation for services rendered Professional Practices 10 Promote the professional mission by: (1) utilizing state-of-the-art practices, (2) maintaining multidisciplinary ties with other professions, (3) maintaining solidarity with peers, (4) networking with peers 1 7 Take responsibility for work performed 1 8 Maintain professional practice within personal and institutional limits 1 9 Maintain professional independence
Professional Values and Ethics as Defined by "The LIS Discipline" 1 1 9 20 Uphold the standards of the profession 2 1 Sever ties with patrons/clients when upholding professional standards is not possible Relationship with Professional Organization(s) 22 Promote the professional organization and participate in its efforts to improve the field 23 Do not undermine the credibility of the professional organization 24 Keep the professional organization informed of employment or status changes 25 Participate in professional activities, including conferences, the interchange of ideas and experiences, and publishing Treatment of Peers 26 Treat peers fairly in employment and promotion 27 Promote the profession among potential new members 28 Value the professional integrity of colleagues 29 Do not promote the entry into the profession of those not qualified 30 Maintain collegiality with one's peers 3 1 Willingly share information and methodologies with others in the field Ethics and Tasks 32 When necessary, act beyond contractual strictures in order to behave ethically Table A3-5 Responsibilities to Employers 1 Maximize returns on investment and resources 2 Maintain appropriate business standards and ethics 3 Perform services with due diligence and speed 4 Provide conscientious service to employers, students, and clients where relevant 5 Remain loyal to the association/employer ó Maintain proprietary confidentiality Table A3-Ó Social and Legal Responsibilities 1 Promote the social mission of the field 2 Contribute to and maintain democracy by protecting citizens' rights 3 Contribute to the collective social memory 4 Integrate the collective memory into the social fabric 5 Librarians have a social, economic, and cultural responsibility to promote the well-being of the community ó Comply with applicable legislation and regulations 7 Protect intellectual freedom 8 Provide leadership in the development of information-based systems 9 Practice the profession in compliance with existing statutes 10 Support national and international development 1 1 Manage public resources judiciously 1 2 The public interest supersedes employer or self interest in the event of conflicting interests 13 Do no harm 1 4 The public interest supersedes professional interests 1 5 Acknowledge the Universal Rights of Man 10 Safeguard public health and safety 1 7 Consider and honor third party rights