T HE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Volume XXXI OCTOBER 1961 Number4 SEVEN QUESTIONS ABOUT THE PROFESSION OF LIBRARIANSHIP: INTRODUCTION PHILIP H. ENNIS A DECADE ago Pierce Butler con- cluded that librarianship could not be considered a profession.' Three deficiencies, he said, barred the way. First, there were no abstract prin- ciples behind library science, and a fail- ure to develop general theoretical guides to practice precluded full professionali- zation. Second, the practice of librarian- ship was too quickly learned; it lacked the special skills and understanding based on long training. Third, there was no generally accepted and specifically inculcated "humanistic" learning that both guided and motivated the librarian to resist the strains of personal interest. These observations bear the mark of the gifted amateur-Butler was neither a librarian nor a social scientist by for- mal training-alert to important prob- lems, insightful, strong-minded. While the content of Butler's "humanistic" learning has never been clear to me, there is a sense of what he means that pervades the proceedings of this con- ference. His over-all verdict, moreover, was probably right, but for the wrong reasons. By assuming that the line di- viding professions from other occupa- tions was a hard and fast one, and by further assuming that an occupation could become a profession on its own, simply by correcting the three deficien- cies cited above, Butler inadvertently refueled the sterile debate as to whether librarianship is or is not a profession. This Twenty-sixth Annual Graduate Library School Conference, sharing a similar concern for the state of librar- ianship, is premised on quite different assumptions. Most important is our be- lief that the road to professionalism is a gradual one, the line separating the traditional professions from newer as- pirants being a band of grays rather than black and white. Of equal signifi- cance, and indeed underpinning the first assumption, is our view that an occupa- tion becomes more professional through complex social processes involving ne- gotiations with the public-exchanging demonstrated mastery and control over services for their clients' deference and trust, involving negotiations with adja- cent occupations for new allocations of tasks, and involving constant commerce with an ever changing technology and array of social needs. There is, finally, ' "Librarianship as a Profession," Librarv Quar- terly, XXI (October, 1951), 235-47. 299
300 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY another set of assumptions that need a closer look: that professionalization is an unalloyed good, that it is relatively costless, and that all its consequences are either known and/or beneficent. The Conference's "Seven Questions about the Profession of Librarianship" therefore do not explicitly include such obvious ones as: Are we or are we not a profession?2 Why are librarians paid so poorly? How are we to recruit better youngsters into librarianship? How should we resolve the dilemma between the real research degree and the work permit idea in present-day M.A. pro- grams? How can we tell the professional from the non-professional task? It is not that these questions are irrelevant or wrong. More might be learned, though, if we were to take a different perspective and view the state of librar- ianship in the context of other occupa- tions, in the light of new social science information about the world of work, and in the confrontation of that knowl- edge with the increasingly self-conscious thinking of librarians themselves-in short, if we look at the problem in a professional rather than an amateur way. This is not a new trend. Almost every occupation aspiring to a higher place in the sun has, at one time or another in recent years, scrutinized itself critically. Librarianship does so constantly, but rarely in an extensive or systematic way.3 These graduate library school conferences, for example, spanning a quarter century of librarianship, have never concerned themselves directly with librarianship as an emerging pro- fession. One reason for this neglect is a paucity of research on the topic,4 re- vealing little research interest, and con- sequently a lack of factual underpinning for our opinions and hunches. But a fact (as the playwright said) is like a sack that will not stand up when it is empty. It is hoped that this conference begins to provide the necessary theoretical ori- entation for the gathering and evalua- tion of the proper facts. The seven questions themselves evolved from discussions between the co-chairmen of the conference and from conversations with the entire Graduate Library School faculty. Developed as they were in this kind of interior dia- logue, the questions were not always ac- cepted or understood in the precise way they had been intended-I think five of the speakers even make some kind of disclaimer for the title of the topic they were saddled with. The questions are all interrelated, de- liberately so, because the social proc- esses they are meant to describe are themselves highly interrelated-so much so that the same points recur several times throughout the papers. Since none of the authors of the major papers had access to the others, some things were overstressed; others hardly seen at all. 2 Even the most sophisticated partisan of our assumption occasionally falls into the semantic trap of saying that librarianship is or is not, or will or will not become, a profession. It is the paradox of knowing that growth is continuous, but still distinguishing the boy from the man. 3 The exceptions are landmarks in library liter- ature, represented, e.g., by the volumes of the "Public Library Inquiry" and such a recent studiy as that reported by Marjorie Fiske in Book Se- lection and Censorship: A Study of School and Public Libraries in California (Berkeley: Univer- sity of California Press, 1959). ' Convenient, if somewhat unrepresentative evi- dence on this point lies in the lack of thesis re- search on the profession. Of the ninety-one Ph.D. theses accepted at the Graduate Library School to date, only five could possibly be considered to have some bearing on the profession of librar- ianship.
THE PROFESSION OF LIBRARIANSHIP 301 In this introductory, and at the same time summary, discussion some of these less visible interconnections will be indi- cated. The first question asks about the process by which professions delineate themselves from other occupations. Goode sketches the general range of so- cial processes involved in this un- planned, trial-and-error, and sometime self-defeating striving toward profes- sional status. One key to success is the creation (or borrowing) of a body of knowledge based on abstract principles firmly under the control of the practi- tioners who use that knowledge. Second, full professionalization is characterized by a service or collectivity orientation typically manifested in a code of ethics and inculcated into the young practi- tioners during their term of specialized training. Goode, like Butler before him (and for curiously similar reasons), is not very sanguine as to librarianship's acquisition of these two key attributes of full professionalization. Implicit in Goode's paper, moreover, is the injunc- tion to turn away from the physician and lawyer as models of the professional style. These two professions, after all, are crisis professions-the layman's health and legal emergencies are the professional's routines.5 While librarian- ship involves mainly routine and orderly behavior, the challenge to the profession lies precisely, Goode says, in mastering the increasingly complex skills neces- sary to collect, organize, and make available the world of fact and fantasy that is our literate heritage. The ability and necessity of librarian- ship to capture and absorb the new tech- nology of information retrieval and documentation as a highly visible ex- ample of this general problem was al- luded to in several of the papers. Dis- cussion of the educational prerequisites for such control and innovative leader- ship in this and related fields also echoed this central problem. The second question, developed by Winger, throws a historical shadow on one of the basic processes of profession- alization that Goode described: the service or collectivity orientation. For the developing concepts of librarianship that he traces from the Assyrian librar- ian-King Ashurbanipal' to the present are actually a series of assertions and re-assertions of the specific content of that service orientation. The kinds of service to be rendered, and to what kind of clientele, need redefinition through the centuries as the technology of books and libraries changes, as the nature and needs of readers change, but, above all, as the individual librarians attempt to solve the persistent dilemmas of their work in a particular fashion. These di- lemmas still exist today and are being resolved in a myriad of ways, but what has become problematical is what Wing- er calls the "social equivalent" of the personal dedication and zeal which char- acterized the earlier, creative librarians. In identifying this key question of the social equivalent of individual dedi- cation, he harks back not only to Goode's point about the service or col- lectivity orientation of a profession but to Butler's "humanistic" learning, for 'Hughes points out in his paper, in addition, that these most frequently used models of a pro- fession are nineteenth-century models wherein the doctor and patient or lawyer and client are seen as socially isolated atoms. The picture of the "free professional" he says was hardly true then; it is definitely misleading now. 6 Probably the highest-ranking librarian known, making the history of librarianship, thereby, a long spiral of downward mobility.
302 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY this is, I believe, the meaning of that term. Winger's paper also connects with two subsequent questions in the confer- ence, one dealing with education-it is in their training that the future profes- sionals' service orientation must be in- culcated. And at the same time he points to the professional association, implying not only its co-ordinating role-the pro- fession's brains-but its value role-the profession's conscience. The importance of these two integrative institutions- professional schools and professional as- sociations-lies in their dampening of the centrifugal forces of specialization, another of the conference's questions. Three of the seven questions are pe- culiarly intertwined: professional edu- cation, the diversity of ports of entry into librarianship, and the librarian's chronic concern for social status. Hughes's paper immediately relates problems of professional education with problems of status. Upgrading educa- tional requirements and content is seen as a key lever in raising occupational prestige, but yields some consequences which strain the fragile and hastily evolved educational institutions and indeed engender important tensions throughout the entire educational sys- tem. The dilemma of practical affairs and "pure" scholarship or research ap- pears concretely in the cacophony of professional degree programs. The trans- formation of the Ph.D. and the M.A. from validation of a research capacity to a work permit especially illuminates this dilemma. Hughes also makes the point that the variety of ways an occupation attempts to improve its status must be negotiat- ed with adjacent occupations jointly re- sponsible for the production or distribu- tion of its particular service. The prob- lem of multiple ports of entry to the library profession discussed by Parker reflects precisely a failure of accommo- dation with adjacent occupations. One does not have to agree with Parker's emphasis on the strategy of exclusion as the profession's response to job se- curity; it is impressive, if only negative- ly, to see the growing self-consciousness of librarianship in respect to the control of training of recruits. Parker's solution for the expansion of "the one legitimate port of entry"- the graduate library school-lies in the penetration of library education into the undergraduate curriculum. This is a de- batable and actually non-essential part of Parker's argument. Hughes's concern about the watering down of professional education is a relevant point here, one that calls for further discussion. So, too, to look forward for a moment, does the prospect of premature and fragmenting specialization of interest implicit in such a program. Yet a "single channel" of education drawing people off at varying degrees of training is an attractive one for several reasons. It might be able to overcome the "second-class citizen" sit- uation that exists at present. Both Parker and Reagan make this point ef- fectively: librarians who have not come into the field by way of the graduate library school differ from those who have in important ways-resistance to research; lack of activity and member- ship in professional associations; differ- ent values of library service. Some of these differences may be minor; others may become a major drain on the ca- pacity of the profession to innovate properly or to maintain its values. The implications of a profession's need for a service orientation have been threaded from Goode to Winger to Hughes; they continue, we see, in Parker.
THE PROFESSION OF LIBRARIANSHIP 303 A second attractive feature of Par- ker's "one-channel" notion is that, if ap- plied, it might help cut through the hopelessly tangled mythology that clus- ters around "professional" versus "non- professional" task assignments. The failure of the profession to find a "natu- ral" distinction between professional and non-professional work is too com- plex to discuss here. There is no doubt, however, that this failure exacerbates the librarian's status problems. If the professionals cannot be distinguished from the non-profes- sionals, other than by external labels, if, indeed, the work of non-professionals and professionals is often identical, then the tendency to appropriate borrowed status terms is enhanced. Lancour in his examination of the librarian's status problem is unconvinced that such status borrowing, especially borrowing of aca- demic rank for librarians, is the answer. Lancour also makes more visible the problem of an occupation's negotiations with the public as a decisive element in changing prestige ranking. What is clear, if not fully articulated, is that public images of an occupation reflect some basic realities of that occupation, perhaps not all the realities the occupa- tion would like to have recognized but at least those aspects on which the soci- ety, for one reason or another, has placed a high value. If Lancour is right in emphasizing that the librarian already has status, Rossi is also right in his emphasis on two of the "realities" which will hold down high public acknowledg- ment of that status-the high propor- tion of women in the profession and the "non-creative" nature of the librarian's connection with intellectual matters. The last two papers are also closely intertwined. Specialization, McGlothlin says, is an inescapable part of the mod- ern world. Its consequences are in part the planned ones of increased ability to expand the frontiers of knowledge and to apply that knowledge more effective- ly. But the unplanned effects-jurisdic- tional disputes among and between spe- cialties, lack of communication, and lack of co-ordination among specialties -grow apace. A profession's accommodation to these effects is a complex business re- quiring constant effort, flexibility, and clear leadership by specially designated elements of a profession. The problems of specialization, McGlothlin suggests, must be met by the political process rather than by some purely rational, scientific, or narrowly efficient system of procedures. The educational commu- nity is a major force in accommodating these negative consequences of speciali- zation. It does so not only by its politi- cal impact on a profession's intramural battles but also, as Henkle suggests, by providing the basis for a "sound com- mon educational background" for li- brarians. This point, it will be noted, implicates Parker's suggested solution for the ports of entry problem with the disjunctive forces of specialization. The relations among these particular proc- esses would repay serious attention. Proper organization, especially the professional association, is a second key instrumentality to this accommodation. The discussants of McGlothlin's paper illustrated, perhaps inadvertently, the utility of organized forums to accom- modate the communication and co-ordi- nation barriers that exist in librarian- ship. School librarians, as Mahar indi- cates, are in a specialty caught between two giants; their dilemma is in trying to fit both the perspectives of the teach- ers and the librarians. The intellectual difficulties here are strikingly clear-the
304 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY social role of teacher intersects the role of librarian. The political difficulties are also clear. The professional association is the central forum in the handling of spe- cialization-and most of the other prob- lems a profession faces as well. Ells- worth's critique of the American Library Association, for it is that and not any lofty view from the summit, should be seen, then, in the context of the preced- ing paper. His view stems from a mood directly antagonistic to McGlothlin's recipe for the professional association's role as mediator and compromiser. Ells- worth expresses the impatience with the organized apparatus reminiscent of Veblen and the technocrats. He wants to sweep away all the superfluities of bureaucracy and get the main jobs done efficiently. This is a familiar cry, one with considerable merit, but is the logic of efficiency the proper test here? Or is Clift more nearly right in his earthy rephrasing of McClothlin's injunction- "the fleas come with the dog." Yet there is an important, even a po- litical, point in Ellsworth's substantive suggestion to reorganize the ALA in such a way that type of library rather than type of function would become more dominant. It is an echo of a major idea in Hughes' paper, that each profes- sion must deal with its adjacent occu- pation. These dealings, in many in- stances a political-power struggle for control or leadership, require the most powerful phalanxes the profession can create. Ellsworth is implying, therefore, that librarianship must fortify itself in its relations with city planners and poli- ticians, school administrators, college faculties, and all the other occupations librarians contend with, by giving its sen- ior and leading librarians, mainly admin- istrators, more power in their profession- al association. The decisive unit in deal- ing with the world, he feels, is the type of library rather than the function. This makes sense, increasingly so as the or- ganizational arms race between profes- sions continues. But here is a genuine dilemma, for the cost of strengthening the type of library component in the ALA must be some loss in the tradition of functional organization and democratic participation which has characterized the ALA. In summary, if there is any one theme that might unify the ideas of this con- ference it is the continuing tension be- tween innovation and tradition. By tra- dition I mean the service orientation, the sense of personal dedication and all its attendant rituals and accoutrements, including the "genteel elegance" and even the "love of books." By innova- tion, I point to the knowledge base of a profession and its ceaseless change. Practice and theory must respond to new knowledge. The important impli- cation here is that education is a con- tinuing matter. Professional librarians, as individuals, must have some system- atic connections to the sources of new ideas both in and out of the professional educational center and the profession as a whole must be receptive to the new ways books and people may be brought together. To an occupation seeking greater pro- fessional stature, both tradition and in- novation are necessary and each must be secured by the proper means. Failure to separate these means correctly can result either in the dissipation of the profession's service ideals in a race for empty modernity or a freezing of its ability to meet new challenges by too
THE PROFESSION OF LIBRARIANSHIP 305 tenaciously embracing old slogans and past glories. Library literature has had its share- some people say more than its share- of research agenda. Without much diffi- culty each of the conference questions could be transformed into research proj- ects, comprising another such agendum. While the importance of doing so seems clear, research motivation can not be legislated. It would not be appropriate to end this introduction without including a word of Ithanks to the Carnegie Corpo- ration of New York for the financial assistance which made possible this col- lection of papers and the conference for which they were prepared.