Getting it on the Record: Faculty of Color in Library and Information Science Nicole A. Cooke, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign nacooke@illinois.edu Joe O. Sánchez, Queens College, City University of New York jose.sanchez2@qc.cuny.edu Being a member of the professoriate is absolutely rewarding and fulfill- ing, but it can also be difficult. And it can be painful. And it can induce anxiety and feelings of being an imposter. These things are certainly experienced by all instructors, and they can be particularly acute for faculty members of color. The arti- cles in this special issue share deeply personal, distressing, and often trau- KEY POINTS matic stories of minority library and • White administrators, faculty, information science faculty across the and students are not used to United States, with the goal of expli- seeing many people of color cating the fact that faculty of color do in positions of power and indeed experience notably different authority, so they experience challenges while working in higher cognitive dissonance when education. encountering a professor In 2017, four Black and Brown who, in their preconceived faculty members, all of whom were bias, does not “look” like a ALA Spectrum Doctoral Fellows, came professor. t ogether to have a discussion about their experiences as LIS faculty of • Each author has personally color (Ceja Alcalá, Colón-Aguirre, experienced instances of not Cooke, & Stewart 2017). The expe- being taken at their word, rience of writing the article was ca- of having their narrative thartic, but it also represented a risk questioned, scrutinized, and of exposure and potential rejection. presumed exaggerated. All of the authors have previously had their work and personal experience • What is missing in most dismissed, minimized, and ignored “diversity” policies in LIS because these experiences raised up- programs and in academia setting questions or conclusions about in general is making the how the field and the professoriate “diverse” faculty members the treat people of color. After the publica- priority of the initiative, not tion of this autoethnographic interview the prop in it. © Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 2019 Vol. 60, No. 3 DOI: 10.3138/jelis.60.3.01
170 Cooke, Sánchez article, it was decided to use it as inspiration for a panel at the 2018 ALISE conference in Denver, Colorado (two of the article authors were able to participate on the panel). Planned and implemented by the ALISE Multicultural, Ethnic, and Humanistic Concerns Special Interest Group (MEHC),1 the panel featured nine faculty members of color, most of whom contributed to this special is- sue as authors and editors. Panelists2 were asked two simple, but profound, questions: (1) Tell us about a time when you experienced discrimination as an LIS faculty member, and (2) What do you want the rest of the world to know about the experiences and/or needs of faculty of color? Their authentic stories were told in front of a standing-room-only audience, some of whom could personally empathize with the stories shared, others who were shocked at the scenarios described, and perhaps there were even some in the room who recognized themselves in the panelists’ stories and registered anger and disbelief instead of feeling an impetus to disrupt the status quo. To say that the panel was emotional and draining would be an understatement; the panelists reflected on the session for weeks afterward, all the while hearing from colleagues who were in the room (and from some who were not present) and wanted to commend them on their brav- ery and honesty. More than a year later, panelists still receive comments about the power of this panel. Because of the lasting impact of this panel, it was decided to revisit these stories in print form. As is often the case with articles about race, microaggressions, discrim- ination, and other difficult topics, finding a home for this special issue was not automatic, nor easy.3 But persistence is the name of the game, particularly when dealing with stories that must be told. With that in mind, the special issue editors are grateful to the JELIS editors for providing the space and encouragement to “shine a light” on these important stories that “need to be told.” The stories that appear in this issue are ethnographic counter-stories, which are the authors’ way of “going on the record” and demonstrating their resistance and resilience. Telling counter-stories is a method of “tell- ing the stories of those people whose experiences are not often told (i.e., those on the margins of society)”: The counter-story is also a tool for exposing, analyzing, and chal- lenging the majoritarian stories of racial privilege. Counter-stories can shatter complacency, challenge the dominant discourse on race, and further the struggle for racial reform. Yet, counter-s tories need not be created only as a direct response to majoritarian stories. . . . Indeed, within the histories and lives of people of color, there are numerous unheard counter-stories. Storytelling and counter-storytelling these experiences can help strengthen traditions of social, political, and cultural survival and resistance. (Solórzano & Yosso, 2002, p. 32)
Getting it on the Record: Faculty of Color in Library and Information Science 171 None of these counter-stories was easy to share at the conference, and they were even harder to write, but all of the authors feel it is important to share and officially document their struggles in an effort to bring awareness and generate honest—and, it is hoped—t ransformative conversations about how the field needs to grow and change to be more respectful, welcoming, and inclusive of minority faculty, staff, and students. The field and professoriate have a retention problem, one that is easily ignored and elicits exasperated (and sometimes insincere) ques- tions of “what can we do?” The infographic “The ‘Problem’ Woman of Colour in the Workplace”4 can easily be retitled “The ‘Problem’ Faculty of Color in the Professoriate.” Minority faculty members can be hired as tokens, and are certainly treated as such, particularly when they are the “only one” or one of few people of color in a school, department, or unit; they routinely experience microaggressions and repetitive injuries (in some case they have been physically touched or aggressed upon); they face denials of abuse and mistreatment and are labeled as angry and/ or overly sensitive, or are accused of playing the “race card”; they are sometimes implicitly and explicitly retaliated against; and they all face thoughts and realities of exiting their organization for the sake of their health and safety, not to mention their job satisfaction and chances of promotion. Hence, the profession has serious retention concerns. All of these factors deserve serious consideration, strategizing, and correction, and these conversations need to happen before the field reaches a point where faculty of color cannot be retained and new tokenized replace- ments cannot be secured. It is hoped that these essays are read with open minds, open hearts, and a desire to improve the field and professoriate, for everyone’s sake. Themes The seven articles presented in this special issue address the experience of being a person of color and a faculty member in an LIS program. When these pieces are read back to back, perhaps the most striking realization is that, while each article makes informative and poignant illustrations of individual instances of derogatory speech and action, as an aggregate, they paint a hard-to-miss canvas of classifiable, deeply entrenched trends of “othering” of faculty of color across different LIS programs. Taken separately, difficult-to-pinpoint hostilities and off-the-wall comments may be interpreted as social “flukes,” but when one sees the same “odd” and inappropriate exchanges happen again and again to different professors of color across the LIS, it becomes apparent that there are, indeed, patterns of experiences that apply only to minority faculty. In fact, the editors of this special issue found quite a few commonalities with personal incidents mentioned by the authors, from getting one’s hair fondled by curious colleagues to having one’s professorial rank rudely questioned by students.
172 Cooke, Sánchez Not surprisingly, none of the authors chose to highlight the joys of being faculty of color, focusing on the many challenges presented by this ascribed status. Dr. Renate L. Chancellor of the Catholic University of America discusses the ever-prevalent Racial Battle Fatigue, as well as the double burden of racism and sexism faced by female faculty of color in the LIS professional environment. Dr. Mónica Colón-Aguirre of Simmons College advises LIS programs to reach past the diversity rhetoric and ask themselves/ourselves what we mean by wanting a “diverse program”—and are we willing to go past lip service and do what it takes to cultivate and support minority faculty? Getting past the hypocrisy of “diversity” lip ser- vice is a goal expressed by another author, Dr. Bharat Mehra of the Uni- versity of Tennessee, who shares his experiences of being a gay male LIS faculty member of color and an international hire. The overt and subtle microaggressions he has experienced since becoming a professor in the United States have inclined him to wish that colleagues spoke up more on behalf of each other when they witnessed bullying and injustice or heard their colleagues express discomfort or offense toward biased language and behavior. Dr. Renee F. Hill of the University of Maryland talks about the epidemic exploitative “othering” of female faculty of color by ignorant a dministrators, sheltered colleagues, and vain mentors, as well as the uneasy reluctance to share these stories, for the weary concern of b eing called a liar. The go-to tendency of privileged colleagues to dismiss complaints by faculty of color as “overreacting” and being “confronta- tional” and “uncooperative” is addressed by Dr. Amelia N. Gibson of the University of Northern Carolina at Chapel Hill. Dr. Gibson points out the toxic history and cycle that has governed LIS policy of ignoring and glazing over any uneasiness within its ranks by weaponizing the argument for “civility” in order to silence unhappy or dissenting voices of faculty of color. Dr. Nicole A. Cooke of the University of Illinois, Urbana- Champaign writes about the pervasive microaggressions, or “impolite hostilities,” that plague minority faculty members, take place quite regularly, and despite being hurtful to the objects of these comments and actions, are consid- ered normal and acceptable in LIS programs. Manipulation tactics such as “gaslighting,” “minimizing,” and the silent treatment are routinely infused into administrative practices and the departmental culture at LIS programs that keep faculty of color isolated, anxious, and second-guessing their own perceptions. Dr. Cooke stresses the importance of counter-story- telling as a means to bring exposure to these topics and to foster solidarity among the recipients of these injustices. Dr. Vanessa Irvin of University of Hawai'i at Mānoa talks about the dehumanizing effect of racism and of a library culture that must acknowledge its past and current transgressions, with a long history of perceiving and treating ethnic minorities and dif- ferently abled patrons as in need of extra help, special instruction, and charitable tolerance.
Getting it on the Record: Faculty of Color in Library and Information Science 173 Microaggressions In addition to referencing documented evidence of bigotry in the aca- demic setting, each author provides examples from their personal life that illustrate times when they had been affected by speech or behaviors from colleagues, administration, or students that were demeaning or offensive but, at the same time, too nebulous in their racism or sexism to be report- able. One of the key running themes across the featured articles is that, while overt displays of bigotry can still be encountered, in most cases, mod- ern manifestations of racial prejudice and chauvinism exist in such subtle, nuanced formats that even their recipients are sometimes left scratching their heads when trying to articulate what precisely constitutes the “hate crime,” even with the knowledge that something is definitely wrong. Microaggressions earned their name for being tiny servings of preju- dice injected into popular common sayings, ritualistic social “niceties,” and even compliments. Much like “backhanded compliments,” microaggres- sions are insults wrapped in superficial pleasantries or small talk; they are comments of dubious positive value that leave a bad taste behind, even as one finds oneself responding with a “thank you” on autopilot. The most devious aspect of microaggressions is that they are frequently intended as earnest “positive” sentiments, with speakers being unaware of the conde- scending tone or the insultingly low expectations lurking behind their own words. The crushing disempowerment brought on by microaggressions comes not as much from their slippery meanings as from their sheer vol- ume and omnipresence in our culture. They are like micro-dosages of poi- son that, if taken daily, will slowly and stealthily result in a certain death. Microaggressions are most potent (i.e., most harmful) when experienced regularly, repeatedly, and from multiple sources—and are notoriously difficult to “prove” as problematic to individuals not used to being on the receiving end of subtly and playfully racist and sexist commentary. Demonstrating racism to be the culprit behind any one strangely uncomfortable or vaguely inappropriate interaction to a non-minority colleague is challenging to say the least, as they have no personal under- standing of how real-life discrimination works or feels. Attempts at explain- ing why something is racist or sexist draw more racist and sexist responses from privileged colleagues who have no idea that social inequality is not a singular experience of something as evident as name-calling or not being let into a nightclub: it is rather the cumulative effect of countless every- day, repetitive, harmful interactions with coworkers and strangers who feel and act superior (and get away with it). Such events might be mildly unsettling, upsetting, or discouraging if they happened once, but over time, the barrage of indignities chips away at the person’s self-worth and grows unbearable and destructive as part of an everyday vicious cycle of mistreatment, under-appreciation and denial of rights, access, and upward mobility on the basis of superficial, arbitrary social markers such as race, ethnicity, gender, or sexual orientation.
174 Cooke, Sánchez Othering At the center of all the articles there is a shared group-identity of being “othered.” Othering “serves to mark and name those thought to be different from oneself” (Weis, 1995, p. 17) and takes many forms, quite a few of which are listed by our authors, from being fetishized as an exotic creature (com- plete with breaches of physical boundaries and fixated fascination with skin color and hair texture) to being expected to represent all people of color (and, as such, to serve as moderator and expert on all discussions of race and to have knowledge and opinions on everything pertaining to African Ameri- cans and Black history). Some of these othering tactics are often justified as being “empowering” to minority faculty: after all, they get special attention and extra authority. In reality, the unasked-for spotlight only serves to add pressure and embarrassment for faculty of color within the LIS environment. The forced emphasis on a faculty member’s race as a trait that makes them “different” from the LIS collective is a perversely counter-productive way to welcome a scholar, an educator, and a researcher into the midst of intellec- tual peers. The glaring “markedness” of being considered “diverse” above all other personal or professional qualifications reduces the individual to a singular social demographic characteristic that signals a deviation from the norm and serves to keep the individual from getting “too comfortable” by virtue of feeling singled out and observed with curiosity and expectation. No matter how much they masquerade under the guise of sowing “specialness,” othering practices are acts of exclusion that serve to reinforce and reproduce positions of dominance and subordination (Fine, 1994) Alas, most of us are tragically unwilling to entertain the possibility of being biased or succumbing to stereotypical thinking, taking an extremely defensive stance at any mention of racism. The American Dream is too deeply rooted in the ideal of meritocracy: to acknowledge that one is possibly being unfair to a fellow individual due to a social prejudice is to acknowledge being a shameful person and a bad American. White Ameri- cans are genuinely mortified at being called “racist,” but for many it’s not because they are sincerely ashamed for callously offending a fellow human: these individuals take offense to being called racist because it unsettlingly casts the shadow of doubt on their “tolerant savior” self-image. To be fair, it is a classical human tendency to mistake our highly subjective, culturally socialized biases for natural facts: “Dominant cultural narratives exert sub- stantial influences on the perceptions, expectations, and behaviors of mem- bers of majority groups with respect to minorities in predictable, almost scripted, and unconscious ways” (Ewick & Silbey, as cited in Hasford, 2016). Tokenism Insult is added to injury for LIS faculty of color when they find themselves tasked with representing for and explaining the behavior of all people of color to white faculty, some of whose interest in race and ethnicity is driven more by morbid curiosity than empathy or desire to understand.
Getting it on the Record: Faculty of Color in Library and Information Science 175 Since faculty of color are frequently the “first and only of” their ethnic “kind” in the LIS program, they are expected to take over the role of mentor for every student or faculty member of color that comes through the department, which creates additional workload, one that goes without extra pay and does not count toward tenure. Given that women and racial minorities are already at a disadvantage with lower salaries compared to their white male counterparts, having those two groups shoulder the most extra unpaid, uncredited labor at the workplace is economically exploit- ative and socially unethical. Additionally, faculty of color are by default understood to serve as the “diverse” face of the program, being pushed to the front of every group photo and expected to be present at every politically visible meeting. The involuntary role of having to represent the institution eclipses the freedom of being perceived as a professional in one’s own right, not to mention putting unrealistic pressure on the individual to be a “model” representa- tive of their minority group. Second-guessed at every turn Another hard-to-ignore thread uniting the authors’ experiences as mi- nority members of their respective LIS programs is the incessant, inescap- able challenging of authority and expertise thanks to racial and gendered stereotyping. Authors recount experiences in which students refused to believe they were faculty members and where colleagues needed confir- mation from white or male peers before validating a statement made by a female professor of color. There are stories of being treated intellectually lacking due to English being a faculty member’s second language, as well as accounts of being statistically “nonexistent” due to low representation of the faculty member’s minority “type” in LIS, combined with classification inaccuracies in demographic surveying of the field. It comes down to this: White administrators, faculty and students are not used to seeing many people of color in positions of power and authority, so they experience cognitive dissonance when encountering a professor who, in their preconceived bias, does not “look” like a professor. Part of being privileged is feeling free to exercise the right to challenge and question authority, which is why many white colleagues think noth- ing of vocalizing their puzzlement or demanding additional proof when they perceive something—or someone—as not making sense. Perhaps in a post-racial utopia this would not be a problem, but the current LIS cli- mate is still wrought with double-standards: Faculty of color neither have the same habit of publicly second-guessing their white colleagues’ quali- fications and credentials—nor would they be able to get away with such arrogant attitudes and unprofessional conduct in the workplace. On the contrary, minority faculty learn to meticulously filter their speech and ex- ercise the utmost sensitivity and gentleness when expressing a criticism or grievance toward colleagues or students, lest they get branded troublesome
176 Cooke, Sánchez and quarrelsome, which leads to being ignored, avoided, and, ultimately, isolated from the LIS community. Racial battle fatigue There are myriad ways in which being a member of racial minority takes a toll on an LIS faculty member’s wellness. All the aforementioned conces- sions of dignity and picking up others’ slack in academic as well as emo- tional labor result in a measurable and latent toll on physical and mental health, something that is mentioned by all authors. For instance, being the token “diversity hire” at a given LIS program is exhausting. There are unspoken expectations for shouldering extra work and service at the department. There is also the insipid emotional burden of “representing” one’s own race, when the individual personality and be- havior of one person of color are perceived as the blueprint of what to ex- pect from the entire racial/ethnic population that this person represents in the eyes of their non-minority colleagues. In tow comes the unsolicited responsibility to have special insight into why other members of the same race—academics, politicians, entertainers, perfect strangers—are the way they are and do what they do. There is also the dubious honor of serving as the de facto moral con- science at departmental meetings and other public forums, where white faculty seem quite at a loss about what constitutes appropriate versus inappropriate behavior and “nice” versus offensive remarks in a diverse professional climate—and look to their “diverse” colleagues for guidance and approval. Perhaps one would be more willing to forgive this scenario if it were not a trap: When faculty of color do speak up about discrimi- natory practices or offensive comments, they are met with defensiveness, dismissal, and apologism. Any emphasis on racial difference, even as a “model minority,” creates strains for faculty of color, as exemplified by the “John Henryism” coping strategy: when marginalized individuals, fully aware of the unfair disadvan- tages they are up against, make a commitment to “do whatever it takes” to succeed against all odds, resulting in premature exhaustion of their intel- lectual, physical, and mental resources, which causes irreversible physical and emotional damage down the road. At least one author in this special issue directly mentions experiencing PTSD as the result of unhealthy work environment in LIS, while most authors allude to having been traumatized in some form or another. Compounded inequalities Having one “minority” characteristic brings on a certain amount of in- equality, which grows exponentially worse as more minority traits are layered. Being a faculty of color comes with racist remarks and practices, but being a female faculty of color intensifies the mistrust experienced as a racial minority and adds a layer of being considered biologically weak.
Getting it on the Record: Faculty of Color in Library and Information Science 177 Consequently, being a gay female faculty of color introduces yet another dimension of misinterpretation and discrimination based on a culture of homophobia—and so on. Lack of tangible support, institutional and individual The overwhelming scarcity of faculty of color across LIS programs is a glar- ing statistic noted by several authors. And, as one author points out, the problem is not the classical “limited pipeline of qualified people of color” explanation trope. Rather, the truth is that, beyond the diversity virtue signaling, LIS programs make no tangible effort to be welcoming or safe for faculty of color. Past checking the “diversity hire” box, they show no comprehension of the complexity or the intersectionality of the minority experience and offer no protection for the said “diversity hires.” Why? Because they never asked themselves Dr. Colón-Aguirre’s question—“Why do [we] want a diversity program?”—at least not with the goal of building a meritocratic, humane, compassionate professional environment. The concept of “diversity” in human resources is rooted in avoiding legal li- ability and fulfilling bureaucratic quotas rather than fostering an equal, respectful workplace. Neither the LIS administration nor the faculty body has the appropriate socio-historical grasp of why “diversity hires” exist in the first place and why having social diversity is not just a politically correct mandate that must be obeyed but is actually a healthier and better intel- lectual environment for an academic setting than social homogeneity. It evidently needs to be clarified that hiring diverse candidates is not an act of charity but a mutually beneficial arrangement between the program and the professional. Unfortunately, as of yet, many well-meaning allies who truly believe in having a diverse and fair workplace still do not realize that faculty of color have a different experience than themselves and fail to show positively impactful support (as opposed to pitying, condescending pseudo-support that can only add to the burden) when faculty of color voice their grievances. Individual risk Reading these pieces, one can clearly see that even the act of publishing these very articles that were specifically requested for this special issue on critical dialog on faculty of color in LIS programs was wrought with potential risks to the authors’ careers, reputations, and mental health. Each author has previously experienced negative (“unconvinced” or downright hostile) receptions from colleagues and other professional acquaintances when suggesting that racism (or another form of bigotry) was a factor in departmental decisions or workplace interactions. And let’s own up to it: There are absolutely no guarantees that they will not face similarly harsh scrutiny and dismissiveness in response to the publication of these insights. This collection of article-essays is not typical academic scholarship; they are acts of breaking oppressive silence, of taking a
178 Cooke, Sánchez stand on a politically volatile and dangerous issue. And though words are picked carefully and nothing radical is suggested (unless unity, mutual respect, and cooperation among colleagues are radical ideas), today it is still risky for junior and senior faculty alike to speak about manifestations of oppression and exploitation in LIS programs. Even when they are an- swering a “call for papers” in a socially sanctioned forum, they do not feel comfortable or safe to speak the truth, as their careers and reputations are presently at stake. If being noticed for speaking up against racially motivated injustice threatens one’s career and social standing, there is also the opposite ex- treme of not being taken seriously at all, rendered invisible, ineffectual, and with a compromised trust in one’s own judgment. Several authors mention their personal struggles with deciding whether to speak out in the LIS workplace, and then having to carefully craft the most gentle/ delicate ways to frame the conversation so as not, essentially, to spook the majority of faculty, administration or students by calling out offen- sive comments or discriminatory treatment too bluntly. Each author has personally experienced instances of not being taken at their word, of having their narrative questioned, scrutinized, and presumed exag- gerated. Each author has found themselves doubting their own under- standing of and reaction to incidents that felt injurious to their dignity. When one is in a small minority, surrounded by a majority that cannot relate to one’s experience, one has to work extra hard to have one’s version of reality accepted as real and valid. As the majority, backed by institutional preference against “rocking the boat” of the status quo in place, chooses not to engage in an open, honest, and amicable dialog about race and gender relations, victims of injustice are not only si- lenced but also forced into a position of isolation in which it becomes easy to question one’s judgment and wonder if it is, indeed, paranoia and not institutionalized and normalized social injustice causing one to feel discouraged and disenchanted from the lack of professional support and shortage of collegial empathy and solidarity in the LIS culture and professional space. Conclusions: now what? This special issue shines light on everyday discriminatory practices that continue to manifest themselves in Library and Information Sciences throughout the United States. There are numerous causes and explana- tions for why social injustice continues to durably reproduce through our culture and institutions, too complex to tackle in one place, yet, based on the contributions offered in this special issue, we can surmise that the answer lies, at least in part, in avoiding the “human” and focusing on “resources,” when it comes to setting priorities in hiring practices (this perspective is dominant not only in the logic of HR departments but in the academic culture as well.) Perhaps the reason LIS programs continue
Getting it on the Record: Faculty of Color in Library and Information Science 179 to fail at recruiting or retaining faculty of color is that the origins of “af- firmative action”/“diversity” hiring are motivated less by trying to fix the problem of harmful bigotry that affects minority members of LIS and more by anticipating and cushioning the problems what will arise when inevitably someone complains about unequal or insulting treatment. As such, “diversity” hiring practices are treated and enacted as a legal obli- gation and a necessary evil for maintaining a positive public image. What is missing in most “diversity” policies in LIS programs and in academia in general is making the “diverse” faculty members the priority of the initia- tive, not the prop in it. The goal should not be to attract faculty of color to the program, “lock them down” with a contract and abandon them to their own devices from then on. As several authors point out, each LIS department has an obligation to protect its faculty of color from the same systemic problems that necessitated diversity hiring practices in the first place: and sometimes that means proactively defending individuals against callous comments from colleagues and students and investigating admin- istrative malpractices. It does not help that the term “diversity hire” is, in itself, a microag- gression that subliminally summons suspicion and invites judgment about a person who came into the workplace under this label. By putting “di- versity” front and center, it pushes out any mention of professional merit and not-so-subtly implies that this category of “hire” was brought in to fill a quota, so their presence is a consequence of charity on the institution’s behalf rather than a mutually beneficial progression of the best-qualified/ best-fitting candidate being rightfully selected for the job. Several authors in this issue bring up this well-documented phenomenon, backed by per- sonal experiences: Being a professor of color attracts a casual suspicion that skin color (or other demographic minority qualification) was the governing reason behind their obtaining their faculty post, as opposed to the more logical assumption (exercised toward white colleagues) that since the hire was rigorously selected from the competition, they must have been the best candidate for the job. Therefore, the sabotaging terms “diversity hire” and “affirmative action hire” must be dropped from use and substituted with neutral descriptive terms that communicate the value of inclusion, such as “best candidate.” Diversity should not be used to “game” two hires from a single job posting, as if there were only one qualified candidate and the other candidate were part of some sort of a compromise/favor to diversity quota. All “diversity hire” means is that one of the best-qualified candidates, who would have been hired regardless of minority status, will also make the given LIS program more diverse in terms of race, gender, sexual orienta- tion, and other human perspectives that will contribute to the intellectual and cultural well-roundedness of the workplace. Before sophisticated dialog about racism, sexism, homophobia, and other bigotry in LIS can thrive, the principal challenge for LIS
180 Cooke, Sánchez programs across the country is to make sure their minority faculty feel safe at their chosen workplace. Safe to speak up about things that matter to them—and to stay silent about things that don’t—without fearing career and social repercussions. Safe from having to overcome lowered expectations—or forced to live up to heightened ones—on the basis of racial and gender identification. Safe from being saddled with extra responsibility while being denied the basic authority that comes with it. Safe from having to feel and act grateful for just being allowed at the table. It was neither fun nor professionally advantageous for the seven authors who contributed to this special issue to critique the LIS system and to reveal personal stories of humiliation and vulnerability related to racism and sexism in the LIS workplace. Their intellectual contribution to this very rarely addressed problem is greatly appreciated, but, in this instance, their courage should be equally applauded because they chose to speak out about a social topic that sees most messengers punished for the message. As Dr. Cooke points out in her article, disrupting dominant narratives with counter-storytelling is an invaluable act of protest and re- sistance—and these authors have answered the call at personal risk and discomfort. It is our hope that this special issue serves as testament to the struggles and strides made by faculty of color in their LIS careers and stim- ulates more open dialog and scholarship on what “diversity” means and how it can be achieved in the professional world of Library Information and Science. Nicole A. Cooke is an associate professor in the School of Information Sciences at the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign. Her research and teaching interests include human information behavior (particularly in the online context), critical cultural informa- tion studies, and diversity and social justice in librarianship (with an emphasis on infusing them into LIS education and pedagogy). Joe Sánchez is an assistant professor at Queens College, City University of New York. His research focuses on the information worlds of Mexican-American youth and the use of emerging technologies to support critical pedagogies. He is a founding member of the iSchool Inclusion Institute (i3). Notes 1. The panel was conceived and organized by Nicole Cooke and former SIG co-convener Tonia Sutherland. 2. The panelists were Nicole Cooke, Tonia Sutherland, Renee F ranklin Hill, Amelia Gibson, Joe Sanchez, Bharat Mehra, Monica Colon Aguirre, Vanessa Irvin, and Renate Chancellor. 3. The special issue editors are grateful to the JELIS editors for facilitating the telling of these important stories. 4. See https://coco-net.org/problem-woman-colour-nonprofit-organizations/.
Getting it on the Record: Faculty of Color in Library and Information Science 181 References Ceja Alcalá, J., Colón-Aguirre, M., Cooke, N.A., & Stewart, B. (2017). A critical dialogue: Faculty of color in Library and Information Science. InterActions: UCLA Journal of Education and Information Studies, 13(2), n.p. Retrieved from https:// escholarship.org/uc/item/1gq2s8q5 Fine, M. (1994). Working the hyphens: Reinventing self and other in qualitative research. In N.K. Denzin & Y.S. Lincoln (Eds.), Handbook of qualitative research (pp. 70–82). London, England: Sage. Hasford, J. (2016). Dominant cultural narratives, racism, and resistance in the workplace: A study of the experiences of young Black Canadians. American Journal of Community Psychology, 57(1–2): 158–170. https://doi.org/10.1002/ ajcp.12024 Solórzano, D.G., & Yosso, T.Y. (2002). Critical race methodology: Counter-storytelling as an analytical framework for education research. Qualitative Inquiry, 8(1), 23–44. https://doi.org/10.1177/107780040200800103 Weis, L. (1995). Identity formation and the process of “othering”: Unraveling sexual threads. Educational Foundations, 9(1), 17–33.