ISLANDS OF INFLUENCE DAVID H. STEVENS T rHE year I942 will be remembered for other reason than its trial of manpower and material resources by war. It will be known, too, as a year of spiritual and intellectual renaissance. Even now, in its early months, appear signs of turning toward the in., tangible forces that hearten and sustain humanity. Persons cast about for reassurances. They want grounds for faith in a future. That faith they are finding, as in past bewildering times, through other men and through books. These two conservers of the universal heritage are as strong and serviceable as ever. They are islands of influence in man's world of doubt and uncertainty. Through its new readers every book that is "the precious life-blood of a master-spirit, embalmed and treasured up on purpose to a life beyond life," now lives again; persons whose minds are stored with understanding of human and divine things now give out to others a part of what they them- selves live by. As always in humanl circumstance the inner resources of a few hearten the many. Yet, even while dependent upon books and men for strength, the masses are ignorant or forgetful of the way these influences came into the modern world. They accept the good without realizing the origins of their help. Those origins are not to be found in decrees or constitu- tional acts but rather in general intelligence and in a free expression of individual ideas. Independent thought and free expression were nurtured in societies that allowed ideas to accumulate and to persist over long periods of time, so that men might extend the boundaries of knowledge by using the ideas of other men from some far-distant place or earlier period. Basically, that range and freedom of choice in learning is due to a widespread use of print and to the protection of printed matter in libraries. Within the record of five hundred years of free thought the plainest fact is that the printed book is still man's most important medium of communication. Books have power to carry the particular quality of an individual mind and the accumulated knowledge of all ages on into 679
68o THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY the future. Other ways into men's minds are more rapid and more flexible, but these ways only supplement the slow, persisting power of books. Man still most easily reaches back in time or most securely embodies his present in form for the future when he puts words and other symbols on a paper page by the use of print. Everyone accepts these facts, once they are stated, but even then is slow to realize the influence that books and their interpreters have had upon the course of human history. The particulars of that ac- count would be beyond easy reach, but its significance is to be found readily in outline and by example. As one instance, it is well known that dictators always have looked upon books as something dangerous -as being a silent kind of free speech that is fearsomely pervasive and timeless in its effects. A Hitler may silence a living mouth with a blow, but not a book once printed and released for mass distribution. For this cause and no other-the right to print has been for centuries a test of individual freedom in every nation having any democratic freedom. Today history only repeats itself: nothing is changed. A Hitler may destroy the intellectuals of Poland, but he cannot touch their ideas that are now protected by printing for reading and for in- terpretation through all future time. The mind of Poland is kept in books as witnesses. There, as everywhere, when free choice is in full play, the quality of life in a country is to be judged from the kinds of printed matter read by its citizens. This was as true in the fifteenth century as today. Between I450 and I460 three printed works symbolized the mind of Germany; they are the two Bibles and the Psalter. Two years ago the modern world turned back in tribute to the men who made these books by using movable type for printing. The name of Gutenberg is for- ever to be associated with the appearance of the Bible in print and with its appearance in Germany. In contrast stands the printing press of Germany today, no longer an aid to religious freedom but a tool of tyranny. There is irony in the name now given to the earliest known bit of printing from fifteenth-century Germany. It is a single leaf of a poem known as the "Fragment of the world judgment." Now the religious fervor in Germany of yesterday or of five hundred years ago is sus- pended temporarily. The present curse laid upon German presses is reason for pity, not discouragement. Other periods and other coun- tries have left like evidence of deterioration under restraint. The hon-
ISLANDS OF INFLUENCE 68i ors of 1940 paid to German printers of the fifteenth century threw into higher contrast the current discredit done their inheritance by Ger- many's present rulers-burners of books and destroyers of men, these two great sources of influence on mind and spirit in all generations. Fear of print is man's confession of weakness and evil-doing, for its power to spread the truth is proved by the record. Such is the role of print in resisting tyranny now, and such has been its role potentially or actually since Gutenberg's day. Then, in Car- lyle's words, men began "creating a whole new democratic world," as they put movable type at work in the service of mankind. But with- out other causes the magnificent gains in democracy during five lhun- dred years could not have been made or held. Movable type produced books in quantity at low price. Distribution to all corners of the world and assembly at strategic points for free use by all were equally im- portant. These two services-distribution and assembly-gave the printed book its chance for world-influence. Fortunately, distribution of print quickened in the decades when books were first becoming plentiful. Explorers of the ocean made rapid progress in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. Book and ship to- gether crossed all horizons. Sea-borne adventurers carried books to dis- tant China and to new colonies in the three Americas. The facts known to scholars have been verified by recent discoveries. Within the period of the present war, old libraries have revealed unique books stored there since they were eagerly read by missionaries in exile while on duty far from home. Illiterate races then began to learn by means of translation. Literate nations saw democratic ideas at work, as the mass production of books made knowledge accessible to all. As we look back over the centuries of books in print, the uses of type to spread the world's ideas stand out very clearly on the records of history and literature. Sea travel was extended so rapidly after the New World adventurers found their way that the book in Europe soon was the book of the world. First, sweeping changes in close-laid, de- veloped countries won the formal names of Renaissance, Revival of Learning, and Reformation. Then, by slow degrees, over oceans, went out impulses toward free learning and democratic human relationships. Literary allusions to the "golden age" of classical letters diminished and then disappeared. The new era of utopian literature arose as men used fact with fancy to influence readers toward new concepts of world-society. More, Bacon, and Campanella drew substance out of
682 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY reality to make their imaginative microcosms of new social orders. Soon their impractical idealisms had practical analogues in the writ- ings of Defoe on international trade and in the communal societies briefly successful on this continent. In these changes from confined, imitative thinking to fresh interest in man's expanding universe the printed book was steadily a factor. The signs of spread in intelligence are clearest in the steady fall of book prices throughout the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. They are evident again in the issue of editions of collected works throughout the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. At the end of five hundred years the printed book found its old foes again at work, as dictators took over the internal economy of many countries and military cen- sorship regulated all seaways of communication. Today the world faces both sudden and slow consequences of this fresh restraint upon distribution and assembly of printed matter. A few of these are beneficial, but most are unalterably bad. When dis- tribution stops, accumulation of books and journals ends abruptly. In large measure these breaks in supply of material cannot be re- paired. Then comes the inevitable destruction incidental to active warfare. Beyond that are the intentional ruin and robbery that have gone on in eastern Asia and western Europe since I937. These losses to world-knowledge due to intent were not necessary and are not par- donable. If reports are to be believed, there are few instances comparable to the pillage of books in Paris. There a German librarian settled to his work on the Bibliotheque Nationale with the cryptic remark, "To the victors belong the spoils." Meanwhile, his second lieutenant ranged over the city in search of books "rare" for different reasons and so sub- ject to confiscation. Both might well remember that after i8iS the manuscripts stolen by Napoleon were returned to their libraries. The more responsible of the two might remember uneasily the fine labors of M. Roland-Marcel, who after 19I8 brought the Bibliotheque Na- tionale to new high levels by his vigorous and intelligent direction. To books, as to noncombatants, is due a kind of respect and to their guardians-absent or present-a sense of responsibility above the temporary chance of forced possession of their collections. As this great library of France passes into the pillaging hands of Germany, the other great libraries of Christendom become more pre- cious. Russia, Switzerland, Great Britain, and the United States of
ISLANDS OF INFLUENCE 683 America have stores of books in their national collections that in days to come will bring them the world's scholars. The international as- pects of learning will revive again. In these days there is satisfaction in remembering that a century ago an Italian, Sir Anthony Panizzi, started the British Museum on its broad plans for international use- fulness. A like gift to another country and to world-scholarship was the reorganization of the Vatican Library in I928. American librar- ians, assisted by a Norwegian and Italians, applied modern principles and American money to the task. In the same spirit all librarians use their knowledge for the common good of workers with ideas. Librar- ians are every man's guides to recorded facts in all parts of the world. Bibliographies, films, photostats, and original works still travel the oceans as did the early printed books of the fifteenth century. Free men are still free to think. Since 1937 new concentrations of world-knowledge in this hemi- sphere have been extraordinarily large. The same spirit that led to in- ternational planning and action before Germany invaded France is responsible. Japan, in the Far East, had aroused to action all the good will of Chinese and American librarians that goes back to the days of the founding of the Boone Library School in I920 and the visit of the late E. A. Bostwick to China in I925. In consequence, books and materials have gone in both directions across the Pacific to the limit of possibilities. In recent years the greater libraries of the United States have brought in large additions to their collections of Chinese books. In consequence of this gain in libraries already noteworthy by reason of their Chinese collections, this country now ranks first in re- spect to large, easily available resources for the study of Chinese cul- ture. Such place is likewise rapidly coming to the United States in respect to Latin-American materials. The Library of Congress, the Pan American Union, and several universities have gathered in varied classes of material on the other Americas. The third source of substan- tial acquisitions is Great Britain, from which American libraries lately have brought many rare books and manuscripts as well as microfilm copies of unique documents. Thus the libraries of the United States have increased greatly their stocks of materials in print from all coun- tries south, east, and west of us. Here they will be open to the free use of all. This race of books against destruction is temporary. Man's success in saving the past for the future by means of print is one of the fine
684 THE LIBRIRY QUARTERLY records of civilization. Since the days when book and ship together began to disseminate knowledge more freely, back in the fifteenth century, the scattering of printed matter has helped toward its preser- vation. The libraries of the world became shelters for books, as well as for scholars. In spite of fire and war, knowledge will persist by means of these two transmitting agents, the man and the book. Al- ways and everywhere, any library that is kept as an open storehouse of universal knowledge will be an island of influence toward democracy and freedom. No less so the independent scholar: By his followers he will be known, as have been the great teachers of the days since Guten- berg. That record of five hundred years will be lengthened as long as books and men are left free.