249 Web-Supported Teaching in the Department of Information Science at the University of Pretoria Theo J.D. Bothma and Retha (M.M.M.) Snyman In order to support the mission of the University of Pretoria (South Africa) the tuition methods in a number of modules in the Department of Information Science have been transformed from traditional classroom presentations to a learner-centered approach supported by web-based material in a flexi- learning environment. A comparison is drawn between the honors (fourth year) program in library and information science (LIS) and the undergraduate program in multimedia with regard to program out- line, student profile, teaching methods, the support of the Academic Information Service (AIS) and in- formation technology (IT), as well as the attitude of the students toward the changes. Qualitative methods of data collection were used. Problems and successes are highlighted. In conclusion, a num- ber of recommendations are made. Introduction What follows is a report of a case study on how the tuition methods in a number of modules in the Department of Information Science at the University of Pretoria have been transformed from traditional class- room presentations to a learner-centered approach supported by material on the Web and by e-mail and list-server interac- tion. The emphasis is on the honors (fourth year) program in library and information science and the undergraduate program in multimedia. The research focuses on these two programs for the following two rea- sons: firstly, the department has the most experience with web-based support in these two programs; secondly, the need exists to evaluate how successful these im- plementations are. Included in the discus- sion is the students' reaction toward these changes (positive and negative), and the role of the university's library. The differ- ence in attitude between the multimedia students and the LIS students in accepting these changes is demonstrated and various reasons are advanced. In conclusion, a number of proposals are made on how to make these changes more acceptable to all students. To contextualize the study, backgrounds to the University of Pretoria, the Department of Information Science at the University, and the programs offered by the Department are provided. This research is primarily based on qual- itative data collection methods. Data were collected by means of structured interviews with lecturers, focus groups, analysis of e-mail messages, and program evaluations by students, as well as informal observa- tions of students during the learning process. Data collection was done over a period of two years. At regular focus group meetings, the coordinators and lecturers of both the honors and multimedia modules were required to provide feedback on each module (including content, tuition method- ologies, etc.), and this was recorded. For the purpose of this article it is important to note that the coordinators and lecturers provided Fall 2002
250 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science About the Authors Theo J.D. Bothma is Professor; and Retha (M.M.M.) Snyman is Associate Professor, Department of Information Science, University of Pretoria, South Africa. feedback (during focus group discussions and structured interviews) on their own experiences with the web-based support of- fered to students, as well as students' per- ceptions and attitudes toward, and use of, the telematic tuition. E-mail messages were saved throughout the period, and were cate- gorized and analyzed; this provided valu- able informal feedback of student experi- ences. End-of-term evaluation of course content and tuition methodologies by stu- dents (by mean of a questionnaire) provided formal feedback, which was again analyzed and interpreted. The term "program" is used as the umbrella term. The duration of the typical undergraduate program is three (or four) years. A program consists of a number of modules. Modules in this department's pro- grams vary between seven and 28 weeks. Background to the University of Pretoria General Profile The University of Pretoria, situated in Pretoria, the administrative capital city of the Republic of South Africa, is a dynamic institution that applies its energies and re- sources to fulfilling its primary functions of teaching, research, and community service. Core considerations in determin- ing its priorities are internationalization, diversity (within and among universities and programs), relevance, and quality. Within this context the mission of the University is: • to be an internationally recognized aca- demic institution which provides teach- ing, undertakes research and renders community service; • to fulfill the educational, cultural, social, economic and technological needs of the South African and Southern African com- munities; and • to be a member of the international scien- tific community.1 The mission is summarized in the catch phrase often used by the Principal of the University: "to be internationally competi- tive and locally relevant." In order to fulfill this mission the University preserves a healthy balance between the development of market and vocationally oriented teach- ing programs that will meet rapidly chang- ing market needs, and the preservation of pure scientific programs to stimulate post- graduate study and research. Cognizance is also taken of international trends in the higher teaching environment, with the result that emphasis is placed on: • outcomes-based learning; • the development of problem-solving skills; and • the application of multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary approaches. The University of Pretoria has nine facul- ties and offers 520 different qualifications. Over the past seven years the student pro- file has changed considerably. Tradition- ally, the University catered primarily for Afrikaans-speaking white students. How- ever, the nature of the student body has changed and is now multicultural. The multiracial and multicultural student popu- lation results in a new dynamism, but also poses new challenges. For instance, in the past - up to 1994 - teaching was primarily in Afrikaans, but the change in student profile has resulted in the introduction of English as a teaching language in addition to Afrikaans; in most departments all Volume 43, Number 4
Web-Supported Teaching in the Department ot Information Science 251 lectures are repeated in English. Some lec- tures are presented bilingually, or only in English. The Honors programs in the De- partment of Information Science, as in most other departments, are presented pri- marily in English for the simple reason that it is not cost-effective to repeat lectures for fairly small groups of students. In 2000, the total number of contact tu- ition students is approximately 27,600. Since 1995, the University has, for the first time, offered some programs telematically. In 1999, about 26,000 telematic students were registered at the University. The Academic Information Service (AIS) and the information technology (IT) infrastructure of the University play a very important role in enabling and supporting telematic teaching. Academic Information Service The University's Academic Information Service consists of a main information cen- ter and various off-campus units that ad- dress the needs of the clients in specific fields of study, for example Veterinary Sci- ence, Medical Science, and Music. The Academic Information Service is also a member of the Gauteng Environs Library Consortium (Gaelic), the largest academic consortium in South Africa, consisting of 14 libraries that cooperate in terms of re- source sharing and shared cataloging. Owing to changing client needs, the Academic Information Service has pro- vided significant momentum to the devel- opment of a digital information service for students and staff. Various strategies are being followed, which include: • The creation of an electronic interface be- tween the University's own databases and commercially available databases. This includes the University's CD-ROM net- work with a number of SilverPlatter, Dia- log, and various other databases, as well as an interface to electronic journal col- lections such as MCB, Kluwer Online, and Elsevier's ScienceDirect. • Development of an academic cyberspace where clients are able to "surf" the Web at a minimal cost. • The development of a portal for each aca- demic department or discipline. This ini- tiative is under the direction of the various information specialists. • Development of an electronic collection of prescribed materials. After copyright clearance has been granted, full-text jour- nal articles and extracts from textbooks are scanned and stored in pdf format. The material is then made available electroni- cally via the Innopac system and the "Explore" function of the catalog. Students enter their student number in order to gain access to the material. Facilities also exist to make hard copies of the elec- tronic material at a minimal fee. Information Technology Infrastructure Technology is a cross-sectional entity that affects all functions of the University to a greater or lesser extent and plays a crucial role in its successful operation. Therefore, the University endeavors to utilize technol- ogy to its fullest extent. It has developed a formal Technology Plan, overseen by a committee at the highest management level that manages the strategic aspects of the technology infrastructure in conjunction with the IT Services Department, which is in charge of all operational aspects. The University has a very sophisticated Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) com- puter network on the main campus and the satellite campuses. More than 40 local area networks, each with its own servers, are connected via a fiber-optic backbone. There is one mainframe computer and a number of UNIX machines, operated by IT staff as well as academic staff. In addition, there is one official web server, a number of depart- mental web servers, and the web server of the virtual campus. Extensive computer laboratories have been established for use by students as part of their formal studies. At present there are Fcill 2002
252 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science more than 1,600 computers in various labo- ratories across the campus and satellite campuses. Students of the Department have access to the 460+ computers in the 12 lab- oratories of the so-called Informatorium of the School of Information Technology, where they attend scheduled practical classes and do practical assignments on their own time. These laboratories are open approximately 14 hours per day, six days per week. Multimedia students in addition have access to the multimedia laboratory of the Department with 17 computers, scan- ners, a video capture card, digital video and still cameras, a sophisticated sound studio, and a multitude of multimedia software. All honors students in the Department have ac- cess to the telematics laboratory, also situ- ated in the Informatorium. All multimedia and honors students in the Department have access to the Internet and e-mail through the various laboratories. Telematic Education Telematic education enables students to ac- cess teaching programs and learning materi- als at a more flexible time, place, and pace, plus results in flexible learning opportunities. Telematic education at the University of Pretoria may be either "pure" distance teaching, or contact teaching supplemented by technology-based teaching. This implies that a student on campus may also be classi- fied as a telematic student if the specific module includes sections that are supported by web-based learning and teaching. Tech- nology-based teaching can be either web- based, or television-based (via the Univer- sity's dedicated digital satellite TV channel). Distance teaching delivery can be either paper-based, or technology-based, or a combination of both. Therefore, there are many permutations of "contact versus distance" and "paper- based versus web-based," which results in a complex continuum of teaching methodolo- gies and delivery methods. To coordinate this complex array of flexi-learn opportunities and programs at the university, a new department, namely the Department of Telematic Education, was established in 1997; renamed at the be- ginning of 2000 to the Department of Telematic Learning and Education Innova- tion. (In addition to its involvement in for- mal teaching programs, Telematic Educa- tion also coordinates a number of support classes in the natural sciences and mathe- matics for schools across South Africa via satellite TV broadcasts.) Web-based telematic teaching provides a continuum of learning possibilities and styles, from fully web-based programs where all material and interaction are pro- vided solely via the Web, to contact teach- ing where the Web is used as a support to fa- cilitate the access to study guides and prescribed articles, as well as for communi- cation between lecturers and students. The latter model is followed by many depart- ments at the University. With a view to implementing the vision of web-based interactive telematic educa- tion and facilitating the development of web-based programs, the Virtual Campus project was established in 1998. WebCT (WebCourseTools) was selected as the de- livery platform for content and manage- ment. It provides an easy interface to struc- ture content for web-based delivery, as well as a number of administrative facilities, such as facilities to manage class lists, marks, submission of assignments, commu- nication through e-mail, and bulletin boards. A separate server, namely the Virtual Campus (VC) server, was installed for WebCT and the web-based programs. A number of departments, including the De- partment of Information Science, make use of different servers for different sections and functions in their programs in addition to the VC server. As part of the Virtual Campus project, various administrative facilities are pro- vided to students via the University Web server. They can, for instance, apply for reg- istration, display their examination marks, academic records, and account status. Vari- ous other facilities are being developed, Volume 43, Number 4
Web-Supported Teaching in the Department of Information Science 253 such as full online registration and secure online payment of accounts. Department of Information Science General Background Education in library and information sci- ence has changed dramatically at the Uni- versity of Pretoria over the past ten years. Not only has the number of students in in- formation science increased fivefold, but also the existing content has been con- stantly renewed. Three new programs, specifically aimed at the growing job op- portunities in the information industry, have also been established, and a further special- ization option has been approved for imple- mentation in 2001. The Department of Library and Infor- mation Science was founded in 1944. At that stage it offered only the traditional library science degree (Bachelor in Li- brary Science). The department officially changed its name in 1990 to the Depart- ment of Information Science. During 1998, it became part of the School of In- formation Technology. The School con- sists of the Departments of Information Science, Informatics, and Computer Sci- ence. To mid- 1999, the Department was part of the Faculty of Humanities. After restructuring at the University of Pretoria, the School of Information Technology, and by implication the Department of In- formation Science, officially became part of a new faculty that comprises the Schools of Engineering, the Built Envi- ronment, and Information Technology. Currently there are approximately 1,200 undergraduate and postgraduate students enrolled in the department, with 16 full- time lecturers. Programs Offered by the Department The department offers a full complement of undergraduate and post-graduate programs, namely bachelors (three years), honors, masters (research or coursework), and doctoral programs. Various specialization options are available, namely: • Specialization in Library Science (the original program of the department). • Specialization in Information Science (from 1991). • Specialization in Publishing (from 1996). • Specialization in Multimedia (from 1998). • Specialization in Information and Knowl- edge Management (from 2001). As from 2000, all programs have been re- named as programs in information science, i.e., Baccalaureus Informationis Scientiae (B.IS), Magister Informationis Scientiae (M.IS), etc., with the various specialization options given in brackets. South Africa is a blend of first- world and third-world features. The training in library and information science, therefore, must provide for students who intend to work in a high-technology environment. Students who are not interested in technology, but who plan to work at the grass-root level, such as in community information centers in rural areas, also receive education. Therefore, the department had to build op- tions in the programs to satisfy the needs of these diverse groups, as well as any combination of choices. The material is or- ganized in a modular system and each module runs for a period of seven weeks. This modular approach is followed by many institutions and "enables students to 'mix and match' their own subjects ac- cording to individual interests, aspirations, and abilities."2 Additional modules have been designed to focus on specific theoretical aspects and practical skills required in industry for specialization options in publishing, multi- media and information, and knowledge management. Specified modules in information sci- ence and/or library science form part of the core in each of the programs in the depart- ment. In each case these core modules are supplemented with compulsory modules and électives from other departments in dif- ferent schools and faculties. Details of the Fall 2002
254 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science various programs and modules are available in Bothma and Britz3 and at http://is.up.ac. za/courses/. Undergraduate programs are presented through contact tuition, supplemented to a greater or lesser degree by web-based telematic teaching. The same applies to the honors programs, even though there is a web-based distance education option. Mas- ters and doctoral students are all part-time, and are scattered throughout the country and even Southern Africa. From 2000, all programs at the Univer- sity are based on outcomes-based educa- tion, which can be directly linked to a new Education and Training dispensation in South Africa. This model is a paradigm shift from traditional training because there is a movement away from content- driven and teacher/trainer-centered edu- cation toward a learner-driven model aimed at achieving specific outcomes and lifelong learning. In this process the teacher/trainer becomes primarily a facil- itator by stimulating creativity, self- learning, and critical thinking. Olivier indicated that, with outcomes-based edu- cation and training, learning achieve- ments are more tangible and the results thereof can be validated against real world requirements.4 Honors in Library and Information Science Two honors programs in library and infor- mation science are currently presented by the Department of Information Science, namely the B.IS (Hons) in information science and the B.IS (Hons) in library science (in addition to the honors in pub- lishing since 1996, and the honors in mul- timedia since 2001). The honors programs aim to provide students with the opportu- nity to develop independent and critical thinking skills, while at the same time bridging the gap between undergraduate and post-graduate study. The duration of the programs is one-year full-time study or two years part-time study. Program Outline As a result of the aims set for the program, it has been arranged to provide students with an opportunity for specialization. Students must choose four électives from a total of eight specialty topics. These specialty topics are: • Information management. • Information retrieval. • Multimedia. • Information philosophy, law, and ethics. • Information users and information user behavior. • Management of information service organ- izations. • Informetrics. • Information for development. • Competitive Intelligence. The program not only focuses on gaining discipline-specific knowledge, but also on research techniques. A module, research methodology, in which students are exposed to both qualitative and quantitative research techniques, is compulsory for all honors stu- dents. With this compulsory module, as well as with the opportunity to specialize in spe- cific fields, a sound basis is developed for further studies on masters and doctoral lev- els. Details about program content are avail- able at http://is.up.ac.za/courses/honours/. Student Profile The student core consists of: • Graduates of the Department. • Graduates of other South African univer- sities - including students from the previ- ously disadvantaged universities. • Experienced people from the industry who did not follow any form of formal study for some time. In order to be admitted to the honors pro- grams a student must have achieved an aver- age of 60 percent in undergraduate studies. Unfortunately, the academic standard among institutions in South Africa is not consis- tent - a student who obtained 60 percent at one university will not necessarily achieve the same mark at another university with a higher standard. Volume 43, Number 4
Web-Supported Teaching in the Department of Information Science 255 Another prerequisite for admission to the honors programs is access to the Inter- net and e-mail facilities. The reason is that all correspondence between students and lecturers takes place via e-mail and all doc- umentation is provided only on the Internet. Teaching Methods Students may choose whether they want to follow the program on-campus or via tele- metric tuition. The two options are not mutually exclusive, and can be used inter- changeably. The method for which a spe- cific student opts is determined by his or her circumstances at a specific time. On- campus tuition consists of lecture room in- teraction. Telematic tuition consists of the integration of contact tuition, paper-based distance education, and electronic discus- sions via e-mail or discussion groups. Ten discussions per module are scheduled for the academic year for the period February to November. Guest lecturers from indus- try present lectures on relevant topics. All students are expected to prepare them- selves properly and to participate actively in the discussions, whether on-campus or telematically. The structure for each lecture/discussion, as well as a bibliography, are provided be- forehand to students on the department's web site. Except for the study material that students need to purchase, all prescribed journal articles and extracts from textbooks are made available to students via the elec- tronic facilities of the Academic Informa- tion Service. URLs to existing articles on the web are also provided to students. It is expected of students to read through the prescribed material and to prepare them- selves properly for each lecture/discussion. It is also expected of students to be in regu- lar electronic contact with their lecturers and to communicate any study problems via e-mail. Apart from the discussions and less com- prehensive assignments, one mini-thesis per module on an approved topic must also be submitted. The final evaluation is a writ- ten examination. Despite all the facilities available to stu- dents, it is found that a number of students: • do not have e-mail or access to Internet facilities; • do not purchase the prescribed study material; • do not prepare themselves properly for discussions; and • do not participate in classroom or elec- tronic discussions. This causes immense frustration among lec- turers who, over and above a heavy work- load, make great efforts to have the material available to students. Students who do pre- pare themselves properly are also frustrated because they do not receive the full benefit of discussions. Multimedia The program in multimedia started in 1998, and in 2000 this group of students will grad- uate. In addition to the multimedia-related modules, students must take computer sci- ence to the third-year level, visual design and a language of their choice to the second- year level, one-year modules in visual com- munication and business management, as well as a few so-called fundamental mod- ules in information literacy, academic skills, and research methodology. The program is very popular. In the first year it was offered, 42 students enrolled, and the first year class has grown to 75 students. However, it seems to be a very difficult pro- gram as well, since approximately 50 per- cent of students drop out by the middle of the second year. Those that remain are very determined to complete their studies. Program Outline The multimedia modules offered by the De- partment of Information Science cover the- oretical as well as practical aspects of mul- timedia. Students study inter alia the following as part of their theoretical work: • An introduction to information science in general, the place of the multimedia Fall 2002
256 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science developer in the information life cycle, in- formation technology, and media studies. • Multimedia software and hardware. • The theory, history, and application areas of hypermedia and multimedia. • Information organization and information architecture. • Multimedia project development and management. • The theory and practice of markup lan- guages (HTML, CSS, XML, XSL, SGML). • Human-computer interaction, interface design, and usability engineering. • Details about the curriculum are available at http://is.up.ac.za/multimedia/. As part of their practical work students must develop web sites in which they have to indicate that they have mastered all the technologies involved. This includes all ba- sic HTML 4 functionalities and style sheets (CSS), as well as multimedia on the web, such as images (Photoshop), animation (Flash), sound (WaveStudio), and video (Adobe Premier) at first-year level. During the second year they do an in-depth study of XML and XSL, as well as ASP and ODBC for web databases and search engines. Dur- ing their second and third year, students also are required to do projects in programs such as Toolbook, Authorware Profes- sional, and Macromedia Director, as well as a number of other software packages. Student Profile Entrance requirements for the program are fairly high. Computer studies at school level as well as mathematics (both at higher grade) are prerequisites. However, a bridging pro- gram, which lengthens the program from three to four years is available for students who do not meet entrance requirements. The student body is fairly diverse, in that some students are more inclined toward programming, and some more toward the design aspects of multimedia. A fairly high level of computer literacy is assumed at the start of the first year, and basic program- ming skills (especially Java) are assumed at the start of the second year. The practicals of some of the multimedia modules rely very heavily on programming skills ac- quired in the computer science modules. This sometimes causes frustration among students (and lecturers), since their progress in acquiring the necessary programming skills sometimes lags behind their progress in the multimedia modules. Students manage to master the theoreti- cal sections of the multimedia modules fairly easily, but tend to struggle with the practical. This is mainly due to the fact that students very often lack the ability to inte- grate their knowledge from modules out- side of the department with what they are taught within the department. Both their design skills (taught by the Department of Visual Arts in the visual design modules) and their programming skills (taught by the Department of Computer Science) are es- sential for the practical development of multimedia products. Most students tend to own computers with Internet access at home by the end of their first year of study. They also have ac- cess to departmental computer facilities; a multimedia laboratory with scanners, digital video cameras, video digitizing facilities, and a sound studio; as well as Internet access. Teaching Methods Teaching in the theoretical aspects of multimedia tends to be a combination of traditional "talk and chalk" and more inter- active flexi-learn where students take part in discussion classes and do presentations. In the practical sessions students are encouraged to learn through a process of discovery, experimentation, and problem solving, rather than trying to teach them "button-press skills." Students are given a very brief introduction to a specific topic, and are then pointed to extensive sources on the Web, which they must consult in order to do a specific practical assignment. The rationale is that problem-solving skills and the ability to teach oneself new tech- nologies are essential for survival in the very fast developing field of multimedia and web technologies. Volume 43, Number 4
Web-Supported Teaching in the Department of Information Science 257 All study guides and project briefs are placed on the departmental intranet. As far as possible, all prescribed articles are also placed on the departmental intranet (pass- word protected) once copyright has been cleared. A portal for web technologies is constantly expanded. Students submit all practical assignments via the experimental departmental web server. Communication with students is elec- tronic as far as possible. E-mail to individ- ual students or lecturers occurs quite often, but most e-mail is distributed via list- servers to the whole group. There are list- servs for each of the three different year groups. Students and lecturers tend to use these list-servs very actively. From the lec- turers' side they are used to communicate any administrative arrangements that need to be brought to the attention of the class, feedback on tests and assignments, and interesting snippets about developments in the general field of multimedia. Students tend to use the list-servs for general corre- spondence that they perceive affects their whole group, for example - discussions about test or examination dates, inquiries about project briefs, and general com- plaints (about, for instance, computer facili- ties), as well as, occasionally, more "social" correspondence (encouragement before a test, best wishes for a holiday or festive season, etc.). Students have also estab- lished private list-servs to which lecturers do not have access. The teaching methods are in line with the University's policy of education innova- tion, which encourages flexi-learn, student- centered learning and lifelong learning.5 Student participation in class discussions and the quality of their presentations are not always on a satisfactory level. Unfortu- nately this sometimes results in a return to the "talk and chalk" method of teaching. Motivating students continually to prepare properly for discussion classes and presen- tations is extremely difficult. Comparison between the Honors (Information Science and Library Science) and Multimedia Programs The two web-supported programs are com- pared in tables 1-6 regarding program out- line, student profile, teaching methods, IT support, Academic Information Service support, and the attitude of the students. The comparison is provided in tabular form because of the ease of comparison of the different data elements of the two pro- grams. Based on the findings, recommenda- tions are made for the improvement of the programs. Table 1 Program Outline Honors (Library and Information Science) Program content keeps track with the latest developments in the field and market needs in a Southern African context. Program addresses a range from high-tech to grass roots levels. Focus is on the narrower fields of Library and Information Science. Mostly theoretical work, with limited practical exposure. The duration of each elective is a full year; the full program is one year full-time or two years part-time. Multimedia Program content keeps track with the latest developments in the field and market needs in a Southern African context. Only high-tech is addressed. Focus is on inter- and multi-disciplinary fields. Approximately equal time is devoted to theory and practicals. Each elective is a seven-week module. The full program is three years full-time. No part-time option is offered. Fall 2002
258 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Table 2 Student Profile Honors (Library and Information Science) Multi-racial and multi-cultural students. Diverse academic background and job-related experience. Entrance requirements fairly high (60%). Vastly different levels of computer skills. Limited computer ownership and Internet access, often only at the office or at the university. Vastly different levels of communication and writing skills in English and/or Afrikaans since these languages are very often the third (or even fourth) language of the student. Multimedia Multi-racial and multi-cultural students, but predominantly from non-disadvantaged backgrounds. All students are school leavers. High entrance requirements due to Computer Science and Mathematics prerequisites. High level of computer skills. Usually own computer with Internet access at home. Fairly homogenous levels of communication and writing skills in English and/or Afrikaans. Both programs meet rapidly changing needs of industry and stimulate the develop- ment of problem-solving skills. Both pro- grams make use of the latest technologies in terms of the program requirements, and receive support from the University's IT services and the Academic Information Ser- vice. Personnel within the department are enthusiastic and support all new develop- ments. Teaching methods in the two pro- grams are comparable, and in line with the University's policy of teaching innovation. Lecturers experiment on a regular basis with new teaching methods. Student profiles dif- fer in the two programs due to the nature of the program content and the composition of the student groups. Student attitudes are fairly similar in terms of general attitudes and acceptance of new teaching paradigms. However, there is a vast difference in their attitude toward and acceptance of the place and value of information technology in their curriculum, as well as the role of informa- tion technology in their future careers. The multimedia students are much more de- manding in terms of being exposed to latest technologies and their expectations from their lecturers. Multimedia students are more exposed to practical work in addition to their theoretical components, and experi- ential learning forms an essential part of acquiring practical skills. Recommendations Based on the experience gained and evalua- tion of student profiles and attitudes, the following is recommended: • Research should be done on how to en- hance intrinsic and extrinsic motivation, since lack of motivation seems to be the fundamental problem in all cases. • In the case of the honors, the attitude of students towards information technology should be improved by means of inter alia - • Additional exposure at undergraduate level. • Special training sessions for students from other universities, as well as bridg- ing opportunities for our own students. Volume 43, Number 4
Web-Supported Teaching in the Department of Information Science 259 Table 3 Teaching Methods Honors (Library and Information Science) Outcomes-based. Lecturer is a facilitator (ideally), but often has to fall back on traditional "talk and chalk." Deepening of theoretical knowledge, with a possibility of application in a student's own working situation. Each students individual working situation determines the level of experiential training. Distance teaching and/or contact. The programs are presented only after hours to accommodate working students. The programs are presented only in English, but accommodate Afrikaans speaking students. Many aspects of the programs are handled telematically. Flexi-learn is encouraged. Many guest lecturers from industry are involved in presenting lectures in order to combine theory and practice. Regular electronic contact with lecturers is encouraged. Study material is made available electronically. Multimedia Outcomes-based. Lecturer is a facilitator (ideally), but often has to fall back on traditional "talk and chalk." Deepening of theoretical knowledge, with a possibility of application in an artificial environment. Experiential training, especially in the practicals. Only contact teaching. Modules are presented only full-time. Modules are presented only in English, but accommodate Afrikaans speaking students. Many aspects of the program are handled telematically. Flexi-learn is encouraged. Limited number of guest lecturers from industry are involved in presenting lectures. Regular electronic contact with lecturers is encouraged. Study material is made available electronically. Table 4 IT Support Honors (Library and Information Science) Access to departmental laboratory and telematics laboratory, which is problematical for working students. Students rely heavily on their own company's IT support to solve problems. Fairly high level of IT support needed by some students. Multimedia Multimedia laboratory to satisfy specific needs. IT support provided by the University. Limited IT support needed due to high level of computer literacy. • Presenting value-added modules such as time management, study methods, com- munication, and language skills. • Encouraging lecturers to experiment with problem-solving teaching techniques. • Encouraging lecturers to have backup plans for innovative teaching methods if students have not prepared properly for a discussion class, so that they do not have to fall back on "chalk and talk." Fall 2002
260 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Table 5 Academic Information Service (AIS) Support Honors (Library and Information Science) Very good support from library (AIS) personnel. Electronic availability of information is very good. Articles scanned and made available on AIS servers that can result in a time delay. Multimedia Very good support from library (AIS) personnel. However, the support is used minimally. Electronic availability of information is very good. Articles scanned by departmental personnel and made available immediately on departmental servers. Table 6 Attitude of Students Honors (Library and Information Science) Students are generally fairly enthusiastic. They enjoy the new teaching paradigms that enhance problem-solving and critical thinking skills. Students tend to lack the ability to integrate knowledge and skills obtained from different modules. Hesitant to use technology due to lack of general exposure at earlier levels. Although all necessary facilities are available, they are under-utilized by most students. Students do not buy prescribed books. Students do not prepare properly for discussion classes, although the material is available well in advance. Students do not participate adequately in classroom or electronic discussions. Lack of proper time planning and management, due to work and family commitments. Multimedia Students are generally fairly enthusiastic. They enjoy the new teaching paradigms that enhance problem-solving and critical thinking skills. Students tend to lack the ability to integrate knowledge and skills obtained from different modules. Eager to experiment with new technologies. Facilities are well utilized, and there are many demands to upgrade and provide the latest technologies. Students tend to buy (or illegally photocopy) prescribed books. Depending on workload students tend to prepare fairly well for discussion classes. Students participate in class and electronic discussions. Often lack of proper time planning and management, due to student life. • Encouraging all lecturers to become more enthusiastic about the use and possibili- ties of information technology to posi- tively influence the attitude of students. • Industry participation in lecturing should point out the essential role of information technology for the modern information professional. • Encouraging independent thinking skills so that students will be able to voice their Volume 43, Number 4
Web-Supported Teaching in the Department of Information Science 261 own opinions - in the classroom situation as well as electronically - based on a solid understanding of the content. • Encouraging students to integrate and ap- ply knowledge from the various modules and discipline-specific areas in order to ob- tain a holistic view of the environment in which they operate or are going to operate. Conclusion It is accepted that many of the problems listed are fairly universal. Some problems, however, are unique to the South African context owing to the inequalities of the past, problems related to second and third lan- guage tuition, and a lack of a learning cul- ture as a result of the school system. Some students lack a general commitment to their studies and the intrinsic motivation to complete their studies successfully. Informal discussions with colleagues at other universi- ties in South Africa have confirmed that this is a general phenomenon, in other fields of study as well. Commitment or lack of com- mitment is not race- or gender-dependent. Many students from historically disadvan- taged communities utilize all opportunities presented by the University and the depart- ment, and are committed to their studies. Even though a number of serious prob- lems were listed, the students in general perform very well academically, and are in high demand in industry. Through the stu- dents who are delivered by the department, the vision and mission of the University are fulfilled. Owing to constant curriculum re- vision based on the latest developments in and needs of industry, it is possible to stay relevant and students can meet the require- ments of the job market. The content and programs are unique in the Southern African context and compare favorably with the best international schools of infor- mation science. The department has recently been reviewed and evaluated by an international panel and received a very favorable report. References and Notes 1. J.A. Boon, A Profile of the University of Pre- toria in Support of an Application for Admis- sion to Universitas 21 (1999) (unpublished report); and University of Pretoria, Towards the New Millennium, 1998-2001 (1999). Available at: www.up.ac.za/asservices/intranet/ strategic/millennium-e.html. 2. J. MacDougall and J.M. Brittain, "Library and Information Science Education in the United Kingdom," in Annual Review of In- formation Science and Technology (ARIST), Martha E. Williams, ed. (Medford: Learned Information, 1993), vol. 28. 3. T.J.D. Bothma and J.J. Britz, "Library and Information Science Education at the University of Pretoria, South Africa: Re- structuring and Curriculum Development," Journal of Education for Library and Infor- mation Science 41, no. 3 (2000): 233-43. 4. C. Olivier, How to Educate and Train Out- comes-based Processes, Knowledge and Skills (Pretoria: JL van Schaik, 1998). 5. T.H. Brown, Focusing on the Client: Into the Future with Flexible Learning: Discussion Document (Pretoria: University of Pretoria, 1999). Fall 2002