The Library Internship and Expo as a Pathway to Diversity: A Case Study Curt Asher and Johanna Olson Alexander College and university libraries need to develop undergraduate internships to encourage low-income and ethnic-minority students to enter the library pro- fession. Such internships can be run on limited budgets. This article presents a case-study model for an internship program and its related promotional ef- forts currently in place at California State University, Bakersfield. The arti- cle discusses the need for greater ethnic diversity in libraries and the value of internships as a tool to confront minority underrepresentation in the library profession. Introduction Colleges and universities can confront the issue of lack of diversity in the li- brary profession by providing library internships to students from minority or economically disadvantaged backgrounds. These internship programs, if kept small, can be run on limited budgets and can have profound effects. Librarians at California State University, Bakersfield (CSUB) developed an internship program designed to equip students with skills and experi- ence they can carry forward into library and information science graduate programs and the professional workforce. The program will broaden His- panic and other ethnic minority representation in libraries. CSUB's program is part of the minority recruitment continuum within the profession. It focuses its efforts on individuals, rather than groups of students, and its small scale allows for an intensive undergraduate intro- duction to library science and in-depth mentoring. Meanwhile, across the profession, there are numerous examples of minority recruitment programs that are opening doors and providing opportunities. For example, the American Library Association funded its Spectrum Initiative in 1997, pro- viding scholarships to minority students who pursue degrees in library sci- ence.1 Efforts such as the Diversity Internship in Libraries Program, sponsored by the University of Massachusetts-Boston, Simmons College Libraries, and the Simmons Graduate School of Library and Information Science, expose high-school students to the profession through intern- ships. On a larger scale, the Mellon Foundation's two $500,000 grants to the Mellon Librarian Recruitment Program for undergraduate students at J. of Education for Library and Information Science, Vol. 47, No. 1 -Winter 2006 ISSN: 0748-5786 ©2006 Association for Library and Information Science Education 1 7
1 8 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science About the Authors CurtAsher is a senior assistant librarían (casher@csub.edu) and Johanna Olson Alexander is a librarían (jalexander@csub.edu), California State University, Bakersfield. Ms. received 07/05; accepted 01/06; revised 01/06. Atlanta University, Mount Holyoke, Oberlin, Occidental, Swarthmore, and Wellesley include internships, library science career awareness, and schol- arships.2 The University of Arizona's School of Information Resources and Library Science actively recruits minority students into its Knowledge River program and provides them with an extensive support network, fi- nancial assistance, and culturally sensitive educational opportunities.3 CSUB does not offer a degree in library science, which makes its intern- ship program somewhat unusual. While there are numerous internships available to library science students, library science internship programs for undergraduates and graduate students in other disciplines are rare. The CSUB program locates students with the potential for and interest in be- coming librarians before they enter a library or information studies gradu- ate program. The goal is to teach these selected students about the library profession by offering them both academic training and experiential learning before library science graduate school. The internship provides basic academic study in librarianship followed by supervised training and experience, preparation for graduate school, constructive evaluations, and mentoring that can lead to completion of a graduate degree. The internship program was one of several CSUB projects funded under the U.S. Department of Education's Title V grant for Hispanic-serving in- stitutions. The paid and competitive internship, which requires a commit- ment often to twenty hours per week and can last up to one year, is divided into four components: training and study, professional development and mentoring, assigned professional projects, and evaluation. The Need for Internships The need for greater ethnic and social diversity in libraries is well-docu- mented. While an estimated 1 2.5 percent of the U.S. population is Hispanic or Latino, only 3.7 percent of the graduates from accredited library science programs are. The Association for Library and Information Science Educa- tion reports that students of Hispanic origin are vastly underrepresented in library science graduate programs. African American students, Asian and Pacific Islanders, and American Indians are also vastly underrepresented.4 In communities such as Bakersfield, the ethnic gap for librarians is even
The Library Internship and Expo as a Pathway to Diversity 1 9 wider. In Kern County, California, where CSUB is located, the Hispanic population is nearly 42 percent.5 CSUB, a Historically Hispanic Serving Institution, has an undergraduate Hispanic student population of 32 per- cent, of which about 26 percent are Mexican American.6 Although the staff and faculty makeup in the CSUB library is about 25 percent Hispanic and 36 percent minority, currently there are no Hispanic librarians serving at CSUB, despite extensive recruiting efforts. Adkins and Espinal make clear the disproportionate ethnic makeup of American libraries' personnel by pointing out that there is one Latino aca- demic, public, or school librarian for every 9,177 Latinos in the population. Conversely, for every white, non-Hispanic librarian, there are 1,830 white non-Latinos in the population. Adkins and Espinal argue that "when people of color do not see themselves represented in libraries, they do not ap- proach librarians. They may not even approach libraries."7 While Adkins and Espinal cite no evidence for this assertion, the idea that ethnic isolation reduces student performance has been fairly well-documented. Loo and Rolinson's 1 986 study found that "no matter how outstanding the academic institution, ethnic minority students can feel alienated if their ethnic repre- sentation on campus is small."8 Harvey, who studied social stigmatization at five American universities, found that African Americans and Native Americans reported more stigmatization than their white counterparts. He wrote, "When a person is surrounded by others who share the same attrib- ute, the common attribute is no longer stigmatized or discredited; hence, the person is likely to feel little stigmatization."9 Schneider and Ward found that students from underrepresented Latino populations are at risk when ethnic-related support is limited.10 Because librarians can play a central role in the education of students, limited exposure to minority librarians has negative consequences for students from minority backgrounds. Thus, both students and libraries suffer from the underrepresentation of minori- ties among librarians. One of the negative consequences of this underrepresentation for students and for libraries is the lack of minority role models. In addition to the minority underrepresentation in the profession, librar- ies in the United States face a well-documented workforce aging problem. The Monthly Labor Review estimated that 57 percent of librarians were more than 45 years old in 1998.11 Library Journal's survey on aging pub- lished in 2000 found that 75 percent of librarians are over 45 and that the av- erage age is 49. About 45 percent of the nation's librarians are expected to reach retirement age before 2010.12 With an ever-expanding need for pro- fessionals to manage information, librarians who leave the workforce will need to be replaced. This need has been addressed at the federal level by ini- tiatives such as the Institute of Museum and Library Service's Laura Bush 21st Century Librarian grant program. We suggest that an interest in the profession can be inspired among those students who may never have con- sidered a career in library science by informational awareness drives and undergraduate internship programs.
20 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Inspiring an Interest One of the American Library Association's recent slogans aimed at pro- moting the information professions was the word "typical" within a red cir- cle and slashed with a red line. The library profession certainly is not a typical profession and, in the experience of these authors, one few students will select without being directed toward it. Our experience as academic li- brarians told us that our profession was widely misunderstood and rarely seen as a legitimate career option by upperclassmen. In 2002, we began seeking a means by which we could teach students and members of the community about the profession and the wide range of options available within it. In the beginning, our aim was simply awareness. We hoped to present the profession as a career option to those who may not have consid- ered it before and provide mentoring to those who might be considering it. The plan we settled on was an information fair, which we called the Li- brary and Information Science Expo. The project was extremely success- ful, drawing 120 interested attendees the first year and 240 the second, all for a base budget of less than $500. The largest number of attendees came from the CSUB student population. Our plan for the Expo was two-pronged. First, we wanted to introduce people to the range of career options available to people who earn a library science degree. Secondly, we wanted to provide information about infor- mation and library science programs in California and across the nation. We began by simply contacting colleagues at Bakersfield Community College and the Kern County Public Library and obtained their commit- ment to attend the event, man booths, and talk about their jobs to attendees. An Expo Committee was formed with representatives from our three insti- tutions. Then, by means of professional contacts and research of profes- sional organization membership lists, we began making phone calls to librarians who worked in other types of information management settings. During the two Expos, one held in 2003 and another in 2004, we were able to attract, in addition to academic and public librarians, information pro- fessionals from archives, medicine, law, computer systems, film, database companies, and public schools. We had people from both private industry and the public sector. The librarians who took part were an ethnically, as well as professionally, diverse group and were enthusiastic to have an op- portunity to promote their professions and talk with attendees. An added benefit of the Expo was the opportunity it provided for unstructured networking among librarians. We also communicated with universities around the country that offered ALA-accredited masters degrees in information studies or library science. The response from most library schools was to provide us with promotional literature. Some institutions have migrated entirely to the World Wide Web and actually had difficulty locating promotional materials in print, but the majority of schools had well-developed promotional packages describing their programs. The two library and information science programs in Cali-
The Library Internship and Expo as a Pathway to Diversity 21 fornia sent representatives to the Expo, and a small private school that of- fers a media credential for school librarians also was represented. In the second year, more library graduate schools were represented by alumni from those programs. We contacted the American Library Association, the California Library Association, and other special library organizations and obtained an exten- sive collection of promotional materials. To promote the Expo, we developed several posters, which we placed conspicuously on campus. We addressed dozens of classes to discuss the Expo and seek attendees. We sent emails to CSUB faculty and students, as well as to academic and library institutions in the area, to encourage atten- dance. We wrote press releases, which appeared in the city's newspaper, the campus newspaper, and on several radio stations. Shortly prior to the event, we solicited donations from merchants in the area and received free use of brochure racks and donated refreshments. Also, several merchants offered gift certificates, which we used in draw- ings to attract students. We assembled packets containing extensive infor- mation about the profession and its options, as well as information about library science education and about obtaining funding for graduate school. A student was employed to assist with the registration of attendees, who were entered in the drawing that took place at the end of the event. The room was arranged with snacks at the opposite end, so that attendees would be required to pass the booths to get refreshments. We established viewing areas with video-taped recruitment videos. During the second year, we also showed a filmed "story time," showcasing the talents of two public librari- ans. We also provided demonstrations of virtual reference technology and held short breakout sessions in which librarians provided more in-depth presentations about their careers or academic programs. After the event, each attendee had received informational packets and spoken with librarians. The organizers had obtained an attendee list of sev- eral hundred people who had shown an interest in learning about the profession. The librarians who participated volunteered their time and paid their own travel expenses, some coming to Bakersfield at their own expense from hundreds of miles away. The second year, with a slightly higher budget, we were able to provide a brunch for participants. The theme of the Expo was "a career you've never thought about before." We know of three attendees who entered library science programs after the Expo. Whether the Expo led these attendees into library science is not en- tirely clear, but the Expo did achieve its goal, which was to make about 360 residents of Kern County aware of the opportunities available with a mas- ter's degree in library and information science. More importantly, nearly 30 percent of the attendees at the 2004 event, communicated their interest in receiving additional information. Promotional events do not need to incur large expenses but do require a large investment of time. Exposure to the realities of the profession can
22 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science shatter myths and stereotypes and awaken individuals to the research, tech- nical, and service careers in library science they may have been unaware of. If the profession expects to attract people from both genders and from eth- nically, socially, and economically diverse backgrounds, these kinds of awareness programs are urgently needed in libraries, particularly libraries serving ethnically diverse populations. While inspiring an interest in librarianship is an important first step, it is not enough. Libraries can nurture promising future librarians into the pro- fession with well-designed internships that prepare them for graduate school. Mentoring through Internships There are people on every college campus who would make good librari- ans. Unfortunately, many of those students choose other careers, either be- cause they face obstacles that interfere with their ability to attend a graduate program or because they have not been made aware of library sci- ence as a professional career option. Stiern Library at CSUB was able to obtain funding to establish a pilot program aimed at locating students with potential for library science ca- reers with the help of a Title V Developing Hispanic Institutions grant. Title V funds several programs at CSUB. Librarians lobbied and played a key role in the writing of the campus-wide grant proposal to the U.S. Depart- ment of Education, successfully obtaining $8,000 per year to fund an in- ternship for five years. This moderate amount of seed money has reaped benefits, allowing the library to begin working with undergraduate interns in January 2004. In 2005, an additional Title V grant funded a second internship for community college transfer students. Since the program started, CSUB internship mentors have worked with five interns. In addition to the current intern, one is currently enrolled in a library science graduate program, another is scheduled to enter a program next year, and a third is in graduate school and researching library and in- formation science programs. One withdrew from the internship to pursue a career in teaching. This 50 percent success rate is impressive, even though the sample is small, particularly if one considers return on the fiscal investment. The internships establish mentor-protégé relationships. Roche's 1979 study of business executives found that those who had mentors were more successful in their careers. Equally as important was his finding that mentored executives were more likely to sponsor proteges than those who were not mentored.13 Roche describes a ripple effect, in which executives who had two mentors tend to sponsor 3.3 proteges on average. Bonnet, whose essay summarized some of the recent mentoring literature relating to libraries, concludes that internships move librarians forward and are a first step toward the advancement of minorities. 14 The benefit for novices of obtaining professional instruction and advice from veterans is obvious. A
The Library Internship and Expo as a Pathway to Diversity 23 less obvious benefit is the ripple effect. Because people tend to seek out others of similar backgrounds for professional advice and because those who have been mentored tend to mentor others, formal undergraduate in- ternships can help build a mentoring infrastructure through which future li- brarians will benefit. Supervising an intern requires a substantial initial investment of a men- tor's time, but in due course the intern's own interests will steadily begin to determine the direction of his or her training. Allowing an intern to find an area of professional interest requires flexibility on the part of the mentor. This self-directed approach will shape the internship and provide a richer, more rewarding experience for the intern. For example, one intern, after working with several librarians on projects, discovered that she had a strong interest in original cataloging. The intern worked with the biblio- graphic control coordinator on a large project involving the cataloging of master's theses. This project allowed her to gain knowledge of the often cryptic and puzzle-like elements of original cataloging. The work, to which she devoted a great deal of her time, was pleasurable and educational for her, as well as valuable to the library. Another intern, who found himself particularly interested in the technical side of digital image management, helped the archivist and systems analyst design and implement a database for this purpose. Structure of an Internship The CSUB internship provides training and study, professional develop- ment and mentoring, assigned professional projects, and evaluation. It begins with assigned readings in library science and an advanced intro- duction to library use, including reference exercises. The readings are se- lected by the mentors and are discussed with the interns at length in a classroom setting. This introduction to the profession can last three to five weeks, depending on the intern's skills and reading interests. Meanwhile, and throughout the course of the year, librarians and manag- ers can submit projects to the mentors. These projects are reviewed by the mentors and only projects that will provide the intern with professional level experience are accepted. The intern then works with a librarian and re- ceives project- specific training. The intern will perform the job and be eval- uated on the outcome of the project. (For examples of typical projects, see Figure 1 .) The projects are central to the internship because the intern is ac- tually working with librarians, either in collection development, instruc- tion, reference, archives, technical services, or systems. The final key element of an internship is career development and profes- sional exploration. Over the course of the internship, librarians arrange trips to libraries and information centers, conferences, and training ses- sions. Since the program began, interns and their mentors have toured facil- ities and networked with librarians who work in major museums, state prisons, space flight research institutions, major metropolitan newspapers,
24 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Figure 1 Selected Examples of Intern Project Activities, 2004-2005. corporations, and several universities. Most of the interns described these tours as memorable and valuable educational experiences, opening their eyes to an even wider range of opportunities in library science. The interns have also attended major library conferences with their mentors, where they had opportunities to meet with current students and professors in li- brary science programs, make professional contacts with librarians, attend presentations and workshops, and see new books and developments in technology unveiled by vendors. On a broader scale, career development entails professional training for library science education. This training will vary, depending on the inter- ests and needs of the intern. Some examples might include a formal Gradu- ate Record Exam preparation course, a writing workshop, or a series of public speaking tutorials. On a more practical level, an intern might spend a week job-shadowing at another institution. Finally, interns are expected to research library science programs and to locate those that most closely match their needs. They also research schol- arship funding. During the course of the program, the interns are encour- aged to complete applications and locate scholarship packages. The mentors assist with this process. During the application process, librarian mentors are in unique positions among academic reference letter writers because they have actually observed the interns at work and can comment on their strengths both scholastically and in librarianship. Attended and observed six subject orientations including presentations for classes in English, political science, social work, physical education and history. Regularly attended the CSUB Library's Advisory Council meetings. Kept log of all activities and projects regarding internship work. Prepared a Web page for an art exhibit in the library. Assisted in a business collection development project. Assisted in the teaching of a 10- week course , Research on the Internet. Completed a project to make electronic reserves more efficient. Prepared a Power Point presentation regarding a database. Located fifty scholarly Websites for a subject guide/pathfinder in American history. Helped library's systems analyst implement an image database system. Assisted Special Collection librarian by locating and writing abstracts for chronological history of CSUB from newspaper articles. Assisted Special Collections Librarian by collecting and organizing a historical collection of Hispanic Excellence documents.
The Library Internship and Expo as a Pathway to Diversity 25 Conclusion Opportunities in library science are expansive but unrecognized. Academic libraries can open the door to the profession by offering internships and mentoring to undergraduates. The interns leave with a real understanding of librarianship and practical skills that will allow them to excel as they pro- ceed into graduate school and the professional workforce. A mentor seeks the potential for excellence in an intern. That translates into a strong work ethic and enthusiasm for the work. Further, however, in- terns must be dedicated learners. While a grade point average is certainly a telling indication of an intern's potential for graduate school, it is not the sole gauge of a willingness to learn or an ability to take instruction. It is the mentor's job to nurture the potential in an intern, so that the intern is well-prepared for the challenges ahead. Such programs need not cost a great deal of money. They are, however, time consuming. Mentors must be prepared to devote a great deal of time to planning, training, and observing. Over the course of the internship, as the intern develops an interest in some element of librarianship and begins to devote more energy to it, the mentor may be able to reduce the time spent with the intern. The aim of any internship should always be to put the educational needs of the intern first. It should never be used as a substitute for staffing, profes- sional or otherwise. Libraries can begin to change the face of librarianship by opening up in- ternship opportunities to people from ethnic-minority or low-income back- grounds. A balanced profession, where all people are fairly represented, is the aim of most public institutions. One means of beginning to build this balance into librarianship is through well-managed internship programs. References 1. Andrea Glick, "Minority Recruitment: ALA Puts its Money Where its Mouth Is," School Library Journal 43, no. 7 (1997): 13. 2. Association of College and Research Libraries, "Reports from national conference pro- grams 05," ACR&L News 66, no. 6 (2005), httpV/www.ala.org/ala/acrl/acrlpubs/crlnews/ backissues2005/June05/ntlconfrpts.htm (accessed January 12, 2006). 3. John N. Berry III, "Knowledge River," Library Journal 129, no. 7 (2004): 55. 4. Jerry D. Saye and Katherine M. Wisser, "Students," ALISE Library and Information Sci- ence Statistical Report, 2003, Table II-4-A, http://ils.unc.edu/ALISE/2003/Students/Ta- ble%20II-4-a.htm (accessed July 11, 2005). 5. U.S. Department of Commerce, "Fact Sheet, 2003: Community Survey Data Profile High- lights," American Fact Finder, Kern County, California. United States Census Bureau. http://factfinder.census.gov (accessed July 1 1, 2005). 6. California State University, "Fall 2004 Enrollment by Ethnicity," Student Information 2005. Division of Institutional Research. http://www.csub.edu/Planning/ethnicity.htx (ac- cessed July 1 1, 2005). 7. Denise Adkins and Isabel Espinal, 'The Diversity Mandate," Library Journal 129, no. 7 (2004): 52-54.
26 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 8. Chalsa Loo and Gary Rolison, "Alienation of Ethnic Minority Students at Predominately White University," Journal of Higher Education 57 (1986): 72. 9. Richard Harvey, "Individual Differences in the Phenomenological Impact of Social Stigma," Journal of Social Psychology 141, no. 2 (2001): 186. 1 0. Monica Schneider and Dahlia Ward, "The Role of Ethnic Identification and Perceived So- cial Support in Latinos' Adjustment to College," Hispanic Journal of Behavioral Sciences 25, no. 4 (2003): 552. 1 1 . Arlene Dohm, "Gauging the Labor Force Effects of Retiring Baby-Boomers," Monthly La- bor Review 123, no. 7 (2000): 17-26 1 2. Evan St. Lifer, "The Boomer Brain Drain: The Last of a Generation?" Library Journal 1 25 , no. 8, (2000): 38-42. 13. Gerard Roche, "Much Ado About Mentors," Harvard Business Review 57 no. 1 (1979): 14-28. 1 4. Ashley Bonnette, "Mentoring Minority Librarians up the Career Ladder," Library Admin- istration & Management 18, no. 3 (2004): 134-9.