“I Have Two Legs, not Four”: Navigating the -isms of the LIS Minefield Vanessa Irvin, University of Hawai’i – Mānoa irvinv@hawaii.edu This article is a commentary documenting the author’s shared experience on the ALISE MEHC panel in 2018, with interwoven narrative addressing LIS cultural competency practices and stance. Keywords: affective knowledge, cultural competency, racism VIGNETTE ONE: As library director for a private, parochial, all-girls’ high school, I was supervisor of a part-time library assistant who was a wealthy, older woman who was born and raised in the suburbs of an h istoric town: “Doris” (pseudonym) had never been to a Walmart. In her mid-70s at the time, Doris was an elder to me, even though I was a full-time, master’s-degreed librarian working on her doctorate and Doris was a bache- lor’s-degreed wealthy widow who worked part-time, by choice. N evertheless, we got on quite well. Although I am Catholic myself, Doris helped me navigate the rigidity of a Catholic high school’s faculty and staff politics. However, one day, Doris revealed a deep part of her lens, stance, and worldview toward me. It was a rainy, wintry day. The chill of the winter season was silently floating through the walls of the school, even though the heating was sufficient. But you know how you can always feel the winter air, even when inside a building sometimes? This was that kind of feeling to an otherwise normal, winter’s day in the school library. It was about 4th period, the start of the lunch time rush for the stu- dents. The girls would often come into the library as part of their downtime between classes. On this day, I was feeling the winter’s hawk in my knees, so my knees were “cranky,” “crotched-y”—cold. I walked out of my office to put up a flyer, and I casually said to Doris, “Ah, my knees are tight today.” To which Doris replied, “Your people are supposed to be walking on all fours anyway.” I replied, “I have two legs, not four.” I was too shocked to say anything more: I’d been taught to respect my elders, I was shocked from the apathetic tone of Doris’ remark, and my feelings were hurt. Thus, my two legs walked me back into my office, but my heart . . . crawled . . . as if . . . on all fours. . . . For those of us librarians who were born and raised and/or live in the United States, we can little argue the fact that library science has © Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 2019 Vol. 60, No. 3 DOI: 10.3138/jelis.2018-0061
232 Irvin decidedly thrived on -isms for many KEY POINTS decades: sexism from Melvil Dewey and his setup of librarianship as a • It is vital for librarians of feminized profession, thus “less than” color to share challenging other professions such as lawyership career experiences so that and medicine (Beck, 1991); racism the profession is made aware in library services since the times of of the unique and specific Dewey (again) and the maltreatment of socio-cultural issues faced black and brown library patrons since in the daily work of minority Reconstruction (Ford, 2018; Robbins, librarians as practitioners and 1996; W iegand, 2002), and hegemonic, instructors. gender- privileged-takeover-ism in the • S u b t l e f o r m s o f ways in which male librarians, who microagressions are often make up just 19% of our professional experienced as trauma during population, comprise an average of the work experiences of 40% of our administrative and lead- librarians of color. ership positions, earning an average of $7,000 more in yearly salary than • L ibrary and informat ion women library directors (Olin & Millet, science (LIS) educators and 2014; Rosa & Henke, 2017; ALA, 2018). practitioners need to acquire And lastly, why does our shared story a heightened awareness of, for librarianship, beginning with the and sensitivity toward, the formalization of the American-iteration ways in which LIS professors of the profession beginning in 1876, of color struggle to navigate include the fact that the first woman the socio-cultural power and person of color to ever hold the dynamics that often can be position of Librarian of Congress didn’t expressed as racism within the occur until 2016, a few short years ago. LIS classroom. Indeed, we librarians are a raggedy bunch when it comes to honoring one another’s identity, stance, and worldview. In the United States, we take an exceptionalism approach to librarianship with the ways in which we conduct research: We tend to ignore or not consider scholarship coming from non-American cultural and indigenous contexts, and we regard librarians and patrons of color, varied sexual identities, differing socio-economic statuses, and diverse physical and cognitive experiences as in need of explanation and tolerance of what we perceive is missing from their lives and experiences, rather than honoring what our fellow human beings bring to the reference desk in the form of their own embedded knowledge and experiences. In my classes, I teach my students that we librarians are not the experts of the reference interaction; the patrons are. We know nothing. After all, we cannot even have the hard conversations to unpack and process the unkindnesses that often happen between library and infor- mation science (LIS) colleagues due to people being from another race,
“I Have Two Legs, not Four”: Navigating the -isms of the LIS Minefield 233 gender, and/or cultural heritage and experience. Reflectively, we are not navel gazers. Librarian scholars and practitioners often balk at taking an inquiry-based stance on the interweaving of our personal beliefs and views with our professional practices. In essence, we librarians are a bunch of emotional punks. I, a black woman who is an LIS faculty member within an Indigenous context, am complicit in the paradigm of LIS punk-i-fication. At ALISE 2018, I shared the vignette that opened this article. And the questions that emerged during my presentation were the same ques- tions that I asked myself back then, when the horrid “Doris” experience occurred. Why didn’t I “git wit” Doris? Why didn’t I “tell her what’s good”? Why didn’t I let Doris know that what she said was hateful and file a complaint to the principal for her vile statement? Why didn’t I tell Doris, “thank you for the education on how you really see me”—as her “boss”, as her col- league, as a fellow Catholic, as a fellow woman, as a fellow human being. I resigned from that position within a year of my start date. There were a few oppressive things happening at that workplace, and my ancestors had been slaves long enough to nudge me that I needed to leave that job. Nevertheless, those questions (Why didn’t I “git wit” Doris? Why didn’t I “tell her what’s good”?) are still a part of my personal soundtrack for various microaggressions and transgressions that I experience as a librarian within a white-male−privileged Western culture that has made it clear that its culture and systemic infrastructure hates—abhors (is that softer? nicer?)—human beings who are not male, who are not descended from Western European people, and who are not of a heritage that ensures public and private privileges that are gendered and encultured—emotional and p sychological— and historic. For example, can I share that my personal soundtrack (Why didn’t I “git wit” so-and-so? Why didn’t I “tell them what’s good”?) is played every time I go on campus, even where I work and teach now? What stories can I tell that will fully convey the subtle yet injurious ways in which white men disregard, disrespect, and disempower (as in silencing voiced-ness and eras- ing relevancy) women of color, particularly, on a daily basis? There are many experiences, past and present, that form an interwo- ven tapestry of toggling between voiced-ness and self-advocacy, and era- sure from self-imposed censorship of emotional, intellectual, and ethical response to the ways in which I “read” behavior directed toward me based on how colleagues and students “read” who I am, to them. Even within the supposed freedom to tell my story via the platform of this interna- tional, peer-reviewed journal, I still feel that I am at risk of repercussion for voicing myself as a means of self-advocacy. The rage of injustice that I constantly experience must be contained to be understood; my indigna- tion must be presented and conveyed in a dignified manner, because it’s about being professional and well-regarded in my profession, not about being respected as a human being. Because, when people of color express that something is not right, it’s a historical typicality that our advocacy quickly gets (mis)interpreted
234 Irvin to “something’s always wrong.” And this might be true, because some- thing always is wrong when subtle and overt forms of sexism, racism, and classism silence, erase, and punt people’s experience to the other end of the proverbial field of “Let’s not deal with this—let’s discard this trouble.” I cannot count the many times I’ve tried to share my experiences of sexism and racism, only to be told, “No, that’s not it,” or, “Well, that’s just how you see it,” or, the worst, always said in jest, “Here comes ‘Trouble.’” In LIS, we have a serious dissonance toward how we “are” toward one another. I feel like we librarians don’t respect the details of one anoth- er’s presence as people who happen to be information professionals and scholars in the world. We don’t apply our own professional values and practices toward one another. We don’t treat one another as patrons—as whole persons who have funds of knowledge, and we don’t take a re- flective approach to our own professional epistemology to be our own best librarian. We are supposed to be information professionals, yet the thoughtless ways in which we (dis)regard one another run counter to our profession’s values of empathy, mindfulness, and respect for people’s knowledge and information. And as we know, the information gods live in the details. In library school, we teach pre-service librarians that we’re supposed not only to pay attention, but also to kindly and empathetically regard the details of human interaction: watch body language and vocal tone when working with patrons during reference interviews; learn the intricacies of citation styles, AACR2 rules, and the importance of reading (books, news, instructions, applications, signs, etc.) in order to successfully help library users to use the library and other institutions in the world, and to navigate their own lives. We teach librarians the importance of read- ing, understanding, categorizing, and preserving the bibliographic data of a book, a film, or any other library or archive artifact because every single detail of that artifact certifies that that item exists. We teach that it is ethical for librarians to stand up and advocate for people in the world who are “marginalized,” “at-risk,” and “underserved.” Yet we have those same people as members of our profession whom we disrespect because they are from “marginalized” communities or “at-risk” or “underserved” backgrounds. Case in point, I’ve had many experiences where I have had to ask my- self some jacked-up reflective questions: Would that student say that to the LIS professor who is a white cis-male? Would that ALA staff person reveal the financial membership profile of a white librarian, male or female, to their colleagues? Would those LIS colleague scholars steal authorship of an article written by a fellow white woman or man, instead of me? Could I get away with ten-year-old syllabi and assignments or outdated lectures if I were not a black woman? Would students submit on-par assignments to me while being able to call me by my first name, instead of “Dr. Irvin” or “Professor Irvin”?
“I Have Two Legs, not Four”: Navigating the -isms of the LIS Minefield 235 The answers are all “no.” I’ve had (male) students tell me that I didn’t know what I was talking about during a lecture; I’ve had students interrupt my lecture to make a personal secretarial request for me to email them the lecture (instead of listening to what I have to say); I’ve experienced an ALA staff person emailing me about my unpaid dues and copying a full handful of people on the email (I’m no longer a member of ALA for this reason); I’ve seen other LIS faculty who are of the majority, privileged demographic who have received course evaluations below 50% and have full tenure, while I’ve been called on the carpet for scoring a few points below 80% for one class for one semester, over the course of consistent 90%+ evaluations over a span of years; I’ve seen mainstream LIS faculty colleagues teach the same lectures for years and not update them; I’ve seen LIS faculty email to LIS students that have said things that I would NEVER say, such as “you are a poor student,” “your work is horrible,” “you cannot turn that in late—NO!” I’ve seen LIS faculty email to students in all caps and exclamation points to boot. I would never; but more pointedly, I could NEVER. I’ve been brought up on university charges for telling a student (with supervisor approval) that they should withdraw from my course with a “W” grade instead of failing. Students have filed complaints against me for not awarding extra credit to them because they didn’t follow the ex- tra credit instructions. I’ve been accused of saying things in office hours that I did not say, so now I always have a witness in my office, or my of- fice door open, whenever I meet with or talk with students. Admittedly, I’ve felt the need to secretly audio-record office hours with a rare, few students with whom I had challenging interactions, for “just in case.” I’ve been told that I’m disrespectful to local culture because I insist that student librarians follow instructions and be precise in the formatting of their assignments, as preparation for writing annual reports as library administrators, grant documents (often federal) for library funding, and peer-reviewed manuscripts that must meet a certain level of excellence, across the world. Why didn’t I “git wit” so-and-so? Why didn’t I “tell them what’s good”? Because even though I walk on two legs, people who have privilege within the majority culture and those who carry multiple -isms to which I qualify, still think, if not act, like I walk on fours. Here’s the thing: I know who I am—and I am not responsible for explaining my existence, or the validity thereof, to anyone . . . right? In recent years, there has been a healthy amount of LIS research published that talks about “librarian identity” (e.g., Pagowsky, 2015; Perini, 2016) and explores critical theory (issues of power and equity) and social justice in librarianship (Cooke, 2017; Leckie, Given, & Buschman, 2010;), in an effort to bring attention and, it is hoped, some conversation and reflection around our collective dissonance as colleagues. Can we read articles and research to “read” one another better? To read one another
236 Irvin more softly? To regard one another in a kindlier way? Can LIS profes- sionals who are of the majority, mainstream American culture swallow the hard pill of “y’all not as nice and kind as you think” and gently enter an ongoing reflective inquiry stance toward their own personal/ professional identity constructions without appropriating cultures beyond their own in- digeneity? Without colonizing black and brown conversations and spaces? Can white LIS professionals figure out on their own when to speak and say, when to be quiet and respect the room, when to show up, and when to stay put? And, most of all: even if you tell us that we have space to speak, and that we have privilege to say, that we. will. not. believe. you.? Is it possible for white LIS professionals (Western-based) to humbly understand or at least empathize and then act on that empathy with kindness and mindfulness toward their colleagues of color and other bordered identities? Overall (2009) makes a good case for how LIS is structured based on the understanding that culture and knowledge are separate, where knowl- edge is constructed based on ways of knowing that stem from enacting specific practices, training, and development of “skills.” However, a more realistic view of how knowledge is constructed comes from the understand- ing that culture and knowledge are inseparable, working hand in hand because knowledge is constructed as an outcome of social interaction. When culture is understood as a holistic expression of knowledge and val- ues, a broader understanding of literacy can emerge for LIS. This means that LIS would embrace a broader idea of what counts as knowledge and what makes a person literate. Overall (2009, p. 182) says that a broader view of what “information” is includes “diverse forms of information, such as pictures, drawings, mu- sic, dance, media, text, symbols, signs, and aural tradition, which convey meaning to humans. This perspective allows for cultural differences about information and how it is developed and used.” Here is Overall’s defini- tion for cultural competency in LIS: Cultural competence is the ability to recognize the significance of culture in one’s own life and in the lives of others; and to come to know and respect diverse cultural backgrounds and character- istics through interaction with individuals from diverse linguistic, c ultural, and socioeconomic groups; and to fully integrate the culture of diverse groups into services, work, and institutions in order to enhance the lives of both those being served by the library profession and those engaged in service. (2009, pp. 189–190) As mentioned, Overall (2009) calls for three domains where cul- tural competency develops: (1) cognitive: cultural self-awareness and knowledge are developed; (2) interpersonal: cultural appreciation and ethic of caring are developed; and (3) environmental: language, condi- tions, space, and policies are developed. Cultural self-awareness includes building cultural knowledge formally and informally—through shared
“I Have Two Legs, not Four”: Navigating the -isms of the LIS Minefield 237 social experiences with colleagues and with community members. It will require a surrender of discursive and procedural space where white power is embedded in the very walls, and books, and plants in the building. This p ower-share requires a humility stance within the agency of seek- ing cultural competence in dealing with a diverse group of colleagues, acquaintances, and friends. While cultural competency confers ongoing behaviors and practices, cultural humility “goes beyond the concept of cultural competence” such that we take responsibility for our interactions with others, by actively listening to those from differing backgrounds while at the same time being attuned to what we are thinking and feeling about other cultures; cultural humility encourages self-reflection and self-awareness. (Levi, as cited in Isaacson, 2014, p. 252) A cultural competency lens that is framed by cultural humility requires empathy, mindfulness, and emotionality. Feelings must become an accepted and safe aspect of our interactions with one another in LIS. Cultural competence includes empathy of care: to care enough to understand that people sitting across a table from you at a faculty meeting, sitting next to you in a conference hall or presentation, walking past you on the street—these p eople have feelings, are human beings. We all come with a tapestry of stories, because, as human beings with a cogent soul, we walk on twos, not fours. Vanessa Irvin is an assistant professor with the library and information science program at the University of Hawai’i-Mānoa, in Honolulu, Hawai’i. She teaches courses in refer- ence services, diversity issues in libraries, youth services, and public libraries. References American Library Association (ALA). (2018). State of America’s libraries 2018. Re- trieved from http://www.ala.org/news/state-americas-libraries-report-2018 Beck, C. (1991). Reference services: A handmaid’s tale. Library Journal, 116(7), 32–37. Cooke, N. (2017). Information services to diverse populations: Developing culturally competent library professionals. Library and Information Science text series. Santa Barbara, CA: Libraries Unlimited. Ford, A. (2018). Bringing harassment out of the history books: Addressing the troubling aspects of Melvil Dewey's legacy. American Libraries, 49(6), 48–52. Isaacson, M. (2014). Clarifying concepts: Cultural humility or competency. Journal of Professional Nursing, 30(3), 251–258. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. profnurs.2013.09.011 Leckie, G., Given, L.M., & Buschman, J. (2010). Critical theory for library and in- formation science: Exploring the social from across the disciplines. Santa Barbara, CA: Libraries Unlimited. Olin, J., & Millet, M. (2015, November 4). Gendered expectations for leader- ship in libraries. In the Library with the Lead Pipe. Retrieved from http://www. inthelibrarywiththeleadpipe.org/2015/libleadgender/ Overall, P. (2009). Cultural competence: A conceptual framework for library and information science professionals. The Library Quarterly, 79(2): 175–204. https:// doi.org/10.1086/597080
238 Irvin Pagowsky, N. (2015). A pedagogy of inquiry. Communications in Information Literacy, 9(2), 136–144. Perini, M. (2016). The academic librarian as blended professional: Reassessing and rede- fining the role. Amsterdam, Netherlands: Chandos/Elsevier. Robbins, L. (1996). Racism and censorship in Cold War Oklahoma: The case of Ruth W. Brown and the Bartlesville Public Library. Southwestern Historical Quar- terly, 100(1), 18–46. Rosa, K., & Henke, K. (2017). 2017 ALA Demographic Study. Office of Research and Statistics. Chicago, IL: ALA. https://bit.ly/2eX6ktG Wiegand, W. (2002). This month, 66 years ago: American Library Association failed to oppose racial segregation at 1936 meeting in Richmond, VA. American Libraries, 33(2), 69.