A Decade of Doctorates: An Examination of Dissertations Written by African American Women in Library and Information Studies, 1 993-2003 Renee E. Franklin and Paul T. Jaeger This exploratory study examines the number of African American female doctoral recipients in library and information science (LIS) and their re- search interests in the past ten years. It enhances understanding of what Afri- can American female Ph.D. recipients plan to contribute to the LIS field through what they have found important to study in their dissertation re- search. These areas of study provide insight into the participation of African American women in LIS and the amount of research focus being given to in- formation issues related to African Americans. This paper presents these data and findings within the context of diversity in doctoral education in LIS and historical issues of the participation of African Americans in LIS educa- tion. Recommendations and areas of future research generated from findings are proposed to further explore the implications of the findings discussed in this paper and to assist graduate school administrators in refining recruitment methods that will serve to attract more African American women to the LIS field. Diversity and US Education A major concern in Library and Information Science (LIS) education for many years has been how to address diversity, or lack thereof, within the field.1 Quite often, the focus has been on recruiting and retaining ethnically diverse master's students in an attempt to produce a larger pool of ethni- cally diverse librarians. Usually, "during periods of intensified recruit- ment, the profession as a whole will focus on MLS students."2 As a result, the diversity of LIS faculties receives less attention than other diversity is- sues, and the research activities of doctoral students and faculty members from underrepresented populations are rarely examined. The faculty population in LIS has remained fairly stable in its level of di- versity. In the mid-1990s, for example, the percentage of African Ameri- cans in LIS faculties had not changed since the passage of the Civil Rights J. of Education for Library and Information Science, Vol. 48, No. 3- Summer 2007 ISSN: 0748-5786 ©2007 Association for Library and Information Science Education 1 87
1 88 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science About the Authors Renee E. Franklin, Ph.D., is an assistant professor, School of Information Stud- ies, Syracuse University (refrankl@syr.edu). Paul T. Jaeger is an assistant profes- sor and the director of the Center for Information Policy and Electronic Government, College of Information Studies, University of Maryland (pjaeger@umd.edu). Ms. received 12/06; accepted 06/07; revised 07/07. Act thirty years before.3 The most recent ALISE statistics indicate that the LIS professoriate continues to lack representational diversity, especially for African Americans and Latinos.4 Only 3.7% of the full-time faculty members were Latino as compared to 14.5% of the total population, and African Americans were just 5.5% of the full-time faculty, as compared to 12.1% of the population.5 Further, doctoral programs are not producing many new graduates from underrepresented populations. In 2002-2003, of the 82 LIS doctoral degrees awarded, only two were awarded to African Americans and one to a Latino.6 When examining diversity, LIS research has generally been more fo- cused on percentages of students and faculty from underrepresented popu- lations than teaching or research about the unique information needs and behaviors of underrepresented populations.7 Few LIS research studies have focused specifically on one population of faculty and their research inter- ests. Studies that do address the issue of African American doctoral stu- dents typically focus on demographic trends and the educational hindrances that African Americans face.8 A search of related literature yielded no published research addressing the specific issue of dissertation topics written by African American Ph.D. candidates in LIS. By examining the titles and purpose statements contained within abstracts of dissertations produced in the last ten years by African American women at U.S. LIS pro- grams accredited by the American Library Association, this study investi- gated the research interests that motivated this group of women to pursue a doctorate in LIS. This study is based on the premise that the diversity of LIS doctoral programs is a vital issue for LIS to consider, as graduates of these doctoral programs will ultimately be educating the next generations of LIS professionals and scholars and serving as directors of libraries and library systems. Historical Issues of African American Participation LIS Education As is true in all areas of American life, African Americans were at one time segregated from the mainstream in library issues and experiences. Throughout slavery and the period of segregation immediately following it, information sources continued to be a scarcity for African Americans.9
A Decade of Doctorates 1 89 The Morrill Act of 1 890 provided funding for southern states to establish separate colleges for African Americans, and the Supreme Court's ruling in Plessy v. Ferguson in 1 896 upheld the doctrine of "separate but equal" pub- lic accommodations and facilities for white and non-white persons.10 Until the decision was deemed unconstitutional in 1954 states had the right to segregate library patrons, if African Americans were allowed library ac- cess at all.11 While attempts were made to allow wider access to libraries and library materials, the efforts were not made on an extensive scale and many African Americans were without access to library services.12 A program was created by the Louisville, Kentucky public library in 1913 to train African American library assistants, but this did not alleviate the need for formally educated librarians.13 By 1925, there were only six African Americans who had graduated from accredited library schools.14 To remedy the problem of unequal access due to a lack of African American librarians, library schools were created to educate African Americans.15 In 1 925, a school was established on the campus of Hampton Institute to pre- pare African American librarians so that they could then develop library services for Southern African Americans.16 The school succeeded in grad- uating 183 African American librarians during the 14 years it operated be- fore its closing in 1939. 17 The library school at Atlanta University (now Clark- Atlanta University) opened in the fall of 1941 and was headed by Dr. Eliza Atkins Gleason, the first African American to earn a doctorate in LIS.18 North Carolina College for Negroes (now named North Carolina Central University) was the site of a third library school that also began in 1941, established following a Su- preme Court ruling in 1938 that "separate but equal" would not be allowed in professional education.19 Many African American librarians were edu- cated on these historically Black college campuses, and more significantly, their founding paved the way for African Americans to earn library degrees and doctoral degrees on predominately white campuses as well. Methodology This research project was intended to explore the participation of African American women in LIS doctoral programs and the focus of their research. The researchers examined issues of the number of African American fe- males earning doctoral degrees in LIS, the schools that awarded these doc- toral degrees, and the areas of research they pursued in their doctoral dissertations. There are key reasons underlying the selection of this population and this method. First, previous studies indicate that African American women in graduate programs are often "denied mentoring by faculty, discouraged from conducting scholarly work on communities of color, and face devalu- ation of ethnic, racial, and gender studies."20 So, the experiences of African American female doctoral students provide a true gauge of the integration of underrepresented populations into teaching and research in a field. Sec-
1 90 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science ond, doctoral dissertation topics are frequently selected because the stu- dent is deeply interested in and plans to pursue that topic after graduation. The type of research this population is conducting at the doctoral level will be a vital measure of how much research is oriented toward under- represented populations. The timeframe of 1993-2003 was selected be- cause data was both available from ALISE statistics and there was a high likelihood that institutional memory at the LIS programs would still be suf- ficient to identify African American Ph.D. graduates. Ten volumes of the Association for Library and Information Science Ed- ucation (ALISE) statistical reports provided data that identified the LIS programs that awarded African American women a Ph.D. during the ALISE statistical reporting period 1995 through 2004 (which represents academic years 1993/1994 through 2002/2003).21 Thirteen LIS Schools (see Table 1) were identified as having graduated African American women from their doctoral programs during the specified time period. Deans and administrative personnel of the LIS schools received emails requesting the names and dissertation titles of women who met the speci- fied criteria in order to allow the researchers to identify the titles and re- search topics of the dissertations. The electronic database Dissertation Abstracts was used to access the dissertations, and purpose statements con- tained within each dissertation's abstract were then analyzed to determine what each author intended to discover through her research. The research- ers conducted a content analysis which allowed each dissertation topic to be placed into mutually exclusive categories based upon an interactive cod- ing scheme. The use of dissertation analysis has not been widely used as a method of research; however, it provides a very efficient method for under- Table 1 US Schools with African American Female Ph.D. Graduates 1993-2003*. ♦Based upon ALISE Statistical Reports 1995-2004. School # Graduates Emporio State University 1 Florida State University 10 Indiana University 3 Rutgers University 6 Texas Woman's University 1 University of Alabama 1 University of lllinois,Urbana-Champaign 2 University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill 2 University of North Texas 1 University of Pittsburgh 5 University of Texas-Austin 1 University of Wisconsin-Madison 1 University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee 1 Total 35
A Decade of Doctorates 1 9 1 Table 2 African American Female Ph.D. Graduates by School and Year*. School Years with Graduates Emporio State University 2000 Florida State University 1 994,1 995,1 996,1 998,2000,2001 ,2003 Indiana University 1993,1994,1997 Rutgers University 1 998,2000,2001 ,2002,2003 Texas Woman's University 1 999 University of Alabama 2001 University of IHinois,Urbana-Champaign 1995, 2003 University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill 1 995, 2001 University of Pittsburgh 1993,1995,1998,1999,2000 University of Texas-Austin 2001 University of Wisconsin-Madison 1 998 University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee 1 996 *Based upon LIS school personnel responses. standing what new scholars in the field are studying and being encouraged to study by current faculty. In this case, it was a clear choice as the goal of the study was to better understand the topics that African American women working toward a Ph.D. in LIS were studying. Findings Thirty five African American females earned doctoral degrees at 13 LIS schools during the ten year period under study. Twelve of the schools con- tacted responded by the data collection completion date which yielded a to- tal of 34 purpose statements to examine. Table 2 illustrates the number of African American females who earned doctorates at each LIS program and the years of graduation (listed alphabetically by institution). The LIS programs with the largest representation of African American female Ph.D. graduates were Florida State University and Rutgers Univer- sity with ten and six, respectively. The School of Information Sciences at University of Pittsburgh graduated five African American women during the period under study; Indiana University's School of Library and Infor- mation Science produced three African American female graduates. The programs at both University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and Univer- sity of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign each had two African American fe- male graduates. The remaining programs - University of Alabama, Emporia State University, University of Texas at Austin, Texas Woman's University, University of Wisconsin at Madison, and University of Wiscon- sin at Milwaukee - each graduated one African American female during the period covered by this study. Content analysis of dissertation titles and purpose statements yielded five categories of research topics (listed in conjunction with dissertation ti-
1 92 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science u "5. § 1 $ ¡5 si ■fi O •2| O I i ! 111 í S| I ìs 1 - c => *"£ c <» ^ ~í ^ 2 1^ * ! 111? <l ¿ ¡-_§ i ^ <^u^ lo "i ^<^ í £ ¿5 g-g S<* II ^ 111 1 4 # UH Ji íg 1^ | S lis J |i?í -íie zi A °es >.$ S >. -5 e c "ISí <-. Jo |^ • eü c 5 S "§o< -5 o c u^^^ <-. Hu 1 Sil ¡i J|i I SiíJ II |5 § |< o o^ o g5 ó |¿ ¿ 5 ^ J2 2!¿ oSf<-5c ^5 ^\^ .J gu ° o I S HI 8 -SI 2 Jll* |= |3 III íííl3|B8¿f?J| I-:?ll ill Hm-tplflÜ SíJli 111 lls||II;>8|lií.?|1lí II J -1 1 1 i I í 1 II i i>í il iij i I ■Ml slJ-i i.¡íf=-»3|<í sjlfs f ¡ i^ I i I -¡ 1 í i Mí i pi lit 1 1 h- < £^C£^ iíj h _E<X^ i-< << -E < o h-U^ i- O co (D 1 Q. | 1 § J ¡ i 1 ^ J ^ -8 mi | *- I ^ mi *- i
A Decade of Doctorates 1 93 u I O _ì "O O U ñ% tn ñ% tn lì «2.0 »| ■Q 2, ¿I O U #u 0) ^^ E < c 2^2 e o g g* -Q <D O) - "B C s i m f ¿i ifi I J 1<I ^ I l| § S | i i ill 1 .Í ?H H 1 3§ "5 1 -5 8 I E § S * £ 3 -S c u z: go-2 g t3 ^ in^ifi ^ £ ; I (X -gal -o ^ |íg o2.y lílf^l ¿g.>J2¿.« í o £ (X 04><b -o o2.y ¿g.>J2¿.« O o 3 í »íí 04><b -o § ii3§¡5 § I ? 8 O | 8 I 1 1 Üf 1 111 ÌÌÌÌU I, 1 1 i ni i íh mus ji i 1,1 H! lili! muí 1| il! urlili SJIKÍ l* 111 31Ü11IH Ujili |! §~¡ ¡liJJ¿|sisi^|if5lJi ¡|2 ¿i?3ií*-¡^í lí ^ i |c32 i- ]!iJJ!|!¡ril!pi¡i|!Ji! QlJr-EZi- ^]<5<oUl- I- IZj h- K- ck¿ H¿ ZQ_^h-Q (O d) D (/> ÍO Q_ Ic </) C O 5^8 £ o ! il i ]
1 94 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science ties in Table 3). Sixteen scholars (47%) produced research that focused on issues related to librarians and librarianship. Seven women (21%) wrote dissertations about information issues, including information literacy, in- formation overload, information behavior, and information retrieval. Five women (15%) wrote dissertations with themes that centered on literature and that had a specific focus on African American perspectives within this topic. Four (12%) researchers had dissertations with technological themes, while two scholars (6%) researched educational issues. Discussion This examination often years of doctoral work can be used as a foundation upon which to address important aspects of diversity as it relates to scholar- ship in LIS Ph.D. programs. Most obviously, the findings can be used to generate data about a population of students whose characteristics and re- search topics heretofore have not been thoroughly examined in respect to doctoral study. There is a dearth of research that examines African Ameri- can doctoral students in LIS; the majority of research on graduate students in LIS concerns those matriculating through Master's level programs and discusses all minority groups as opposed to exploring the characteristics and attributes of a specific ethnicity. This study offers details about the number of African American LIS doctoral graduates during a ten year pe- riod, the specific Schools that have graduated these students, and the stu- dents' research interests. During school years 1993/1994 through 2002/2003, ALISE statistical reports indicated that 42 of the 612 doctoral recipients in ALA accredited LIS Schools with Ph.D. programs in the United States were African Ameri- cans. This number represents only 6.8% of the total number of LIS Ph.D. graduates during this time period, while the 35 African American females that were the focus of this study represent just 5.7% of the total number of graduates. During the ten years examined during this study, 35 African American females completed doctoral work at LIS doctoral programs on 13 cam- puses, with several programs graduating multiple women in multiple years; noting the number of African American males who graduated from these programs raises the figure to 15. As there are 29 ALA accredited LIS pro- grams in the United States who grant doctoral degrees, this means that only about half of the LIS programs successfully educated African American students at the doctoral level in the time period at hand. The African American women graduating from LIS doctoral programs researched a broad range of topics that were placed into five mutually ex- clusive categories. Additionally, content analysis allowed for comparison of dissertation topics within thematic categories which revealed that only nine of the 34 African American women (26%) during the examined de- cade wrote their dissertations about topics that addressed some aspect of the African American experience in respect to LIS issues (see Table 4).
A Decade of Doctorates 1 95 Table 4 Dissertations with African American Focus. Seven of the dissertations written about African American issues also in- cluded a specific focus on African American women within this topic. Research that examines African Americans' experiences in higher edu- cation points to a possible reason for this occurrence by suggesting that people view the world through their individual "lenses" which causes them to react to the world and determine how they will explore it based upon their individual experiences.22 This may have been descriptive of the nine Afri- can American female scholars who wrote dissertations with topics directly related to African American issues, as many occurrences in their lives were likely a result of and reacted to based upon their gender and ethnicity.23 As well, many scholars who are members of the African diaspora ascribe to an Afrocentric worldview, which has the potential to leak into their research interests.24 As is evident from the findings herein, the majority of African American LIS Ph.D. students are deciding not to research issues related to their race or culture. Clearly, not every African American doctoral student will want to study issues related to their experiences as African Americans. Further, other LIS scholars certainly can meaningfully contribute to the discourse on African American experiences related to libraries and information. However, African American teachers and scholars will be best equipped to provide authentic teaching and scholarship about the information needs of African Americans. It is essential for LIS programs to be positive research environments that have faculty members who will support African Ameri- Dissertation Title Year Health Information-Seeking Behavior of Urban, Older, African American 1993 Women The Portrayal of Literacy in Children's Picture Storybooks about 1 995 African-Americans: A Content Analysis The Identification and Bibliographic Control of African American Women 1 995 Writers in New Jersey An Investigation of the Relationship of Selected Planning Strategies and 1 998 Success in Funding Library Programs at Historically Black Colleges and Universities Toward Inclusion: Factors that Influence the Writing of Children's Books by 2000 African American Women Representations of African American Women in Young Adult Biography: A 2001 Narrative Analysis Reference Group Theory and its Implications for a Study of Jeanes 2001 Supervisors in Leon County, Florida (1908-1968) The Importance, Review and Holdings of Contemporary Afri can -American 2003 Women's Poetry and Fiction in ARL Libraries, 1 980-1 990 Career Paths of African American Women Academic Library Administrators 2003
1 96 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science can students' interests in pursuing research that focuses on experiences within the African American community. Students should be encouraged to research areas that are of interest to them and that will contribute to the existing body of scholarly work in LIS. Students should also be assured that if they decide to undertake research that focuses on issues unique to or largely about their ethnic group, their contribution will be considered to be as serious and as worthwhile as others' work about non-ethnic issues. Recommendations for Recruitment and Research It is hoped that this study will be a catalyst for additional inquiry into the topic of African American doctoral students in LIS doctoral programs. In order for LIS to foster its commitment to increasing diversity, there must be obvious efforts toward understanding, encouraging, and embracing voices from each underrepresented population. Recommendation 1 An in-depth qualitative study should be conducted to gain detailed and di- verse perspectives from African American females and males who have earned a Ph.D. in LIS about what influenced their choice of institution, their experiences while matriculating in their respective programs, what in- fluenced their research topic, and track their careers subsequent to obtain- ing the Ph.D. Recommendation 2 Results of the qualitative study should be used to develop recruitment ef- forts that encourage African Americans to enroll in LIS Ph.D. programs. Recommendation 3 Administrators of LIS Schools who have succeeded in recruiting, retain- ing, and graduating African Americans in multiple years should be queried to document the methods used to achieve success. Recommendation 4 A survey should be conducted to examine the level of support African American students in LIS are shown when they choose to pursue research with an African American or multicultural focus. Recommendation 5 Results of the survey can be used to design instructional materials for LIS Schools that will assist faculty who advise African American doctoral stu- dents in determining the best practices for supporting and encouraging this group of scholars; doing so will likely increase the rate of retention and graduation among African American LIS Ph.D. students. Recommendation 6 A comparative study should be conducted that examines the similarities and contrasts of dissertation purpose statements of all African American
A Decade of Doctorates 1 97 men and women who have earned the Ph.D. in LIS to note trends in research topics. Recommendation 7 Scholarly pursuits should be conducted with the specific intent of identify- ing unique characteristics of each ethnic minority group as they relate to enhanced understanding of each group's needs in order to increase recruit- ment to, retention in, and graduation from LIS doctoral programs. Beyond these recommendations, the findings of this study indicate a number of other potential research avenues and topics that could be ex- plored to better understand how not only African American women, but other underrepresented populations as well, choose dissertation topics re- lated to diverse populations and reasons that they choose to become or not become LIS educators. These include: • What are the factors that make an LIS Master's program successful in producing graduates from underrepresented populations and encouraging those graduates to pursue doctoral degrees in LIS? • What are the academic, social, professional, and economic support systems in place for students from unrepresented populations who attend LIS Ph.D. programs? • How can funding programs that support LIS education - like the Laura Bush 21st Century Librarianship program of the Institute for Museum and Library Services (IMLS) - play a stronger role in increasing the presence of students from underrepresented populations in the Master's level and eventually the Ph.D. level in LIS? Exploring research questions such as the ones above allows the focus of studies of diversity in Ph.D. programs to begin to become expansive enough to include all unrepresented populations in LIS. Ultimately, LIS would greatly benefit from a large-scale survey and fol- low-up interviews of the LIS Ph.D. graduates from underrepresented popu- lations over the past ten years. This type of large-scale study would reveal a great deal about research, social, professional, and economic factors that lead students to choose dissertation research topics, how such research car- ries over into their career decisions about whether or not to become LIS ed- ucators, and if and how they try to bring studies of diversity into their professional careers. This type of study could greatly inform the LIS pro- fession about how to change educational programs to promote diversity in Master's programs, Ph.D. programs, library professions, and LIS faculties. Conclusion: The Importance of Increasing Diversity and US Education There are many important reasons to focus on increasing the diversity of LIS faculties and increasing the amount of research and teaching being
1 98 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science conducted about the information needs of underrepresented populations. First, the "diversity across the faculties of LIS schools does not reflect to- day's multicultural populations, a situation that may not bode well for the composition of future LIS faculty."25 For example, while the percentages of Whites and of Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders in the general librar- ian population and among LIS faculty is equivalent to or higher than among the general population,26 African Americans and Latinos are the two larg- est minority populations in the United States and the two populations most sorely underrepresented among LIS faculty and librarians27 and Native Americans comprise less than 1 % of librarians and LIS faculty.28 Further, the representation of persons with disabilities among LIS doctoral pro- grams and faculties remains unexplored. Increasing diversity in LIS facul- ties is necessary to broaden of the number of perspectives in teaching, research, service, leadership, and administration, better reflecting the di- verse users of libraries in the United States. Second, research indicates the "representation of diverse peoples throughout the education cycle is critical to achieving the pluralistic goal of education."29 Therefore, a lack of faculty members from underrepresented populations will serve to perpetuate a lack of diversity in LIS as a whole. Third, faculty members from underrepresented populations in predomi- nantly white faculties are vital as recruiters, mentors, and mediators for stu- dents from underrepresented populations.30 Fourth, colleges and corporations that are the most diverse are often highly regarded and highly successful.31 As such, limited diversity among LIS faculty may be fairly sizeable detriment to LIS programs as a whole. LIS programs "must accept responsibility for populating the profession with a new generation of culturally competent librarians."32 However, cul- turally competent librarians can only be educated by diverse faculty offer- ing diverse perspectives on information. A key part of that is developing a better understanding of why more members of underrepresented popula- tions do not choose to get doctoral degrees in LIS. One reason may be re- lated to the social networks that impact why individuals chose a particular occupation. Many people - family members, friends, teachers, counselors, and other role models, among others - have an impact on the decision of an individual to join a field.33 Perhaps the current level of limited faculty di- versity becomes self perpetuating when there are an insufficient number of mentors available from under represented populations.34 The overall limited amount of teaching and research related to the experi- ences of underrepresented populations may be another factor in the contin- uing limitations on diversity in LIS. However, faculty members from underrepresented populations will not necessarily be interested in or capa- ble of teaching and researching in areas related to underrepresented popu- lations.35 In the case of African American doctoral students, the majority are choosing not to study issues related to diversity. A further issue is that many graduates of LIS doctoral programs become library administrators rather than academics. As such, not only are the percentages of African
A Decade of Doctorates 1 99 Americans in LIS doctoral programs far below the percentage of African Americans in general population, not every African American graduate of an LIS doctoral program will become an LIS educator. The issues related to insufficient diversity in LIS Ph.D.s cascades to the realm of practitioners, as well. The majority of African American librarians do not feel that they work in discrimination-free environments.36 Were there more African Americans with doctoral degrees in LIS working both as LIS faculty and as library administrators, feelings about acceptance of diversity among li- brary professionals would likely be improved. The issues examined in this paper are clearly complicated and create many more questions than answers. However, the issues examined in it are vital to LIS education. It is the obligation of LIS researchers to better un- derstand the reasons for the limited diversity and the limited scholarship about diversity issues in LIS doctoral programs and faculties. Further, these issues are not limited to just ethnic populations; there are other underrepresented populations, such as persons with disabilities, whose limited presence in LIS faculties merits attention. As a society, the United States continues to become more diverse. Without greater diversity in LIS faculty, graduates of master's and doctoral programs will be insufficiently prepared to meet the diverse information needs of the diverse cultures in the United States. References 1 . E. J. Josey, "The Challenges of Cultural Diversity in the Recruitment of Faculty and Stu- dents from Diverse Backgrounds," Journal of Education for Library and Information Sci- ence 34 (1993): 302-31 1 ; Keith Curry Lance, "Racial and Ethnic Diversity of U.S. Library Workers ," American Libraries 36, no. 5 (2005): 41-43; and Maurice B. Wheeler, "Faculty Development and Cultural Diversity in Teaching: LIS Education's Last Frontier," in Unfin- ished Business: Race, Equity, and Diversity in Library and Information Science Education, ed. Maurice B. Wheeler, 181-192 (Lantham, MD: Scarecrow Press, 2005). 2. Claudia J. Gollop, "Library and Information Science Education: Preparing Future Librari- ans for a Multicultural Society," College and Research Libraries 60, no. 4 (1999): 385-395; the quotation is on p. 389. 3. Josey, 1993, note 1. 4. Timothy W. Sineath, "Faculty," in ALISE Library and Information Science Education Sta- tistical Report 2004, eds. Evelyn H. Daniel and Jerry D. Saye (Oakridge, TN: Association for Library and Information Science Education, 2005). 5. Ibid., note 4. 6. Ibid. 7. Mark Winston, "Communication and Difficult Topics in LIS Education: Teaching and Learning about Diversity in the Classroom," in Unfinished Business: Race, Equity, and Di- versity in Library and Information Science Education, ed. Maurice B. Wheeler, 171-180 (Lantham, MD: Scarecrow Press, 2005). 8. Martin Anderson, Alexander W. Astin, Derrick A. Bell, Jr., Johnetta B. Cole, Amitai Etzioni, Walter Gellhorn, Phillip A. Griffiths, Andrew Hacker, Theodore M. Hesburgh, Walter E. Massey, and Reginald Wilson, "Why the Shortage of Black Professors?," The Journal ofBlacks in Higher Education 10, no. 1 (1993): 25-34; Michelle R.Howard- Vital, "African- American Women in Higher Education: Struggling to Gain Identity," Journal of
200 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Black Studies 20, no. 2 ( 1 989): 1 80- 1 9 1 ; Dolan Hubbard, "Education without Representa- tion," Black Issues in Higher Education 19, no. 17 (2002): 1-2; and Orlando L. Taylor, "Ph.D. trends defer Dreams of Faculty Diversity," Black Issues in Higher Education 1 5, no. 3 (1998): 84. 9. Klaus Musmann, "The Ugly Side of Librarianship: Segregation in Library Services from 1900 to 1950," in Untold Stories: Civil Rights, Libraries, and Black Librarianship, ed. John Mark Tucker, 78-92 (Champaign, IL: University of Illinois, 1998). 10. Ibid., note 9. 11. R. R. DuMont, "The Educating of Black Librarians: An Historical Perspective," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 26 (1986): 233-249, and Musmann, "Ugly Side of Librarianship," note 9. 12. DuMont, "Educating of Black Librarians," note 1 1 ; Eliza Atkins Gleason, The Southern Negro and the Public Library (Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1941); E. J. Josey, The Black Librarian in America (Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press, 1 970); and E.J. Josey and Marva L. DeLoach, Handbook of Black Librarianship, 2nd ed. (Lanham, MD: Scare- crow Press, 2000). 13. Gleason, Southern Negro, note 12; and Mussman, Ugly Side of Librarianship," note 9. 14. Ibid. 15. Dumont, "Educating of Black Librarians," note 11; and Josey and DeLoach, Handbook, note 12. 16. R. L. Albritton, "The Founding and Prevalence of African- American Social Libraries and Historical Societies, 1 828-1 9 1 8: Gatekeepers of Early Black History, Collections, and Lit- erature." in Untold Stories: Civil Rights, Libraries, and Black Librarianship, ed. John Mark Tucker, 23-46 (Champaign, IL: University of Illinois, 1998); and Kathryn C. Stevenson, "Annette Lewis Phinazee and the North Carolina Central University School of Library and Information Science, 1970-1983," in Educating Black Librarians, ed. Benjamin F. Spellers, Jr., 113-140 (Jefferson, NC: McFarland & Company, 1991). 17. Dumont, "Educating of Black Librarians," note 1 1 . 1 8. Josey and DeLoach, Handbook, note 1 2; L. Shiflett, 'The American Library Association's Quest for a Black Library School, Journal of Education for Library and Information Sci- ence 35 (1994): 68-72; and Stevenson, Annette Lewis Phinazee," note 16. 19. Dumont, "Educating of Black Librarians," note 1 1 ; and Josey and DeLoach, Handbook, note 12. 20. R. L. Woods, "Invisible Women: The Experiences of Black Female Doctoral Students at the University of Michigan," in Sisters of the Academy: Emergent Black Women Scholars in Higher Education, eds. Reitumetse O. Mabokela and Anna L. Green, 1 05-1 1 6 (Sterling, VA: Stylus Publishing, 2001); p. 107. 2 1 . Evelyn H. Daniel and Jerry D. Saye, eds., Library and Information Science Education Sta- tistical Report, Vols. 16-25 (Oakridge, TN: Association for Library and Information Sci- ence Education, 1995-2004). 22. Arthur F. Holmes, Contours of a Worldview (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans Press, 1983). 23. George J. Dei, "Why Write Back? The Role of Afrocentric Discourse in Social Change," Canadian Journal of Education 23, no. 2 (1998): 200-208; and Woods, "Invisible Women," note 20. 24. Dei, "Why Write Back?" note 23; and Woods, "Invisible Women," note 20. 25. Gollop, "Library and Information Science Education," note 2, p. 388. 26. Lance, "Racial and Ethnic Diversity," note 1 ; and Sineath, "Faculty," note 4. 27. Ibid. 28. Denise Adkins & I. Espinal, 'The Diversity Mandate," Library Journal 45, no. 2 (2004): 1 49-1 61 ; and Mary Jo Lynch, "What We Now Know about Libraries," American Libraries 31, no. 2 (2000): 8-9.
A Decade of Doctorates 201 29. Herman L. Totten, "Ethnic Diversity in Library Schools: Completing the Education Cy- cle ," Texas Library Journal 76, no. 1 (2000): 16-19; the quotation is on p. 16. 30. Ibid., note 26. 31. Mark Winston and Kimberly Walstad, "Recruitment and Diversity: A Research Study of Bilingualism and Library Services," Library & Information Science Research 28 (2006): 390-406. 32. Wheeler, " Faculty Development," note 1, p. 184. 33. Mark Winston, 'The Role of Recruitment in Achieving Goals Related to Diversity," Col- lege and Research Libraries 59, no. 3 (1998): 240-247. 34. Paul T. Jaeger and Renee E. Franklin, "The Virtuous Circle: Diversifying LIS Faculties to Create More Inclusive Library Services and Outreach," Education Libraries 30, no. 1 (2007): 20-26. 35. Lorna Peterson, "Curriculum Reform and Diversity," in Unfinished Business: Race, Eq- uity, and Diversity in Library and Information Science Education, ed. Maurice B. Wheeler, 163-170 (Lantham, MD: Scarecrow Press, 2005). 36. Cynthia Preston, "Perceptions of Discriminatory Practices and Attitudes: A Survey of Af- rican American Librarians," College and Research Libraries 59, no. 5 (1998): 434-445.