EFFECTS OF READING UPON ATTITUDES TOWARD THE NEGRO RACE' EVALENE P. JACKSON IBRARIANS often talk about the so- cial significance of the library, but assumptions that reading-the li- brary product-is an activity bringing about socially desirable results have not yet been substantiated by any great amount of experimental evidence. One socially significant result of read- ing might be changed attitudes brought about by reading materials dealing with the objects or values toward which those attitudes were directed. The purposes of the study described in this paper were: (i) to investigate the effects of reading fiction upon the attitudes toward the Negro race of a group of southern white children, assuming a decrease in prejudice against that race to be desirable, and (2) to show the applicability to a library problem of a technique borrowed from social psychology. THE MEASUREMENT OF ATTITUDES The concept of attitudes has been widely used by social psychologists. All- port, upon an examination of sixteen def- initions of attitudes, found a common thread running through all of them: "In one way or another each [definition] re- gards the essential feature of attitude as a preparation or readiness for response. "2 An attitude is "a mental and neural state of readiness, organized through experi- ence, exerting a directive or dynamic in- fluence upon the individual's response to all objects and situations with which it is related."3 It has been called "probably the most distinctive and indispensable concept in contemporary American social psychology."4 Attitudes are measurable by scales de- signed to indicate the degree of their prejudice in favor of or against an object, such as a race or a country. The use of such a device makes it possible for an in- vestigator to measure attitudes toward certain objects before and after the read- ing of material dealing with those ob- jects and, under properly controlled con- ditions, to detect the influence of this reading upon them. According to general belief, our atti- tudes tend to be favorable toward the fa- miliar; through experience we become familiar with, and less hostile toward, the strange.5 Much of the hostility toward the Negro is a result of the failure of the southern white to perceive that the Ne- gro is essentially a creature like himself. The conditions of southern culture give him few opportunities of seeing the Ne- gro in roles other than those conforming to his stereotype of the Negro as a serv- ant. As Dollard says: It is often something of a discovery when white people learn that there are Negro people I A paper based on a study reported in Miss Jack- son's Master's essay, submitted to the School of Li- brary Service, Columbia University, in 1942. 2 Gordon W. Ailport, "Attitudes," in Carl Mur- chison (ed.), A Handbook of Social Psychology (Wor- cester, Mass.: Clark University Press, I935), p. 805. 3 Ibid., p. 8io. 4 Ibid., p. 798. s Truman L. Kelley and A. C. Krey, Tests and Measurements in the Social Sciences ("Report of the Commission on the Social Studies," Part IV [New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 'I9341), p. 82. 47
48 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY of refined feeling and noteworthy talent, be- cause they stand in such sharp contrast to the white-caste stereotype of the Negro.6 Reading might serve to change this stereotype through its provision of a vi- carious experience of Negro life-an ex- perience difficult to come by in actual living. This reading should, of course, emphasize the humanity of the Negro rather than the ways in which the white man supposes that he differs from him- self. Educators have believed that reading helps to fix such attitudes. Rosenblatt feels that books may help fix attitudes toward different races; consider the influence, for instance, of the fact that the child usually encounters the Negro pre- sented as an object for laughter or at best as a kind of prize domestic animal, as in so many novels of the South purporting to show the kind- ness of masters to servants. The repeated im- pact of such images bodied forth in poems, nov- els, plays, and biographies surely adds some- thing to the complex pressures acting on the in- dividual and leading him to crystallize his sense of the world about him and his sense of the ap- propriate attitudes to assume toward it.7 I. A. Richards has called the attitudes evoked the important part of any experi- ence.' Art he regards as a potent experi- ence in bringing about growth and change. Indeed, he holds that among all the agents by which "the widening of the sphere of human sensibility" may be brought about, the arts are the most powerful, since it is through them that men may most co- operate and in these experiences that the mind most easily and with least interference organizes itself.9 It was assumed for the purpose of this study that a story might serve as such an agent. It was believed that the attitudes of a group of southern white children toward the Negro race might be modified by reading fiction presenting that race in a sympathetic light. The problem of attitude modification has been approached by others. No at- tempt is made to review the literature of the subject here, since adequate sum- maries are available elsewhere. The in- terested reader is referred to Allport,'0 to Droba," and to Dunham.'2 Murphy, Murphy, and Newcomb have also re- viewed experimental studies of the effects of extra-school experiences, some of which involved reading, upon attitudes.'3 To summarize the conclusions reached: "Experimental studies of the possibility of affecting attitudes have in general yielded positive results, although the changes have usually been of a small or- der of magnitude."''4 Such investiga- tions have usually followed a pattern: (i) the measurement of the attitudes in question, (2) the application of some stimulus designed to affect these atti- tudes, and (3) a second measurement of the attitudes to ascertain the change pro- duced in them by the stimulus. Several studies report the use of reading as such a stimulus. According to Waples et al., 6John Dollard, Caste and Class in a Southern Town (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1937), P. 73- 7 Louise M. Rosenblatt, Literature as Exploration (New York: D. Appleton-Century Co., I938), p. 227. 8 Principles of Literary Criticism (New York: Harcourt, Brace & Co., 1925), p. I32. 9 Ibid., pp. I32-33. Op. ci., pp. 798-844. Daniel D. Droba, "Topical Summaries of Cur- rent Literature: Social Attitudes," American Jour- nal of Sociology, XXXIX (1I934), 513-24. I2 H. Warren Dunham, "Topical Summaries of Current Literature: Social Attitudes," American Journal of Sociology, XLVI (1940), 344-75. 13 Gardner Murphy, Lois Barclay Murphy, and Theodore M. Newcomb, Experimental Social Psy- chology (rev. ed.; New York: Harper & Bros., I937), pp. 956-59. 14 Otto Klineberg, Social Psychology (New York: Henry Holt & Co., 1940), p. 371.
EFFECTS OF READING UPON ATTITUDES 49 such studies ". ... have repeatedly shown that reading can change attitudes."'Is So far as the investigator knows, this is the first study of changes in attitudes to- ward the Negro race as a result of reading fiction. Lasker cites the cases of children who claimed that they had acquired ra- cial attitudes through reading stories. Anti-Jewish attitudes were, in one in- stance, aroused by reading a fairy tale and confirmed years later by the Mer- chant of Venice. Another child learned to love the Germans through their litera- ture to such an extent that she was to some degree proof against propaganda during the First World War.'6 THE PLAN OF THIS STUDY This study follows the same general pattern described above in its use of (i) an initial measurement of attitudes, (2) an experimental situation, and (3) a sub- sequent measurement of attitudes. Two equated groups of junior high school chil- dren were used as subjects, an experi- mental group reading fiction presenting the Negro race in a sympathetic light and a control group doing no reading. Atti- tudes were measured for a third time after a fortnight to ascertain if the change produced by the reading was last- ing. In order to equate factors which might, if not controlled, influence atti- tude shifts, groups were matched to in- sure similarity. The factors in respect to which they were matched were sex, intel- ligence, chronological age, and socioeco- nomic status. The bearing of these fac- tors upon attitudes is uncertain. There is no consensus in regard to the relation between sex differences and prejudice for or against the Negro. Mur- phy, Murphy, and Newcomb point out: Considerable evidence is at hand regarding sex differences in racial attitudes, but no gen- eralizations whatever are warranted. Both men and women, according to various investigations, have been found to be "reliably" more favorable toward the Negro, while no differences at all are reported in still others. Nothing short of a com- parison of males and females from the same homes can give us authentic information on this point, and we know of no such evidence.X7 The same number of male and female children were, however, used in each group. Children from both groups were like- wise paired according to intelligence, for, "other things equal, .... individuals of low intelligence may be presumed to bor- row ready-made attitude stereotypes most freely."1I8 It would be thus as- sumed that less intelligent subjects were more conventionally southern, i.e., more unfavorably prejudiced, in their attitudes toward Negroes than subjects of greater intelligence. It is not known how soon anti-Negro prejudice develops in children, but racial attitudes are not innate. This brings up the question of when these prejudices appear, for once it is granted that prejudice against races is not a native trait there must, of course, be age differences in racial attitudes, since attitudes develop during some period of time. The only question is: How early and how rapidly do they develop?'9 There is some evidence that anti-Negro prejudice develops early even in children outside the southern environment.2" The suggestion has been made that many dif- ferences are simply the result of living under certain cultural conditions.21 Every i5 Douglas Waples, Bernard Berelson, and Frank- lyn R. Bradshaw, What Reading Does to People (Chi- cago: University of Chicago Press, I94I), p. io8. 16 Bruno Lasker, Race Attitudes in Children (New York: Henry Holt & Co., I929), pp. I63-65. "7Op. Cit., p- 914. IS Ibid., p. 1045 20 Ibid., p. 925. '19 Ibid., p. 925. 2 _ I., pp. 919, 980.
50 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY effort was made to secure children who had been immersed in this particular cul- ture for the same length of time; all chosen were natives of Atlanta, Georgia. There is no certainty that the socio- economic status of an individual influ- ences his attitudes, and in view of the complicated network of influences responsible for attitude formation, it seems posi- tively naive to expect to find simple correlations between socio-economic status and a particular attitude.22 Because of the lack of evidence on this point and the possibility of increased animosity (due to greater economic rival- ry) on the part of children from poorer homes, children were also matched in this respect. The Sims score card for socioeconomic status23 was used for ob- taining the necessary data on the chil- dren's background. Data on sex, intelligence, and chrono- logical age were secured from school rec- ords. The children were equated, pair by pair, for the first two factors. The mean chronological age and the mean socio- economic status for the two groups were matched, the differences between the means exceeding the probable error of those means in neither case. It was originally planned to secure fic- tion to use in this experiment from among children's books in current use in libraries. Certain arbitrary standards, largely based upon common sense, were adopted for purposes of selection. The material had to be a story about a Negro. It had to provide a sympathetic and in- teresting reading experience for children twelve to fourteen years of age. Prefer- ably, it should stress the similarity of the needs and personality of the Negro child to those of the white child, while showing the dissimilarity of the circumstances and opportunities of his life. Of necessity the story or passage could not be beyond the reading ability of the average eighth- grade child. To achieve these objectives the follow- ing criteria were set up: i. Presentation of the Negro as a nor- mal human being, essentially similar to the white but denied his opportunities for achievement and self-expression. 2. Simple, vivid narrative quality. 3. Situations of interest to junior high school students. The interest of such a group would include home, school, ad- venture, and a dawning interest in adult books.24 4. A vocabulary level suitable to the seventh grade. The level was kept a grade lower than that of the children in order to facilitate comprehension. 5. Avoidance of dialect. Lasker feels that "one of the worse features of popu- lar literature for children, from the point of view of racial attitudes, is the pigeon English or ridiculous diction that is put into the mouth of foreigners. "25 While Negro dialect is not precisely pidgin Eng- lish to the southern white child, it is a factor which leads to a feeling of superi- ority when seen in print. 6. A reading time of no more than twenty-five minutes, since it was neces- sary to adapt the experiment to the exi- gencies of the school schedule. A search for a story meeting these re- quirements was unsuccessful, and a short story was therefore constructed accord- ing to these criteria. While any attempt to conform to such principles of propa- 22ibid., p. Ioi5. 23 Sims Score Card for Socio-economic Status, Form C (Bloomington, Ill.: Public School Pub. Co., 1927). 24 Lewis M. Terman and Margaret Lima, Chil- dren's Reading (2d ed.; New York: D. Appleton & Co., I931), pp. 41-43. 25 Op. Cst., p. 205.
EFFECTS OF READING UPON ATTITUDES 51 ganda as those presented by Doob26 was avoided, it cannot be denied that the purpose was "to control the attitudes of .... indivlduals" ;27 therefore, strictly speaking, the passage used falls within the category of propaganda. No claim to literary excellence is made. The story was used as a makeshift in lieu of better material. The children, however, evinced their interest by numerous questions as to the subsequent fate of the boy about whom the story was written. The story was first written, then checked with the Thorndike word list28 in order to eliminate words beyond the seventh-grade level, i.e., those beyond the first 8,000.29 The Hinckley scale for measuring at- titudes toward the Negro was used in as- certaining the attitudes of the groups. This scale consists of two forms, A and B, and is one of a series, "The Measurement of Social Attitudes," constructed accord- ing to principles devised by L. L. Thur- stone,30 and published by the University of Chicago Press. The psychophysical method, which Thurstone used, is based upon the con- ception of degrees of favorable or un- favorable prejudice as shown by the per- son's agreement or disagreement with certain statements. For instance: agree- ment with the statement, "Inherently the Negro and the white man are equal," is evidence of considerable favorableness toward the Negro. Conversely, agree- ment with the statement, "I place the Negro on the same social basis as I would a mule," is evidence of unfavorable preju- dice. The process of constructing the scale was this. The attitude to be meas- ured was stated. From one hundred to one hundred and fifty statements about this attitude were collected from maga- zines, newspapers, people, etc. The state- ments, which express unfavorable preju- dice, neutrality, and favorableness, were then rated by a number of judges as to the degree of these qualities which they indicated. The scale value assigned to each item was the median of all the scale values assigned by the judges. State- ments receiving widely differing judg- ments were discarded as unsuitable. Suitable statements were used in the final scale, care being taken that they were evenly spaced with respect to favor- ableness. The person whose attitudes are being tested checks all statements with which he agrees, and his score is the median scale value for all those indorsed. Scores may be interpreted according to the following table: o.o- i.9 Strongly prejudiced against the Negro 2.0- 3.9 Prejudiced against the Negro 4.0- 6.9 Neutral position 7.0- 8.9 Liberal toward the Negro 9.0-io.9 Very liberal toward the Negro31 The statements on both forms of the scale were checked for vocabulary diffi- culty, and words beyond the seventh- grade level were replaced by synonyms falling within it. The procedure for administering the scales was as follows: (i) Form A was administered to both groups, (2) the ex- 6 Leonard W. Doob, Propaganda: Its Psychology and Technique (New York: Henry Holt & Co., I935). 27 Ibid., p. 89. 28 Edward L. Thorndike, A Teacher's Word Book of the Twenty Thousand Words Found Most Fre- quently and Widely in General Reading for Children and Young People (New York: Teachers College, Co- lumbia University, I932). 29 Edward L. Thomdike, "The Vocabularies of Juvenile Books," Library Quarterly, V (1935), I54. 30 L. L. Thurstone and E. J. Chave, The Measwue- ment of Attitude (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1929). 35Instructionsfor Using the Scale "Attitude toward the Negro" (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1930).
52 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY perimental group read the story, the con- trol group did not, (3) Form B was ad- ministered to both groups. About I2 minutes was required for each of the two testing periods. The children were told that there were no right and wrong answers, that what the examiner wished was a frank expression of opinion, and that no use would be made of the results that would in any way influence their school stand- ing. The children in the experimental group were asked to read the material, presented in mimeographed form, as if it were a story in a book which they were reading for fun, not as a lesson to be learned. Questions were allowed, and an informal atmosphere was encouraged. There was no formal discussion, although subjects were told when Form B of the scale was distributed that, after checking it, they might talk about the story. They were extremely co-operative and asked numerous questions at the end of the ex- periment, chiefly about the Negro boy in the story and what became of him. The time allowed for reading was twenty-five minutes, all subjects finishing well within that period of time. RESULTS The mean score for the experimental group on Form A of the Hinckley scale was 6.54 with a sigma of o.8 at the time of the initial measurement of attitudes. The mean score for the control group was 6.23 with a sigma of i.oi. These scores place both groups at least within the neutral range (4.o-6.9). According to Waples et al., neutral attitudes indicate a good possibility for a shift in the direction de- sired after reading.32 After the experimental group had read the story, the mean of their attitudes, as measured on Form B of the scale, was 7.49, sigma o.93; while the mean for the control group was only 6.25, sigma 1.24. Since the differences between the two scores was I.24 and the sigma of the dif- ference 0.32, this represents a small but significant change in the attitudes of the experimentals, now within the liber- al range (7.o-8.9). The experimentals gained 0.93 over their own initial atti- tudes-a shift which is likewise signifi- cant. At the end of two weeks, when Form A of the scale was repeated, the gain had been lost. The mean score of the experi- mental group was only 6.27, sigma i.I6, a slightly lower score than was achieved at the beginning of the experiment. The mean score of the control group was 6.I, sigma o.87. Some regression toward the original position was to have been expected, al- though "even small amounts (fifteen minutes) of reading have been known to produce an attitude change which will be measurable at the end of eight months."33 Although this study was planned in terms of a single experimental situation, curiosity on the part of the investigator prompted a second trial using the same techniques and materials, but groups from a different school. The second con- trol and experimental groups were matched, each to each, by the method employed in matching children in the first experiment. On the second test the experimental group scored 6.75, sigma i.i; the control, 5.65, sigma I.24. The difference was I. IO in favor of the experi- mentals, the sigma of the difference 0.45. This does not indicate complete reliabil- ity. 3 Waples, Berelson, and Bradshaw, op. cit., p. IOO. 33Ibid., p. IO.
EFFECTS OF READING UPON ATTITUDES 53 CONCLUSIONS A small but significant shift from a less to a more favorable attitude toward the Negro race, as measured by the Hinckley scale, was indicated by the mean scores of the experimental group in the first school after reading fiction which presented that race in a sympathetic light. This shift was not lasting. A repe- tition of the experiment in a second school revealed a small but insignificant shift in the same direction on the part of the experimentals. In this particular situation reading does seem to have had a measurable so- cial effect, if not a lasting one. The find- ings are in accord with what is known of the influence of reading upon attitudes. It must be remembered that in both schools experimental and control groups were equated within the particular school. There was no attempt to equate the schools with each other. The chil- dren at the first school were slightly more intelligent than those at the second, whereas the children from the second school were slightly older than those from the first. In respect to socioeconomic status, children from the first school were of a very high status while those from the second were of a high status. It is felt that too little is known of the cor- relation of intelligence, chronological age, and socioeconomic status with atti- tudes or attitude change to offer this as an explanation of the differences in the influence of reading on the attitudes of the children in the two schools. If other factors, not present in the circumstances of the first experiment, entered into the second, the investigator is unaware of them. Differences might possibly have resulted from such condi- tions as failure on the part of the investi- gator to secure as friendly a relationship with subjects or less interest on the part of the children in the reading matter. A further explanation of these factors is outside the scope of this study, which included no examination of predisposi- tions of subjects which might make them more, or less, responsive to particular reading materials. Under similar circum- stances the attitudes of the first experi- mental group shifted significantly, the attitudes of the second group did not. The change effected by reading was not lasting. The score of the experimen- tal group on the third test indicated that the gain made after reading fiction was lost in two weeks.' It should be remem- bered that the time involved was brief, the reading and the two tests all falling within an hour. Findings cannot be used to forecast action on the part of the sub- jects, for, as Kelley and Krey point out, a test of attitude administered [after emotion which caused violent change] .... would have little value in predicting future conduct. Modi- fication of such attitudes can be accomplished only by repeated or reinforced treatment ex- tending at least through school years and often beyond that time.34 It is hoped that further studies will be made of the influence of reading upon attitudes. Evidence as to the cumulative effect of the reading experience is par- ticularly needed, as this study involved only one such experience, the result of which was not lasting. Comparisons of the relative efficacy of various types of reading materials in producing attitude change might also be made. Investigations of the possibility of using other scales from the fields of psy- chology and social psychology in study- ing library problems might be carried further, since some of these scales should be applicable. For example, evidence as 34 Kelley and Krey, op. cit., p. 93.
54 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY to the influence of reading upon such personality traits as life-values might be gathered by employing similar tech- niques and the Allport-Vernon scale.35 This scale consists of a number of ques- tions designed to reveal the relative dom- inance in the personality of several val- ues: aesthetic, economic, social, reli- gious, political, and theoretical. Exami- nation of the Hildreth36 bibliography of mental tests and rating scales and the Buros bibliographies37 should suggest some of the ways of going about col- lecting data to answer questions now asked as to the ways in which reading influences readers. In view of the fact that a change in attitude was produced by reading in a specific situation, librarians might be urged to give more representation to fic- tion in which the Negro is presented in a natural and sympathetic light. Publish- ers should be encouraged to make avail- able more stories of this type suitable for children. An effort should be made to publicize such material to children and to adults. This study makes no pretense of being more than an approach to the problem of the social significance of reading, and it has touched upon but one limited aspect of that problem. The results do seem to indicate the possibility, upon the basis of further experiments with such instru- ments and the development and perfec- tion of others, of measuring the influence of reading upon communities in terms of such effects as changed attitudes. The attitudes of a school toward a cer- tain race or social problem might be measured at the beginning of a term. If, during that term, a library program de- signed to bring about more favorable at- titudes toward that race or problem was planned and carried out, the influence of the library upon these attitudes might be measured by a repetition of the scale. Another school in which no such program was tried could, if desined, be used as a control. In the case of the public library, the effects of a program designed to bring about better race relationships might be measured by testing samples of the popu- lation before, during, and at the end of that program. This, of course, implies the co-operation of the community, which depends largely upon its attitudes toward the library. Such tests might be made at community meetings, if the aud- ience were representative of the library public. The data found in this study are less useful as evidence of the influence of reading upon attitudes than as the dem- onstration of a method of evaluating li- brary service in terms of social signifi- cance. Further studies utilizing similar methods and producing more evidence should suggest further applications. 35 Gordon W. Allport and Philip E. Vernon, A Study of Values (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co., '93'). 36 Gertrude H. Hildreth, A Bibliography of Men- tal Tests and Rating Scales (2d ed.; New York: Psy- chological Corp., I1939). 37 Oscar K. Buros, Educational, Psychological, and Personality Tests of I933, I934 and 1935 ("Rutgers University Bulletins," Vol. XIII, No. i; "Studies in Education," No. 9 [New Brunswick: School of Edu- cation, Rutgers University, 1936]). Oscar K. Buros, Educational, Psychological, and Personality Tests of 1936 ("Rutgers University Bul- letins," Vol. XIV, No. 2A; "Studies in Education," No. I i [New Brunswick: School of Education, Rut- gers University, 19371). Oscar K. Buros, Mental Measurements Year- book (New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, I938 ).