AN ARGUMENT FOR SELECTIVITY IN THE ACQUISITION OF AIATERIALS FOR RESEARCH LIBRARIES MARGIT KRAFT "The Superfluous is an Enemy to the Necessary." -NrETZCHE I II S OME contradictions in our philos- ophy of librarianship have con- tributed in the past and will, if they remain unchecked, increasingly contribute to the difficulties libraries must face now and in the future. They involve goals. Automation; micropho- tography; photoduplication; regional or national information, documentation, and storage centers; and centralized or co-operative cataloging and acquisition- infg are only techniques. These tech- niques will solve our problems only if there are logical and clearly defined goals toward which they can be ap- plied. Tnese devices will only aggravate our problems if, for want of goals, they make it possible for us to postpone solu- tions for another few years. The difference between a philosophy and a technique is that a philosophy sets goals, while a technique devises means to achieve these goals. If goals are nebulous, technique takes over and runs wild. Because of today's technical possibilities, we are in the greatest dan- ger that the superabundance of library techniques will completely obscure both library goals and the purpose for which libraries exist. This not only will ruin the profession by severing librarianship from its scholarly basis, but it will also ruin libraries and fulfil Goethe's pre- diction that the library will gradually decline from a treasure house to a store- house and from there to a junk room.' Academaic libraries, particularly uni- versity libraries, are institutions whose purpose is to preserve, organize, and make accessible those graphic records that have contributed in the past and are contributing in the present to the advancement of knowledge. They are not institutions whose purpose is to pre- serve the output of the printing presses. In spite of their fundamental difference, these two concepts are constantly being substituted for each other; as a result, confusion is created and a rational solu- tion for the extremely difficult problems arising from the explosion of knowl- edge is hindered. The collection is the raison d'etre of a library, and the most vital decision any library can make is what should or should not be added to the collection. Traditionally and logically, it is the function of the librarian to make this decision. In the general assembly of the Sorbonne on December 23, 1780, J. B. Cotton des Houssayes, the newly ap- pointed librarian, said: A librarian truly worthy of the name should . . .have explored in advance every region of the empire of letters, to enable him afterwards to serve as a faithful guide to all who may de- sire to survey it. And though it is by no means my intention to give the preference above all other sciences to the science of bibliography, which is nothing more than an exact and crit- 1 Georg Leyh, "Der Bibliothekar und sein Beruf," in Ilandbuch der Bibliothekswissenschaft (2d ed.; Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz, 1961), 2:62. 284
AN ARGUMENT FOR SELECTIVITY 285 ical acquaintance with the productions of the intellect, it will nevertheless be permitted me to consider this science as the forerunner of all the others, as their guide, who is to light them with his torch.2 Cotton des Houssayes emphasizes the need for subject knowledge, for proper classification of the book collection, and for judicious acquisitioning. One of the most disastrous results of the confusion of librarianship with li- brary technique is that most American academic librarians are not equipped to assume the responsibility for book selection. On the Continent, academic librarians complete graduate studies in subject fields before being admitted to practical and theoretical training in li- brarianship and thus are better quali- fied to assume full responsibility for the building of their collections. On the other hand, the overwhelming majority of American academic librarians enter library school after receiving a Bache- lor's degree in the liberal arts and com- pleting a one-year course in library techniques. Young people so prepared cannot be called "subject specialists," nor should they be intrusted with the building-up of the collection. Under these circumstances, the faculty must assume responsibility for building up the collection, in spite of all the disad- vantages which this creates.3 Having thus abdicated from their primary responsibility, it is small won- der that academic librarians do not de- vote nmuch thought to the basic issues of book celection for academic libraries.4 Having learned dozens of titles of bib- liographies and having learned how to find more titles-even in subjects of which they know nothing-they come out of library school with the conviction that the knowledge of many book titles will turn them into good librarians. Being intellectually unequipped for judging the importance and the value of the printed word in scholarly sub- jects, they are willing to worship all printed words. Having thus forsaken the responsibility for judging quality, the librarian becomes enamored with quantity, and the door is opened for larger and larger collections, with the result that "the American library with the smallest average yearly rate of growth approaches the German library with the largest rate. Every American library shows a larger growth rate than all but one of the German institutions." Between 1850 and 1960 "the mean and median yearly additions of the German libraries increased seven and ten times respectively; those of the American li- braries about fifty times."' If the size of the collection were as decisive in determining the quality of scholarship as American librarians be- lieve, it would logically follow that American scholarship must far surpass 2 Duties and Qualifications of a Librarian: A Discourse Pronounced in the General Assembly of the Sorbonne, December 23, 1780 (Chicago: McClurg, 1960), pp. 37-38. (Italics are mine.) 3It is generally acknowledged within the pro- fession that reliance on a constantly changing faculty for developing a collection leads to un- balance and lopsidedness. Specialists quite naturally favor their own specialties and usually have a limited perspective on the field and no knowl- edge of the collection as a whole. 'J. Periam Danton, Book Selection and Col- lections: A Comparison of German and American University Libraries (New York: Columbia Uni- versity Press, 1963). This study represents a kind of "state-of-the-art" review of American book- selection policies, reflecting the misconceptions that underlie such policies. Consequently, frequent references are made to it in this article. Danton examined the literature on book selection very thoroughly and was astonished by the paucity of literature dealing with the basic issues of book selection, particularly as regards book selection for university libraries (p. xxi). 6 Ibid., pp. 103-4.
286 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY European scholarship, because Euro- pean libraries are generally much small- er and grow much more slowly. I do not know if any librarian or scholar actual- ly holds this conviction, but the diver- gence in size of European and American libraries raises these questions: Are the huge collections made in America really necessary? Do they contribute to schol- arly progress as much as their defend- ers insist they do? Are the time, the ener- gy, the manpower, and the money spent in their acquisition, organization, and servicing rationally expended, or could these expenditures be spent in more fruitful ways? Will collections reaching into the millions and increasing at an alarming rate6 remain intellectually viable? Do we help the advancement of scholarship with these mammoth col- lections, or do we contribute to its suffo- cation? The gravity of these questions makes all the other problems libraries face seem puny in comparison. The questions are particularly important be- cause of recent advances in techniques. Before we go too deeply into automa- tion or information retrieval, we should be sure that we know not only in which fields such techniques are sensible but before that what is worth committing to the memory of the computer.7 The com- puter will no doubt be able to handle quantity faster and better than today's librarian, but it will be even less able to differentiate between quantity and quality. Only adequately educated hu- man intellect can do that. III Basically, three arguments are ad- vanced to justify a policy that leads to the gigantic collections in the United States. They are: 1. The ideal of a research collection is completeness, meaning the acquisi- tion of the entire output of the printing presses of the past, the present, and the future, and, in addition, great quanti- ties of manuscripts. 2. The library collects not only for the present but also for the future, for all future. 3. A research library never becomes obsolete. The chorus of American librarians wlho defend this ideal of comprehensive- ness is so great8 that one feels like a 6 0. C. Dunn, W. F. Seibert, and Janice A. Scheuneman, The Past and Likely Future of 58 Research Libraries, 1951-1980: A Statistical Study of Growth and Change (Lafayette, Ind.: University Libraries and Audio Visual Center, Pur- due University, 1965). This valuable study should be required reading for every librarian concerned with book selection, since it might frighten him into re-evaluating his policies. The study shows that book collections-even of the largest libraries -are growing at alarming rates which give no indication of slowing down. a Samuel A. Goudsmit, "Is the Literature Worth Retrieving?" Physics Today (September, 1966), 19:52. Goudsmit makes the interesting point that in physics only review articles and data compi- lations should be committed to the memory of the computer, since original articles seldom are a helpful source of information. Their nomenclature and techniques become obsolete within a few years with the result that they are not understood by later generations. 8 Only a few typical references can be cited here; the interested reader is referred to the sources cited in Danton's book. Rollin A. Sawyer, "Book Selection in the Refer- ence Department of the New York Public Library," College and Research Libraries (December, 1944), 6:20. "The ideal objective of such a library is a complete record of human thought, emotion, and action . . . it should have everything." Changing Patterns of Scholarship antd the Future of Research Libraries: A Symposium in Celebration of the 200th Anniversary of the Establishment of the University of Pennsylvania Library (Phil- adelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1951). Crane Brinton expects the library to collect everything since there is a new demand for the tenth-rate, meaningless, trivial, trash, or worse (pp. 11-12). In the same symposium Verner W. Clapp remarks, "It may seem wholly unrealistic to dis- cuss this ideal [of comprehensiveness]. But I
AN ARGUMENT FOR SELECTIVITY 2g7 heretic even to question it. Yet, Taoist philosophy says: "When you can see a reason for doubting, at a point where no one has hitherto seen a reason for doubting, then you are making prog- ress." Our most urgent task today is to question this ideal. As long as librarians accept comprehensiveness as an ideal and believe that no argument other than expediency, particularly financial ex- pediency, can be advanced against it,9 the ideal of comprehensiveness will haunt the profession like a ghost and will influence the acquisition policy of every American institution. It is there- fore essential to realize that decisive in- tellectual reasons contradict this ideal and unmask it as a dangerous dogma. IV The urge to preserve an object assumes it has value. It can have sub- jective value, in which case the number of "valuable" objects is as limitless as are individual tastes and preferences. On the other hand, it can be considered worth saving for its value in relation to some ideal to which a community sub- scribes. Without the differentiation be- tween subjective and objective value, no intellectual basis for a collection policy in any kind of public library can exist. Without criteria to differentiate between the good and the bad, the worthwhile and the worthless, the nec- essary and the superfluous, book col- lecting becomes a race for quantity be- tween competing institutions. We do not know when libraries started, but they originated at a time when writing was a difficult and cum- bersome art mastered by only a few members of the intellectual elite. In consequence, only that which was im- portant was written down. It was writ- ten down to be preserved. To be written and to be valuable were synonymous. This awe for the written word lingers on today in the ideal of comprehensive- ness. The discovery of printing devaluated the written word: It eliminated the quality of uniqueness which handwrit- ten manuscripts possessed,10 and it in- itiated a social and intellectual revolu- tion that even today is far from finished. Formerly the monopoly of an intellec- tual elite, reading and writing became accessible to ever greater numbers of the masses; they became available to the intellectually mediocre and to the less than mediocre. In consequence, publishing became big business and books became an economic commodity in which the salability, and not the inherent value, was the decisive ele- ment. It should be pointed out that the often-mentioned syndrome "publish or perish" is not the only and perhaps not think we must do so from time to time if only to make clear to ourselves how far from the ideal we are. . . . For practical purposes the sole control upon our collecting is the restraining power of the budget bureau" (pp. 68-69). Lawrence S. Thompson, "The Dogma of Book Selection in University Libraries," College and Research Libraries (November, 1960), 21:444-45. "It seems to be generally recognized that if a library is to be a research library in the best sense, it must be comprehensive in its fields of emphasis, including good, bad, and indifferent." Thompson proposes that the librarian should not select individual titles but should pursue mass collecting in fields of interest. 9Danton, op. cit. (n. 4 above), p. 119. The author is convinced that only arguments of expe- diency can be advanced against the concept of comprehensiveness. These arguments "have neither intellectual nor educational nor philosophical valid- ity." 10 Karl Loffler, "Allgemeine Handschriftenkunde," in Georg Leyh (ed.), Handbuch, op. cit. (n. 1 above) (1952), 1:106-8. He points out that even copies of manuscripts are unique because they have physical characteristics that are of great im- portance to the scholar who studies them.
288 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY even the primary contributor to the flow of superfluous graphic records. The publishers need to keep their presses going; thus they entice authors into writing books for which they have no inner urge and into organizing periodicals for which there is no intel- lectual necessity. To maintain, under these circumstances, that comprehen- siveness is an ideal means that one has substituted for the original goal of the library to collect what is valuable, the goal to collect what is being printed. In our fast-moving age, even conventional publishing has become too slow or selec- tive a process; xeroxed or typewritten manuscripts, preprints, and the "invis- ible college" gradually displace the nonopoly of the printed word and sup- ply additional headaches for the li- braries and for the scholarly commu- nity."1 The overemphasis on authorship in our bibliographical apparatus obscures both the fact that libraries are essential- ly institutions for the preservation of thought processes and the fact that the value of these thought processes is inde- pendent from the form in which they appear and from the individuals who create them. Ever-lengthening author lists on title pages should forewarn us our whole bibliographical technique may be on the road to obsolescence. The time is perhaps not far off when, as a consequence of increasing team au- thorship, subject bibliographies will be- come the focus of our bibliographical organization. This will automatically direct attention again to the essential reason for the preservation of a graphic record, naimely its contents; perhaps this will make exclusion of what has no value more likely. V In "The Balance of Conflicting In- terests in Building Collections: Com- prehensiveness versus Selectivity," Ver- ner W. Clapp says: "The case [ for "everything"] is never quite proven, just as it is never quite disproved."'2 It seems to me that the very develop- ment and growth of scholarship offer, of themselves, decisive testimony that the ideal of comprehensiveness is not valid. Since there never was a time which had everything and there never will be a time which has everything, we would have no scholarship at all if "every- thing" were a prerequisite for its pro- duction. Our studies of previous genera- tions are not only based on incomplete records, they are often based on tiny fragments of graphic records and some- times on no graphic records at all. These lacunae did not make scholarship impossible. On the contrary, they taught the inquiring mind to develop methods by which to combine graphic records, artifacts, works of art, and bits of all kinds of information so as to re- construct the intellectual, social, and physical history of man. The incom- pleteness of the records stimulates thinking, imagination, and ingenuity, develops sagacity, critical analysis, and judgment, and fosters scholarship. We might know more about certain periods of the past if we had more com- plete records, but consideration of the past and projection into the future should make us reconsider any ideal of comprehensive collecting of records. "Ideally, perhaps, in order to provide '" Simon Pasternak, "Is Journal Publication Ob- solescent?" Physics Today (May, 1966), 19:38-43. Pasternak defends the importance of the scientific journal against its erosion through mass distribu- tion of unrefereed preprints. 'In Changing Patterns, op. cit. (n. 8 above), pp. 66-67.
AN ARGUMENT FOR SELECTIVITY 289 all material when need arises, the uni- versity library should acquire, at the time of publication or other contempo- rary availability, every item that will ever be needed by any of those whom it is to serve. . . . A library founded in 1440 which had done so, and had not since suffered loss, would possess an ideal research collection so far as printed materials are concerned. Its holdings might total something like thirty million bound volumes and an- other thirty or forty million manu- scripts, maps, pamphlets, broadsides, etc."'13 Irrespective of the cost of main- taining such a library, the questions necessarily arise: Where would we get the manpower to organize and to service it? Would there be enough scholars to make use of it? Would not the sheer size of material on any topic discourage research?'4 The advocates of complete- ness consistently forget that there are natural limits to the reading capacity'5 of the individual as well as to the num- ber of scholars which any generation can produce.'" In consequence, the larger library collections become the greater will be the number of books which remain unread. The development of scholarship proves that completeness is not only not necessary but that, on the contrary, in- discriminately acquired graphic records increase the danger of sterility in schol- arship. "As the waste and detritus of scholarship accumulate, the burden of ever-greater bookishness is imposed upon the latest generation of scholars. The result is self-perpetuating and self- regarding scholarly bibliolatry."'7 Since each future generation will have its own intellectual problems to contend with, it is unlikely that they would feel the need to study the "good, bad and indif- ferent" that we collect for them. It is much more likely they will use some of our audiovisual material to gain a pic- ture of and an insight into our times, heeding the wisdom that a picture is worth ten thousand words-not to say that pictures would not require some selection, too! 13 Danton, op. cit. (n. 4 above), p. 6. (Italics are mine.) 14 Vincent Davis in "A Proposed Bibliography Bank for the Behavioral Sciences," The American Behavioral Scientist (June, 1964), 7:68-70, sug- gests that not only all published but also all un- published manuscripts be collected in this bank. Complete bibliographies of subject fields have been attempted since the sixteenth century; they have invariably broken down, not only because of the inherent difficulties of such an enterprise but also because the longer bibliographies are the less acces- sible pertinent material becomes, and thus their usefulness for the scholarly community diminishes. (See also nn. 31 and 32 below.) 15 Don R. Swanson, "On Improving Commu- nication among Scientists," Library Quarterly (April, 1966), 36:79-87. The merit of this article lies not only in its having called attention to this fact and in its having discussed the consequences but particularly in its exhortation to librarians to improve communication among scientists by ad- justing to and supporting the habit of scientists to cluster together in small groups of mutual interest. 16 Derek J. de Solla Price, Science since Babylon (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1961). In the chapter "Diseases of Science," Price em- phasizes the increasing shortage of manpower that the exponential growth of science creates. He predicts that if this growth continues, too many discoveries will chase too few workers. Today we already see too many books chasing too few readers in spite of a great and unexpected increase in numbers of readers. 17 William Arrowsmith, "The Shame of the Graduate Schools: A Plea for a New American Scholar," Harper's Magazine (March, 1966), 232: 52. The sterility and poor quality of dissertations as a consequence of the belief that scholarship equals length of bibliographies are excellently characterized by Stanley Pargellis in "Building a Research Library," College and Research Librar- ies (March, 1944), 5:110-14. He refers to a disser- tation based on the use of the word "the" in the sixteenth century. Unfortunately, it is to be expected that this dissertation is only a forerunner of a type of scholarship that, thanks to the computer, will be based on counting words, phrases, and what not.
290 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY VI The second argument used to justify the necessity for big, even complete, collections is the argument that we col- lect not only for the present but also the future, for all future.18 Collecting for the future can mean different things in library parlance. It is important to distinguish between these different meanings because confusion in this area contributes to our indis- criminate collecting. 1. To collect for the future means, in its simplest form, to preserve the ac- quired graphic records for posterity. Since it is a purpose and function of the library to preserve graphic records and to pass them on to future generations, no particular collection policy can be deduced from this statement. 2. To collect for the future also means that the librarian should antici- pate the demands of its clientele. This is a legitimate function of selection policy and follows from the library's function as a service institution. If it is the task of the librarian to acquire those records which advance knowledge, it is irrelevant whether and when the de- mand for such records is expressed. The record contains new knowledge, thus it is pertinent to the collection. The im- portant thing is that the librarian should know what constitutes new knowledge. 3. The third legitimate meaning pro- ceeds from the purpose and the essence of a university library. A university library is, by definition, comprehensive in the sense that it has universal intel- lectual responsibilities. Parochialism and universality are excluding con- cepts. Therefore, a university library cannot make its collection policy de- pendent upon the accident of whether a particular subject is being taught at a particular time in the particular institu- tion. The intellectual importance of a field does not depend on its representa- tion in the curriculum. This presup- poses again that the librarian knows what is going on in the intellectual world. 4. There is a fourth meaning to the phrase "collecting for the future," and it is this fourth meaning which contra- dicts the rational foundations of any collection policy: It rests namely on the supposition that we somehow can fore- see the future. "Selection of books for a library like this [Harvard] calls for an attempt to foresee the future course of research and to obtain publications that, though they seem insignificant to- day, will be wanted by scholars tomor- row.")19 While in the first three instances the material which we collect is or at least should be significant in the present, ac- cording to the fourth definition we ad- mit that the material is not important in the present; but, for one reason or the other, we hope that it will become important in the future. This hope rests on sand, and it is therefore no wonder that a large amount of the material ac- quired for future use "has never been used and may never be used."20 "We cannot anticipate to-day what we shall only knzow tomorrow.""2 Recent history demonstrates that the future has the tendency to outwit the speculations of the past and can take unexpected turns 8 Danton, op. cit. (n. 4 above), p. 8. "The problem is not simply of the need fifty or even ten years hence but rather of all future need, that is, all need not specifically known today." " Paul Buck, in E. E. Willianm (ed.), Libraries and Universities: Addresses and Reports (Cam- bridge, Mass.: The Belknap Press of Harvard Uni- versity Press, 1964), p. 71. 20 Keyes D. Metcalf, in Clhanging Patterns, op. cit. (n. 8 above), pp. 34-35. 2 Karl R. Popper, The Poverty of Historicis7n (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1957), p. x. (Italics in source.)
AN ARGUMENT FOR SELECTIVITY 291 in research methods, research interests, tastes, and evaluations. This is why col- lecting with the view to the future is an irrational undertaking; on the other hand, by preserving only what is impor- tant in the present, we add our share not only to the advancement of knowl- edge but also to the social history of our age, since what we deemed important will give future generations a clue to our interests, feelings, and thoughts. While we do not know and cannot guess what will be appreciated in the future, we do know that every book we purchase today adds to the size of the library, to the expenses of all future books, and to the growing complexity of our catalogs and library procedures. Each superfluous book purchased today adds its share toward endangering the viability of the library of tomorrow. In the past such a collecting policy might have had a certain justification since a book not acquired in the present might have been unavailable if requested in the future. In our age of photoduplica- tion and general mobility of materials and persons, this policy is an anchro- nism as much as the policy that main- tains the ideal of comprehensiveness, first expresSed in the sixteenth century under totally different conditions. It should perhaps be mentioned in passing that the trauma that has haunted librarians since Mendel's fa- mous paper on genetics remained un- noticed for thirty-four years does not prove that to prevent such an occur- rence we should have all records; on the contrary, this event and many simi- lar ones prove that having records available is no guarantee of their being read, or of their significance being recognized when read. If unnoticed dis- coveries prove anything, they prove that smaller collections fully analyzed would be more important than large collections whose content remains un- known. VII The awe for the written word that compels American libraries to buy much more than could be digested, even if the number of scholars were much greater, also expresses itself in a great reluctance to get rid of materials once purchased. "The research library never becomes obsolete.... The library is the university's chief permanent invest- ment"22 are at best half-truths. Very large parts of every library do become obsolete, and their presence on the shelves is not only not a permanent in- vestment but, on the contrary, an un- necessary drain on the resources of American institutions. Besides, the presence of obsolete books counteracts the advantages of the open-shelf policy, that pride of American librarianship. Obsolete and insignificant books, if looked at, waste the time of the scholar and might misinform the would-be scholar; if not used, they are super- fluous. The experience of German libraries proves convincingly that even collec- tions selected with much greater care and restraint than are American collec- tions become in time to a very large ex- tent obsolete. During World War II, Germany lost 3,600,000 books from its university and technical libraries (34 per cent of the collections). If we include the losses of the city and state libraries that to a great extent are research libraries sup- plementing the university libraries, the losses totaled 13,000,000 volumes.23 When the time came to replace these losses, it turned out that a very large 2Danton, op. cit. (n. 4 above), p. 119. 2 Fritz Redenbacher, "Die Erwerbung," in Georg Leyh (ed.), Handbuch, op. cit. (n. 1 above), 2:172.
292 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY number, in many cases as much as 50 per cent of the losses, were not con- sidered worth replacing, because these books were obsolete or worthless.24 There is no reason to suppose that the intact 66 per cent of the German col- lections would escape a similar evalua- tion if they were submitted to the same test. If this is true for German libraries that, in principle, collect only scholarly material considered to be of permanent value, how much more true must it be of American libraries that collect, in the name of comprehensiveness, the "good, bad, and indifferent"? As tragic as is the loss of valuable, in many instances irreplaceable, books, the damage Ger- man libraries suffered had its compen- sations: It rid them of several million antiquated books as well as of the ex- penses caused by their continued pres- ence on the shelves and in the catalogs of the institutions. No doubt a thorough weeding campaign in American libraries would result in a substantial reduction in their size and in the problems size creates. Libraries that recatalog their collections without first thoroughly elim- inating the deadwood involve their in- stitutions in expenses that seem not to offer any benefits. The argument of librarians that weeding is too expensive refers to the visible expenses weeding would create. Leaving useless books on the shelves year after year creates unseen ex- penditures that outweigh the expendi- tures for weeding-not only in money but in loss of time and efficiency of operations. There is a certain irony in the fact that our book-collection poli- cies show a concern for the future only when such concern helps us to increase the collections; we forget our concern for the future the moment it would compel us to reduce our collections. The reason for this failure lies not only in the fact that librarians find satisfac- tion in the sheer size of their collection because size adds to their prestige, but chiefly in the fact that librarians be- cause they do not trust their judgment in buying can neither trust it in elimi- nating. This lack of self-confidence is the natural result of an education that rests on insufficient subject knowledge and that neglects to develop the critical faculties of the mind. Both are absolute prerequisites for responsible book col- lecting. VIII On previous pages, the case against book-selection policies that result in oversized collections rested chiefly on logical considerations and could there- fore be dismissed as more or less irrele- vant for our practical world of librar- ianship. Fortunately, these logical con- siderations can be backed up by some recent important use studies. In A Study of the Use of Serials at the John Crerar Library, MIargaret Notheisen disclosed the astonishing fact that 65 per cent of approximately 11,000 serial titles in the library were not used a single time during a twelve- month period.25 A Survey of the Inter- library Loan Operation of the National Library of Medicine has an even more startling result. From a total of 37,000 serial titles "88 per cent . . . was not subject to a single loan during a period of one 'year." From the 4,347 titles which were loaned, 1,235 or 28.41 per cent were used only once, "532 titles were used only twice, and 307 titles were used only three times." The heav- 2AIbid., p. 174. 25 Margaret Notheisen, "A Study of the Use of Serials at the John Crerar Library" (Master's the- sis, University of Chicago, 1960).
AN ARGUMENT FOR SELECTIVITY 293 iest use concentrated on 161 titles or 3.70 per cent.26 In view of the use studies certain questions are pertinent: If these li- braries eliminated the periodicals for which there is no demand, would there be any loss to the advancement of knowledge? How long should unused periodicals be kept? Assuming even that all of these periodicals were in- dexed (18,314 were not indexed in In- dex Medicus when the study was made), what reason have we to expect that future generations, who will have added their own publications to the al- ready existing ones, will have more time to read these periodicals when they are old than our generation had when they were new? Are we not the victims of a delusion by assuming that the sheer existence and collection of these periodi- cals for which there is no demand con- tribute in some way to scholarship? As is to be expected, the situation is not much better in the social sciences and the humanities. We do not have ex- haustive studies of the use of our really big research collections in these fields, but what we have suggests strongly that very large parts of these collections are not used either. In Patterns in the Use of Books in Large Research Libraries, the authors report that at the University of Chicago in a twenty-year period, from a sample of 992 titles in the Teutonic collection, 302 had never been used up to 1961; in the economics collection, 265 titles out of a sample of 1,045 had never been used.27 Gordon Williams mentions a study by Trueswell according to which the technology library at Northwestern University could be reduced by 75 per cent and still satisfy 99 per cent of its present users, and the general library could be reduced by 60 per cent ap- proximately and satisfy 99 per cent of users.28 Ix The theoretical considerations ad- vanced by this article are not only sup- ported by the quoted use studies but by the observation of scholars and librar- ians. "Even the modern great library is not generally consulted; it is nibbled at by a few," says Vannevar Bush,29 and the scholarly librarian, Georg Leyh, with fifty years of experience in librar- ianship, remarks that only a very small fraction of the collections assembled by librarians with the help of bibliographi- cal tools are being consulted and uti- lized by scholars.30 Complaints of li- brarians that scholars do not know how to use the library, or that their collec- tions are only lightly used by scholars, all suggest that librarians overestimate the necessity for and the value of our oversized collections, and of bibliogra- phies for that matter. How else could it be explained that, in spite of the lack of use or the very light use of very large parts of the collections, our scholarship does not stagnate but, on the contrary, explodes? If in spite of all evidence to the con- trary librarians keep insisting that larger and larger collections are a neces- 26 William H. Kurth, A Survey of the Interlibrary Loan Operation . . . (Washington: U.S. Depart- ment of Health, Education, and Welfare, Public Health Service, 1962), p. 21. 27 Herman H. Fussler and Julian L. Simon, Pat- terns in the Use of Books in Large Research Li- braries (Chicago: University of Chicago Library, 1961), pp. 68-69. ' Gordon Williams, "Academic Librarianship: The State of the Art," Library Journal (May 16, 1966), 91:2417. 'Vannevar Bush, "As We May Think," At- lantic Monthly (July, 1945), 176:103. soLeyh, op. cit. (n. 1 above), p. 103.
294 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY sity for scholarship and the advance- ment of knowledge, they only prove how correct Priestley's observation is, that we may take a maxim so strongly for granted that the plainest evidence of the senses will not entirely change and often hardly modify our persua- sions. x If the great collections we assemble would cost only money, there would perhaps not be too much harm in buy- ing as much as the purse will bear. But our constantly growing collections cost not only money. They increase the com- plexity of the library to such an extent that they place the usefulness of this in- stitution in jeopardy. They divert criti- cally scarce manpower into the unpro- ductive tasks of acquiring, cataloging, and maintaining useless graphic rec- ords. To merely shift the goal of complete- ness from the individual library to re- gional or national information centers, as is so frequently proposed, is no solu- tion to the problem. If the acquisition policies of these centers will be geared toward completeness, as they propose to be, these centers will face the same problem in the not too distant future that individual libraries face today. Our information problems will not be re- duced. Even the computer cannot solve the problems unless given criteria that might guide collecting, because the computer will accept and will return all the literature, worthless or not, that is fed into it.3" The basic intellectual prob- lem is not which institutions should be responsible for preserving the masses of graphic records our printing presses turn out. Neither is it in which form should they be preserved. The basic problem is whether all these records are worth preserving. Should they be pre- served at all?32 The answer requires the abandon- ment of the dogma of comprehensive- ness and a serious attempt to distin- guish between the explosion of knowl- edge and the explosion of the printing presses. The only answer to indiscrimi- nate publishing is increasingly selective buying.33 Libraries, as a major market 31 William Knox, "The Changing Role of Li- braries," American Library Association Bulletin (September, 1965), 59:721-25. Knox castigates the library profession for not having recognized the drastic changes that were stirring in their market and for not having developed ideas to master them. "It is a matter of sad record . . . that, out of some twenty-odd plans for achieving a more effective and efficient national network of information systems in science and technology, not one . . . has origi- nated within the library community." He stresses that the need is for less not for more information, but for information of a higher degree of perti- nence. He also questions the validity of a store- house-of-knowledge concept of library for an in- dustrial society. Goudsmit, op. cit. (n. 7 above), p. 52. "A modern computer can make a complete literature search in a remarkably short time and overwhelm the re- search worker with a bibliography that requires a lifetime to read and study." 32 John Maddox, "Is the Literature Worth Keep- ing?'" Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists (November, 1963), 19:14-16. Maddox berates scientists for pub- lishing literature that is hastily prepared, written in unintelligible style and sloppily and therefore not worth preserving. "Certainly it is ingenious almost to the point of dishonesty that the scientific com- munity should so persistently badger the librarians for more and more elaborate methods of cataloging the scientific literature, and for more and more storage space, when it appears to be doing nothing to make the torrent of literature worth storing" (p. 16). In Changing Patterns, op. cit. (n. 8 above), pp. 22-26, the zoologist G. E. Hutchinson expresses his concern about the "totally unnecessary amount of literature . . . spilled out into libraries in an irre- sponsible way." Swanson, op. cit. (n. 15 above), p. 85, advocates ultraselectivity in the dissemination of knowledge to interested groups. This would be greatly facili- tated if it were preceded by ultraselectivity in the acquisition of materials. 3'Pargellis, op. cit. (n. 17 above), pp. 110-14, be- lieves that a collection of approximately 1,500,000
AN ARGUMENT FOR SELECTIVITY 295 for the products of the printing presses, are the agencies that have to keep the channels of communication open for the scholarly community by refusing to buy the irrelevant, the redundant, the "bad," the "indifferent." The occasion- al scholar who needs the "trash," the "trivial," the "tenth rate," will have to look for it in the depository libraries that, by their very nature, have to ac- cept and preserve it. XI It is evident that a responsible intel- lectual task cannot be carried out by dilettantes or by a faculty that, already burdened by research and teaching, can devote only very little time to it. Re- sponsible book selection requires a staff of scholars who, in addition to their sub- ject fields, have mastered the history of ideas, the history of science, epistemol- ogy, and the necessary bibliographic tools. These subject-specialist librarians should be able to devote their full time to book selection, a time consuming and exacting occupation. As a by- product of their activity might emerge annotated subject bibliographies, criti- cal state-of-the-art reviews, critical book reviews, abstracts, and, where ap- propriate, the routing of literature to teaching and research colleagues. These essential tasks are neglected today be- cause librarians are either not equipped to do them or because their time is taken up with deadly routines resulting from our buying policy. The scientists among book selectors in academic li- braries could perform an additional valuable service by grading the books selected for the collection according to their difficulty. Initials denoting the educational level (F, S, J, Se, Gr) added to the call numbers could auto- matically direct the students to the literature appropriate to their educa- tional level. By reuniting librarianship with schol- arship, the profession could become more attractive to good minds because it would be an intellectually rewarding, responsible profession. Not in competi- tion with other scholars for immediate results, the librarian could share in the excitement of intellectual life without participating in its disappointments. By keeping the libraries free from the su- perfluous and the irrelevant, librarians could make a much more significant contribution to the scholarly world than they do by striving for compre- hensive collections for which nobody has any use. carefully selected books would suffice to meet the needs of creative scholars. Price, op. cit. (n. 16 above), p. 120, suggcsts that there exists a law of diminishing returns within the world of science publications. "For every single pa- per of first order of importance there are four of secondary quality, nine of the third class, and so on." J. C. R. Licklider, Libraries of the Future (Cam- bridge, Mass.: M.I.T. Press, 1965), distinguishes between the "solid" and the total literature in a field and believes that the "solid" literature is ap- proximately a tenth of the total literature in a field. "Solid is intended to delimit the literature by ex- cluding popularizations, ephemeral items, and con- tributions from unqualified sources" (p. 15 n.),