Fifty-one years ago, when I was a freshman in college, I went into the Wildcat Inn, the equivalent of a student union building on most majority culture campuses, and was surprised by the excitement of students hovered around the local newspaper. The reason they were excited was that they had just read the headline on the front page: “Russia Launches the First Satellite”! The satellite was called “Sputnik,” the Russian word for satellite. Sputnik was the first artificial satellite to be put into outer space—it launched on October 4, 1957—and much to America’s chagrin, Russia had won the race to space. Those of you born in the latter part of the twentieth century may not realize the implications of Russia’s accomplishment. In 1957, the United States and Russia were in the midst of the Cold War, and Russia’s indication of technological superiority over the United States was quite disconcerting. The reputation the United States had sustained as the most progressive nation in the world was shattered. Even though the United States launched the Explorer 1 just a few months later, in early 1958, it would always be remembered by all nations of the world that the United States came in second to Russia in the increasingly important space race. The United States was humiliated. No longer would the world deem America as the superior nation in science and technology. How could a country where the majority of the population had only learned to read and write in the last fifty years outdo the United States, the most innovative country in the world? I will explain how. In 1945, the Allies allocated Berlin to Russia. Russia seized German scientists and displaced Jewish intellectuals by the thousands, as did the Western Allies. It also seized countries from the Baltic to the Adriatic, creating what Winston Churchill deemed the “Iron Curtain” that divided Europe into two distinct regions. Behind the Iron Curtain, Russia abducted and exploited the brilliant minds of these diverse peoples. Russia had acquired its own talent pool representing the brightest and best minds in Europe. Russia’s edge over the United States in the race to space boiled down to one advantage —the advantage of a diverse talent pool! The advantage of harnessed diversity! This advantage always leads to success. The loss of this first race to space caused US leaders to take a long hard look at our own scientists. Although the United States had abducted some German scientists, we realized that the only way to truly harness diversity was to expand our educational system to include all races and cultures living in the United States. Although Russia used its ill-gotten talent pool to its advantage in the beginning, it made the mistake of trying to force its diverse cultures into the mold of the Soviet culture. Instead of celebrating differences, it tried to produce a single “Soviet puree,” a concoction of Soviet-minded robots, where everyone was forced to conform to a single set of cultural beliefs and practices. On the other hand, America made the first steps toward accentuating and capitalizing on differences among its people; America strived for a “tossed salad.” America decided to implement the change to create a colorful, yet distinctive, nation of people. In the “tossed salad” of society, the separate components create a salad representing our nation as a whole. America determined to provide educational opportunities for all its citizens by focusing on the importance of diversity and inclusiveness. Diversity includes gender, ethnicity, religion, cultural background, sexual orientation, age, and disabilities. The successful rocket launch of the Sputnik forced Americans to self-assess and question American education and its scientific, technical, and industrial strength. In 1959, Congress increased the National Science Foundation’s (NSF) appropriation by nearly $100 million as compared to the year before. By 1968, the NSF budget was nearly $500 million—this was money allocated to “promote the progress of science; to advance the national health, prosperity, and welfare; to secure the national defense.” Monies were used to promote inclusiveness, which is the embracing and harnessing of a diverse talent pool. As a result of this harnessed diversity, the United States beat the Russians to the moon! In other words, diversity is an advantage to the nation as well as an advantage to all of you who are given the opportunity of an education to promote this inclusiveness. My message to you is to embrace the experiences, perspectives, and expertise of other cultures. You have been given the opportunity by the Institute of Museum and Library Services (IMLS) to access the powerful learning advantages diversity brings. You cannot forget your personal responsibility to succeed and give back to the organization that has made it possible for you to be here in the first place! The IMLS has made it possible for persons of color to get a degree, but it’s up to you to do the work. You have access to the advantage of diversity. Use the resources. Embrace the experiences, perspectives, and expertise of other cultures made available to you. Now you may be thinking that diversity brings adversity. However, the climate is changing. You have been given the opportunity to excel should you take advantage of your diverse learning environment! People of diverse cultures, religions, and social status founded the United States. Do you realize that this diversity has made the United States the strongest and greatest nation on earth? Our educational system knows that embracing diversity results in effective learning. There is a need not only to embrace a diverse student body but also to embrace diverse leaders—principals, teachers, and administrators. How else can we prepare a bright talent pool for tomorrow’s scientific, technological, and societal leadership? Education has learned to embrace diversity. The business world knows that embracing these differences brings profits. How can corporate America sell products to a diverse nation? They will hire the brightest and best individuals across a broad spectrum of cultures. How can you take advantage of this demand? Embrace the differences in others. Ask questions, compare experiences, listen for facts about customs, and compare the perspectives, values, religious beliefs, and philosophies of others. By embracing diversity you will become a part of the strongest nation in the world’s quest for knowledge, security, and peace. Take advantage of the opportunity to be enriched by diverse experiences, perspectives, and expertise. You have it here—use it. Seize the opportunity and realize the advantages of diversity. It may take you to the moon!