International Library Education 6 1 Two participants firmly reminded the audience that similar conferences had been taking place since the early 1970s, but many problems were still outstanding. However, the discussions did little to suggest how the problems might be met. Nonetheless, a small working group met and identified a ser- ies of broad recommendations, and some specific suggestions for action were addressed to individual schools in the region or to appropriate inter- governmental and nongovernmental or- ganizations. These included: ■ Improving and maintaining the pro- fessional knowledge and teaching skills of the teaching staff by seeking appropriate candidates, by regularly reviewing their needs for continuing development, and by providing ade- quate education and training when necessary. ■ Carrying out high-quality research on the basis of determined research targets and priorities for each Arab country and for the Arab region as a whole, and publishing and dissemi- nating the results. ■ Encouraging publishing of teaching materials in Arabic, and establish- ing a regional clearinghouse for un- published or hard-to-obtain litera- ture and materials. ■ Organizing a conference on equiv- alency of degrees and reciprocity of qualifications in the Arab region. ■ Publishing an Arabic bulletin of re- gional news about LIS education and training. The poor communication between the Arab LIS schools was frequently commented upon during both formal and informal discussions, and at the conclusion of the meeting it was agreed to establish an Arab Association for Li- brary and Information Science Educa- tion. Mohammed Benjelloun, director of ESI, was elected as secretary. Noie: This is an excerpt of the Report of the IFLA Mission to South Africa, June 1993 (IFLA: The Hague, 1993), 13-15. Education and Training The education and training of profes- sionals and paraprofessionals in the li- brary and information science field in South Africa is undertaken at two differ- ent levels and offered by different insti- tutions; technikons and departments of library and information science in uni- versities. Technikons offer either a two-year lower diploma in LIS or a three-year national diploma in LIS with an exten- sive period of practical training in li- braries as part of the program. The min- imum entry requirement into these programs is a senior certificate or equiv- alent qualification. Matriculation ex- emption is not necessary. There are technikons, however, that will admit students who may not be strong aca- demically but are successful at inter- Winter 1994
62 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science views that assess candidates' disposi- tion to interactive work with grass- roots, low-technology libraries and community information centers and who demonstrate attitudes responsive to community needs. Departments of LIS within univer- sities offer: a four-year degree, followed by a one- year postgraduate diploma in LIS, or a two-year course (instead of the one-year postgraduate qualification) that leads to a second degree, the B.BibL, or a four-year degree that includes educa- tion, the B.Bibl.Ed. A number of teacher-training col- leges also offer programs leading either to a qualification in school librarianship or an orientation in some aspect of librarianship appropriate for teachers. The NEPI report on library and in- formation services made the following comments on professional education in South Africa: The structure of formal provision is characterized by: ■ lack of articulation of programs be- tween institutions, which results in limited mobility and problems of accreditation; ■ high cost; ■ curricula that have been criticized for neglecting current realities of the local and African context; ■ a student profile that suggest limited success in the past in attracting black students; ■ fragmentation and lack of coordina- tion (for example, between the train- ing colleges and college of education). The South African Institute for Librarianship and Information Science (SAILIS), as a national professional body representing the interests of the profession, prescribes conditions for registration as a full professional mem- ber. IAS graduates attain the status of full professional membership in SAILIS after serving two years of practical ex- perience under the supervision of a pro- fessional and upon acceptance of their application. As a national professional accreditation organization, SAILIS has no statutory powers but influences em- ployment opportunities for professional careers in established library and infor- mation organizations. These form the majority within the LIS sector providing employment for professionals. It is not unusual for advertisements for pro- fessional posts to require SAILIS pro- fessional membership as a preference. The recent restructuring of LIS pro- fessional education in South Africa has reduced access to LIS education for Eng- lish-speaking persons living in the Trans- vaal. The nearest available full-time pro- fessional education for them is in Cape Town, Pietermaritzburg and Pieters- burg, thus increasing the cost of pro- fessional education for those who can least afford it, considering the differen- tial in economic power between the races. This restructuring is an area that requires reconsideration. The current sit- uation is one that encourages a variety of approaches to education and promotes little or no standardization between tech- nikon and university-based programs. Continuing education is recognized as being an important component of professional training, but is not readily available from either the library schools or from existing professional associa- tions. There is a lack of specialized post- graduate training despite the fact that current LIS education is deliberately broad-based in order to enable pro- fessionals to find employment in a variety of LIS organizations. Employment As was already indicated, the library and information services in South Volume 35, Number 1
International Library Education 63 Africa have been affected directly by the apartheid amenities distribution sys- tem, which has caused a concentration of library and information services in cities and urban areas that are well sup- ported by wealthy local and regional authorities. The suburban black town- ships and rural areas have grossly in- adequate libraries, and where they exist, their quality is poor. Recruitment policies of library and information institutions have not had racial restrictions since 1987, when the Separate Amenities Act was repealed. Statistics of staff establishments of insti- tutions visited do not break down their staff lists by race. Estimates provided indicated that there was a paucity of black professionals and that, where pre- sent, they formed a cluster at the lower levels of the organizational structure. According to the 1989 statistics of em- ployment of professional librarians (in- cluding archivists) compiled by the De- partment of Manpower, out of a total population of 3,352 librarians, 79.9 per- cent were white, 9.3 percent were black, 5.5 percent were colored, and 5.2 per- cent were Asian. Most employers indi- cated that they intended to employ more black professionals but that their efforts were being frustrated by the de- cline in the national economy, which has resulted in the freezing of positions. The rate of frozen positions was estimated at 10 to 12 percent in one institution. The unfavorable ratio of black pro- fessional employment is said to be one of the legacies of apartheid, which en- couraged employment according to geo- graphic location of services. The major- ity of black professionals, therefore, are said to be employed by local authorities or regional library services for black population groups. There were no statistics available countrywide to indi- cate how many professionals existed and where they were employed. Some LIS schools conducted studies tracing the employment of their alumni, but there is no coordination of this data. It was reported by black profession- als that there were barriers against their gaining employment in established in- stitutions. Their perceptions, backed by examples, were that these resulted largely from their educational back- ground (rooted in Bantu education and universally seen as inferior) and that, as a result, they were often deprived of opportunities to serve the mandatory two-year postgraduate practical train- ing under conditions acceptable to SAILIS. This has allegedly resulted in the marginalization of black profession- als and the stunting of their professional development because of their limited career options. Employment is readily available at sites that serve black population groups, although it should be noted that the largest regional employers, the pro- vincial library services, have recently begun to employ a few black profession- als at the level of coordinator. The ma- jority of black professionals are em- ployed in library information centers in the underdeveloped areas, where the staff usually consists of only a single professional. These librarians work in isolation and consequently see their career prospects as being further limited by the lack of opportunity to apply standard professional skills on the job. Their high-technology library training does not prepare them to serve the needs of communities requiring the skills of "barefoot" librarians and does not equip them with a creative and ana- lytical approach to the problems of the community library. Readers are encouraged to submit articles oi 1,000 to 1,500 words to Mohammed M. Aman, School of Library and Information Science, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, P.O. Box 413, Milwaukee, WI 53201. Winter 1994