A Critical Analysis of the Equity of US Education Programs in Sri Lanka Pradeepa Wijetunge A major study involving critical analysis of library and information science (LIS) education in Sri Lanka was carried out by the author covering the 2004-2007 period, and the equity of LIS education discussed in this paper was one element of the larger study. The study on equity has three objectives: ( 1 ) to provide a brief introduction to the LIS education programs and the in- stitutions which offer those programs in Sri Lanka; (2) to analyze critically the equity of the LIS programs; and (3) to make recommendations for im- provement. Four principal methods were used to collect the data required for the main research; semi-structured interviews, questionnaires, review of rel- evant documents, and participatory observations by the researcher. Four cri- teria, namely gender, income, geographic region and language, were used to analyze the equity of LIS education programs. Findings of the study estab- lished that there is a gender imbalance in the LIS programs with 80% to 90% female students, that an income inequity is evident, that there is a severe in- equity in the regional distribution and language of the programs. The paper makes several recommendations to reduce these inequities and makes sug- gestions for further research. Introduction This paper reports research findings representing one element of a major study on the critical analysis of library and information science (LIS) edu- cation in Sri Lanka conducted by the author during the 2004-2007 period. The main study concentrated on seven aspects of LIS education: (1) the number and types of LIS education programs presently conducted in Sri Lanka; (2) educational institutions that offer LIS education programs; (3) course contents; (4) teaching and assessment methods; (5) the relevance of programs to emerging information sector needs; (6) demographic charac- teristics of the teaching faculty and their research and publications; and (7) infrastructure facilities (classroom and library facilities, teaching/learning equipment and institutional guidance available for students). While the au- thor expects to publicize the results of these different aspects studied as in- dividual papers in the near future, the findings of the analysis of the equity of LIS education programs currently conducted in Sri Lanka is presented in this article. For the benefit of international readers, a brief socioeconomic introduc- J. of Education for Library and Information Science, Vol. 49, No. 4- Fall 2008 ISSN: 0748-5786 ©2008 Association for Library and Information Science Education 243
244 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science About the Author Pradeepa Wijetunge is a Head of Acquisitions, University of Colombo, Sri Lanka (pradeepa@lib.cmb.ac.lk). Ms. submitted 07/08; accepted 09/08; revised 10/08. tion to the country and a summary of the current LIS education programs in Sri Lanka are provided in the following subsections. Section two contains a review of related literature while the research methodology is presented in section three. Equity of LIS education in Sri Lanka is critically analyzed in section four while the paper concludes with the discussion and recom- mendations in section five. Sri Lanka The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka (formerly Ceylon) is an is- land with an area of 65,610 square kilometers (25,332 square miles) in the Indian Ocean about 28 kilometers (18 miles) away from the southeastern coast of India. Sri Lanka currently has a population of nearly 19 million and is divided into three community sectors: urban (14.6%), rural (80.0%) and estate1 (5.4%). Population by ethnicity consists of Sinhalese (82%), Sri Lankan Moor (7.9%), Indian Tamils (5.1 %), Sri Lankan Tamils (4.3%) and others (0.7%). The labor force (which is the economically active popula- tion) is 46.6% of the total population.2 The country is divided into nine ad- ministrative provinces as shown in Figure 1 . Present education system of Sri Lanka consists of four stages: ( 1 ) early childhood development stage for children of 3-4 years, (2) primary and secondary education foi children of 5-10 years (Grades 1-5) and 11-18 years (Grades 6-13) respectively, (3) vocational training and technical ed- ucation and (4) tertiary education.4 Unlike many other developing coun- tries, Sri Lanka has been able to reduce disparities in literacy between males and females, and the 2001 survey indicated that the female literacy rate was 89.7% while it was 92.6% for males.5 The main reasons for this healthy access to education by females is the universal free education and several other expansions of educational opportunities in the country imple- mented in the mid 1940s.6 Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per capita in Sri Lanka is US$4,595 ac- cording to the Human Development Index,7 and this gives the country a rank of 99th out of 177 countries. The Human Poverty Index in Sri Lanka in 2004 was 17.8 which gave the country a rank of 44th out of 108 developing countries for which the index has been calculated.8 Nevertheless, 23% of the population is below the poverty line.9 According to the country's overall Knowledge Economy Index and Knowledge Index,10 Sri Lanka ranked first in South Asia but 81st in the global context in 2007. n Areas such as tertiary education enrollments, ac-
A Critical Analysis of the Equity of US Education Programs in Sri Lanka 245 Figure 1 Administrative Provinces of Sri Lanka. (Source: Sri Lanka Provincial map)3 cess to knowledge infrastructure including the use of computers, tele- phones and the Internet, and science and technology research need urgent attention of the policy makers. Politically, Sri Lanka is a country with conflict and the causes are related primarily to ethnic issues, historical interpretations, language, education, employment and land which are manifest in language, education and social policies. It has reduced the country's economic growth by 2 to 3% annually mamm y ■ « $_ ^w y i ■ : i $_ ^
246 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science and has destabilized communities with allegations of abductions, forced conscription of adults and children, and human rights violations.12 How- ever, the conflict had severe ramifications for libraries on two occasions: the burning of the Jaffna Public Library in 1 981 l3 and the bombing of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka in 1996 which destroyed its library with six members of the library staff.14 The Ten Year Development Framework (2006-201 6) of the present gov- ernment attempts to address most of the issues with regard to the develop- ment of the country in correspondence with the four pillars of the Knowledge Economy. A number of proposals are made for the develop- ment of the institutional regime; education; innovations and the use of ICT; developments in macroeconomic management; banking, finance and in- surance; trade and commerce; energy policy; transport; telecommunica- tions; and e-governance. Reforms in the public sector as well as constitutional reforms are proposed for a more efficient administration sys- tem. The Ten Year Development Framework also identifies the risks which include a less favorable external environment, particularly in the context of high oil prices and rising world inflation and the risk of delays in imple- menting large infrastructure projects. Current LIS Education Programs At present 24 LIS education programs are conducted in Sri Lanka. These include six certificate programs, six diploma programs, three bachelor's programs, three postgraduate diploma programs, four master's programs and an MPhil program leading to the PhD and a PhD program which enrolls students directly for the doctoral degree. A paper to be published by the re- searcher contains a detailed analysis of these LIS education programs and the educational institutions which offer them in Sri Lanka.15 All the 24 LIS programs are offered by eight education providers divided among the university and non-university sectors. At the university level there are six types of organizations: the National Institute of Library and In- formation Sciences at the University of Colombo; the Department of LIS at the University of Kelaniya; Faculties of Graduate Studies at the Universi- ties of Kelaniya and Jaffna; the Centre of Open and Distance Learning at the University of Kelaniya; and the External Degree Programs and Exten- sion Services Unit of the Sabaragamuwa University of Sri Lanka. At the non-university level there are two types of organizations: the Sri Lanka Li- brary Association and three National Colleges of Education. Table 1 indi- cates the various programs offered by the educational institutions of the university and non-university sectors. Literature Review Equity of education is defined as "equalization of educational opportuni- ties to all irrespective of class, caste, creed, ethnicity and location."16 Based
A Critical Analysis of the Equity of US Education Programs in Sri Lanka 247 Table 1 Institutions and US Education Programs in Sri Lanka. Sources: Course co-coordinators and brochures. Institutions Affiliation Program Title 1 . National Institute of University of 1 . Certificate in School Librarianship Library & Information Colombo (CSL) Sciences (NILIS) 2. Certificate in Teacher Librarianship (CTL) 3. Certificate in Public Librarianship (CPL) 4. Mandatory Training Program for University Asst. Librarians (MTP) 5. Diploma in Teacher Librarianship (DTL) 6. Diploma in English for LIS Professionals (DELIS) 7. Diploma in Library and Information Management (DLIM) 8. PG Diploma in LIS (PGLIS) 9. PG Diploma in Teacher Librarianship (PGTL) 1 0. Master of LIS (MLS) 1 1 . Master of Teacher Librarianship (MTL) 12. Master of Philosophy leading to PhD (MPhil) 2. Department of Library Faculty of 1 . Higher Diploma in LIS (HDLIS) & Information Science Social Sciences, 2. BA (General) - LIS as a subject for (DLIS) University of three years Kelaniya 3 BA (Special)- LIS as the secialization for 3. Faculty of Graduate University of 1 . MA (Library Science) Studies (FGS) Kelaniya 2. Master of Social Science (Library Science) (MSSc) 3. Doctor of Philosophy (PhD) 4. Faculty of Graduate University of 1 . PG Diploma ¡n LIS (PGLIS/Jfn) Studies (FGS) Jaffna 5. Centre for Open & University of 1 . BA (General External) (LIS as a subject) Distance Learning Kelaniya (CODL) 6. External Degree University of 1 . Certificate in LIS (CLIS) Programs and Sabaragamuwa Extension Services Unit (EDPESU) 7. Sri Lanka Library Independent 1 . Diploma in Library & Information Association (SLLA) organization Science (DIPLIS) 2. Course in Library Automation (COLA) 8. National Colleges of Ministry of 1 . National Diploma in Teaching (LIS as a Education (NCOE) Education major subject) (NDT)
248 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science on this definition of Indraratne, equity of LIS education within the context of this paper is defined as "Equalization of LIS educational opportunities to all interested individuals irrespective of class, caste, creed, ethnicity and location." Equity of education in the developing countries of Asia has been studied by Lee17 using four criteria, namely, gender, income, region and sociocultural. He asserts that these are the criteria set out by the Framework and Criteria for the Appraisal and Socioeconomic Justification of Educa- tion Projects1* to study the equity of education in the developing countries of Asia. A search for literature pertaining to equity of LIS education in Sri Lanka was made, but it was established that nothing has been written. The only an- alytical studies of LIS education in Sri Lanka were those of Irving19 and Wijetunge and Willson,20 but neither dealt with the equity of LIS education programs. The literature search was expanded to the other South Asian countries21 and it was confirmed that in the South Asian region LIS educa- tion is offered only in Bangladesh, India and Pakistan (other than Sri Lanka). Although many other aspects of LIS education are well repre- sented in the literature, equity of LIS education has not received direct at- tention in these three South Asian countries as well. Perhaps realizing this void, the Indian Association of Teachers in LIS (IATLIS) chose "Equity of LIS Education" as the theme for their annual conference in 2007 and ten papers concentrated on equity as the major topic in the Indian context.22 Siddamallaiah and Karisiddappa have per- ceived a difference between equity and equality. They define equity as the social or economic return that one gets proportionately to their investment in education. Equality is perceived as treating all with the same status. They further discuss the tangible equity which are financial returns and intangi- ble equity which are image and recognition received in return for one's in- vestments in education.23 Several other authors (Chetty,24 Kalra,25 and Singh26) reflect this definition in their papers. However, Singh27 and Varalakshmi28 have defined equity as the availability of the same opportu- nities for all for self-actualization and social development irrespective of race, religion, gender, caste, geography and socioeconomic environment, resembling the definition of Indraratne.29 However, all these Indian authors seem to echo the same viewpoint that the Indian universities overproduce LIS graduates and the output far exceeds the demand for librarians. Espe- cially the distance education programs are contributing to this overproduc- tion. Despite the overproduction of graduates, the LIS departments are littered with many issues like lack of qualified teachers and infrastructural facilities, weaknesses in the curricula, and absence of accreditation of LIS programs. As a result, there are huge disparities in LIS education across the states and levels of courses and this has affected the equity as defined by Siddamallaiah and Karisiddappa30 of LIS education in a negative manner. In their concluding remarks all the authors have stressed the need to im- prove the quality of the programs in order to improve the social and eco- nomic returns for LIS education.
A Critical Analysis of the Equity of LIS Education Programs in Sri Lanka 249 Although the Pakistan and Bangladesh literature on LIS education does not directly deal with equity, several authors (Ameen,31 Islam and Chowdhury,32 Mahmood33) have echoed the prevalence of issues similar to those in India. It can be concluded that in Bangladesh, India and Pakistan, gender, in- come, language and sociocultural factors have not affected access to LIS education because the literature denotes that the issue they have to deal with is the overproduction of LIS graduates. But the evidence in Sri Lanka, according to Irving34 and Wijetunge and Willson,35 is that the student num- bers are inadequate in the LIS programs. One of the main challenges the LIS educators in Sri Lanka have to deal with is the increase in the number of LIS students. The mere lack of students in the LIS programs makes one wonder whether there are any issues of equity in the LIS education pro- grams and Sri Lanka has to face this challenge alone in the South Asian re- gion. In order to explore the equity of LIS education programs in Sri Lanka, Lee's (2004) framework was considered as the most appropriate frame- work because as he states it is the framework used to analyse the equity of general education in the Asian countries. Methodology The research question "how equitable are the current LIS education pro- grams?" attempted to achieve three objectives; (1) to provide a brief intro- duction to the current LIS education programs and the educational institutions that offer those programs in Sri Lanka, (2) to analyze critically the equity of the LIS education programs with regard to gender, income, geographic region and language and (3) to make recommendations for the improvement of equity of the programs. Four principal methods were used to collect the data required for the main research; (1) Semi structured interviews, (2) questionnaires, (3) re- view of relevant documents and (4) participatory observations by the re- searcher. Semi structured interviews were carried with the course coordinators36 of 24 LIS programs conducted during the 2005-2007 period and seven key policy makers in the LIS profession. Questionnaires were used to collect data from 77 full time and part time LIS faculty members. Questionnaires were also used to collect data from 20% of 1054 identified LIS students37 and 20% of 3165 identified LIS professionals in Sri Lanka during the same period. Many relevant documents for instance course handbooks, promotional brochures were reviewed to obtain the original data required and published material were reviewed to develop a theoreti- cal foundation to the study. Participatory observations by the researcher were used to compliment the data gathered through other methods. Utiliz- ing the findings of this empirical survey on LIS education, a critical analy- sis of the equity of LIS education in Sri Lanka was made according to the framework used by Lee.38
250 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Equity of LIS Education Lee in his study defines the four criteria used to analyze equity of education as follows: • Gender-Related Equity. This refers to the opportunities of the traditionally disadvantaged gender group, i.e. females, in their access to various levels of education, in their opportunities for success in education and in their opportunities to make use of education as an asset for enhancing their life chances. • Income-Related Equity. This refers to the financially disadvantaged groups, i.e. the income poor, in their access to various levels of education and their opportunities for success in education. • Region-Related Equity. This refers to educational opportunities of the people living in disadvantaged regions. In most cases, the disadvantaged regions are rural, but they can also be economically backward regions within an economy, and also the income poor within urban areas. • Sociocultural-Related Equity. This refers to the educational opportunities of socioculturally disadvantaged groups. In most cases, they are ethnic minorities within the economy, but sometimes women are also regarded as minorities in certain respects, and their education opportunities are limited by sociocultural perceptions of women that are unfavorable for them to receive education.39 In this article only language equity will be studied due to its specific na- ture within the Sri Lankan context. The following sections critically evalu- ate the equity of LIS education programs in Sri Lanka using this framework. Gender-Related Equity Statistics of gender-related enrollments in LIS education programs are not maintained by the respective educational institutes. Compilation of such statistics for the purpose of my research was not possible due to the time-consuming nature of the task because it requires analyzing all the original applications of the students to identify their gender. However, participatory observations of the researcher as well as the in- terviews with the course co-coordinators of the 24 LIS education programs confirm that 80 to 90% of the students are female in all current LIS pro- grams except in the PhD (direct) program. According to the numbers of LIS students in 2007 (Table 2) it can be hypothesized that 1 ,276 to 1 ,435 are fe- males. This pattern conforms to gender stereotypes in the field of LIS in some of the other developing countries. For example, females account for 85% of the LIS students in Kiribati, and in Vietnam also there is a female concentration in LIS programs.40 About 75 to 80% of the Indian LIS stu- dent population is also female.41 The gender-related issue in the Sri Lanka
A Critical Analysis of the Equity of US Education Programs in Sri Lanka 251 Table 2 Fees and Number of Students in US Education Programs, 2007. Source: Course co-coordinators. *Total number of students in all three years is indicated here. fTotal number of students who study US in all three NCOEs. LIS education system is the lack of males in the LIS classrooms as well as in the profession. For the healthy growth of the profession a gender balance is essential because males and females make different contributions to the profession based upon their distinctive gender-based characteristics. Several socio- logical studies, including those by Belenky et al.,42 Callón and Ardener,43 and Daniels,44 identify the differences in the role of men and women. Women work with people and their work is expressive, interactive, re- sponsive, supportive, nurturing and labor intensive45 while men's work is perceived as intellectual, solitary, dominating, controlling and unilat- eral.46 Therefore, LIS educators need to address the issue without further delay. Tuition Fees Number of Level Course Title (Sri Lankan Rs.)47 Students Certificate 1 . COLA Í2000 18 2. CSL 8000 80 3.CTL 8000 10 4.CPL 8000 18 5.MTP 15000 09 6. CUS 8000 17 Diploma 7. DTL 18000 10 8. DELIS 15000 09 9. DIPLIS 26800 301* 10. HDUS 9500 167* 1 1 . DLIM 36000 58* 12.NDT 20* Bad^ 1 3. BA (Genera.) ^¿í? y ^~~ 1 4. BA (Special) y 62* 15. BA (Gen.) (Ext) 3390 521* Post-Graduate Diploma 16. PGLIS/NIUS 2000 07 17. PGTL 20000 31 1 8. PGLIS/Jaffna 35000 35 Master's 19. MLS 45000 05 20. MA 39500 26 21.MSSc 45000 17 22. MTL 25000 12 Research Degrees 23. MPhil 30000 07 (Leading to PhD) 24. PhD/Direct 38000 03 Total Í595
252 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Income-Related Equity According to the tuition fees of each course and the number of students en- rolled in 2007 (Table 2) it is evident that the student numbers are low in most of the LIS programs and in 12 programs the number of students is fewer than 25. The observations have indicated that 75-80 % of these LIS students are from middle- or low-income groups and from rural areas. The current LIS education programs do have an income-related equity issue in two aspects; firstly, even if the tuition fees of the LIS programs are compar- atively lower than those of the other programs, (researcher's observations of various advertisements indicated that the tuition fees of the education programs in accountancy, information/communication technology and management are three or four times more) the programs are less equitable to the low-income group. Secondly, the students from high income families seem to be less attracted to the LIS programs. Although there are no previ- ous empirical studies on income-related enrollments in the Sri Lankan LIS education programs the situation can be explained using other socioeco- nomic studies in Sri Lanka. Although there is a high degree of equity between Sri Lankan families from various economic levels at primary, junior, secondary, and senior sec- ondary education levels the enrollments in tertiary education reveal sharp disparities between poor and non-poor households. Tertiary enrollments are three times higher from non-poor households than from poor house- holds. Mora explains this relationship between the enrollment of students for tertiary education and the socio-economic status of their families. Ac- cording to this author the low education levels and low skilled jobs of par- ents are associated with low access to higher education by their children. Families with a manager or a professional as the main householder are more likely to invest in education because they have better information about the advantages of higher education investments.48 Kaneko also ex- plains that a positive relationship between family income levels and access to higher education is not only a result of the ability to pay the fees but par- ents with a higher income have created a large amount of "Cultural Capital" which helps the children to obtain higher academic standards. Hiring pri- vate tutors to help the children in preparing for admission examinations can contribute to higher rates of access to higher education from these families. High-income urban families also have the advantage of sending their chil- dren to selective private secondary schools, which in turn increases the rate of access to higher education.49 The World Bank50 further states that ter- tiary education in Sri Lanka generates high private rate of return51 to indi- viduals, i.e., 26% for men and 24% for women while the social rate of return is 1 1% and 10% respectively. Such quantitative data are not available with regard to the LIS profession in Sri Lanka. However, the research findings showed that 9 of the 24 LIS education programs are not recognized by the employers and 4 programs are yet to be recognized (discussions are going on between the educational institutions which offer these programs and the government authorities
A Critical Analysis of the Equity of US Education Programs in Sri Lanka 253 Table 3 Fees and Number of Students in US Education Programs, 2007. Source: Interviews with course co-ordinators and institutional documents. who employ the graduates of these programs) as indicated in Table 3. Therefore, after completing these programs, the LIS professionals do not gain any salary increases. They also do not get paid study leave or other concessions such as employers contributing 50% of the course fee because the programs are not recognized by the employers. As a result, it can be in- ferred that a high private rate of return is not generated by 1 3 LIS programs out of 24. Under these circumstances the children from affluent Sri Lankan fami- lies with professional parents and those who could afford good educational facilities are attracted towards education program which provide them with better private rates of return than LIS education programs. Therefore, en- rollments from the children of these families are less in LIS programs, leav- ing them to the children from the low-income groups. Yet the low numbers Program a Requirement for Employer Contribution to the Program Title Promotions Payment of Fees 1 . COLA No Only by some organizations 2. CSL No None 3. CTL No None 4. CPL No Only by some organizations 5. MTP Yes Full cost paid by the universities 6. CLIS No Only by some organizations 7. DTL Not yet None 8. DELIS No Only by some organizations 9. DIPLIS Yes Only by some organizations 10. HDLIS Yes Only by some organizations 1 1 . DLIM Not yet Only by some organizations 12. NDT Yes Sri Lankan government bares the full 1 3. BA (General) Yes cost of these programs under its free 14. BA (Special) Yes education policy. Students only have to bear their personal expenses. 15. BA (General) (Ext) Yes" None 16. PGLIS/NILIS No Only by some organizations 1 7. PGTL Not yet None 18. PGLIS/Jaffna No Only by some organizations 1 9. MLS Yes (in the university Full cost paid by the universities sector) 20. MA No Only by some organizations 21 . MSSc Yes (in the university Full cost paid by the universities sector) 22.MTL Not yet None 23. MPhil Yes (in the university Full cost paid by the universities for 24. PhD/Direct sector) their employees
254 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science of students in the LIS programs leads to the conclusion that the hidden costs of travel and subsistence increase the cost of participation in addition to tui- tion fees and these further affect the limited access by the low-income groups. Region- Related Equity Sri Lanka consists of nine administrative provinces (Northern, Eastern, West- ern, Southern, Central, North Central, North Western, Uva, and Sabaragamuwa), as indicated in Figure 1, and 19 out of 24 current LIS pro- grams are based only in the Western Province with a few exceptions (Table 4). DIPLIS is offered in Northern, Eastern, Southern and Central Provinces in addition to the Western Province and the NDT in the Northern and Central Provinces in addition to the Western Province. There are no programs of- fered at all in North Central, North Western, and Uva Provinces because of a lack of infrastructural facilities and the absence of professionals to pro- vide leadership, especially in the Uva and North Central Provinces, which are the poorest and the educationally most disadvantaged provinces.52 LIS education providers have not taken initiatives to offer programs. The certif- icate program conducted in the Sabaragamuwa Province was also not started in 2008 due to lack of students. Observations indicate that about 75% of the students in the LIS programs are not from the Western Province but from other provinces. According to the theories discussed with regard to the relationship between income and enrollments under the income-related equity the students from Western Province - which is the wealthiest, most literate and possesses the highest tertiary education attainment in Sri Lanka53 - may be attracted to other pro- fessional education programs which offer better career opportunities and financial prospects than the LIS programs do, but further empirical studies are required to establish this fact. According to Table 4, it is obvious that there is no regional equity in the present LIS education programs. It does not mean that the programs of- fered in Western Province are restricted to the students from that province but accessibility by the prospective students from other provinces is lim- ited due to many reasons; additional traveling and subsistence costs in- crease the expenditure on education which in turn affect accessibility by the students of low-income groups. This especially affects the LIS pro- grams in which a higher percentage of students are from low-income groups. The fact that a higher percentage is female also aggravates the problem because the family commitments as well as safety issues con- cerned with traveling limit their attendance at programs conducted in the Western Province.54 At the same time, limited financial capacity of the family forces the females to sacrifice their education for more crucial needs like food and shelter of others and the education of the male members of the family. Civil disturbances also affect the participation at programs conducted in the Western Province by the students from other
255 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science s a. </> *** -fi 3 -Í ■*- -fi 3 ■*- 5 15 I a. 55 i i i i i x i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i o E o O) O 3 I I I I I I I | I I I I I I J? I I I I I I I I I J3 o o * Ì i 2 I I I I I I I I I I I I I I . I I I I I I I I I n" •: ^ 2 i i i i i i i i i i i i i i 8 i i i i i i i i i | o I S ,O -c | U IIIIIIIIXIIXII^IIIIIIIII ^ O ^£ I ¿ O J ^£ ^ I U) llllllllXIIXII-glllllllll a S 1 i Í 5 xxxxx ixxxxxxxx0x ixxxxxxx ^ o I to U s fi- lli I I I I I I I I X I I I I I T^ I I I I I I I I I E ^ c Z I I I I I I t I X I I X I I IIXIIIIII c 0) "d O CO co g Oloh-Q-!-=ii-LijE=QZiQ<<<oOO^S^t^^E 2 c D -D"w ft r-CNOO^-iOONOOOOr-CNrO^iO^ONCO^Or-CNrO^ C O O LLJ 1 E S o t o o o "5. V z 5 8 I 5 S O O o 2 -"" "O •• O 11 I 111 Ì ¡I
256 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science provinces. With the recently heightened terrorist activities, bomb ex- plosions in public places, especially in the public transport system tar- geting civilians in the Western Province and in Colombo and its suburbs and the tightened security measures, put off prospective students from reaching the Western Province for education. Repeated requests made to NILIS by the students to conduct programs through distance mode and to expand the programs to other provinces, so that they do not have to travel to Colombo, further confirm this issue. Access to the programs of- fered in Northern and Eastern Provinces is also limited to those from other provinces because of the civil disturbance prevailing in these two provinces. Language Equity Sri Lanka is a multicultural and multi,ethnic country (Table 5), but, as Ta- ble 6 indicates, 1 7 programs are offered in Sinhala only, 6 programs are of- fered in either Sinhala or English, 7 are offered in English only and only 1 LIS program is offered in Tamil. Languages in which the programs are offered illustrate an acute inequity of LIS education as far as the Tamil speaking ethnic minority is concerned. Analysis of the ethnic composition of the LIS teachers revealed that while 83% are Sinhala speaking only 17% (11% Tamils and 3% Muslims) speak Tamil. Eight of these Tamil speaking teachers are in the Northern Province making it difficult for the LIS education institutes in the other provinces to obtain their services for curriculum development activities which take place in the Western Province due to transport problems caused by the civil war. Their teaching expertise is not available for the programs conducted in the Western Province due to the same reason. Absence of such equilibrium in the teaching faculty pushes the LIS education system further into a vi- cious cycle of ethnic imbalance. The limited number of Tamil speaking LIS professionals in the North and East who have obtained their master's de- grees in the English medium may not perceive the widening ethnic gap in the profession. As a consequence, necessary leadership and role models are still absent among the Tamil speaking community. Table 5 Literacy Rate in Languages by Major Ethnic Groups55. Literacy in Major Ethnic Group Sinhala Tamil English Sinhalese (82%) 9Z3 ì~8 Í6~2 SL Tamil (4.3%) 31.4 78.5 24.1 Indian Tamil (5.1%) 15.7 72.7 11.0 SL Moor (7.9%) 38.5 84.2 24.0
A Critical Analysis of the Equity of US Education Programs in Sri Lanka 257 Table 6 Language Equity of US Programs. Sources: Course co-coordinators and brochures. S-Sinhala, E-English, T-Tamil. *Program offered in a combination of Sinhala and English. Implications and Recommendations There is no evidence that gender issues of LIS students have ever been dis- cussed in Sri Lanka. With the absence of any empirical evidence no conclu- sion could be made about the effects of the female dominance of LIS education, but it needs to be questioned whether it has any negative impacts on the profession. The controlling, dominating, visible, professional and powerful characteristics considered as male56 will not be presented ade- quately in the absence of male students which may lead to the absence of these qualities among the LIS professionals. This imbalance is not a healthy trend for the successful development of the profession. Income-related equity indicated that access to LIS education by the af- fluent urban class is limited, leaving it for the low-income groups. The im- plication of this is that there will be a shortage of students with good Level Course Title Language Certificate 1 . COLA S + fF 2.CSL S 3. CTL S/E 4.CPL S 5. MTP E 6. CUS S Diploma 7. DTL S/E 8. DELIS E 9. DIPLIS S/E/T 10. HDUS S 1 1 . DLIM S/E 12. NDT E Bachelor's 1 3. BA (General) S 14.BA(Gen.) (Ext) S 15. BA (Special) S Post-Graduate Diploma 16. PGLIS/NILIS S 1 7. PGTL S/E 1 8. PGLIS/Jaffna E Master's 19. MLS E 20. MA S 21.MSSc S 22. MTL S/E Research Degrees 23. PhD/DirectM E 24. Phil E (Leading to PhD)
258 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science secondary school education (in schools which provide better facilities) and with a science background in the LIS education system. At the same time, LIS programs will not attract the best students from the low-income fami- lies because of the low private rates of return for LIS. The study revealed that the regional distribution of the programs is highly centered in the Western Province, restricting participation by the students from other provinces. This limits the number of students in the LIS programs and at the same time those who need to study LIS for their profes- sional development are not catered to adequately. As an implication, the li- brary staff from the other provinces, especially from the economically disadvantaged provinces, often has to work without training, leading to poor library services. Absence of Tamil-language programs has led to the under-representation of ethnic minorities in the profession which in turn affects library services to the Tamil speaking community because their needs and expectations are not represented in the LIS education system and this is driving this ethnic minority towards a dangerous cycle of ethnic isolation within the discipline of LIS in Sri Lanka. In order to reduce the gender inequity in the LIS programs it is recom- mended to provide incentives like scholarships and fellowships to encour- age male enrollments. At the same time, the men who are holding higher positions in the LIS domain must act as role models and attract male stu- dents to the classes. With regard to the income inequity stakeholders need to address the issue from two aspects; to attract students from high income families with pro- fessional parents and to attract the bright students from low-income fami- lies. In order to attract the children of professional parents it is necessary to raise the standards of the LIS profession so that it is perceived as "cultural capital' by the parents of prospective students. For example, it is recom- mended to upgrade the existing three-year diploma program of NILIS to the bachelor's of library and information management in consultation with the UGC so that a new degree program is offered in the LIS discipline to at- tract the students from affluent families who would not otherwise consider enrolling for an LIS program. In order to address the issue of low private rates of return for LIS qualifi- cations, the salary structure of LIS professionals needs to be improved. At the same time, LIS educators must take action to obtain recognition for the LIS programs so that the students who complete these programs receive recognition and the financial benefits which will in turn increase the enroll- ments by the children of middle- and high-income families. An incentive scheme should be implemented to provide learning oppor- tunities to attract bright students from low-income families at the same time employers can be encouraged to sponsor LIS workers' education and training programs. In order to increase regional equity of the LIS education programs it is recommended that the programs are offered in distance mode so that stu-
A Critical Analysis of the Equity of LIS Education Programs in Sri Lanka 259 dents from remote areas can have access. But LIS educational institutes need to obtain the infrastructural support from other external organizations like the Open University of Sri Lanka, which has already developed exper- tise in distance education. Library educators are warned that a substantial amount of funds will be required to develop course material, provide staff training and many other infrastructural developments. If the programs are offered online the costs will be higher. However, the implementation of on- line programs will be a long-term phenomenon and more suitable for the undergraduate and postgraduate programs while correspondence mode can be used to offer short courses for those who do not have access to computer centers. It is also recommended that the LIS educational institutes establish re- gional centers especially in the educationally disadvantaged North Central and Uva Provinces to offer short-term programs. These centers should have co-coordinators, resource persons from the area and teaching/learning re- sources so that the students can have face-to- face learning experiences with the teachers. Quality of the programs must be monitored by the parent main LIS educational institution. This model was implemented by NILIS in 2008 as a pilot project in the Uva Province in collaboration with the Uva Provincial Library Services Board to offer a six-month certificate program in LIS. In order to address language inequity it is recommended that Jaffna, Eastern and South Eastern Universities commence LIS education programs at the bachelor's level in Tamil. Initially the support of the university li- brary staff and the staff of the other faculties where applicable needs to be obtained for teaching until a strong Tamil speaking LIS teaching faculty is developed. But all these programs should not follow the same curriculum to avoid a surplus of LIS graduates leading to under- and unemployment. They must offer a variety of specializations decided in consultations with the regional policy makers who possess a broader picture of the regional and ethnic employment needs in the LIS sector. It would have been more beneficial for the LIS educators and the policy makers if it had been possible to examine the implications of the inequities of LIS education programs upon library and information services in Sri Lanka. For instance, the impact of having more female librarians on the in- formation services for males and females, implications of having more LIS students/professionals from the low- and middle-income groups on the in- formation services for the clients from these income groups and its impact on the professional status as a whole are some of the issues worth research- ing. The quality of library services available for ethnic minorities, when the access to LIS education programs in the minority languages is limited, needs to be further investigated. A handful of publications illustrate that the university, public and school libraries in Sri Lanka need a considerable amount of improve- ment.57 However, empirical data sets related to the Sri Lankan LIS sector which are essential to make such comparative studies are absent. Al-
260 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science though 1 15 postgraduate theses in LIS have been completed in Sri Lanka between 1993 and 2007, the major study on LIS education carried out by the author and referred to in the introduction established that national level LIS research is absent.58 This is a serious drawback to the LIS re- searchers as well as to the development of the profession. LIS educators, professional associations and other national bodies like the National Li- brary and Documentation Services Board must take immediate action to conduct a census and surveys to provide basic information related to the LIS sector to enable in-depth comparative studies. Nevertheless, it is ex- pected that this paper will draw the attention of the LIS educators of the other countries, especially those in South Asia to new areas of research in- volving the equity of LIS education. References and Notes 1 . Estate sector is defined as plantations of 20 acres or more in extent upon which there are 1 0 or more resident laborers (Sri Lanka Department of Census and Statistics, 2001). 2. Sri Lanka Department of Census and Statistics. Brief Analysis of Population and Housing Characteristics, http://www.statistics.gov.lk/PopHouSat/PDF (accessed on October 24, 2007). 3. Sri Lanka provincial map. http://www.info.lk/srilanka/srilankanature/geogra- phy/provincialmap.htm (accessed on October 6, 2008). 4. World Bank. Treasures of the Education System in Sri Lanka: Restoring Performance, Ex- panding Opportunities and Enhancing Prospects. (Colombo: World Bank Colombo Of- fice, 2005). 5. Sri Lanka Department of Census and Statistics. Statistical Abstracts 2007. http://www. statistics.gov.lk/Abstract_2006/abstract2006/Pages/chap 14.htm (accessed on September 26, 2008). 6. Since the early 1 940s education in Sri Lankan public schools has been provided free of charge. Universities also offer free education until the completion of three or four years of undergraduate education. Increasing the number of rural schools to provide education op- portunities for the talented poor and making Sinhala and Tamil language the mediums of instruction in 95% of these schools in the 1 940s also contributed to the expansion of educa- tional opportunities for females. Furthermore the fact that 97% of the schools in Sri Lanka are co-educational (accommodating both male and female students) has made an impact on the provision of equal opportunities in education for both sexes. 7. Human Development Report - Sri Lanka: Human Development Index http://hdrstats.undp. org/countries/country_fact_sheets/cty_fs_LKA.html (accessed on June 27, 2008). 8. The national poverty line in Sri Lanka in 2006/07 was set at Rs. 2233 per capita per month according to the Official Poverty Line Bulletin of the Sri Lanka Department of Census and Statistics in 2008. 9. Sri Lanka Department of Census and Statistics. Official Poverty Line for Sri Lanka, 2008. http^/www.statistics.gov.lk/poverty/OfficialPovertyLineBuletin.pdf (accessed on April 10,2008. 1 0. The World Bank has developed an interactive benchmarking tool, Knowledge Assessment Methodology (KAM), to help countries identify the challenges and opportunities they face in making the transition to the knowledge economy. KAM consists of 83 structural and qualitative variables for 140 countries to measure their performance on four aspects con- sidered as the four pillars of the knowledge economy: economic incentives and institu- tional regime, education, innovation and ICT. The variables are normalized on a scale of
A Critical Analysis of the Equity of LIS Education Programs in Sri Lanka 261 0-10 relative to other countries in the comparison group and KAM also derives the coun- try's overall Knowledge Economy Index (the average of four pillars) and Knowledge Index (the average of education, innovation and ICT). 1 1 . World Bank. Knowledge Assessment Methodology (An interactive benchmarking tool), 2007. http://www.eorldbank.org/etools/kam2 (accessed on January 23, 2008). 1 2. Asian Development Bank. "Sri Lanka inclusive development and conflict resolution: ma- jor challenges in the future," 2007. http://www.adb.org/Documents/CAPES/SRI/ CAPE-SRI-2007.pdf (accessed on 02.01.2008); and United Nations Development Assis- tance Framework. "Sri Lanka 2008-2012" 2007. http://www.humanitarianinfo.org/ srilanka/hosting/unsl/english/inpages (accessed on 6.01 .2008). 13. Rebecca Knuth, "Destroying a Symbol: Checkered History of Sri Lanka's Jaffna Public Li- brary" 2006. http://www.ifla.Org/IV/ifla72/papers/l 19_knuth-en.pdf (accessed on Janu- ary 20, 2008). 14. Though many literary references are available about the burning of the Jaffna Public Li- brary, it is a pity that the destruction of the Central Bank library is not recorded in the LIS literature either locally or internationally. 15. Pradeepa Wijetunge. Forthcoming paper on Current LIS education programs and provid- ers. 16. A.D.V. De S. Indraratna. Economics of Higher Education in Sri Lanka. (New Delhi: Navrang, 1992), p. 41. 17. W.O. Lee. "Equity and access to education: themes, tensions and policies," 2004. http://www.adborg/Documents/Books?Education_NatDEv_Asia/Equity_Access/equity- access.pdf (accessed on April 1 7, 2006). 1 8. Asian Development Bank. Framework and Criteria for the Appraisal and Socioeconomic Justification of Education Projects. (Manila: Economics and Development Resource Cen- ter, and Infrastructure Department, ADB, 1991). 19. Ann Irving. Education and Training forLlibrary and Information Work. (Colombo: Sri Lanka National Library and Documentation Services Board, 1988). 20. Pradeepa Wijetunge and Jonathatn Willson. "Perceptions of Library and Information Sci- ence Education and Training in Sri Lanka," 1998. http://www.ifla.org/IV/ifla64/056- 140e. htm (accessed on August 14, 2008). 21 . Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka are the seven countries identified as South Asia. The literature survey was extended to the other South Asian countries because of their socioeconomic and political similarities to Sri Lanka 22. C.R. Karisiddappa and B.D. Kumbar, eds. Equity in US Education: In IT-based Pedagogi- cal Environment of the Knowledge Society. (Dharwad: IATLIS, 2007). 23. H.S. Siddamallaiah and C.R. Karisiddappa. "Equity in LIS Education: A New Generation Digital Pedagogy in Knowledge Society." In Equity in US Education: In IT-based Peda- gogical Environment of the Knowledge Society, ed. C.R. Karisiddappa and B.D. Kumbar, 1-21 (Dharwad: IATLIS, 2007). 24. P. Rajarathnam Chetty. "Achieving Equity in LIS Education in the Knowledge Society: Need of the Hour." In Equity in LIS Education: In IT-based Pedagogical Environment of the Knowledge Society, ed. C.R. Karisiddappa and B.D. Kumbar, 50-59 (Dharwad: IATLIS, 2007). 25. H.P.S. Kalra, "Equity in Students' Intake and Levels of LIS Education in India." In Equity in LIS Education: In IT-based Pedagogical Environment of the Knowledge Society, ed. C.R. Karisiddappa and B.D. Kumbar, 74-81 (Dharwad: IATLIS, 2007). 26. Dalbir Singh. "Need of Enthusiasm and Healthy Practices in Library Schools for Equity of Library and Information Science Education in Evolving Societies of 21st Century." In Eq- uity in LIS Education: In IT-based Pedagogical Environment of the Knowledge Society, ed. C.R. Karisiddappa and B.D. Kumbar, 82-90 (Dharwad: IATLIS, 2007).
262 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 27. Jagtar Singh. "The Paradoxes of Envisioned Knowledge Society and Misplaced Equity of LIS Education in India: Ramifications and Remedies. In Equity in LIS Education: In IT-based Pedagogical Environment of the Knowledge Society, ed. C.R. Karisiddappa and B.D. Kumbar, 22-35 (Dharwad: IATLIS, 2007). 28. R.S.R. Varalakshmi. "Equal Opportunities in LIS Education: A Myth or Reality: A Study of LIS Education Programs in Andrà Pradesh." In Equity in LIS Education: In IT-based Pedagogical Environment of the Knowledge Society, ed. C.R. Karisiddappa and B.D. Kumbar, 100-1 16 (Dharwad: IATLIS, 2007). 29. Indraratna, Economics of Higher Education in Sri Lanka. 30. Siddamallaiah and Karisiddappa. "Equity in LIS Education." 3 1 . Ameen Kanwal. "Issues of Quality Assurance in LIS Higher Education in Pakistan " 2007. http://www.ifla.org/IV/ifla73/papers/! 1 4- Ameen-en.pdf (accessed on July 31, 2007). 32. Md. Shiful Islam and Mohammed Abu Khaled Chowdhur. "Library and Information Sci- ence Education in Bangladesh: An Overall Situation." In Preparing Information Profes- sionals fo Headers hip in the New Age. ed. Christopher Choo, Diljit Singh and Abdus Sattar Chaudhry, 358-363 (Singapore: Division of Information Studies, School of Communica- tion and Information, Nangyan Technological University, 2006). 33. Khalid Mahmood. "Distance Education in LIS: Experience in Pakistan." In LIS Education in South Asia: Progress, Problems and Prospects, ed. P.B. Mangia and R.G. Prasher. 221-236 (Ludhiana: Medallion. 2004). 34. Irving, Education and Training for Library and Information Work. 35. Wijetunge and Willson, "Perceptions of Library and Information Science Education and Training in Sri Lanka." 36. In Sri Lanka there is a co-ordinator for each LIS education program to handle the course-specific administrative work like preparation of time tables, liaising with the visit- ing faculty, scheduling the examinations and many other course-related duties. 37. Although there are 1 ,595 students according to the course co-ordinators as indicated in Ta- ble 3 of this article, two programs did not have the lists of students to be used as sampling frames; therefore, about 521 students had to be excluded from the survey. 38. Lee, "Equity and access to education." 39. Ibid., p. 4. 40. Ibid. 41. C.R. Karisiddappa. Inaugural speech delivered at the NILIS/IATLIS joint workshop on Managing E-Resources for Excellence. 1 3-1 5 December 2007 at NILIS, University of Co- lombo. 42. Mary Fíela Belenky, et al. Women s Ways of Knowing: The Development of Self Voice and Mind. (New York: Basic Books, 1986). 43. Hillary Callan and Shirley Ardener, eds. The Incorporated Wife. (London: Croom Helm, 1984). 44. Arlene Kaplan Daniels. "Invisible Work." Social Problems 34 (1987): 403-415; and Arlene Kaplan Daniels. Invisible Careers: Women Civi Leaders from the Volunteer World. (Chicago: University of Chicago, 1988). 45. Nel Nodding. Caring: A Feminine Approach to Ethics and Moral Education. (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1984). 46. Martha R. Fowlkes. "The Myth of Merit and Male Professional Careers: The Roles of Wives." In Workand Families, ed. Naomi Gerstel and Harriet Engel Gross, 347-360 (Phil- adelphia, PA: Temple University Press, 1987). 47. Sri Lankan Rupees 108 = US$ 1.00 48. Jose-Gines Mora. "Equity in Spanish Higher Education." Higher Education 33, no.3 (1997): 233-249.
A Critical Analysis of the Equity of US Education Programs in Sri Lanka 263 49. Motohisa Kaneko. "Efficiency and Equity in Japanese Higher Education." Higher Educa- //0/i34,no.2,(1997): 165-181. 50. World Bank. Treasures of the Education System in Sri Lanka: Restoring Performance, Ex- panding Opportunities and Enhancing Prospects. (Colombo: World Bank Colombo Of- fice, 2005). 51 . Within the past 50 years labor economists have seriously examined the returns to invest- ment in education. By the mid-1970s techniques focused on the difference between aver- age annual earnings among people with different levels of education attainment. They also analyzed the differences between social and private rates of return by comparing the amount of public subsidy received by education with the amount of extra tax society was able to levy on resultant higher earnings (World Bank, 2005). 52. World Bank. Sri Lanka Poverty Assessment: Engendering Growth with Equity: Opportu- nities and Challenges. (Washington, DC: World Bank, 2007). 53. Ibid. 54. Part-time LIS classes are conducted either Saturdays or Sundays from 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. Due to the less developed status of transport facilities, many students from the rural areas need to leave their villages very early in the morning, usually by 4 to 4:30 a.m. to reach the class by 9 a.m. Often they leave the classes by 1 : 30 to 2 p.m. to reach their provincial capital cities so that they do not miss the last bus which leaves to their home villages from the city. 55. Department of Census and Statistics, "Brief analysis of population and housing character- istics." 56. John Pease. "Professor Mom: Woman's Work in a Man's World. Sociological Forum 8, no.l (1993). 133-139. 57. T.L. Chrishantha Dilroshan. "Identification of Problems Faced by University Libraries in the Process of Automation: With Special Reference to the Libraries of Moratuwa and Co- lombo Universities." Sri Lanka Journal of Librarians hip and Information Management 1 , no. 1 (2004). http://www.cmb.ac.lk/academic/institutes/nilis/reports/InformationLiteracy. pdf. (accessed on November 15, 2005); Zawiyah Baba. Report of Situation Concerning Public Libraries in Sri Lanka. Unpublished report submitted to the National Library and Documentation Services Board, 2006; and World Bank. Unpublished draft proposal of the libraries component of the general education project. (Colombo: World Bank Mission to Sri Lanka, 1997). 58. C. J. Manawadu. Index to Masters and PhD Dissertations and Theses in Library and Infor- mation Science submitted to Faculty of Graduate Studies University of Colombo and De- partment of LIS, University of Kelaniya. Unpublished report submitted as a partial fulfilment of the requirements of Intermediate Certificate in Library and Information Man- agement. NILIS, 2007.