Librarians, teachers, and parents use professional reviews and awards to guide purchases and selection of books for children and young adults. Professional associations, such as the American Library Association (ALA) and the International Reading Association (IRA), and state-level affiliates have created book awards to distinguish the best of the best. Lists and awards recognizing high-quality audiobooks for children and young adults, however, are relatively recent. The Odyssey Book Award, inaugurated by the Association of Library Service to Children (ALSC) and the Young Adult Library Services Association (YALSA), both divisions of ALA, pays homage to Homer’s Ulysses and draws attention to the importance of the oral tradition (Burkey 2013). This particular award exists to honor “the best audiobook produced for children and/or young adults available in English in the United States” (ALSC and YALSA 2012). Numerous studies examining the qualities and characteristics of print texts reveal trends in the characteristics of the materials to which awards are conferred. For example, Lenore J. Weitzman and colleague’s (1972) examination of award-winning picture books uncovered a proclivity toward sex-role stereotyping in children’s books, and Sandra Hughes-Hassell and Ernie J. Cox’s (2010) analysis of board books for young readers found very few characters of color or of diverse ethnic origin. However, Jonathan Lathey (2005) found that protagonists in Newbery-winning books of the 1990s display resiliency in contrast to those of the 1950s, and Mara L. Houdyshell and Coleen Meyers Martin (2010) found that the female protagonists of Newbery-winning books from the late 1990s through the late 2000s are likely to display that resiliency. Audiobooks can also vary greatly in both content and quality. In addition to the quality of the stories being told in their print counterparts, audiobooks have added components in the production process to separate the poor from the average from the outstanding. In fact, professional reviews of audiobooks focus almost exclusively on the production components rather than the story or information conveyed (Mediatore 2003; Saricks 2010), and awards are conferred based on production quality rather than story or information (ALSC and YALSA 2012). Audiobook Production Process Narration To narrate an audiobook requires unique skills, with one person typically giving voice to multiple characters (Tolkoff 2005). Narrators of children’s and young adult audiobooks must be able to voice the whimsy, excitement, and energy so outwardly apparent in youth (Burkey 2013). The narrator’s tone, voice, and emphasis (Yokota and Martinez 2004) can enliven a story and engage a reader or do just the opposite (Saricks 2008, 2010). A narrator must ensure that the voicing of a story does not interfere with the meaning; thus, it is particularly important that pronunciation of words be accurate and clear (West 1995). A narrator’s pacing expresses meaning; pauses (Wittkower 2011) and speed (Saricks 2010) enhance the action and emotions of stories. Narration Styles Narration occurs in one of four styles. The most common style employed is fully voiced, in which each character is represented by a different voice. In partially voiced narration, the narrator uses distinguishable voices for the primary characters, whereas the secondary characters typically share a common voice in the background. Multivoiced readings utilize multiple narrators, with each representing a different character. Unvoiced readings are straight readings of the text without any distinguishable voices (Beavin 1995). Expressiveness of the Reading High-quality reading in face-to-face settings is typically characterized by the interactions that occur between reader and listener rather than the reading itself (Wasik and Bond 2001). A recent study (Mira and Schwanenflugel 2013) that measured expressiveness by changes in pitch using sophisticated, specialized software found that expressive readings tend to be longer due to changes in prosody. Sound Elements Sound elements, in the forms of sound effects and background music, are often included in audiobooks. Like narrators’ use of speed and pauses, background music affects pace and thus conveys meaning (Burkey 2013). Background music can establish the mood or set the level of intensity of a scene, and it can emphasize the cultural significance of a text. Music is also used as transition between chapters and/or discs and to signify the beginning and ending of the text (Myrick 2008). Final Production Steps Final production entails four steps after recording is complete. First, all audio files are arranged in the correct order. Second, the pacing is adjusted to remove long pauses and unwanted noises. Next, the audio is compared to the written text to ensure one-to-one correspondence. Finally, sound elements are added, and the text is divided into tracks (Burkey 2013). An average of 5.5 hours of production is required for each hour of an audiobook (West 1995). Odyssey Award Criteria and Selection Process Each year, the Odyssey Award is given to the producer of the best English-language audiobook for children and/or young adults produced in the United States. The Odyssey Award Committee comprises a total of nine members. Although for the inaugural award, the committee worked without a manual and with only modest guidelines (Vardell 2008b, 124), all committee processes are now guided by the Odyssey Award Manual (ALSC and YALSA 2012), which specifies award criteria and selection procedures. The award is based on the technical aspects of production, including the quality of the direction, narration, and engineering, but not on the content of the book. Committee members evaluate the following production quality criteria: • Narration: The narrator should be expressive, dynamic, use dialects correctly and consistently, differentiate between characters, speak clearly, pace words appropriately, and engage the listener. • Sound quality: The recording should be free of unrelated, distracting noise, such as humming. • Background music and sound effects: When used, background music and sound effects should enhance the listening experience and fit the mood of the text. Throughout the year, committee members listen to eligible audiobooks. Before the ALA Midwinter Meeting, they nominate titles to be included on the voting ballot and then meet in three closed sessions to vote on the award. The committee also has the option of selecting honor titles. If no production is deemed worthy, an award does not have to be given. The Odyssey Award and Honor publications are announced at a press conference at the ALA Midwinter Meeting, and the award is presented at the ALA Annual Conference (ALSC and YALSA 2012). Research Purpose The dearth of research investigating audiobooks for children is astounding given the widespread endorsement of their use for children of all ages. Just as children’s reading performance differs according to the characteristics of the text read, it is plausible that the effect of audiobooks on children’s literacy development varies according to components within the recordings. Thus, a preliminary step in investigating audiobook use with typical and struggling readers is consideration of the factors constituting a high-quality audiobook. No research has yet examined the Odyssey Award or any other recommended-audiobook lists to explore trends in high-quality audiobook recordings. The purpose of this study was to answer the question, What are the typical characteristics of an award-winning audiobook produced for children and/or young adults?” Methods Through content analysis of all audiobooks distinguished by an Odyssey Award or Honor designation, this study aimed to quantitatively analyze and describe the characteristics of select audiobooks developed for children and/or young adults that were subsequently awarded for their distinction. Data Sources The sample for this study was all 30 texts that were recognized as Odyssey Award winner or Honor title from the inauguration of the award through 2013, when this study commenced (ALA 2014). Data Analysis Two researchers analyzed each of the audiobooks included in the sample. For materials in “read-aloud” format, the researchers analyzed the packaging (for published length), listened to the audiobooks in their entirety, and based pacing upon the total number of words and full running time. For materials exclusively in audiobook format on multiple CDs, at a minimum, the researchers analyzed the packaging (for published length) and listened to the first, second, and final tracks of the first CD; the first and last tracks of all other CDs; and the last two tracks of the last CD. For materials exclusively in audiobook format on a single MP3-CD, at a minimum, the researchers analyzed the packaging (for published length) and listened to the first, second, and final two tracks. For all materials in audiobook format, they randomly selected and listened to five one-minute segments and based pacing upon the average number of words per segment. The Odyssey is based on the expressiveness, consistency, and clarity of the narration as well as production aspects such as addition of sound elements; thus, the analysis in this study considered those factors that could be operationalized and measured, including characteristics of the narrator, voicing of the narration, pacing, and inclusion and placement of music and additional sounds. Further, the researchers considered the publisher, characteristics of authors, format of materials, structure of the text, and length of the recording. Other factors surrounding the recordings, but separate from the productions themselves, were also considered in this study. Books are typically characterized by subject and genre (Weisburg 2013), and book selection by and for children is often driven by interest level. In school-based contexts, designated reading levels of texts are also important selection factors, and the reading level system employed in the Common Core State Standards (NGACPB and CCSSO 2010), which currently predominate in the United States, is Lexile (MetaMetrics 2013). Thus, in addition to analyzing the materials themselves, the researchers collected the following for each of the titles: Library of Congress (LOC) subject heading, interest level, reading level, Lexile, and genre (all based on the print format) and recognition and/or awards for all formats of the book. The researchers then examined the LOC subject headings and through open coding grouped the 154 assigned subject headings into general “superset headings” (Follis 2012). To establish interrater reliability, the researchers independently analyzed four randomly selected Odyssey-distinguished texts. For all criteria except pacing, the researchers were in agreement. To measure agreement for the pacing, a correlation coefficient was calculated using Spearman’s rho. For each of the four novels, R = 1. Results An average of five books receive an Odyssey distinction each year, and 96.7% (N = 29) of those have received other national awards or recognition for either the print or audiobook/read-along format. Publisher Unlike most book awards, which are conferred on either author or illustrator, the Odyssey Award is presented to a producer. As shown in table 1, Listening Library produced more than one-third of the materials with Odyssey distinction. The majority of texts with Odyssey recognition are audiobook format (n = 25); however, two of the remaining texts in a read-along format (n = 5) are Odyssey Award productions. Table 1.  Odyssey Award and Honor Producers Producer Odyssey Award Odyssey Honor Total Listening Library 2 9 11 Brilliance Audio 1 5 6 Listen and Live Audio 0 3 3 Live Oak Media 2 0 2 Harper Children’s Audio 0 2 2 Westin Woods 0 2 2 Recorded Books 1 0 1 Macmillan Audio 0 1 1 Peachtree Publishers 0 1 1 Scholastic 0 1 1 Length of Recording The average Odyssey Award production is just short of 10 hours, and the average Honor production is nearly 8 hours. The discrepancies between actual and published lengths of recording range from 1 second to 38 minutes, with 56.6% (n = 17) having an actual length that is shorter and 33.3% (n = 10) having an actual length that is longer than the published length. Characteristics of Narrators and Narration In only two instances (6.7%) does the author serve as narrator. As table 2 displays, there is only one narrator in 86.7% (N = 26) of Odyssey recordings. This finding is not surprising considering that only certain titles lend themselves to more than one narrator. Males serve as narrator more frequently, and two recordings have both male and female narrators. The gender of the narrator matches that of the primary character in each novel, with the exception of four recordings: Jazz, which has no characters and alternates between one male and one female narrator; Dooby Dooby Moo and I Stink!, which feature anthropomorphic and genderless animals or objects; and Skullduggery Pleasant, whose main character is a female, yet the story is told from the male narrator’s perspective. Three narrators are associated with more than one Odyssey Honor title: Katherine Kellgren has narrated five, and Dion Graham and Nick Podehl have each narrated two. No narrator is associated with multiple Odyssey Award–winning recordings. Table 2.  Gender(s) of Narrator(s) Gender(s) Odyssey Award Odyssey Honor Total One male 2 14 16 One female 3 7 10 One female and one male 1 1 2 Two females 0 1 1 Two males 0 1 1 Reading Style Twenty-eight Odyssey recordings are fully voiced, with the narrator employing a distinct voice for each character. One recording is partially voiced: the narrator used unique voices for main characters, but other characters’ voices are less distinguishable. One recording does not have characters, and although it has two narrators, the reading is classified as unvoiced because each narrator delivers the text in a single voice. Reading Pace As shown in table 3, average reading pace differs considerably between formats, and a Mann Whitney U test confirms that differences are significant (z = −3.478; p < .001). The average pace of honor productions is slightly faster than that of award productions, but differences are not significant (z = −.570; p = .568). Rather, the variance seems to be a facet of having a higher percentage of read-alouds in the award category than in the honor category. The range of pace among the data set is quite large: the book with the fastest average pace is read more than four times faster than that with the slowest average pace. However, within each production, the pace of the reading corresponds with the mood and action of the text being read. For example, in the award-winning read-along Jazz, the introduction on the history of jazz is read at a much faster pace than the individual poems, which are sung in rhythms reflecting the styles of the jazz described. Table 3.  Pace by Format and Award Designation Odyssey Award Odyssey Honor Total Pace Mean Productions Pace Mean Pace Range Productions Pace Mean Pace Range Read-aloud 2 83.52 79.81–87.23 3 76.77 43.97–107.02 79.47 Audiobook 4 154.4 126.60–172.80 21 157.02 137–184.40 156.60 Total 6 130.77 79.81–172.80 24 146.99 43.97–184.40 143.75 Additional Sound Elements and Placement of Sound Elements Sound elements in Odyssey productions include instrumental music, thematic sound effects, and sounds indicating a page turn. Table 4 details the types of sound elements and music, and table 5 illustrates the placement of those within the productions. The most frequent sound element is instrumental music introducing and concluding an audiobook in its entirety. In all but four instances, the music matches the theme, culture, and/or era of the text and enhances the listening experience. For example, the music in Skulduggery Pleasant has sound elements embedded that are perfectly aligned with the text so that the sound element (such as a crashing sound) plays at the precise moment when a suspenseful event occurs. Thematic sound effects, which are more often the exception than the rule, are used more frequently in read-alouds and placed sporadically to emphasize actions occurring within a book. For example, I’m Dirty, a read-aloud about a backhoe, includes a revving engine, truck horn, and crashing sounds. The read-aloud Martina the Beautiful Cockroach: A Cuban Folktale employs a Cuban clave to signal page turns. Four other recordings also include sounds to direct page turns. Table 4.  Types of Sound Elements Odyssey Award Odyssey Honor Total Instrumental music 3 21 24 None 2 4 6 Thematic sound effects 1 5 6 Sound of page turning 1 3 4 Table 5.  Placement of Sound Elements Odyssey Award Odyssey Honor Total Beginning of entire audiobook 2 16 18 Conclusion of entire audiobook 2 15 17 Credits 1 10 11 When related actions occur 1 4 5 Beginning of each disc 1 3 4 End of each disc 1 3 4 Throughout 1 2 3 Between chapters 0 2 2 Text Structure Twenty-seven Odyssey titles have a narrative text structure. Of those titles, 23 are novels, 1 is a narrative history, and 3 are narrative picture books. Of the remaining 3 productions, 1 is a novel written in letters, 1 is a descriptive picture book, and 1 is a collection of poems. Genre The researchers used the genre provided by EBSCO’s NoveList (for the book format) for each Odyssey production. Nineteen titles are categorized into multiple genres. For example, Nation is categorized as both historical fiction and adventure. Other titles include identifiers not considered genres such as cultural designation, theme, and format, which were eliminated from the genre data. Table 6 illustrates the genre labels most frequently identified with Odyssey titles. Table 6.  Odyssey Award and Honor Genres Genre Odyssey Award Odyssey Honor Total Fantasy 0 8 8 Historical fiction 0 8 8 Adventure story 1 5 6 Realistic fiction 3 3 6 Humorous story 1 2 3 Multiple perspectives 0 2 2 Science fiction 1 1 2 Biography 1 0 1 Counting book 0 1 1 Folklore 0 1 1 Folktale 0 1 1 Ghost story 0 1 1 Cultural Designation The majority of Odyssey titles (n = 23) do not have any cultural designation. As displayed in table 7, only one culturally specific work has received the Odyssey Award. More materials about African Americans than any other cultural group have received Odyssey distinction. Table 7.  Cultural Designation of Odyssey Award and Honor Materials Cultural Designation Odyssey Award Odyssey Honor Total African American 0 4 4 American Indian 1 0 1 Cuban 0 1 1 Indigenous peoples of Oceania 0 1 1 LGBT 0 1 1 Library of Congress Subject Headings When analyzed and grouped by a more general superset heading (Follis 2012), the 154 LOC subject headings assigned to Odyssey titles resulted in 42 superset headings. The top 20 superset headings are illustrated in table 8. “Geographic locale” and “social issues/relationships” appear most frequently in both award and honor titles. Table 8.  Top 20 Superset Headings Superset Heading Odyssey Award Odyssey Honor Total Geographic locale 2 10 12 Social issues/relationships 2 8 10 Families 1 5 6 Orphans/foster children 0 6 6 School 1 5 6 Animals 1 4 5 Historical events and figures 0 5 5 Supernatural and extraterrestrial beings 1 4 5 Entertainment 1 3 4 Magic 0 4 4 Race/ethnicity 0 4 4 Text format 2 2 4 Adventure and adventurers 1 2 3 Criminal activity 1 2 3 Emotions 1 2 3 Fantasy 0 3 3 Occupations 1 2 3 Pirates 1 2 3 Science fiction 1 2 3 Sexuality and sex roles 0 3 3 Interest Level The researchers used the Interest Level by Age published by EBSCO NoveList, Interest Level by Grade assigned by Booklist, Lexile level assigned through MetaMetrics’(2013) “Find a Book” tool, and appropriate Lexile range according to Common Core State Standards (NGACPB and CCSSO 2010). Because many of the materials would be appropriate across a range of grades, designations are not mutually exclusive. As illustrated in table 9, less than 15% of award and honor books are intended for young children. Table 9.  Interest Levels by Age Age Level Odyssey Award Odyssey Honor Total 0–8 1 3 4 9–12 2 8 10 Teens 3 12 15 Unavailable 0 1 1 Table 10 shows a comparison between the number of materials available at each grade level based on interest level and Lexile range (both based on print format). Audiobooks and read-alouds intended for preteens and teens have received the lion’s share of Odyssey recognition as determined by interest level; however, based on Lexile level, the majority of Odyssey titles fall into the range appropriate for intermediate grade readers. Clearly, there is great disparity between the two measures. Table 10.  Interest Level and Lexile Range by Grade Level Interest Level Lexile Range Grade Level Odyssey Award Odyssey Honor Total Odyssey Award Odyssey Honor Total Preschool 1 2 3 NA 0 0 0 K 2 3 5 NA 0 0 0 1 2 3 5 NA 0 0 0 2–3 2 4 6 450L to 790L 3 8 11 4–5 2 9 11 770L to 980L 1 12 13 6–8 2 18 20 955L to 1155L 0 5 5 9–10 4 14 18 1080L to 1305L 0 2 2 11–12 2 8 10 1215L to 1355L 0 0 0 Discussion The purpose of this study was to answer the question “What are the typical characteristics of award-winning audiobooks produced for children and/or young adults?” The Odyssey Award Manual (ALSC and YALSA 2012) purports that the award is based on high-quality engineering and direction, and for this study these terms were operationalized to include the quality of the narration, sound effects, and music. As the results of this study demonstrate, award-recognized audiobooks for children vary greatly in a number of factors, but based on means and modes, a typical Odyssey-designated audiobook would be a fantasy or historical fiction novel about a white, male character. The audiobook would be intended for a young adult audience, but the print counterpart would have been written on a fourth to fifth grade reading level. The recording would be fully voiced by a male narrator, with pacing at about 156 words per minute and instrumental music that matches the tone, era, and/or subject matter placed at the beginning and conclusion. The production would take slightly longer than 8 hours, and the title would have received another recognition for either print or audio format. Does it really matter? What difference does it make if an audiobook has two narrators or one, if the pacing is fast or slow, if sound elements are present? Librarians and educators should care about both the production elements and the content of audiobooks. It is widely recognized that the quality and content of children’s and adolescents’ literature matters. An abundance of professional literature in education and library science exists that promotes audiobooks for use with children and young adults. This literature recommends using audiobooks to develop listening skills, to encourage deep reading, to support literacy development, and to serve as reading motivation (e.g., Neuman 2005; Serafini 2006; Grover and Hannegan 2012). Alhough research has repeatedly suggested using high-quality texts to develop children’s and young adult’s literacy learning, language, and thinking skills (Fox and Short 2003; Vardell 2008a; Galda et al. 2013), studies exploring elements of quality in audio texts do not exist. Just as previous analyses of children’s literature reveal discrepancies, so too does this study’s analysis. As in children’s literature in general (e.g., Perkins 2009; Hughes-Hassell and Cox 2010), this study reveals the lack of diversity found in characters of audiobooks. This is particularly troubling given the potential of audiobooks to authenticate multicultural literature for young audiences (Yokota and Martinez 2004). Given the percentage of award-winning audiobooks that have garnered other recognitions for the print-based counterparts, the story or information of the audiobooks could be considered high quality, and it’s not surprising that, on the whole, their subjects are similar to those of print-based award-winning books (Follis 2012). Interestingly, although public school standards in the United States call for greater use of information text and higher reading levels of print materials (NGACPB and CCSSO 2010), the majority of audiobooks available for children and adolescents are fictionalized accounts, utilizing narrative text structures, with reading levels trailing interest levels. However, the discrepancy between interest levels and reading levels could, in fact, lend credence to educators’ use of audiobooks as support for struggling readers. Given the importance of reading texts on an appropriate instructional level to support reading growth (Allington 2012) coupled with the notion that reader interest is essential for engaged reading (Guthrie et. al. 2007), audiobooks with high interest but low reading levels might be ideal for older struggling readers. The results of this study reveal important areas for researchers to explore further. This analysis demonstrates that most award-winning audiobooks employ fully voiced reading styles with appropriate prosody; however, further analysis of the materials, using sophisticated software to measure levels of expressiveness, may be useful as a next step. Previous research suggests that the fast pacing of many audiobooks for younger children inhibits their ability to follow along with a print text while listening (Shany and Biemiller 1995). Yet pacing is related to levels of expressiveness and thus comprehension (Mira and Schwanenflugel 2013). More studies are needed to investigate the relationship between audiobook pacing and older struggling readers. In addition, previous research demonstrates that individuals have preferences for different voice qualities (Hollien, Gelfer, and Carlson 1991), yet how, or if, those voice qualities affect listeners’ comprehension is not known. Similarly, background music affects both the comprehension and enjoyment of spoken messages (Carpentier 2010), but exploration of the relationship of sound elements within audiobooks and subsequent comprehension by listeners is absent in the professional literature. Conclusion Children and adolescents engage with audiobooks for enjoyment purposes, but many educators and literacy proponents have also suggested that interacting (Rosenblatt 2005) with audiobooks advances literacy development. Early childhood experts encourage parents to use audiobooks to develop reading and listening skills for young children (Neuman 2005), and library and literacy scholars have endorsed the medium for advancing literacy skills, for classroom use (e.g., Serafini 2006; Grover and Hannegan 2012), and as a tool for adolescents’ literacy development (Wolfson 2008; Moyer 2011). With audiobook use among children and adolescents on the rise (Audiobook Publishers Association 2013) and the availability of audiobooks for children and young adult readers more prevalent (Bowker 2013), further research exploring audiobook use and reader outcomes is necessary. This investigation of the components of high-quality audiobooks pushes forward that line of inquiry.