THE "GREAT BOOKS" DISCUSSION GROUPS' GEORGE F. BOWERMAN FORMERLY, when the term "adult education" was mentioned, edu- cated people usually thought it was of no concern to them individually, but that it meant the teaching of illiterates, perhaps foreign immigrants, to read in order to prepare them for naturalization. Of late years it has somewhat generally come to connote the idea that formal edu- cation, no matter to what advanced level it may be carried, is only the beginning; that education is lifelong; and that unless our education becomes a life-process, we go backward and cease to be able to con- sider ourselves educated. In other words, there is no such thing as a completed education. The psychologists tell us that ability to learn increases up to about the age of nineteen or twenty; remains about the same up to the age of forty-five; and then starts slowly to decline. But psychologi- cal studies also seem to indicate that, with adults who continue the learning process, ability to learn does not begin to diminish in middle age but remains at about the same high level until a much later period. In order, therefore, to keep intellectually alive we must keep on learning. Such adult education is, of course, self-education, which may be carried on through utilizing various cultural ad- vantages: music, art, drama, and espe- cially literature-the reading of books. For the education of the young, society furnishes the public school, at first on a compulsory basis; for adults it furnishes the public library, on a voluntary basis. Viewing children as potential adults, the public library has children's rooms and sends books to schools for supplemental reading in the hope of inducing lifelong reading habits. It has readers' advisers and special departments of music, art, philosophy and religion, science, etc., with specialists in charge, who outline courses of reading if desired-all to en- able a constantly increasing number of people to continue their education, to live richer lives, to be better citizens. All of these services and many more, whose constant purpose has ever been individual and community enlighten- ment, the Washington Public Library has carried forward in increasing volume and intensity for more than fifty years. During the last three years there has been added to the individual reader- guidance services a program of discussion groups organized around the so-called "great books of Western civilization," which are read in advance and form the basis of the discussions. For the past several months I have been an eager participant in certain of these groups. In the preparation of this statement I have drawn upon my own satisfactory experience; also somewhat heavily on what the leaders of the move- ment here and elsewhere have written in its exposition, especially on articles by the director of the Washington program, Dr. John W. Powell; by Dr. Cyril 0. Houle, dean of University College, Uni- versity of Chicago; and on the I3o-page Manual for Discussion Leaders by Pro- fessor Mortimer J. Adler, of the Univer- I A paper presented before the Literary Society of Washington, November 22, I947. 52
THE "GREAT BOOKS" DISCUSSION GROUPS 53 sity of Chicago, one of the principal pro- ponents of this new, but rapidly growing movement. The program, as it operates in Wash- ington, consists of the groups, the books, and a leader for each group. The program in its first year started with seven groups, each of ten weeks' duration, followed by six, also running ten weeks. Two years later there were nineteen groups going. Most groups meet weekly in two-hour sessions, although some meet bi-weekly. Nearly all meet in branch libraries, usu- ally in children's rooms, after their evening closing hours. A few meet morn- ings, and these are mnainly composed of housewives. Registration for each group is usually restricted to twenty. Members are ordinarily seated around a big table, with ash trays in evidence, since the li- brary's "no smoking" rule has been sus- pended for this program, to induce an atmosphere of informality. In the first thirty months of the pro- gram in Washington, about a thousand different individuals came about twelve thousand times to about a thousand meetings of nearly one hundred groups, for the purpose of discussing more than one hundred titles by seventy-five au- thors. The books consist for the most part of those sometimes known as "the classics of the Western world." They have been used as far back as I9I9 in the Honors course at Columbia University; at Cooper Union, New York, in I927; since I930 at the University of Chicago; from I933 to I942 in San Francisco in an adult school founded by Alexander Meikle- john; and since I937 they have formed, together with mathematics, the sciences, and languages, the core of the curriculum at St. John's College, Annapolis. They are used in the Washington program, but with several modern titles added, some of which scarcely rank as classics, but, nevertheless, are useful in discussion groups. The lists of the books used in the first two groups in which I participated and their sequences should be of interest. One group read the following: The Declaration of Independence; Plato's Apology and Crito; Sophocles' Oedipus Rex andA ntigone; Plato's Republic, Books i and ii; Aristotle's Politics, Book i; Thu- cydides' History of the Peloponnesian War, Book i; Aristotle's Ethics, Book i; from Plutarch's Lives, " Caesar" and " Alexander"; St. Augustine's Confes- sions, Books i-viii; St. Thomas Aquinas' Treatise on Law (Summa theologica, Books i and ii, Questions 90-97); Machi- avelli's The Prince; Montaigne's Selected Essays; and Shakespeare's Hamlet and Othello. The other group's readings con- sisted, in sequence, of the following: Shakespeare's Henry V; Hawthorne's Scarlet Letter; Kant's Metaphysics of Ethics; Tolstoi's War and Peace; Freud's Introduction to Psychoanalysis; Tacitus' The Annals (selections); Marx's Wage- Labor and Capital, and the Communist Manifesto; Mead's From the South Seas; Federalist Papers, Nos. 5i and IO; and The Education of Henry Adams. Dos- toievski's The Brothers Karamazov was to have been a part of this second se- quence, but had to be omitted as the in- expensive " Modern Library" edition was out of print. For last summer's group discussions the staple was the newly published abridgment of the first six volumes (so far issued) of Arnold J. Toynbee's A Study of History. Along with this great work there were read and discussed the celebrated chapters xv and xvi of Gib- bon's Decline and Fall, devoted to the early progress of Christianity and the policy of the Roman government toward it. There were four summer sections
54 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY using these two titles. Another summer group used Adam Smith's The Wealth of Nations, Veblen's The Vested Interests; and Lilienthal's TVA-Democracy on the March. The scheduled reading of several of the groups now in progress contains, in addition to orthodox "great books," the first and third of James T. Farrell's trilogy, Studs Lonigan, which called forth much thoughtful and animated discus- sion in the group of which I am a mem- ber. It may be reassuring to note that in connection with the reading and discus- sion of these books, some by so-called pagan authors, the Book of Job, Genesis, chapters i* and 2, as well as other por- tions of the Bible, are read. Much is made of the order in which the books are read and discussed; that is, by subject matter, by historical period, by literary type, or because some common problem is involved, such as war and peace or freedom and law. Most of the books used are available in inexpensive editions, such as the" Mod- ern Library," " Everyman's Library," etc. The Washington Public Library regu- larly purchases about twenty-five copies of each title in order to be able to furnish a copy to each member of a group. It has been interesting to observe that a good many members purchase personal copies (through leaders at a discount) and are thus building up their private libraries. It should be noted that so far as public participation in this program is con- cerned, the service is free, as are all Pub- lic Library services. The leader of each group is a highly important part of the program. He is not, and should not be, its teacher, and he is preferably not an "expert" in the sub- ject matter of the book under discussion, or there would be the danger that he might lecture or otherwise monopolize the conversation. Best results are ob- tained when he or she is a well-informed person with interest in people, problems, and ideas, who has read the book or pas- sage more intensively than any of the group and comes prepared with questions that will bring out the vital points. At present all leaders, other than the direc- tor and assistant director of the program, consist of certain members of the library staff who have other regular duties, to- gether with other persons from outside the library who as members of previous discussion groups have shown aptitude for such service and who have had some instruction and practice in a special dis- cussion group conducted by the library for the purpose of training group leaders. These discussion groups are not courses of study leading to a degree nor for cred- its toward a degree. Their aim is not vocational education but liberal educa- tion. Fortunately, there has been in the undergraduate colleges of late an effort to get away from hit-and-miss electives and vocational studies and to put more emphasis on well-co-ordinated liberal studies. Though liberal education may and should begin in school and college, undergraduates or recent graduates are usually too immature, too lacking in ex- perience, fully to grasp the ideas involved in a liberal education. These embrace the great, basic problems of human life and society, such as happiness, tragedy, good and evil, justice and injustice, poverty and wealth, immortality, freedom and security, war and peace, the individual and the state, science and religion, etc. Four groups of titles have been given of the books used in these discussions out of a larger list of titles, most of which are regarded as the great books of Western civilization. They are well suited for reading and group discussion in a pro- gram of adult liberal education inasmuch as they consist of the great works of
THE "GREAT BOOKS" DISCUSSION GROUPS 55 philosophy and history, of science and poetry, and deal with the fundamental problems which mankind has had to meet throughout the ages. They repre- sent various sides of major issues. They do not settle things, but by introducing us to great intellectual controversies they bid us make up our own minds. The authors of these books are the original minds of our civilization, our greatest teachers. They challenge and stimulate us. Although these books are hundreds or thousands of years old, they treat of the principal issues of today. They are written, not for specialists, but for ordi- nary men and women. While parts of them may be "'over our heads," once they are understood, they are more re- warding than lesser books. If what has been said concerning the value of reading the great books for a lib- eral education has been persuasive, one may ask why such liberal education may not be secured simply by the solitary reading of them. In the first place, few will have the fortitude to carry through such a private reading program. To give a personal experience: I, who have spent my adult life among books and have had at least an official nodding acquaintance with most of the titles used in all the group reading programs here and else- where and have had, in addition, a fairly wide reading interest and experience-I must, nevertheless, confess to have read only a small fraction of these books known to be great. I had long known that I really ought to have read them, but newspapers, magazines, and current books have for the most part crowded them out. So when I learned somewhat late that the Public Library had this program, I decided "better late than never." The incentive of needing to have read recently the book or passage to be discussed was effective as no simple good resolution would have been. Furthermore, I have got more out of this reading by reason of the discussions that followed. Solitary reading may be- come a secret vice, resulting in intellec- tual isolation and ministering to private prejudices. The opposite of a man with a liberal education is one with a closed mind-one who looks for and will seri- ously consider only such statements as agree with what he already believes. Even to read aloud a great book to one person and then to discuss it, as has long been my habit, has advantages, provided there is real discussion and reader and listener do not think too much alike. The value of the group discussion comes in part from the fact that no group is altogether homogeneous. Each group includes people with different experiences and different temperaments, with differ- ences in formal education, in age, in oc- cupation, and in social background. The result is that there are not two opinions -as in the case of one person reading aloud to another-but a whole set of views about the book, with a smaller chance for misconceptions and misinter- pretations. This not only results in better comprehension of the book under discus- sion but also makes for better under- standing of our fellow-men and for greater tolerance of the ideas of others by reason of the give-and-take of others focused on the same question in the dis- cussion. At the beginning of any series of group discussions the members are likely to be comparative strangers to one another. To make the program a success it is im- portant, not only that every member should read the book or passage in ad- vance, but that the attendance should be regular. The meetings may be likened to a college seminar, in fact are so called in
THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Chicago; but lectures by the leader are strictly taboo. The book is the teacher; the leader functions by using modifica- tions of the so-called "Socratic" method; that is, by questions that will bring out answers that will require more and more questions and then more and more an- swers, and not final answers at that. Thus there will be brought out not only the root idea in the book under discussion but worth-while ideas that may be brought to birth in the participants' minds. Who are the people who make up these discussion groups in Washington? The di- rector of the program reports that a sam- pling questionnaire brought answers from two hundred individuals, of whom two-thirds are the products of college or graduate schools. The remaining third have had only high-school or business training. Foreign nationalities repre- sented in the groups range from Aus- tralians to Africans, with a number from Central Europe; thirty-six different states were represented, largely from the New York-New England area and from the Midwest, with the South third. Only about twenty Negro members were in- cluded among the one thousand par- ticipants, although some effort was made to recruit more. Most of these were in group meetings in the small branch li- brary in a Negro housing development, and there were a few in some pre- dominantly white groups. The largest occupational group consisted of profes- sional, management, and executive per- sonnel, of whom the largest proportion were men. About 30 per cent of all groups were men. Housewives form perhaps I 5 per cent of all groups. Since government is Washington's principal industry, cleri- cal workers constitute a large part of every group, with manual and service trades low. A few military service per- sonnel, several college undergraduates, and even a few senior high-school stu- dents were included. Most group members were found to be already book-readers and library-card holders, but the questionnaire showed that the books used in the groups were new to most members. By means of this program, the great old books, heretofore only occasionally asked for, are gal- vanized into life and become subjects of study and discussion. It may be assumed that most people who join these groups and read the as- signed texts do so to make up deficiencies in their reading and so more or less de- liberately seek further education. But it is also no doubt true that some members are lonely and seek social and intellectual companionship in these groups. From my experience and observation, I judge that some of those joining are rather con- tentious by nature and seek an outlet for such proclivities. Although the leaders try to hold the discussion to the theme, seeming irrelevancies are tolerated; often these prove to be applications of the sub- ject of the book to men and events of to- day: for example, the character and mo- tives of such men as Henry Wallace, Senator McKellar, Stalin, and Molotov. I understand that one man was not toler- ated who confessed regularly that he had not read the assigned book but had read several encyclopedia articles about the subject and insisted on retailing them. Britannica articles are good as supple- ments but not as substitutes. All is not sweetness and light in these discussion groups. Occasionally recurring themes were the sins of big business, the trusts, the rich, the newspapers, and other similar topics, some of which added spice to the proceedings. To me a heart- warming incident was the impassioned statement of a young woman student in
THE "GREAT BOOKS" DISCUSSION GROUPS 57 a local Catholic college that she had served as a picket before the National Theater in the cause of admitting Ne- groes. It has been interesting to observe that certain members, who have prob- ably been attending these groups from the beginning, often quote previously read authors who also treated the subject of the book under discussion and compare the two, pitting one against the other. Some people have asked, as I did, why this program is so predominantly de- voted to the old books, and why present- day books would not do as well or better. Among the answers given were: first, that since such groups are made up of readers, many members will already have read the current books; and, second, that most modern books are derivative in that the fundamental ideas in them have already been expressed, and perhaps better expressed, in one or another of the "great books" and so do not so well hold the attention of readers and groups. As an example, it was stated that a group in San Francisco took up one of the books of Stuart Chase, but soon became sick of him and was about to break up, when Adam Smith's The Wealth of Nations was substituted with a successful outcome. For another example, most modern writ- ers on world government-from Streit to Reves-derive their basic arguments from the Federalist Papers. The groups read the Federalist themselves and build their own thinking from there. The job of the groups is to do the same kind of thinking that Chase or Reves or Streit did, rather than to rehearse the conclu- sions that those men reached. The basic distinction between books which are or are not useful to a group is not a matter of dates; it is simply the distinction be- tween original and secondary thinking. A few incidents growing out of the program here and elsewhere may illus- trate its effectiveness. Lifelong beliefs have been radically changed as a result of the discussions. It is related that a de- clared Communist attended great books discussions in Chicago for two years, with the result that he joined the Dominican Order. A visitor to a big heating-equip- ment plant in Indianapolis, seeing a dozen workmen at the lunch hour, each eating a sandwich and reading a paper- covered book, asked them if they were studying Roberts' Rules of Order, in preparation for a union meeting. To his surprise, one replied, impatiently, "No, we're reading Aristotle's Ethics." That factory had its discussion group, at- tended by welders and other mechanics as well as by men and women from the office and the engineering and sales forces. In Washington there is plenty of hu- mor in the comments. For example, at one of the three meetings when The Edu- cation of Henry Adams was the subject of discussion, a young newspaperman, who was apparently fed up with some of the posings of Adams, remarked that prob- ably he wasn't so muclh to blame since he came from "that cesspool of culture," Boston. In addition to many letters re- ceived by the director of the program highly commending their own leaders and expressing appreciation of the Public Library's role in conducting such groups, the following incidents are significant. When the announcement was made that there would be summer groups, one young woman asked eagerly for the exact dates, saying that she wanted to plan her vacation so as not to miss any of the meetings. As Mr. John Cheney, the as- sistant director, was showing his pass when boarding a streetcar, the motor- man said: "Hello, Mr. Cheney, when does our group start again?" A police- man on the beat where Director powell lives stopped him to say that he had just
THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY bought himself a fine copy of Voltaire's Candide, which he had read in a group. A man from New Orleans in a group where Aristotle's Politics was under discussion, after a lively but good-natured argu- ment on slavery with a Negro girl, re- marked: "As a matter of fact this is the first time I ever sat at the same table with a colored person." Then there was the young man who was being examined for a foreign-service post by State De- partment personnel, who supported his answer by citing De Tocqueville, which he had been reading with a group, to such purpose that he is now in India for the State Department. Finally, there was the man who held an important post with one of the local public utilities, who, in answer to a question on a labor matter from the head of the Labor Relations Department, quoted something out of the Veblen he had been reading in a group. His comment was: "Boy, if I hadn't been with them for thirty years, I'd sure be hunting a job now." At the close of the last season's ses- sions there was held a general meeting to which members of all the reading groups were invited. About two hundred and fifty came. The meeting opened with the showing of two short films on atomic energy ("One World or None" and "The Tale of Two Cities") followed by a dis- cussion of quotations from The Educa- tion of Henry Adams, which had filled such an important place in the reading and discussion of some half-dozen groups during the year. Although this assembly was too large a group to have the most successful discussion, Dr. Powell some- how managed it well, hooking up the films with that part of the Adams book, written long before the atom bomb was made, in which Adams asks what kind of ''a new social mind" will be required to deal with the "unlimited power" that he saw coming. Those in attendance felt the weightiness of the issues, without being able to make any final answer to Adams' question. After other discussion the meeting was brought to a close by a strong plea for the mutual understanding of all peoples. This eloquent speech, which served as benediction, was made, without mention of race or color, by the Negro librarian of the Public Library's only branch in a Negro housing develop- ment, who was also a co-leader of a dis- cussion group. The Public Library's discussion group program is only one of several somewhat similar enterprises. Among other cities to which it has already spread are Chicago, Detroit, Indianapolis, Cleveland, Mil- waukee, Seattle, and Portland. Under the leadership of Mr. Ralph A. Beals, director of the New York Public Library, that library has just launched an exten- sive program for which one hundred leaders have been in training. Most of the other cities are more or less under the guardianship of local or near-by univer- sities, rather than strictly under public library direction, as is the case in Wash- ington. Another way in which most of the others differ from Washington is that each group has two leaders, in a sense in- terlocutors, rather than only one leader for each group, as is usually the case here. Washington now (fall of I947) has eight- een groups in progress; eleven of these are led by volunteers, of whom eight work in pairs and six alone. As already indicated, this program was started in January, I945, by Miss Clara W. Herbert. Learning that Education Fund, Inc. (which meant Dr. Robert M. Hutchins, chancellor of the University of Chicago), was desirous of spreading the gospel of "great books," Miss Her- bert, as librarian, modestly asked for $s,ooo to start the program here. But Dr.
THE "GREAT BOOKS" DISCUSSION GROUPS 59 Scott Buchanan, then dean of St. John's, who investigated the Washington plans, recommended a grant of $45,ooo. At first there was further help and advice from Annapolis, but finally Dr. Powell, with somewhat similar experience in San Francisco, was brought into the picture and has carried on as director since Sep- tember, 1945. Originally, the grant funds were used to buy the extra copies of books needed, as well as to pay the direc- tor and some of the leaders. But the grant will soon be exhausted and then, if the program is to be continued, appropri- ations for personnel will be required. It is to be hoped that the program will have sufficiently justified itself to insure the necessary appropriations by Congress. While this paper was in preparation, news came from Chicago of the organiza- tion of the Great Books Foundation (a nonprofit corporation), with Dr. Robert M. Hutchins as chairman. The an- nouncement predicted that by the fall of 1947 "more than 20,000 American men and women from all walks of life, will be reading the great books of the Western world and meeting .... to discuss them. Many .... will be participating in the program for the first time. Others will be in their second, third, or fourth year of it; and there are some who will be beginning their fifteenth year." According to the prospectus, the "sole purpose" of the Foundation "is to assist those who are interested in establishing .... groups for reading and discussion of the great books." Since it has been found, here and elsewhere, that book purchases for these programs have, in many cases, exhausted the publishers' stocks of certain of the books used in groups, the Foundation proposes to enlist the aid of the pub- lishers to keep the titles in print and also itself to provide at low cost reprints of the readings, some of which are available only as parts of larger and more costly works. The Foundation will also assist in the training of laymen as group leaders and will publish descriptive material for use in local publicity, telling of the pur- pose and method of the great books pro- gram. The Foundation will be financed in part from contributions from those who believe in the program, and in part by the profits from the sale of large-quantity printings of reprints used by groups. The announcement lists several more places where leader-training programs are un- der way, including one in Vancouver, B.C., and one in the Veterans Adminis- tration of the Seattle area, with most metropolitan centers to follow. It is ex- pected to enlist not only public libraries, as here and at several other places, but also parent-teacher associations, com- munity centers, service clubs, labor unions, and other institutions. The Foundation envisions a wide acceptance of this form of adult education. As indicated at the beginning, educa- tion is a never ending, lifelong process. The beauty of the plan of reading the great books and then of discussing them with groups is that many of the books are re-readable and that there are enough of them to last out any lifetime. As an evangelist of the gospel of adult educa- tion through the medium of the great books discussion groups, I do not hope to entice anyone away from radio soap opera programs or anyone away from poker, pinochle, or bridge; but to those to whom this program makes a strong appeal, I can promise much fun, great satisfaction, and real happiness.