DGU E S T E D I T O R I A LDiversity by Design Keren Dali and Nadia Caidi ABSTRACT In this article, we introduce the concept of diversity by design. This concept is relevant to library and information science (LIS) education, professional environments, and partnership-based com- munity engagements. Building on our experience as educators and researchers, we illustrate this concept in the context of LIS graduate education and invite readers to contemplate whether this concept makes sense to them and, if yes, how it works in their respective workplaces and com- munities. We interrogate the term “diversity,” bringing to light the multiplicity of contexts that give diversity meaning and life in our complex field. By so doing, we demonstrate that diversity, broadly conceived, is foundational to LIS and that discounting or underappreciating its pivotal function may have a disintegrating effect on our practice, scholarship, and education. iversity” has become one of the most frequently used buzzwords in our field, almost to the point that we do not often stop to ask ourselves, What exactly do we mean by diversity? The fact of the matter is that diversity is a multidimensional term that gets reinterpreted and redefined practically every time it is used, depending on who uses it and in what context. In most cases, diversity refers to a wide array of community members whom we engage; or to the demographic composition of the professional and academic workforce and student body; or to the versatility and richness of resources and information we handle and make avail- able. Diversity is also frequently framed as an issue of social justice with regard to both people and information. An often-noted problem, however, is that there is not enough diversity in the workforce and not enough representativeness in resources. An often-offered (and rather obvious) solution to both is a call for increasing the number of diverse individuals among li- brarians, other information professionals, students, and faculty and for improving the variety of available information and modes of access. There is no shortage of initiatives to address both.The first author listed is a corresponding author. There is no principal author, and both authors have equal author- ship rights. For the purposes of bibliographies, authors can be listed in any desired order. Library Quarterly: Information, Community, Policy, vol. 87, no. 2, pp. 88–98. © 2017 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-2519/2017/8702-0002$10.00 88
Diversity by Design • 89However, despite our best efforts, the state of diversity is not getting better significantly or quickly enough. This brings us to the crux of the matter. As the president of Columbia Univer- sity, Lee C. Bollinger, was quoted as saying, “We really want to have more diverse faculty, we think it’s good for a variety of reasons . . . and the fact is, very little happens. You have to won- der what it is that leads to that” (McMurtrie 2016). What, indeed? Many answers can be given to this question, but when all is said and done, it comes down to one crucial consideration: diversity remains pretty much an “add-on,” not the essence, whether we talk about staff, students, information resources, or a pool of ideas. “It’s an extra thing you add at the end” (McMurtrie 2016, quoting M. B. James, par. 31). In our previous publication (Caidi and Dali 2015), we noted a turn toward what we can call integral diversity, or the idea that diversity is not “a mere add-on in our field but rather an inseparable part of our credo, daily activities, education and practice” (751; emphasis added). Diversity ideas, ideals, and considerations, we posited, should be seamlessly built into our curriculum, work environments, decision making, professional choices, and interpersonal rela- tionships in both the workplace and academia. They should be there from the start, not thrown in for reasons of trendiness and popularity at a moment of need; they should be part of the foundation, part of the core. In other words, they should be there by design, not by chance. The whole idea of building something in and integrating something into the overall design means that an element becomes indispensable: removing this element will preclude the system from functioning properly. It seems, however, that library and information science (LIS) curric- ula, workplace logistics, and faculties are unlikely to disintegrate if diversity conversations and considerations are removed from the equation. Those who agree with this statement, we feel, may be simply unaware of how pervasive and ubiquitous diversity contexts are in LIS scholarship, education, and practice. This issue is something that our article intends to address. Making diversity integral and structural will not be an easy task. One of the issues is a lin- gering mentality and the perception of diversity as a bonus and a frill. One of our colleagues once shared a story of how she worked with a senior faculty member on an introductory ref- erence course and suggested that the course coverage be expanded to involve diversity con- siderations beyond the 30 minutes in one class allocated to “working with diversity users.” The answer she received, although certainly frustrating, was not entirely unexpected and not at all exceptional. The senior faculty member replied that while it would be nice to have a con- versation about diversity in a classroom, the course was already so densely packed with “essen- tial” stuff that they could hardly afford to have diversity discussions. In addition, she noted, the topic of diversity was addressed in another class on LIS foundations. It is particularly alarm- ing to consider that the comment came from a person who can be considered a “designer”— a faculty member charged with overall course development and administration. If designers do not see diversity as an essential, structural, and functional element, there will never be di- versity by design.
90 • The Library QuarterlyNot all examples are grim, though. The diversity conversation received new impetus in one of our classes, in which a group of opinionated and forward-looking students brought up a serious question: If every librarian or information professional inevitably finds him- or herself working in a diverse environment, why are courses on diversity not part of the LIS core cur- riculum? Every LIS program realizes the vitality and ubiquity of technology and offers core tech- nology courses despite the fact that not every LIS graduate will end up in a highly technology- saturated environment. At the same time, practically every LIS graduate will work in a diverse setting with diverse community members, regardless of the type of library or information/ information technology (IT) setting. Yet courses on diversity are not built into the core. Stu- dents talked about these questions passionately and at length, and the discussion spilled over to other classes in the same course. In the final project, in which students could choose to give sug- gestions on curriculum improvement to their faculty administration, many students noted the need to include diversity courses as a core requirement. This is a very hopeful and heartening sign; students’ interests, priorities, and aspirations are an important part of the curriculum design, and, at least in this class, it was clear that diversity topped the list of educational and profes- sional priorities in which students took keen interest and into which they put their hearts. That is to say, one element of diversity by design—community-minded, diversity-conscious students— was there. The progressive student body can be relied on as a partner in diversity initiatives. This is not always the case, however. In another class on diversity, for example, there was much initial reluctance by some students to engage with real-life diversity issues and to get involved with community projects. Poor neighborhoods, homeless persons in libraries, the lives of immigrants and refugees, access barriers in the lives of people with disabilities—those issues seemed too heavy for a classroom assignment. Students felt much more comfortable discussing diversity in broader theoretical terms and, given a choice of projects, defaulted to the safer options of analyzing websites or comparing policy documents. This could be an indi- cation that while, hypothetically, students appreciate the importance of diversity and inclu- sion, hitting the ground running and doing the “real thing” is an entirely different proposition. Diversity can be messy, unfamiliar, unpleasant, and uncomfortable, and many students are not prepared. The overall design of the course, however, was intended to help students get out of their shell, overcome their insecurities, and step into the shoes of those for whom diversity is not a topic to cover or a textbook chapter. This design worked, changing perceptions and attitudes at least in the small group of students who dared to venture out of their comfort zone, as was shown by course evaluations and ensuing student feedback. As we noted earlier, our examples came from the field of LIS education, academia, and the curriculum structure. For the learning environment, the elements of diversity by design are quite clear: 1. Instructors’ awareness of how vital diversity considerations are in the design of any course (not only electives on diversity): this can be done through the integration of re-
Diversity by Design • 91flective readings, class discussions, assignments, and guest talks that address both diver- sity dimensions and the course subject area. Diversity should become the mainstay of instructors’ vision and course planning. 2. Support from the faculty and administration for making the content of courses inclu- sive of diversity considerations: this inclusion can culminate in the introduction of a core diversity course to the curriculum, a course that is found in some LIS programs but not frequently enough. 3. Students who realize the ubiquity and importance of diversity and who are willing to engage with diverse populations in class and in professional environments regardless of their own backgrounds: students’ awareness that diversity competencies and attitudes are just as important as knowledge of technology and core professional skills will be par- amount in driving the learning process. 4. Learning-oriented partnerships with community groups representing diverse popula- tions in the broadest way: such partnerships open up a wide array of learning, training, and engagement opportunities for students and future professionals and lend mentor- ing and professional support. 5. A robust network of educational resources and technological platforms that facilitate diverse learning styles 6. The diversity mind-set, which includes but is not limited to the following: a. A recognition that diversity is a reality of life, not a problem to solve or an issue to address b. An internalized belief that diversity is everybody’s business and not a concern of minority groups: depending on the context, we are all diverse or have the potential to become diverse. A broken leg and a temporary cast may prompt an otherwise healthy and able-bodied person to suddenly realize how inaccessible public tran- sit, educational buildings, and governmental offices may be. A person who has grown up in a white, middle-class, Christian household may one day fall in love with a person of a different race, religion, and country of origin, subsequently finding him- or herself to be part of the multicultural, multiracial, multilingual community. c. A deep conviction that diversity is not an option or an add-on: it is integral to social structure, daily interactions, learning environments, professional settings, and hu- man relationships—from kinship to friendship to collegial engagements to serendip- itous encounters with strangers. d. An understanding that the diversity debate should proceed from concern for spe- cific groups to concern for the health and function of the diverse society as a whole e. An ability to see the multiple contexts and expressions of diversity in our professional and academic settings
92 • The Library QuarterlyThe latter ability is absolutely crucial to treating diversity as integral to the entire field of LIS, especially because in our eclectic and interdisciplinary field, diversity can indeed be inter- preted in many ways. 1. The diversity of professional practices and research and diversity of resources and infor- mation handled in professional environments: Traditionally associated with collections, records, and artifacts, the field of LIS has evolved in recent years into an individual- and community-focused field, with LIS graduate education becoming increasingly student- centered and premised on the principles of experiential learning, community engage- ment, and service orientation (e.g., Bertot, Sarin, and Percell 2015). 2. This trend is inextricably connected to the diversity of roles performed by informa- tion professionals and the settings in which they work. Not bound to libraries, archives, and museums, information professionals find an application of their skills in govern- mental organizations, nongovernmental organizations, IT companies, health care, mass media, the entertainment industry, and so on. New roles include information and data analysts, social media librarians, community engagement and outreach workers, and remote training coordinators for online resources, to name just a few. No longer lim- ited to information mediation and helping individuals locate needed resources, infor- mation professionals have transformed into information literacy educators, community advocates, online resource managers, information policy makers, and data curators, among others. With expertise ranging from library services for children to managing big data and from database engineering to museum curation, it is hard to find a more diversified professional and scholarly field (Auckland 2012; Bertot et al. 2015; Howard 2015). 3. The diversity of communities served: in the course of their work, information profes- sionals engage with diverse communities, be they geographic communities or commu- nities of respective institutions. This diversity is not limited to race, ethnicity, religion, age, gender, body abilities, sexual orientation, or social status but also involves diverging worldviews and different opinions and perspectives, which result from diverse cumula- tive life experiences. Viewed in totality, these experiences amount to so-called values- based diversity, or “insights that can’t be taught” (Schmidt, Rosenberg, and Eagle 2014, 107–8), and is brought by people into their professional settings as part of their indi- vidual identities (Economist Intelligence Unit 2014; Hudson-Ward 2014). In the socio- cultural context, information professionals work with Aboriginal, immigrant, visible minor- ity, and mainstream communities, which accounts for the truly multicultural nature of LIS practice and scholarship (e.g., Pyati 2003; Burke 2008; Jaeger, Bertot, and Franklin 2010; Mestre 2010; Dilevko and Dali 2011; Somerville and EchoHawk 2011; Jaeger, Bertot, and Subramaniam 2013; Ghaddar and Caidi 2014).
Diversity by Design • 93 agem4. Diversity considerations in preservation and digitization: the cultural and historical her- itage information of communities of color, Aboriginal, multilingual, and immigrant com- munities is very complex and may involve traditional knowledge and knowledge gen- erated and passed through oral communication practices and expressed in a multitude of languages other than English or French. These types of knowledge create particular challenges in terms of collection, classification, and digital preservation, which should be resolved to ensure the authenticity of preserved information and effective and reli- able access to it (e.g., Stevens 2008; Daniel 2010; Gardiner et al. 2011; Maina 2012; Roy 2015). 5. Diversity in the workforce: not only are communities engaged by librarians and infor- mation professionals diverse and eclectic but also librarians and information profession- als themselves are a very diverse and eclectic group, which makes the conversation about values-based diversity in LIS particularly relevant and significant (e.g., Warner 2001; Allard, Mehra, and Qayyam 2007; Dali and Dilevko 2009; Overall 2009; Thurston 2012; Hastings 2015). 6. Diversity in academia: similarly, the issue of the diverse student body and the diversity of faculty and staff in LIS programs has become a popular subject of discussion in LIS (Jaeger and Franklin 2007; Subramaniam and Jaeger 2010; Hirsh et al. 2015; Lee et al. 2015). 7. Diversity as intellectual freedom: the notion of values-based diversity gives impetus to an in-depth exploration of diversity as intellectual freedom. Intellectual freedom has always been one of the primary domains—and often battlefields—of librarians and other information professionals, and an expanded understanding of diversity draws at- tention to new aspects of the debate (e.g., Samek 2007; Hudson-Ward 2014; Samek 2016). 8. Diversity as an engine of competitiveness on the job market and a staple of creativity and innovation: in the present day, many corporate partners realize that “diversity and inclusion . . . are at the core of an organization’s culture. Having a diverse and in- clusive culture will positively affect innovation and [the] organization’s bottom line. It’s no longer a nice-to-have; a strong D&I [diversity and inclusion] strategy aligned with [the] organization’s business objectives is imperative. Gone are the days when it was only about affirmative action.”1 IT leaders, including Apple, Google, and Microsoft, incorporate diversity statements on their websites, implement diversity strategies, and make public the results of organizational diversity surveys (see also Caidi and Dali 2015). 9. LIS domains affected by diversity considerations and developments: social justice and social inclusion are important in relation to information access; the digital divide; access1. The Web page quoted at the time of writing in fall 2016 has been replaced, see Society for Human Resource Man- ent, “Diversity & Inclusion Conference & Exposition,” https://conferences.shrm.org/diversity-conference.
94 • The Library Quarterlyto governmental information, including electronic documents; copyright and intellec- tual property in the context of a multicultural society; community engagement; infor- mation and resources in languages other than English in libraries, in other information organizations, and online; user-centric and user-friendly design; accessibility of infor- mation and information facilities; cross-cultural understanding in information organi- zations; the cultural competence of information professionals; graduate LIS education for diversity; partnership with diverse communities; literacy, information literacy, re- lated competencies, and their differences across communities; access to affordable lei- sure, culture, and entertainment; second-language and citizenship integration, among others. As this by no means complete inventory shows, diversity is at the very heart of practice and schol- arship in LIS, and being acutely aware of the multiple contexts of diversity is an important condition for developing and cultivating the diversity mind-set. The diversity mind-set will be a constant in any diverse environment. However, the other components of diversity by de- sign will vary from professional setting to educational setting, from public and nonprofit in- stitutions to corporate environments, and so on. We therefore invite an open conversation on what diversity by design means to all of us, individually and collectively. We also invite you to contemplate what would happen if one of the aforementioned con- texts were deprived of diversity contents or altogether disappeared: if we lose the right to ex- ercise intellectual freedom, if we refuse to work with diverse communities, if we allow a ho- mogeneous group of people to drive decision making and innovation in our workplaces and graduate programs. Would this not damage the entire structure? Granted, at this juncture, some elements may be wobbly and imperfect, but without even one of them, disintegration is imminent. Why then do we feel that it is important to reframe the diversity discourse in LIS? The reason for our preoccupation with rethinking and expanding the concept of diversity is our belief that, on some level, both diversity discourse and diversity action have hit a brick wall. Despite the growing number of conferences, celebratory events, public presentations and con- versations, and scholarly publications, there has been no significant qualitative shift that would indicate an improved diversity climate in our field. We believe that thinking of diversity as diversity by design is one possible way to reframe the dialog. By focusing our rhetoric and ap- proaches on the “holistic,” the “whole,” the “integral,” and “by design,” we can truly highlight a different angle of diversity and push the stalled diversity conversation out of the rut. We can illustrate our argument by using the example of immigrant communities. We go a long way in advocating on behalf of immigrants and making their adaptation to a new coun- try easier and smoother. We introduce governmental policies that enable intensive program- ming and access to resources and information in different languages. We open subsidized
Diversity by Design • 95English-language classes to allow for faster professional integration of immigrants. We allo- cate money to support the preservation of ethnocultural heritage and heritage languages. We fund affirmative action (United States) and employment equity (Canada) programs to improve the hiring and representation of immigrant professionals in our libraries and other informa- tion organizations. We develop more rigorous hiring procedures to recruit internationally educated faculty in our graduate programs. All these policies, regulations, funding, and other support mechanisms will certainly help immigrants adjust faster and more effectively. And yet, despite their undeniable usefulness, these measures can be seen as mechanisms to make immigrants more like their hosts so that they can better and faster fit with the way of life in the new country. Helping immigrants to adapt is admirable if, simultaneously, the host so- ciety is also changing in a way that adapts to the influx of a different cultural, linguistic, social, and religious capital. But therein lies the problem: we believe that host societies do not change quickly or sub- stantially enough. Would North American educational institutions revise their information lit- eracy policies to incorporate traditional and non-Western systems of knowledge? Would North American organizations modify workplace etiquette to include the workplace practices and relationships of immigrant groups? We all know the answer. Signage, services, and informa- tion in languages other than English, as well as world-language collections in libraries, are, no doubt, positive signs, but they do not amount to foundational change. Scholarly literature refers to immigrant adaptation as “acculturation,” and acculturation is a two-way street, necessitating changes in both immigrant and host communities (Berry 2001). If we go to great lengths to help immigrants become more like their hosts while the hosts have no intention of becoming more like the immigrants, then there is no true acculturation. Inclusion does not mean only giving newcomers tools to change and adjust; it also means chang- ing host society practices and customs to reflect the immigrants’ heritage and ways of life, insofar as such change does not contradict human rights, core democratic values, and civil liberties. If a host society does not evolve and transform with a constant and substantial in- flux of new members, can there be bona fide sociocultural inclusion or only a semblance thereof? In our professional and academic milieu, the aforementioned policies, regulations, and funding will certainly help diverse users and professionals, but will they improve the overall diversity climate? Will they ensure that the colleagues of a new immigrant professional give him or her a warm welcome and help him or her acclimate, or will this hiring breed mis- understanding and resentment in current staff members, who might suspect that the new- comer scored an employment ticket by riding a diversity train instead of being hired for his or her qualifications? Will they alleviate the evergreen talk that taxpayers’ money is spent on world-language collections and programming for ethnocultural communities while many host- country communities are in desperate need of investment and assistance?
96 • The Library QuarterlyQuestions posed in this example and the derived conclusions can be applied to other contexts and communities, for example, individuals with disabilities, interracial relationships, and relation- ships with the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer community. It is obvious that many issues raised in this example cannot be resolved through policies, regulations, support mecha- nisms, and governmental programs alone (for initiatives, see Campbell 2001; Warner 2001; Kim and Sin 2008; Dali and Dilevko 2009; Tammaro 2009). We need to look beneath the surface and start an uncomfortable but honest conversation at the personal, social, familial, historical, and community levels about society-wide causes of diversity tensions (Caidi and Dali 2015). These causes preclude increasing diversity in our social and workplace settings; make the retention of the diverse workforce difficult; and create a relationship of misunderstanding, conflict, and mis- trust among groups of individuals, thus provoking emotive and irrational responses and render- ing a constructive dialog impossible. Therefore, we need to focus on the affective dimensions of diversity as well and to dedicate a great deal of attention to the concerns, misconceptions, per- ceptions, and attitudes of mainstream communities. Wemay start off by talking about improved representation of and equal information access by minority groups in our workplaces, academia, and the information landscape at large, but we have to take this conversation to the next level and realize that without diversity, there is no potential for growth and evolution and there is no way forward for society as a whole—economically, politically, intellectually, culturally, or oth- erwise. Only then will we address the “integral” and be able to bring to life diversity by design.References Allard, Suzie, Bharat Mehra, and AsimQayyam. 2007. “Intercultural Leadership Toolkit for Librarians: Building Awareness to Effectively Serve Diverse Multicultural Populations.” Education Libraries 30 (1): 5–51. Auckland, Mary. 2012. “Re-skilling for Research: An Investigation into the Role and Skills of Subject and Liaison Librarians Required to Effectively Support the Evolving Information Needs of Researchers.” RLUK: Research Libraries UK. http://www.rluk.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/2014/02/RLUK-Re-skilling.pdf. Berry, John W. 2001. “A Psychology of Immigration.” Journal of Social Issues 57 (3): 615–31. Bertot, John C., Lindsay C. Sarin, and Johnna Percell. 2015. “Re-envisioning the MLS: Findings, Issues, and Considerations.” College of Information Studies, University of Maryland, College Park. http://mls.umd .edu/wp-content/uploads/2015/08/ReEnvisioningFinalReport.pdf. Burke, Susan K. 2008. “Public Library Resources Used by Immigrant Households.” Public Libraries 47 (4): 32–41. Caidi, Nadia, and Keren Dali. 2015. “Can We Talk? Perceptions of Diversity Issues by Students with Diverse Backgrounds, and a Rumination on Personal Roads to Systemic Change.” New Library World 116 (11/12): 748–80. Campbell, Harry C. 2001. “Advancement of Librarianship through IFLA.” In International Librarianship: Co- operation and Collaboration, edited by Frances L. Carroll and John F. Harvey. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow. Dali, Keren, and Juris Dilevko. 2009. “The Evaluation of International Credentials and the Hiring of Inter- nationally Trained Librarians in Canadian Academic and Public Libraries.” International Information and Library Review 41 (3): 146–62.
Diversity by Design • 97Daniel, Dominique. 2010. “Documenting the Immigrant and Ethnic Experience in American Archives.” American Archivist 73 (1): 82–104. Dilevko, Juris, and Keren Dali. 2011. “The Challenge of Building Multilingual Collections in Canadian Pub- lic Libraries.” Library Resources and Technical Services 46 (4): 116–37. Economist Intelligence Unit. 2014. Values-Based Diversity: The Challenges and Strengths of Many. http://c.ymcdn .com/sites/www.shrm-emeraldcoast.org/resource/resmgr/Docs/EIU_SuccessFactors_Values-ba.pdf. Gardiner, Gabrielle, Jemima McDonald, Alex Byrne, and Kristen Thorpe. 2011. “Respect, Trust and Engage- ment: Creating an Australian Indigenous Data Archive.” Collection Building 30 (4): 148–52. Ghaddar, Jamila, and Nadia Caidi. 2014. “Indigenous Knowledge in a Post-Apology Era: Steps toward Healing and Bridge Building.” Bulletin of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 40 (5): 41–45. Hastings, Samantha K. 2015. “If Diversity Is a Natural State, Why Don’t Our Libraries Mirror the Popula- tions They Serve?” Library Quarterly 85 (2): 133–38. Hirsh, Sandra, Michelle Holschuh Simmons, Paul Christensen, Melanie Sellar, Cheryl Stenström, Christine Hagar, Anthony Bernier, Debbie Faires, Jane Fisher, and Susan Alman. 2015. “International Perspectives in LIS Education: Global Education, Research, and Collaboration at the SJSU School of Information.” Jour- nal of Education for Library and Information Science 56 (1): 27–46. Howard, Jennifer. 2015. “Master’s-Degree Programs Specialize to Keep Their Sheen.” Chronicle of Higher Education 62 (3): 17. Hudson-Ward, Alexia. 2014. “Eyeing the New Diversity: An Emerging Paradigm for Recruitment and Re- tention.” American Libraries Magazine 45 (7/8): 32–36. Jaeger, Paul T., John C. Bertot, and Renee E. Franklin. 2010. “Diversity, Inclusion, and Underrepresented Populations in LIS Research.” Library Quarterly 80 (2): 175–81. Jaeger, Paul T., John C. Bertot, and Mega Subramaniam. 2013. “Preparing Future Librarians to Effectively Serve Their Communities.” Library Quarterly 83 (3): 243–48. Jaeger, Paul T., and Renee E. Franklin. 2007. “The Virtuous Circle: Increasing Diversity in LIS Faculties to Create More Inclusive Library Services and Outreach.” Education Libraries 30 (1): 20–26. Kim, Kyung-Sun, and Sei-Ching Sin. 2008. “Increasing Ethnic Diversity in LIS: Strategies Suggested by Li- brarians of Color.” Library Quarterly 78 (2): 153–77. Lee, Shari A., Renate Chancellor, Clara M. Chu, Howard Rodriguez-Mori, and Loriene Roy. 2015. “Igniting Diversity: Actionable Methods and Ideas for Advancing Diversity in LIS Education in the US.” Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 56 (1): 47–60. Maina, Charles K. 2012. “Traditional Knowledge Management and Preservation: Intersections with Library and Information Science.” International Information and Library Review 44 (1): 13–27. McMurtrie, Beth. 2016. “How to Do a Better Job of Searching for Diversity.” Chronicle of Higher Education 63 (3). http://www.chronicle.com/article/How-to-Do-a-Better-Job-of/237750. Mestre, Lori. 2010. Librarians Serving Diverse Populations: Challenges and Opportunities. Chicago: ALA Editions. Overall, Patricia M. 2009. “Cultural Competence: A Conceptual Framework for Library and Information Science Professionals.” Library Quarterly 79 (2): 175–204. Pyati, Ajit. 2003. “Limited English Proficient Users and the Need for Improved Reference Services.” Refer- ence Services Review 31 (3): 264–71. Roy, Loriene. 2015. “Indigenous Cultural Heritage Preservation.” IFLA Journal 41 (3): 192–203. Samek, Toni. 2007. Librarianship and Human Rights: A Twenty-First Century Guide. Oxford: Chandos.
98 • The Library QuarterlySamek, Toni. 2016. “Critical Reflection on Librarianship and Human Rights: A Book and Continuing En- deavor.” In Perspectives on Libraries as Institutions of Human Rights and Social Justice. Vol. 41, Advances in Li- brarianship. Edited by Ursula Gorham, Natalie Greene, and Paul Jaeger. Bingley: Emerald. Schmidt, Eric, Jonathan Rosenberg, and Alan Eagle. 2014. How Google Works. New York: Grand Central. Somerville, Mary, and Dana EchoHawk. 2011. “Recuerdos Hablados/Memories Spoken: Toward the Co- creation of Digital Knowledge with Community Significance.” Library Trends 59 (4): 650–62. Stevens, Amanda. 2008. “A Different Way of Knowing: Tools and Strategies for Managing Indigenous Knowledge.” Libri: International Journal of Libraries and Information Services 58 (1): 25–33. Subramaniam, Mega, and Paul T. Jaeger. 2010. “Modeling Inclusive Practice? Attracting Diverse Faculty and Future Faculty to the Information Workforce.” Library Trends 59 (1): 109–27. Tammaro, Anna Maria. 2009. “Internationalisation of Library and Information Science Education: The Is- sues of Recognition and Quality Assurance.” Bollettino AIB 49 (2): 181–99. Thurston, Alyssa. 2012. “Addressing the Emerging Majority: Racial and Ethnic Diversity in Law Librarian- ship in the Twenty-First Century.” Law Library Journal 104 (3): 359–81. Warner, Jody N. 2001. “Moving beyond Whiteness in North American Academic Libraries.” Libri 51 (3): 167–72.Keren Dali: assistant professor, School of Library and Information Studies, University of Alberta, Canada. Dali’s research interests include information literacy and leisure practices in immigrant communities, cross-pollination between LIS and social work, diversity in the workplace, and the role of humanistic approaches in community relationship building and higher education. She holds awards of excellence in teaching and research and has received research funding from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada and the American Library Association. E-mail (corresponding author): kdali@ualberta.ca. Nadia Caidi: associate professor, Faculty of Information (iSchool), University of Toronto, Canada. Caidi’s research interests focus on human information behavior and information policy. She has re- ceived several grants for her research on information control and the public’s right to know in times of crisis. Her current research is situated in the context of global migration and the role that infor- mation resources, institutions, and technologies play in the everyday lives of migrant and refugee communities. E-mail: nadia.caidi@utoronto.ca.