PV The Application of the Usability Approach in Libraries and Information Centers for Resource Selection and Deployment Myke Gluck Libraries and information centers most often rely on published reviews, vendors' demonstrations, brief visits to local sites, or word of mouth to select resources for in-house or public use. The usability approach developed in the field of human computer interaction (HCI) strives to test the ease of use, user satisfaction, and effectiveness of software, hardware, and information products for a range of users. To understand how users interact with products, usability analysts employ methods from task analyses and rapid prototyping in informal settings to talk-aloud protocols in specially equipped usability laboratories. For example, OCLC and Lexis-Nexis have maintained usability laboratories for several years to assist in the design of their software products. The application of the usability approach for research in informa- tion studies and to support library and information center purchase and implementa- tion decisions holds much promise. This work presents an overview of the major methods of usability analysis and indicates how they can be used efficiently and effectively by information professionals in real work environments to improve selec- tion and deployment of hardware, software, and information products. Also included is a discussion of the current and future role of usability in the formal education of information professionals. Usability of an information system or product assesses the degree to which users are able to employ the system or product as well as its usefulness in suc- cessfully completing the task for which it is employed. Usability may also be viewed as commingling the efficiency of the process (Is it usable?) with the effectiveness of the product (Is it use- ful?). For example, in the first instance, a patron may not be able to invoke the search functions of an online public ac- cess catalog (OPAC), indicating the OPAC is not usable and so has low usabil- ity; in the second instance, the patron may well be able to search using the OPAC's functions, but may not find the information sought to resolve the infor- mation need, indicating a lack of useful- ness, which is again low usability. 90 Volume 39# Number 2
The Application of the Usability Approach 9 1 About the Author Myke Gluckis Assistant Professor, School of Information Studies, Florida State University. Manuscript received July 10, 1997; accepted October 23, 1997. The usability approach to informa- tion system product development and evaluation evolved from a combination of human factors engineering (a sub- field of industrial engineering) and ap- plied and cognitive psychology. Human factors engineering, or ergonomics, studies the ability of humans to employ tools or effect processes in the work- place without incurring physical harm from their use. Ergonomics investi- gates physical and perceptual issues such as the design of low-stress chairs and work surfaces, placement of tool receptacles at a workbench, selection of color combinations to provide ef- fective computer monitor contrast and lighting, determination of instrument cluster placement within a fighter plane cockpit, and the determination of load lifting methods to reduce the likelihood of lower back pain. Cogni- tive psychology may also be invoked in these and other scenarios to assist infor- mation workers and seekers in reducing memory demands, cognitive processing time, and the amount of information overload. Reducing these demands and effort makes human execution of infor- mation-related tasks less prone to error and decreases the time for accomplish- ing the given tasks. The roots of usabil- ity can thus be traced to the 1911 workplace time and motion analyses of Taylor1 and to the processing demands exposed by Gestalt psychology.2 As computers became more com- mon in the workplace, design of com- puter interfaces and the desire to move toward more user-centered information systems led workers in the computer field to adopt and adapt the goals, con- cepts, and methods of human factors engineering and psychology. 3 Such ef- forts have led to the development of a separate field shared by computer sci- ence, industrial psychology, and infor- mation systems called usability. As further evidence of these develop- ments, several organizations are now dedicated to usability (e.g., Usability Professionals Association) and other groups actively recruit members with usability specialties or careers (e.g., Computer Human Interaction Special Interest Group [SIGCHI] of the Associa- tion for Computing Machinery). The traditional usability approach held a limited yet effective view of hu- mans as information processors because of its roots in engineering and psychol- ogy. The traditional usability approach monitored the performance of a small sample of workers on a task, typically capturing their time on tasks and their rate of errors in executing the tasks. Much work in applying the usability approach remains centered around the careful selection of subjects, composi- tion of subject-tested tasks, and assess- ing only performance time and error rates. The traditional usability approach based in these roots was spurred on by the dual yet sometimes competing desires to. be (1) the servant of users of systems as opposed to being subservient to the tech- nical aspects, and (2) cost-effective in a commercial setting. Occasionally us- ability laboratories will post signs stat- ing, "The User Is Always Right" or "The User, Stupid, The User." Based on these efforts and the general attitude of us- Spring 1998
92 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science ability professionals, usability analysts reasonably claim to be the user advocates for the world of information system de- velopment and deployment. With increased engagement with the user, less impoverished views of humans have been employed within us- ability analysis. However, the applica- tion of rich, deep, reliable, and valid perspectives of humans is still uneven among researchers in the usability field.4 These varied views of a human engaged in information work have led to novel and deep concepts and meth- ods of design of systems, interfaces, and collaborative work. Such varied con- ceptualizations include participatory design,5 contextual design,6 and analy- sis of the process of design as analysis of artifacts.7 Others have more abstract metaphors for development and human interaction with machines such as that of a theatrical production,8 social proc- ess,9 or a political process.10 Thus views of the human within the usability approach have ranged from seeing peo- ple as mere error and time "ma- chines"11 to accepting users as sensitive, intelligent agents who are creating a structured, routinized daily life while continually confronting threats to their ontological security and overcoming them in creative ways.12 The usability approach is applied at several different stages of the infor- mation system or product development and deployment cycle. The umbrella term "usability approach" is used here to include usability engineering, analy- sis, and testing. At different stages, dif- ferent names have been applied to the application of usability methods. If us- ability techniques are used in the pre- liminary design and early prototyping stage, the application has been called usability engineering; later in the de- sign or early product development stage, it has been called usability analy- sis or inspection; and as an evaluation process, it has been labeled usability testing. However, these labels are inconsis- tently applied. In general, during the design stage, more emphasis has been placed on the usefulness (effectiveness) issues and less on usableness, while the evaluation process has included more emphasis on the usableness than on the usefulness; yet both aspects are evalu- ated at all phases. The emphasis on ef- fectiveness early and efficiency later may seem inverted; however, this pat- tern is not awkward if one thinks about design as achieving the goal (effective- ness=usefulness) and evaluation as as- sessing how well resources are used (usableness) in accomplishing the task. The debate over the balance of useful- ness and usableness at all stages contin- ues within the usability field.13 The view of the user as well as the methods chosen to investigate usabil- ity will often vary as the usability ap- proach is utilized at these differing stages. Both artificial (laboratory) and natural environments (e.g., offices, meeting rooms) have been chosen as milieus for observing and analyzing the usability of information systems, products, and interfaces. The debate over location or setting for data collec- tion is common in research. It is based on the effects of varying levels of intru- sion or distortion of human behavior created when the subjects are observed. Those in favor of laboratory settings wish to maintain more control over the variables and to unconfound them. On the other hand, those wishing to collect data in more natural settings hope to observe the holistic activity and are willing to tolerate the random and un- anticipated environmental influences to better understand the pheno- menological aspects of real people do- ing real work. Both settings are of value and often both can be effective within the same study. For example, observing Volume 39, Number 2
The Application of the Usability Approach 93 patrons and staff in actual settings can help understand their information- needs situations and the effect of par- ticular system or interface features on the user's ability to complete an infor- mation search (usefulness), while a laboratory setting, controlling all the other influences on human perform- ance, may provide more specific data on a particular feature of, say, a menu sys- tem (usableness). That is, the choice of setting is not an "either/or" once the researcher realizes that both artificial and natural settings provide necessary but distinct inputs from differing views of the same phenomena. Although usability is a young field of research and there are strong propo- nents for several competing conceptu- alizations as discussed previously, several key principles of the usability approach are generally agreed upon by workers in the field. One expression of the general agreement in the field is espoused by Rubin:14 1. Effective usability demands an early focus on users and tasks as products and systems are being developed. 2. Usability analysts insist upon em- pirical observation and as much measurement of product usage and performance as possible. Most us- ability analysts are willing to also make qualitative assessments (i.e., focus groups, short-term eth- nomethodological task analysis) along with quantitative assess- ments. One of the debates in the field addresses more ardently the concerns with the balance between qualitative and quantitative assess- ment than whether qualitative as- sessments are of value. 3. Usability analysts agree that effec- tive use of the usability approach requires multiple assessments of usability during the design and de- ployment of a product. This usually involves development of a design, some testing with users, modifica- tion of the design, additional test- ing with users, and so forth through the implementation process, with testing cycles "beginning" all over again with users as new versions are developed and deployed. Thus, the overall goal of the usability approach is to identify and suggest pref- erable alternatives to the weaknesses of an information system, product, or inter- face as noted by the users of such a sys- tem. Issues noted by users are to include both usableness and usefulness concepts and functions. The usability approach seeks to support the development and deployment processes by gauging the ease of learning and use, the degree of user satisfaction, and the provision of highly functional components valued by the user community. Applying the usability approach may make logical sense and may be per- ceived as a taken-for-granted aspect of design, development, and deployment; however, it is not. Before looking more closely at the methods used in the us- ability approach, consider the follow- ing reasons that strongly suggest the need for explicit and sustained use of the usability approach: 1. Traditionally product development has been a creative activity with emphasis on the machine or sys- tem, not the ultimate user. Design- ers try to see what's possible, not what is useful or efficient at the early stages of the process. Design- ers and developers know machines are more rigid and brittle than hu- mans, so they let the user adapt to the system rather than let the sys- tem adapt to the user. 2. Development organizations are slow to respond to the changing audiences in the technology con- sumer market. The audience for Spring 1998
94 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science such products is less technologi- cally experienced and less inter- ested in the inner workings of the tools than in the past; they are more driven by the problem that brought them to the system than by how the system works. Current users are in- creasingly different from the de- signers of these systems than had been the case in the past. 3. Many organizations take it for granted that common sense is suffi- cient to provide a good design in- stead of acknowledging the difficult and unpredictable nature and the unintended consequences of the design process. Petroski makes a strong case that technologi- cal improvements are not the result of "form following function," but of hard work in trial-and-error proc- esses in the laboratory, market- place, and workplace.15 4. The development of information products and systems is complex and often done by multiple groups or teams within an organization that frequently do not integrate their efforts effectively. The rush to get to market to beat the competi- tion and the need for venture and technology companies to maintain high cash flow shorten product de- velopment cycles. These shortened cycles favor the completion of tech- nical aspects over the users' ulti- mate needs (the "we can put that in the next version" syndrome). 5. Design and technical implementa- tion require different skill sets. To- day's developers tend to have an abundance of technical or construc- tion skills, while they all too often lack good design skills. The distinc- tion between the work of architects and the work of carpenters in de- signing and building a house is a reasonable analogy to the different skill sets needed, but often lacking, in the development of information products, systems, and interfaces.16 It is clear that there are good rea- sons for applying the usability ap- proach and yet there are many pressures not to apply it. Unfortunately, short- term cost savings may obviate increased product effectiveness, product loyalty, or long-term revenue streams. Traditional Methods A very brief overview of the methods used in the usability approach to con- duct usability testing, analysis, and en- gineering is provided in this section. Rubin17 suggests a six-step gen- eral scheme for applying the usability approach at any of the stages sug- gested earlier: the development of a test plan; selecting and engaging par- ticipant subjects; preparation of ma- terials; conducting the testing with participants; debriefing the partici- pants; and analysis of the findings and reporting recommendations. Within this framework the most common and general method for usabil- ity assessment involves testing subjects in a laboratory or office setting on a prepared set of tasks while monitoring their actions. The design and selection of tasks for testing are a major creative element in the usability approach and require the investigator to have a thor- ough understanding of the goals of the user and the role of the tool to be tested in meeting those user-centered goals.18 Further, the recording of observations of users' interactions during the usabil- ity tests ranges from a researcher merely taking notes while observing the subject to audio- or videotaping while subjects talk aloud as they perform tasks.19 Com- pound records of the interactions often include recording computer keyboard strokes and mouse clicks, time-stamped videotape of computer screen images, Volume 39, Number 2
The Application of the Usability Approach 95 and video images from multiple angles of the researcher/participant interac- tion. These more elaborate compound records are usually collected in a spe- cially designed laboratory and are in- creasingly being done with portable equipment in more natural settings. Elaborate recording is costly and time- consuming as it requires expensive computer and videotape equipment as well as extensive efforts in videotape analysis. However, small studies with observation and note taking on reason- ably broad tasks can be quite illuminat- ing and an effective use of the usability approach to provide quality results for low to moderate investments of time, personnel, and money for libraries and information centers. The Goals, Operators, Methods, and Selection (GOMS) rules construct or method serves as an example of one of the more reflective techniques sup- porting the usability approach.20 GOMS involves creating a listing of possible user goals and subgoals; listing the op- erators that users have available as mo- tor, perceptual, or cognitive primitives; listing the methods that users employ to compose sequences of these operators to achieve the goals or subgoals; and creating the list of selection rules nec- essary to assist the user to decide what to do next if the user has several goals pending or if there are several methods that will accomplish the same goal.21 Time for accomplishing a given task is calculated by adding the time for each individual step of the task. For exam- ple, a user's goal of obtaining a full text document, after having seen an abstract or extract on the Internet, might have operators of mouse clicking, looking at the menu bar, and remembering the file- name. The method might be composed of moving the cursor to the right word and double clicking the mouse, while selection rules might involve backspac- ing to retype the filename or cutting and retyping a new filename. The shortcom- ings of the GOMS approach are known,22 yet GOMS, as with other more reflective usability techniques, has been of benefit in analyzing user inter- faces as well as in practical case stud- ies.23 There are other theoretically driven usability techniques and meth- ods that have gained favor and have been used to advantage in various set- tings, and are currently being re- searched in their own right.24 Usability Methods and Uses in Libraries and Information Center Workplaces Library and information centers may greatly benefit from at least two prac- tical methods of the usability ap- proach. Rapid prototyping and focus groups are low cost and have been shown to be effective in a range of studies and settings. Rapid prototyping involves the de- velopment of mockups of screen im- ages, Web pages, or report page layouts.25 These "rough sketches" in paper, cardboard, or plastic can be used to test and interview potential users. For example, many academic libraries have customized OPAC screens for ba- sic instructions, help, and searching commands and options. These instruc- tions and commands are often dis- played in menus constrained by the proprietary software. However, mock- ups of the screens could be used with a small sample of patrons to eliminate the most inefficient aspects of early de- signs. A small sample of users (often six to fifteen participants sufficient for ap- plying "t" statistics) can be asked to walk through the steps they would fol- low to accomplish several standard tasks using the mockups. These walk- throughs enable the implementation team to better understand the impact of Spring 1998
96 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science the designs for real patrons. Rapid pro- totyping provides a wealth of real user input at very low cost in a short time, and eliminates having to rely on best guesses as to what will be needed and used by patrons. Rapid prototyping in collaboration with patrons for the de- sign of OPAC menus or Internet Web pages will not diagnose all of the com- plexity in the use of the interface. How- ever, rapid prototyping can help spot the glaring problems that designers and experts (and yes, librarians) have trouble assessing a priori, but that users will encounter nonetheless. Such tech- niques can be effectively used with four to ten participants without being overly concerned with the statistical validity, yet emphasizing the anomalies users encounter while engaged with the mockups. Results from rapid prototyp- ing studies can reduce the need for bib- liographic instruction and patron education in the long run; librarians can assist patrons with their information needs rather than teach the vagaries of a system with low usability. Further, rapid prototyping iterations can be ac- complished with participant patrons or appropriate staff in office areas of the library or information center; this can be done repeatedly at low cost with short turnaround time as the designs are changed and modifications suggested. Focus groups are a second usability method that can be very effective in library and information centers for aid- ing in selection or deployment of prod- ucts or services.26 Groups of six to twelve participants led by a trained fa- cilitator discuss the issues surrounding the implementation and use of informa- tion systems or products. The discus- sion may be aided by having mockups or the real product demonstrated prior to the discussion and keeping the mockup at hand for participants to refer to as the discussion proceeds. The ses- sions usually convene in small confer- ence rooms and use a tape recorder to refresh the investigator's memory. The facilitator focuses the discussion on key aspects of the product or system that the implementation or selection team feels would provide them with the most meaningful input. The facilitator also pursues issues and details raised by the participants and explores differing po- sitions within the group. Focus group facilitators may be trained by reading several good books on the method and conducting a few role-playing simula- tions as practice, or they may be sent to workshops specifically designed to train focus group facilitators. Compe- tent facilitators can be developed in- house at nominal cost and effort with excellent return on investment.27 Both of these methods (rapid proto- typing and focus groups) are rather coarse tools; they will not identify all the issues in the designs, but they can help a selec- tion or implementation team to avoid many obvious and some subtle errors at a very low cost. Both methods may be con- ducted in office settings and without high tech recording and monitoring equip- ment. While this paper does not address the cost justification of the usability ap- proach, others provide strong evidence for the financial viability of the usability approach.28 These two methods may be used for assessing a range of information system services and products prior to selection or deployment whether these products are for technical services, reference pro- vision, administrative support, or for patron access. They can be used to as- sess computerized products such as OPACs, children's catalogs, CD-ROMs, Web pages, electronic databases, digital atlases, multimedia products, or online services as well as manual materials such as paper journals and atlases, in- dexes, bibliographies, and other major reference sources in print. Such meth- ods can be used to assess both the for- Volume 39, Number 2
The Application of the Usability Approach 97 mat and layout as well as the actual content of the products and services. Future of Usability in Library and Information Studies Education Florida State University's (FSU) School of Information Studies identi- fied the need for providing library and information professionals with us- ability assessment skills. Students have achieved excellent results at FSU conducting usability assessments as part of course work or during intern- ships. Students have employed these methods in local libraries and infor- mation centers with a few students having found permanent employment in these organizations after gradu- ation. Further, based on these experi- ences, FSU has implemented usability analysis courses for information pro- fessionals at both the graduate and un- dergraduate levels. Also, institutional and foundation funds have been dedi- cated to the renovation and equipping of a state-of-the-art usability center. The center has provided students with the opportunity to have input to com- mercial software design through us- ability analysis of prerelease versions of vendor software. The students not only use the high technology labora- tory but also continue to apply the usability approach in local libraries and information centers employing lower levels of technology. Informa- tion studies programs at Indiana Uni- versity, the University of Texas, and the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill are also pursuing the us- ability approach in their curricula. Recent projects at FSU that have involved students in the usability evaluation of information services and products include: ■ FSU's School of Information Studies distance education Web-based re- sources and syllabi;29 ■ Exploration of the usability of geospatial metadata standards as part of an OCLC grant;30 and, ■ Third-party evaluation of Lexis- Nexis's Web-based UNIVerse infor- mation search product.31 Conclusions As librarians and libraries reinvent themselves at the end of the twentieth century based on the rapid changes in technology and access to information, an enhanced role for information pro- fessionals may be that of usability ana- lyst. The usability approach assesses the usableness and usefulness of infor- mation systems and products. Librari- ans and other information professionals are well positioned, given moderate lev- els of training and experience, to sup- port the selection and deployment of systems and products that meet the in- formation needs of a range of patron groups. The usability approach's meth- ods are cost-effective and provide use- ful results for a range of settings. Librarians and other information pro- fessionals can continue to provide unique support to both local and remote patrons and information seekers by con- ducting usability analyses and dissemi- nating the results to a wide audience. Schools of library and information stud- ies can and are beginning to provide their graduates with the skills necessary to apply the usability approach. Usabil- ity is just one more technique in the "bag of tricks" of information profes- sionals to serve various clienteles in resolving their information needs, wants, and preferences. References 1. Frederick W. Taylor, Principles of Scien- Spring 1998
98 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science tifie Management (New York: Harper & Row, 1911). 2. Wolfgang Kohler, Gestalt Psychology (New York: Mentor Books, 1947). 3. D.C. Engelbart, "A Conceptual Framework for the Augmentation of Man's Intellect," in Vista in Information Handling, vol. I, eds. RD. Howerton and D. Weeks (Wash- ington, D.C: Spartan Books, 1963), 1-29; Ben Shneiderman, Designing the User In- terface: Strategies for Effective Human Computer Interaction, 2d ed. (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1992); Donald A. Norman, Things that Make Us Smart: De- fending Human Attributes in the Age of the Machine (Reading, Mass.: Addison- Weslev, 1993). 4. Shneiderman, Designing the User Inter- face; Brenda Laurel, Computers as Thea- ter (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1991); Lucy A. Suchman, Plans and Situ- ated Actions: The Problem of Human- Machine Communication (Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Pr., 1987). 5. Morten Kyng, "Designing for Coopera- tion: Cooperating in Design," Communi- cations of the ACM 34 (1991): 65-73. 6. Dennis Wixon, K. Holtzblatt, and S. Knox, "Contextual Design: An Emergent View of System Design," in Proceedings of ACM CHI '90 Conference (Seattle, April 1-5, 1990): 329-36. 7. S.K. Card, T.R Moran, and A. Newell, Psychology of Human-Computer Interac- tion (Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum, 1983); John M. Carroll, Interfacing Thought: Cogni- tive Aspects of Human Computer Interac- tion (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Pr., 1987); John M. Carroll, User-Oriented Design Representations (Reading, Mass.: Ad- dison-Wesley, 1994); Andrew Dillon, "Artifacts as Theories: Convergence Through User-Centered Design," in Pro- ceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the American Society for Information Science, vol. 32, ed. T. Kinney (Medford N.J.: Information Today, 1995): 208-10. 8. Laurel, Computers as Theater. 9. Kyng, "Designing for Cooperation"; Diane H. Sonnenwald, "Knowledge Ex- ploration in Design: Boundary Spanning Roles and Strategies," in Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the American Society for Information Science, vol. 32, ed. T. Kinney (Medford N.J.: Information Today, 1995): 200-7. 10. Suchman, Plans and Situated Actions. 1 1 . Shneiderman, Designing the User Interface. 12. Card, Moran, and Newell, Psychology of Human-Computer Interaction; Michael Nilan, "Cognitive Space: Using Virtual Reality for Large Information Resource Management Problems," Journal of Com- munication 42 (1992): 115-35; Myke Gluck, "Understanding Performance in Information Systems: Blending Rele- vance and Competence," JASIS46 (1995): 446-60. 13. Gluck, "Understanding Performance in Information Systems"; Jeffery Rubin, Handbook of Usability Testing: How to Plan Design, and Conduct Effective Tests (New York: Wiley, 1994). 14. Rubin, Handbook of Usability Testing. 15. Henry Petroski, The Evolution of Useful Things (New York: Vintage Books, 1992). 16. Rubin, Handbook of Usability Testing. 17. Ibid. 18. Carroll, Interfacing Thought; Jakob Nielsen, Usability Engineering (San Di- ego: Academic Pr., 1993); Jakob Nielsen and Robert L. Mack, Usability Inspection Methods (New York: Wiley, 1994). 19. Anders Ericsson and Herbert Simon, "Verbal Reports as Data," Psychological Review 87 (1980): 215-51. 20. Card, Moran, and Newell, Psychology of Human-Computer Interaction; Nielsen, Usability Engineering. 21. Nielsen, Usability Engineering. 22. John Carroll and R. L. Campbell, "Soften- ing Up Hard Science: Reply to Newell and Card," Human Computer Interaction 2 (1986): 227-49. 23. T. Gray and others, "The Precis of Project Ernestine, or, an Overview of a Validation of GOMS," Proceedings ACM CHI '92 Con- ference (Monterey, Calif.: 1992): 307-12. 24. Nielsen, Usability Engineering; Nielsen and Mack, Usability Inspection Methods. 25. J.C. Thomas and J.D. Gould, "A Psycho- logical Study of Query by Example," pre- sented at the National Computer Conference (Anaheim, Calif.), AFIPS Con- ference Proceedings 44 (1975): 439-45. 26. Richard Krueger, Focus Groups: A Practi- Volume 39, Number 2
The Applicotion of the Usability Approach 99 cal Guide for Applied Research (Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage, 1988). 27. Ibid. 28. R. Bias and D. Mayhew, eds., Cost Justi- fying Usability [New York: Academic Pr., 1994). 29. Pamela Barron, Kathleen Burnett, Eliza Dresang, and Myke Gluck, "The Role of the Information Designer in the Design of Asynchronous Learning Networks: A Case Study," Proceedings of the First Annual Information Design Network Conference July 1997, Coventry, Eng- land (http://www.csad.coventry.ac.uk/ IDN/conf/id97.htm); Kathleen Burnett and R. Brooks, "Research and Assess- ment of Learning in Asynchronous Learning Networks," conference presen- tation, 3d Annual International Confer- ence on Learning Networks, New York, Oct. 3, 1997. 30. Myke Gluck and Bruce Fraser, "Usability of Geospatial Metadata: Metalevel Issues for Information Retrieval," in Proceed- ings of GIS/LIS 1997, Cincinnati, Ohio, Oct. 28-30, 1997 (in press). 31. Myke Gluck, Usability Evaluation of Lexis Nexis' UNIVerse, Technical Report (School of Library and Information Stud- ies, Florida State University, 1997). Spring 1998