Small Business Perspectives on the Role of Rural Libraries in Economic Development Bharat Mehra, Bradley Wade Bishop, and Robert P. Partee II ABSTRACT People living in the Appalachian region, including its rural areas, face challenging economic, so- cial, and cultural conditions with limited financial opportunities, information poverty and un- employment, and low levels of information literacy and educational attainment. The roles played by rural public libraries in small business economic development in this region require explora- tory study of representative small businesses to refocus library services and resources on their information needs and information-seeking experiences. This article proposes a user- and use- based model to represent the information context and perspectives of such businesses in the state of Tennessee as a case study in order to apply the lessons and insights to other parts of the United States. It concludes with suggestions for the blueprint design of a public library small business tool kit, an ideal resource that Tennessee’s rural public libraries can develop for small businesses in the future. T his article is based on research for a planning grant titled “The Role of Rural PublicLibraries in Small Business Economic Development in the Appalachian Region: ACase Study of Tennessee” awarded by the Institute of Museum and Library Services’ National Leadership Grants for Libraries (Mehra, Bishop, and Partee II 2016). The authors are thankful to grant partners (Blount County Public Library, Clinch River Regional Library, Hol- ston River Regional Library, and the Sevier County Public Library System) for their assistance in the grant activities. People living in the Appalachian1 region, including its rural areas,2 have traditionally faced challenging economic, social, and cultural conditions (Skinner and Slifkin 2007; Eller 2008;1. The Appalachian Regional Commission (1974), created as a federal-state partnership, demarcates Appalachia to in- clude 420 counties in 13 states, including Tennessee. 2. The US Bureau of the Census defines rural as areas with fewer than 2,500 people and open territory (Economic Development Research Group 2007). The Encyclopedia of Rural America defines the related concept of “nonmetropolitan” counties to include housing developments outside the boundaries of metro areas that have no cities with as many as 50,000 residents (Rathge 1997, 627), in addition to being nonurbanized (Office of Management and Budget 1998). The word rural in this article encompasses both of these meanings. Library Quarterly: Information, Community, Policy, vol. 87, no. 1, pp. 17–35. © 2017 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-2519/2017/8701-0002$10.00 17
18 • The Library QuarterlyMehra et al. 2012). For example, a recent Appalachian Regional Commission’s (ARC) study based on 2015 estimates found that of the 420 designated Appalachian counties, 84 counties with a total population of 1,668,358 are economically distressed, and another 114 counties with a total of 3,621,825 residents are economically at risk (ARC n.d.). Forty-two percent of the residents of the Appalachian region live in rural areas, compared with 20% of the na- tional population (ARC 2015). Further, according to the US Census Bureau’s 2007–11 Amer- ican Community Survey, two-thirds of the Appalachian counties had populations of fewer than 50,000 people, and 125 counties had fewer than 20,000 residents. According to the In- stitute of Museum and Library Services (IMLS) Public Library Data Files (US Census Bureau n.d.), 352 of the 420 Appalachian counties are considered rural. Rural residents in these counties face limited financial opportunities, information poverty, unemployment, low levels of in- formation literacy, inadequate information technology, and other uniquely debilitating en- vironmental circumstances (Mehra, Singh, and Parris 2010; Mehra et al. 2011a; Spatig et al. 2009). Rural public libraries have a strong potential role to play in the economic development and sustainable economic viability of the Appalachian region (Mehra, Black, and Lee 2010; Ezzell, Lambert, and Ogle 2012). The Fels Institute of Government reported in a fiscal 2010 national study that the Free Library of Philadelphia had a strong direct economic impact of almost $4 million with an estimated 8,600 businesses starting or growing via the li- brary’s support (ALA 2011). It is unsurprising that a large city public library would have such influence, and urban conditions are very different than in rural areas. However, the metropolitan library’s strategy to conduct a systematic needs assessment of local busi- nesses to implement specific activities of support suggests that smaller libraries, especially in the Appalachian region, can adopt similarly effective practices to promote rural eco- nomic development (Economic Development Research Group 2007). In helping their busi- ness community extend its economic assets (Mehra et al. 2011b), Appalachian public librar- ies can become leaders in achieving the goals and objectives of the ARC’s Strategic Plan 2011–16 (2010) to foster community building and economic revitalization and to enhance workforce skills through training and education (Mehra et al. 2010; Black, Mehra, and Singh 2011). To advance understanding of rural public libraries’ role in the Appalachian region’s eco- nomic growth, this exploratory case study (Stake 1995; Yin 2013) documents perspectives of Tennessee’s small business representatives about their information-seeking behaviors. It helps explain the information context of who the small business user is to determine her or his information need that in turn shapes her or his information use. Based on the analysis, the article also identifies suggestions for the blueprint design of a public library small business tool kit, an ideal resource that Tennessee’s rural public libraries can develop for small busi- nesses in the future.
Small Business Perspectives on Rural Libraries • 19Research Context Small Businesses in Tennessee The US Small Business Administration (SBA), a federal agency created to aid small business interests (Small Business Act 1953), recognizes small businesses as critical to economic recov- ery and strength, important to build America’s future, and essential to further US interests in the contemporary global marketplace (US Small Business Administration n.d.a). To be eligi- ble for the SBA’s federal programs, an entity must satisfy the agency’s size standards for spe- cific industry types matched to the North American Industry Classification System. This in- cludes fewer than 500 employees for most manufacturing and mining industries and less than $7.5 million in average annual receipts for many nonmanufacturing industries (US Small Business Administration n.d.b). The entity must also meet the SBA’s definition of a business that is organized for profit; located as a place of enterprise in the United States; contributes to the economy through payment of taxes or use of US products, materials, or labor; indepen- dently owned and operated; and not dominant in its field on a national basis (US Small Busi- ness Administration n.d.c). According to the SBA’s Office of Advocacy (2014), which provides an annual analysis of each state’s small business characteristics, for the period 2007–14 there were 564,326 small busi- nesses in Tennessee, of which 93,300 had employees and 471,026 were nonemployers. Also, small businesses employed 1,023,528 workers in Tennessee (two-fifths of the state’s private workforce in 2012), where the real gross state product increased during that period by only 0.8%, compared to 2.2% for the US gross domestic product. Tennessee’s libraries are conspic- uous by their absence in the distribution of small business resources in the Tennessee Smart Guide: Small Business Guide (Tennessee Department of Economic and Community Development 2015). The resource guide highlights the fact that even though small businesses make up a ma- jority of all companies in Tennessee and form the backbone of the state’s economy, yet the challenges and obstacles they face are often intimidating. Rural Libraries in Tennessee Tennessee has 52 Appalachian counties out of its 95 counties (http://www.arc.gov/counties), and those counties represent 43.9% of the state’s total population (2,785,342 living in Appala- chian counties out of Tennessee’s total population of 6,346,105; see http://www.arc.gov/data). Of these, 10 counties are economically distressed and 23 counties are at risk, with 37 counties containing 119 economically distressed areas (ARC 2016). Sixty-six of Tennessee’s counties are rural with a population of less than 50,000 residents (National Association of Counties Rural Action Caucus 2002; US Census Bureau 2010). The Tennessee State Library and Archives consists of nine multicounty regions (geograph- ically defined for small businesses and libraries) serving 211 small and medium-sized public li- braries throughout Tennessee. Tennessee’s regional public library is defined as one that does
20 • The Library Quarterlynot belong to the four single-county metropolitan public library systems in the state (Mem- phis Public Library, Knox County Public Library, Nashville Public Library, and Chattanooga– Hamilton County Bicentennial Public Library; http://www.tn.gov/main/article/tennessee -state-library-and-archives). The potential role of regional public libraries to shape the everyday lives of people in their communities is high in the state’s rural areas (Mehra, 2012). Rural li- braries in Tennessee face a challenge to provide small businesses with access to current and credible information, critically use the information based on their needs, provide benefits of technology in far-flung isolated areas, and collaborate with community agencies to provide bet- ter systems and services for all small businesses (Rosser-Hogben 2004). WebJunction, launched in 2003 by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and the Online Computer Library Center, focuses on developing resources, technologies, and management competencies for the librarian from a library-centric perspective (http://www.webjunction .org/about-us.html). The research reported in this article extended WebJunction’s strat- egies in its community-centric approach by collecting the service community’s feedback (i.e., from small businesses) to develop library resources that will be valuable to it. The Associ- ation of Rural and Small Libraries makes significant efforts to “provide a network of people and materials to support rural and small library staff” to integrate the library into the com- munity it serves (http://www.ala.org/groups/affiliates/affiliates/arsl), again from a library- centric point of view, with limited insights into the community’s perspective about the value and deficits in library and information services being provided to it. The American Library Association too has developed various resources and programs for librarians from a system- and institution-centric perspective (http://www.ala.org/advocacy/advocacy-university /rural-library-resources). The research reported in this article built on the authors’ past community-centric work to reach out to the small businesses and document their experiences and perspectives. Information Behavior of Small Businesses This section includes some conceptual aspects to consider regarding the focus of this article exploring how rural public libraries can better serve small businesses. First, the work recog- nizes the gap of “disconnection between research and practice” that Tom Wilson (2008, 457) traced in the emergence of information behavior as a domain of study in the library and in- formation science professions. It relates information behavior theory (user-need-information- use) to library resource design and practice that has only recently begun to draw attention as a result of critical reflections on past efforts that compartmentalized theory, design, and prac- tice as separate and unrelated (Crowley 2004; Case 2012; Mehra 2014). The research also extends the approach of “linking theories to action” (Wilson 2005, 35) by documenting selected infor- mation behavior perspectives of a particular underserved population in order to identify design suggestions for a proposed information resource or tool (the proposed action component). Fur- ther, the focus on small business perspectives gives an instance of one information use envi-
Small Business Perspectives on Rural Libraries • 21ronment (Taylor 1991) from the point of view of community representatives about how the li- brary can address their information needs and information use via the design of an informa- tion resource (i.e., public library small business tool kit). It provides an understanding of the value-added processes tailored to a particular use environment “in its stress on the user and on the needs and dimensions of the information environment as a major element in the design and evaluation of systems” (Taylor 1986, 204). From the earliest “use studies” (Davis and Bailey 1964), information behavior research has recognized information needs and information uses as important components (Menzel 1966) of “people’s interaction with information” (i.e., information behavior; Bates 2010, 2387). Often in direct and/or indirect response to their information needs, people behave and search for information in a particular manner to effectively use it (Bates 1989; Kuhlthau 1991). Brenda Dervin (1992) has articulated these connections in her triangulated “situation/gap/use” frame- work (Mehra, Bishop, and Bazzell 2000), which informed this article’s focus on the informa- tion needs and uses of small businesses (i.e., the selected information behavior construct shap- ing their experienced situations) to propose suggestions for the design of a tool kit that might further the effectiveness of library services. The goal is to eventually address gaps that emerged in not meeting the situational information needs of the small business user community and thereby improve the existing conditions of that community’s limited use of rural public library services. In addition, the focus on the individual small business representative’s perspective about her or his information needs and experienced situations provides a person-in-situation ap- proach in which “information needs to happen to individuals who are embedded in a range of social situations” (Allen 1996, 88). It represents a socioconstructivist understanding of the individual’s cognition of her or his information needs related to work contexts that “aims at capturing the socially and culturally shaped ways of understanding information practices, that is the practices of seeking, accessing, creating, using, and sharing information” (Tuo- minen, Talja, and Savolainen 2005, 329). The article bridges the world of information behavior and information practices to “more fully understand how people’s experiences of informa- tion needs and their information behaviors are embedded in their accomplishments of other tasks” (Wildemuth and Hughes 2005, 276). In articulating a user- and use-based model of the information context of small businesses, this research adopts a sociocognitive view in the analysis of the “product” for the domain (i.e., small business community), nevertheless integrating a view of users’ individual cognitive processes (Hjørland 2002). User- and Use-Based Model of the Information Context of Small Businesses Figure 1 represents a user- and use-based model of the information context of small businesses that was foundational to the research design and development of the survey instrument (https://scholar.cci.utk.edu/sites/default/files/plsb-tn/files/plsb-tnsmallbusinesssurvey.pdf ). It vi- sually connects the thematic model headings of the small business user (in terms of her or his
22 • The Library Quarterly Figure 1. User- and use-based model to represent small businessesattributes) and information need that determines her or his existing and proposed information use while identifying a public library small business tool kit in the process. The two attribute types of the small business user relevant to this research are characteristics of the person (e.g., demo- graphics such as gender, race/ethnicity, or age) and traits related to their small business (e.g., location in rural areas and/or the Appalachian region and number of years owned or worked in the business). In this research, to find out about the information needs of small busi- nesses involved documenting information-related assistance (Q1) and challenges the people experienced in managing their business (Q3). This established their small business information context of interest to a librarian who wants to help the user but is unaware of her or his ex- perience. Recent existing use examples of non–public library information services and re- sources (Q2) are important for the concerned librarian to understand where the public library fits (Q7) within the existing use framework of resources sought. Regarding the potential use of the public library, the progressive librarian needs to know the small business perspective in the value the subjects assign to the importance of assistance (Q9), how to provide assistance
Small Business Perspectives on Rural Libraries • 23(Q4, Q5), and desired improvements in assistance (Q6). In order to bridge the gap from the existing to the proposed levels of library use, feedback regarding the desired components of a public library small business tool kit was important (Q8). The user- and use-based model informs the design of the public library small business tool kit that should include provision of searching capability for the user based on her or his de- mographics, traits related to his or her small business, existing information needs and expe- rienced challenges, information-related resource use characteristics (e.g., based on source agency type or format of materials), areas of desired assistance, and a combination thereof. Additional functionalities must include searching resources at the local, regional, and/or na- tional level to start and/or maintain a small business based on type of business. Research Methods Survey data collected from small businesses served as a pilot experience to expand using sim- ilar future strategies for the entire Appalachian and rural regions. Results reported in this article also identified baseline data to develop further work with the small business commu- nity. Quantitative and qualitative feedback were also collected from Tennessee’s public librar- ians to conduct a gap feedback analysis across the two stakeholders (Bishop, Mehra, and Partee 2016). By focusing on the case study of Tennessee, the researchers wanted to provide a system- atic and strategic approach to strengthen the role of public libraries, especially in rural areas, by reaching out to the small business community. An Internet-based software system administered an online survey with an informed con- sent form that was approved by a university institutional review board and hosted on a secure server. An advisory committee of 10 small business and rural library representatives were consulted during the process. A convenience sample of small business representatives and members associated with chambers of commerce and economic development councils was recruited using snowballing techniques to participate in the research (Thompson 2012). Mem- bers of the sample group were sent a recruitment e-mail with an explanation of the study, a survey link, and a request to forward the message to small businesses in their professional circles. The authors also communicated with various library contacts in Tennessee to assist in distributing the surveys to small businesses in their regions. All rural areas were included in the research because they shared conditions similar to those in the Appalachian setting. This research used a novel approach in its use of a web-based survey data collection method that has traditionally been used to collect quantitative data sets (Barrios et al. 2011) in order to gather qualitative feedback with the inclusion of comment boxes for nearly each nondemographic question. Open-ended questions for collecting qualitative data are common in surveys, though they are selectively used in a limited manner, whereas this survey-based research was essentially structured with a majority of open-ended questions. The resulting ad- vantage was that a larger number of respondents participated in the research; in the process,
24 • The Library Quarterlydetailed qualitative feedback was collected in the survey comment boxes (Creswell and Clark 2007). Data analysis of survey feedback also involved applying a “mixed methods” approach in using content analysis that has traditionally been employed in qualitative research (Glaser 1965; Neuendorf 2002) to generate quantitative representation of response counts for the cat- egories and themes identified for each question. As a result, the analysis and generation of results can be appreciated for both their quantitative and qualitative attributes (Mertens 2010). Grounded theory application of open, axial, and selective coding was applied to gener- ate categories and broad themes that were recorded quantitatively as response counts to the questions and selectively presented in tables in the article’s results section. Several respon- dents provided more than one response to each survey question. Categories and themes were based on understanding synonymous intertwined meanings in varied respondent vocabulary and when grouping respondents’ specific responses under broader, narrower, and related concepts. For each question, the coding steps involved compiling the text response of respon- dents, ordering sequentially each respondent’s content separated in response counts (C1, C2, etc.), classifying each response count under specific categories related to themes (if applica- ble), developing and refining a key of categories and themes, and totaling counts for each with specific examples. For example, in response to the kinds of information-related assis- tance (Q1 on the data collection instrument) the following selected respondent feedback (from P1 and P2) illustrates the application of the coding scheme: P1: “I mainly need tax in- formation (C1) . . . when I opened my business (C2) including laws/regulations (C3), tax forms (C4)”; P2: “Government rules (C5) . . . business registration (C6), licenses (C7), sales tax appli- cation/filing (C8), federal wage/tax filing (C9).” In this instance, C1, C4, C8, and C9 were re- lated to the theme “tax information.” Similarly, C2 related to the theme “start-up informa- tion,” C3 and C5 to “legal information,” and C6 and C7 to “business registration and licenses.” Reliability, validity, and relevance of the categories and themes for each question across the two researchers were ensured as a result of documenting the particular details while compiling the feedback (e.g., examples of a particular theme), often reflecting the re- spondent’s choice of words. Results A total of 120 small business representatives responded to the survey. The findings include the respondents’ demographics and feedback concerning their library information services and resources use. Respondents’ Demographics and Contextual Information Many respondents did not select a gender and/or race/ethnicity. Forty-four (59%) of the re- spondents selected “male” and 30 selected “female” (41%). Of the 74 who indicated a race/eth-
Small Business Perspectives on Rural Libraries • 25nicity, 70 identified as Caucasian/White, and only 1 each self-identified as African American Black, White/Native American, Hispanic/Mexican, and “human.” A maximum of 24 respon- dents (32%) of the 74 who provided a response were age 60 or older, followed by 22 (30%) who were 40–49, 18 (24%) who were 50–59, 8 (11%) who were 30–39, and 2 (3%) who were 18–29. The average number of years owned (or worked in) a small business was 17.72 from the 71 usable responses. Forty-five respondents (63.38%) had worked in or owned small businesses for more than 10 years. Fifty-four (73%) of the 74 respondents indicated that their small busi- ness was in a rural area, with all located in 22 of the 41 Appalachian region counties in Ten- nessee. Seventy-seven respondents identified the kind of small business they owned or worked in. These included general/specific retail (6), law (5), marketing communication (5), medical/ health (5), restaurant (5), children’s services (4), banking mortgage (4), residential construction (4), agriculture (3), church and charity (3), insurance (3), lodging/transportation (3), manufac- turing (3), real estate (3), event planning recreation (2), engineering and surveying (2), infor- mation technology consulting (2), metal mining (2), personnel management and security (2), mortuary (2), gifts/goods (2), home cleaning/repair (2), performing arts (2), and nonprofits (2). Thirty-two respondents specifically identified their business by name. Existing Information Needs Table 1 summarizes respondents’ feedback regarding information assistance to manage small business (Q1) and included tax information, legal information, functionalities to start and maintain business, local information, finance information, news and trends, developing busi- ness plans, business registration and licenses, and trade information about products. Thirty-one respondents provided a total of 105 examples of specific services and resources where they had found information to manage their businesses (Q2). These included (with re- sponse counts): (1) government agency websites, 24 (22.86%); (2) specific business websites, 17 (16.20%); (3) chamber of commerce, 12 (11.43%); (4) search engine classified sites, 9 (8.57%); (5) resources to assist with insurance/taxes, general Internet, and no services/resources used, 5 each (4.76%); (6) services for necessities, services used in their past experiences, and social networking/media resources, 4 each (3.81%); (7) finance resources, private nonweb resources, and local universities and colleges, 3 each (2.86%); and (8) legal research and medical/health ser- vices, 2 each (1.91%). Table 2 summarizes respondents’ feedback about recent information challenges (Q3). Twenty-seven respondents identified a total of 83 information challenges they had faced in managing their small business related to finance information, legal information, function- alities to maintain business, external environment, personnel management, health informa- tion, information infrastructure, tax/insurance, access networks, and local events.
26 • The Library QuarterlyExisting Public Library Use Out of 30 respondents who provided feedback (Q7), 7 (23%) indicated in the affirmative that they had used a public library in the past to manage their small business, and 23 (77%) indi- cated that they had not. Potential Public Library Use Table 3 compiles respondents’ feedback about ways libraries can provide assistance (Q4, 21 re- spondents), the “how” in providing specific services and resources (Q5, 23 respondents), and desired improvements (Q6, 16 respondents). Of the 29 respondents who assigned a value to the importance of public library assis- tance (Q9), only 1 considered them indispensable (3%), 3 considered them very important (10%), 6 considered them important (21%), 8 did not consider them important or unimpor- tant (28%), 9 considered them unimportant (31%), and 2 considered them very unimportant (7%).Table 1. Respondent Feedback Regarding Information Assistance to Manage Business Number of Information Need Responses Example Tax information 22 Forms, federal wage filing; sales tax application; assistance; city/county/state/federal tax information; returns; privilege taxes; professional taxes; tax benefits Legal information 17 Local/state/federal government laws; new health care, human resources, and privacy regulations; building codes Functionalities to maintain 12 Management agency; web design; relationship business management; researching grants; insurance; marketing Local information 9 Tennessee happenings; calendar of local business-type events; business listings/updates/leaders; development center; small business networks; newsletters Finance information 7 Management of financial reports; accounting and purchasing; preparation of budgets News and trends 6 County newsletters; practices; federal programs; opportunities Developing business plans 5 Parts and process of a strategic plan for different business types Business registration 3 Local licenses and permits and licenses Trade information 3 Web resources regarding various products from vendors Start-up information 2 Services to recruit new businesses Total 86Note.—33 respondents provided this feedback.
Small Business Perspectives on Rural Libraries • 27Information-Related Components of a Public Library Small Business Tool Kit Table 4 summarizes respondents’ feedback about essential components of a public library small business tool kit (Q8). Components ranged from a general topic of functionalities to maintain business on a daily basis based on type to specific category domains (e.g., tax, finance, health, etc.). Discussion Data analysis of existing information needs related to both starting and operating an existing business. These included content typically captured in a business plan such as tools to write a plan, factors to consider in environment and market analysis, laws, rules and regulations, taxes, and registration process to get started. Local laws and licenses differ, and respondents shared the need for more information to develop a plan that is actionable. They indicated that needs may change during actual business operations and may not be foreseen during planning. Immediate regular information needs were related to human resources (e.g., pay- roll, medical, hiring, and management). Some infrequent needs were related to purchasing, overhead, maintenance, compliance, insurance, and taxes. Respondents referred generallyTable 2. Respondent Feedback Regarding Information-Related Challenges Number of Challenges Responses Example Finance information 14 Database costs; loans; operating funds; generating sales; budgeting; low client purchasing; advice Legal information 12 State/local law differences; federal/copyright laws; government compliance; complexity; changes; assistance Functionalities to 11 Research skills; data gathering; finding business; accurate maintain business resources; resource/time management; marketing; locating supplies; staying motivated External environment 11 Rural low sales/travel distances; negative public opinion; low business; chain corporations; competition; limited opportunities; bad economy None 10 n/a Personnel management 7 Human resources; managing patrons/staff; employee recruitment; finding skilled/reliable workers; resources on partnerships Health information 5 Finding health care providers; sickness lack of mobility Information infrastructure 4 Inadequate phone/Internet; limited tech support Taxes/insurance 4 Deadlines/law changes; unclear insurance policies Access networks 3 Local business-type networking Local events 2 Poor advertising and news of upcoming events Total 83Note.—27 respondents provided this feedback.
28 • The Library Quarterly- - - ; -Table 3. Respondent Feedback Regarding Potential Use of the Public Library Number of Desired Assistance Responses Example Functionalities to 34 Continuing education; resources center; retirement; maintain business insurance; marketing; print/online collections; searching skills; current trends None 24 n/a Technology 16 Computer/Internet access/maintenance; tech classes, automation; social media optimization; web development Rules/requirements 14 Government program guidelines; updated yearly/monthly requirements; laws, regulations, and business-type rules; filings calendar; guidelines to start/maintain business Legal/physical information 13 Legal tutorials, list of law resources/records; free resource section; farm-oriented rural business materials Access networks 10 Business-specific networking; speakers on business topics Outreach 10 Press/media programs; recruiting high school students to join workforce; library capabilities community marketing Finance information 10 Sales ideas; CPAs; bookkeeping, automated programs. Tax information 8 Tax resources/forms (e.g., W-2s, 1099s, etc.), filing help Start-up services 3 Start-up resources and guides Personnel management 3 Human resources; how to manage staff, customers, and books; help in finding part-time workers Health information 2 Resources on home health criteria, insurance, etc. Local information 1 Weekly online newsletters with events, news, etc. Total 148Note.—This table is a compilation of feedback provided in response to three questions. Hence, the total num- ber of respondents cannot be identified since the same respondent might have responded to more than one ques- tion. (See text for explanation and number of respondents to each question).to items such as local business happenings organized in the community that would include networking opportunities so that they could stay informed about changes in the market, trade information, and competition. Although some respondents indicated that public libraries did not and could not help, a majority indicated that public libraries already offered at least three distinct roles related to education, technological infrastructure, and tax help. The educational arm of every public li brary varies depending upon the needs of the public at large, but in rural Appalachia, the op portunities offered by such programs are critical if individuals prefer hands-on and free train ing. Public library trainings in a variety of technologies, including programs on social media software applicable to businesses; and information literacy in using, evaluating, and finding resources were listed by respondents as ways they already used their library. Small business owners valued trainings at public libraries to have more educated workers; technological in frastructure to facilitate learning was also mentioned several times. Public access terminals and Wi-Fi were considered important to allow businesses to reach customers and address most
Small Business Perspectives on Rural Libraries • 29Table 4. Respondent Feedback about Public Library Small Business Tool Kit Components Number of Component Responses Example Functionalities to 12 [General] management profiles; business plans; maintain business access to new practices; business support services None 8 n/a Tax information 7 Tax filing regulations/dates; tax returns Local information 7 Access to local business-related: history; e-mail list with updates; online newsletters; similar business contacts Finance information 6 CPAs; financial aid/loans; automated bookkeeping Business events 5 Workshops to facilitate business management; small business seminars; lectures on business development Rules/requirements 4 Licenses; laws; regulations; records; government programs Technology skills 3 Computer use; small business media center Internet resources 3 Web-based guidance; access to the Internet Advertising and marketing 3 Business advertising to library patrons; web-based marketing guidance Miscellaneous 2 Printing and media center Personnel management 2 Human resource information; retirement and benefits Health information 1 Health care services Total 63Note.—18 respondents provided this feedback.information needs. Some indicated that they had run their small business operations out of the public library. Internet access and devices with various software programs may be more recent for some rural public libraries, but offering tax assistance to patrons is a long-standing governmental role indicated as ideal and affordable by respondents. Respondents understood many of the existing roles of public libraries, and in response to questions related to potential public library use, many of the recommendations related to simply expanding and promoting current services. Certainly public libraries tailor education programming to those high-frequency users. Programs related to genealogy are widely popular, and demands for such services have perpetuated their offerings. Respondents indicated that in addition to the existing popular programming, public libraries could expand their activities to include more targeted small business pieces, for example, a course on how to start a business and how to write a business plan, annual coverage of changes to the tax code, and an overview of compliance with emerging legal changes (e.g., in health care). Feedback also called for librar- ies to invite speakers through the chamber of commerce or other local and regional small busi- ness development organizations to offer training beyond staff expertise on variety of topics. There is great potential for library space to be utilized to host job fairs and other network- ing opportunities related to such trainings. Many public libraries offer courses in how to use public library resources, but these could be targeted and marketed to small business owners. Due to the ability to remotely access many electronic resources, public librarians may benefit
30 • The Library Quarterlyfrom conducting on-site outreach at local businesses. To encourage more small businesses to work and conduct business inside public libraries, the library could purchase new and update existing technologies with respect to both software and devices. These purchases would ben- efit other users as well, but having more expansive software suites to enable small businesses to create professional marketing materials and to build a web presence, at no additional cost, could position public libraries as the central incubator to help get businesses started in these communities. Blueprint Design of a Public Library Small Business Tool Kit Analysis in this research revealed that the blueprint of a public library small business tool kit should integrate search field components related to the following categories of information described below. User Demographics Users should be able to find appropriate resources by selecting their race/ethnicity, gender, or age, and a combination thereof. For example, a Black woman may check her race/ethnicity and gender to retrieve information resources for minority women at the local, regional, and/or national level. For example, see the web resource “List of Grants for African-American Women to Start a Business” (http://smallbusiness.chron.com/list-grants-africanamerican-women-start -business-15618.html). Traits Related to Small Business A small business user should be able to find relevant resources based on selection of number of years she or he has owned (or worked in) a small business, the location of the small business by county and/or rural (Appalachian) setting, or the kind of business, and a combination thereof. For example, a small business user and new owner (less than 1 year) of a restaurant located in rural Knox County should be able to find information for starting a new business at the local, regional, and/or national level. For this research, a correlation between the respondent’s type of business and her or his library was not expressly found at that level of granularity owing to low numbers. Information Needs Users should be able to find appropriate resources based on their needs related to (see table 1) tax information; laws, rules, and regulations for specific business types; information services to maintain (or start) a specific type of business; local, regional, and national calendars of news and events for specific business types; trends and product information for specific business types; financial information; and developing business plans for specific business types. Small Business Resources A user should be able to find a range of web-based and print resources at the local, regional, and national level that includes government agencies (IRS.gov, TN.gov), specific businesses
Small Business Perspectives on Rural Libraries • 31(QuickBooks.com, lucidbusiness.com), chamber of commerce information (Athens Chamber of Commerce newsletter), insurance or tax information (Farm Bureau, Liberty Mutual), social networking and media information (FCC guidelines, Facebook), information on finances (a CPA’s office, Keogh group), private nonweb resources (Cumberland Business Journal, the SBA), lo- cal universities and colleges (University of Tennessee Extension Service, Maryville College), le- gal research (Westlaw/Lexis), and medical/health information (Drive Medical, Pride Medical). Users’ Experienced Challenges A small business user should be able to find resources based on experienced challenges related to (see table 2) finances, legal information, general services to maintain business (based on type), marketing and public relations, personnel management, health information services, tax information, local news and events, and technological problems, among others. This ability may also be represented by giving an opportunity to a small business user to find relevant in- formation based on searching “How do I . . . ?” Public Library Assistance A public library small business tool kit should provide extended information support services and library assistance (see table 3) related to general information seeking and information functionalities to maintain business (based on type); legal information; state laws, local rules, and licensing requirements; local business information networks; outreach and public en- gagement (physical and online hosting of business events, e.g., workshops and seminars); fi- nance information; tax information; information services for starting a business (based on type); technology use support; human resources personnel management; health information; local news and events; advertising and marketing resources; and access to physical resources (e.g., printers, scanners). Conclusion As the survey reported in this article suggests, there are many current and potential roles for public libraries to play in meeting small business individuals’ needs. Public libraries aspire to serve all equally, but to reflect the information needs of the entire community, all public li- braries must retain a seat at the table of commerce because local businesses and related jobs are the economic engines that drive the communities they serve. Small businesses’ informa- tion needs, their current public library use, and their potential public library use are outlined in this article to provide a framework for public libraries to expand upon existing services to serve other constituencies. References ALA (American Library Association). 2011. “The State of America’s Libraries: A Report from the American Library Association.” Special issue, American Libraries: The Magazine of the American Library Association.
32 • The Library Quarterlyhttps://americanlibrariesmagazine.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/04/State_of_Americas_Libraries _2011.pdf. Allen, Bryce. 1996. Information Tasks. San Diego, CA: Academic. ARC (Appalachian Regional Commission). 2015. “Appalachia Then and Now: Examining Changes to the Appalachian Region Since 1965.” https://www.arc.gov/assets/research_reports/AppalachiaThen AndNowCompiledReports.pdf. ARC (Appalachian Regional Commission). n.d. “County Economic Status and Distressed Areas in Appala- chia.” http://www.arc.gov/appalachian_region/countyeconomicstatusanddistressedareasinappalachia .asp. ARC (Appalachian Regional Commission). 1974. “The New Appalachian Subregions and Their Develop- ment Strategies.” Appalachia, a Journal of the ARC 8:11–27. ARC (Appalachian Regional Commission). 2016. “County Economic Status and Number of Distressed Areas in Appalachian Tennessee, Fiscal Year 2017.” https://www.arc.gov/images/appregion/economic _statusFY2017/CountyEconomicStatusandDistressAreasFY2017Tennessee.pdf. ARC (Appalachian Regional Commission). 2010. “Moving Appalachia Forward: Appalachian Regional Commission Strategic Plan 2011–2016.” http://www.arc.gov/images/newsroom/publications/sp/ARCStrategicPlan2011-2016 .pdf. Barrios, Maite, Anna Villarroya, Ángel Borrego, and Candela Ollé Castellà. 2011. “Response Rates and Data Qual- ity in Web and Mail Surveys Administered to PhD Holders.” Social Science Computer Review 29:208–20. Bates, Marcia J. 1989. “The Design of Browsing and Berrypicking Techniques for the Online Search Inter- face.” Online Review 13:407–24. Bates, Marcia J. 2010. “Information Behavior.” In The Encyclopedia of Library and Information Sciences, 3rd ed., vol. 3, edited by Marcia J. Bates and Mary N. Maack. New York: CRC. Bishop, Bradley W., Bharat Mehra, and Robert P. Partee II. 2016. “The Role of Rural Public Libraries in Small Business Development.” Public Library Quarterly 35 (1): 1–14. Black, Kimberly, Bharat Mehra, and Vandana Singh. 2011. “Scope of Broadband Education and Deployment in Rural Libraries.” Tennessee Libraries 61 (2). http://www.tnla.org/?428, Case, Donald O. 2012. Looking for Information. Bingley: Emerald Group. Creswell, John W., and Vicki L. Plano Clark. 2007. Designing and Conducting Mixed Methods Research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Crowley, Bill. 2004. Spanning the Theory-Practice Divide in Library and Information Science. Summit, PA: Scare- crow. Davis, Richard A., and Catherine A. Bailey. 1964. Bibliography of Use Studies. Drexel Library School Series 18. Washington, DC: National Science Foundation, Office of Science Information Service. Dervin, Brenda. 1992. “From the Mind’s Eye of the User.” In Qualitative Research in Information Management, edited by J. D. Glazier and R. R. Powell. Englewood, CO: Libraries Unlimited. Economic Development Research Group. 2007. “Sources of Regional Growth in Non-Metro Appalachia.” Cambridge, MA: Department of Urban Studies and Planning, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. http://www.arc.gov/research/researchreportdetails.asp?REPORT_ID584. Eller, Ronald D. 2008. Uneven Ground: Appalachia since 1945. Lexington: University Press of Kentucky. Ezzell, Tim, Dayton Lambert, and Eric Ogle. 2012. “Strategies for Economic Improvement in Appala- chia’s Distressed Rural Counties.” http://www.arc.gov/research/researchreportdetails.asp?REPORT _ID598.
Small Business Perspectives on Rural Libraries • 33Glaser, Barney G. 1965. “The Constant Comparative Method of Qualitative Analysis.” Social Problems 12 (4): 436–45. Greenwood, Davydd J., and Morten Levin. 1998. Introduction to Action Research: Social Research for Social Change. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Hjørland, Birger. 2002. “Domain Analysis in Information Science.” Journal of Documentation 58 (4): 422–62. Kuhlthau, Carol Collier. 1991. “Inside the Search Process: Information Seeking from the User’s Perspective.” Journal of the American Society for Information Science 42 (5): 361–71. Mehra, Bharat. 2012. “Small Businesses’ Information Seeking Practices and Use of Broadband in the South- ern Appalachian Region: An Exploratory Survey of the Perspectives of Tennessee’s Rural Librarians.” Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 75th Annual Meeting, Baltimore, October 26–30. Mehra, Bharat. 2014. “Perspectives of Rural Librarians about the Information Behaviors of Children with Special Needs in the Southern and Central Appalachian Region: An Exploratory Study to Develop User- Centered Services.” In New Directions in Children and Adolescents’ Information Behavior Research, edited by Dania Bilal and Jamshid Beheshti. Cambridge, MA: Emerald. Mehra, Bharat, Ann Peterson Bishop, and Imani Bazzell. 2000. “The Role of Use Scenarios in Developing a Community Health Information System.” Bulletin of the American Society for Information Science 26 (4). http://www.asis.org/Bulletin/May-00/mehra_et_al.html. Mehra, Bharat, Bradley Wade Bishop, and Robert P. Partee II. 2016. “Information Science Professionals as Community Action Researchers to Further the Role of Rural Public Libraries in Small Business Eco- nomic Development: A Case Study of Tennessee. Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the 2016 Cana- dian Association for Information Science/L’Association Canadienne des sciences de l’information (CAIS/ACSI), Calgary, Alberta, Canada, June 1–3. Mehra, Bharat, Kimberly Black, and Shu-Yueh Lee. 2010. “Perspectives of East Tennessee’s Rural Public Li- brarians about the Need for Professional Library Education.” Journal of Education for Library Information Science 51 (3): 142–57. Mehra, Bharat, Kimberly Black, Vandana Singh, Nancy Renfro, Don Reynolds, Susan Simmons, and K. C. Williams. 2010. “Rural Library Professionals as Change Agents in the 21st Century.” Tennessee Libraries 60 (3). http://www.tnla.org/?376. Mehra, Bharat, Vandana Singh, and Hannah Parris. 2010. “Open Source Software Collaborations in Tennessee’s Regional Library System.” Library Review 59 (9): 690–701. Mehra, Bharat, Kimberly Black, Vandana Singh, and Jenna Nolt. 2011a. “Collaboration between LIS Educa- tion and Rural Libraries in the Southern and Central Appalachia: Improving Librarian Technology Lit- eracy and Management Training.” Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 52 (3): 238–47. Mehra, Bharat, Kimberly Black, Vandana Singh, and Jenna Nolt. 2011b. “Mapping the Education of Rural Librarians’ Technology Literacy and Management Training.” Proceedings of the 77th IFLA General Confer- ence and Assembly. San Juan, Puerto Rico, August 13–18. Mehra, Bharat, Kimberly Black, Vandana Singh, Jenna Nolt, K. C. Williams, Susan Simmons, and Nancy Renfro. 2012. “Computer-Enabled Innovations in the Information Technology Rural Librarian Master’s Scholarship Program: Bridging Rural Digital Divides in the Southern and Central Appalachia.” Proceed- ings of the 57th Indian Library Association Annual Conference. Mangalore, Karnataka, February 23–25. Menzel, Herbert. 1966. “Information Needs and Uses in Science and Technology.” Annual Review of Infor- mation Science and Technology 1:41–69.
34 • The Library QuarterlyMertens, Donna M. 2010. Research and Evaluation in Education and Psychology: Integrating Diversity with Quan- titative, Qualitative, and Mixed Methods. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. National Association of Counties Rural Action Caucus. 2002. County Data. Washington, DC: NACRAC. Neuendorf, Kimberly A. 2002. The Content Analysis Guidebook. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.Office of Manage- ment and Budget. 1998. “Part III: Alternative Approaches to Defining Metropolitan and Nonmetropol- itan Areas.” Federal Register 63. http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/granule/FR-1998-12-21/98-33676/content -detail.html. Rathge, R. W. 1997. “Rural Demography.” In Encyclopedia of Rural America: The Land and the People, edited by Gary A. Goreham. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO. Rosser-Hogben, D. M. 2004. “Meeting the Challenge: An Overview of the Information Needs of Rural America.” Rural Libraries 24 (1): 25–49. Skinner, Asheley Cockrell, and Rebecca T. Slifkin. 2007. “Rural/Urban Differences in Barriers to and Bur- dens of Care for Children with Special Health Care Needs.” Journal of Rural Health 23:150–57. Small Business Act of 1953. HR 555, 85th Congress, 1958. Spatig, Linda, Shelley Gaines, Ric MacDowell, Betty Sias, Leanne Olson, and Cassi Adkins. 2009. “Like a Mountain: Performing Collaborative Research with Youth in Rural Appalachia.” Collaborative Anthropol- ogy 2:177–212. Stake, Robert. 1995. The Art of Case Study Research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Taylor, Robert S. 1991. “Information Use Environments.” In Progress in Communication Sciences, vol. 10, edited by Brenda Dervin and Melvin J. Voigt. Norwood, NJ: Ablex. Taylor, Robert. 1986. Value-Added Processes in Information Systems. Santa Barbara, CA: Praeger. Tennessee Department of Economic and Community Development. 2015. Tennessee Smart Guide: Small Busi- ness Guide. http://www.tn.gov/assets/entities/ecd/attachments/TNSmartStartupGuide.pdf. Thompson, Steven K. 2012. Sampling, 3rd ed. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. Tuominen, Kimmo, Sanna Talja, and Reijo Savolainen. 2005. “The Social Constructionalist Viewpoint on Information Practices.” In Theories of Information Behavior, edited by Karen E. Fisher, Sanda Erdelez, and Lynne E. F. McKechnie. Medford, NJ: American Society for Information Science and Technology, Information Today. US Census Bureau. n.d. “Status of Survey Sites.” US Department of Commerce. http://outage.census.gov /maintenance.html?_host5harvester.census.gov. US Census Bureau. 2010. “2010 Census Urban Area Facts.” US Department of Commerce. https://www .census.gov/geo/reference/ua/uafacts.html. US Small Business Administration. n.d.a. “What We Do: Mission.” https://www.sba.gov/about-sba/what -we-do/mission. US Small Business Administration. n.d.b. “Summary of Size Standards by Industry Sector.” https://www .sba.gov/content/summary-size-standards-industry-sector. US Small Business Administration. n.d.c. “Qualifying as a Small Business.” https://www.sba.gov/contracting /getting-started-contractor/qualifying-small-business. US Small Business Administration Office of Advocacy. 2014. “Small Business Profile: Tennessee.” https:// www.sba.gov/sites/default/files/advocacy/TN.pdf. Wildemuth, Barbara M., and Anthony Hughes. 2005.“Perspectives on the Tasks in Which Information Be- haviors Are Embedded.” In Theories of Information Behavior, edited by Karen E. Fisher, Sanda Erdelez, and Lynne E. F. McKechnie. Medford, NJ: American Society for Information Science and Technology, In- formation Today.
Small Business Perspectives on Rural Libraries • 35Wilson, Tom D. 2005. “Evolution in Information Behaviour Modeling: Wilson’s Model.” In Theories of Infor- mation Behavior, edited by Karen E. Fisher, Sanda Erdelez, and Lynne E. F. McKechnie. Medford, NJ: American Society for Information Science and Technology, Information Today. Wilson, Tom. 2008. “The Information User: Past, Present And Future.” Journal of Information Science 34:457– 64. Yin, Robert. 2013. Case Study Research: Design and Methods. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.Bharat Mehra: associate professor in the School of Information Sciences at the University of Ten- nessee. Mehra’s research examines diversity and intercultural communication, social justice in li- brary and information science, critical and cross-cultural studies, and community informatics, the use of information and communication technologies to empower minority and underserved popu- lations to make meaningful changes in their everyday lives. Mehra has collaborated with racial/eth- nic groups, international communities, sexual minorities, rural librarians, and small businesses to represent their experiences and perspectives in shaping the design and development of community- based information systems and services. He primarily teaches courses on public library manage- ment, collection development, resources and services for adults, diversity services in libraries, and grant development for information professionals. E-mail (corresponding author): bmehra@utk.edu. Bradley Wade Bishop: assistant professor in the School of Information Sciences at the University of Tennessee. Bishop’s research focus is on geographic information (GI) organization, access, and use, and his educational focus is on bolstering the curation, preservation, and metadata creation of GI. He has published several articles utilizing GI systems as a tool in the analysis of public librar- ies. He has published works related to public libraries in Library and Information Science Research, Public Libraries, Public Library Quarterly, Government Information Quarterly, Library Quarterly, Library Trends, Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, Journal of Education for Library and Information Science, College and Research Libraries, and portal: Libraries and the Academy. E-mail: bbisho13@utk.edu. Robert P. Partee II: graduate student in the School of Information Sciences at the University of Ten- nessee. Partee recently completed his bachelor’s degree in chemistry with a minor in biology and a premedicine focus. While working on his graduate degree at the University of Tennessee, he is fo- cusing on team science and participating in collaborative efforts to address a scientific challenge that leverages the expertise of professionals trained in different fields. Partee plans to pursue a ca- reer in medicine either as a scientist or a practicing physician. E-mail: rpartee12@utk.edu.