THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Volume IV JANUARY 1934 Number I THE DEMOCRATIC FUNCTION OF PUBLIC LIBRARIES AMERICA has been one of the significant democratic laboratories of the nineteenth century. Democracy had set going various social and educational activities which we may regard as experiments carried on for the purpose of giv- ing free and equal opportunity to all people, of lifting the race from ignorance, and of preparing it for social responsibility- activities which "were expected to give the democratic ideal its reality and consummation." Of all such essays none has been more truly democratic and liberal in motive, or, dare we say, in some respects more naive, than the creation of the free public library. In seeking a cause for this spirit of liberalism we need, at this time, go no farther back than to the American and French revolutions; here we can trace the political and philosophical thought which was stressing in violent terms the need for in- tellectual and social freedom for all the people. In the decades which followed, the spirit of the times came to rest upon the con- viction that the world was an automotive thing, running itself, to good purpose if human intelligence at its highest guided its course, but to bad purpose if the masses of people remained in ignorance. The whole nineteenth century can be called a period of buoy-
2 THE LIBRA4RY QUARTERLY ant romanticism during which man held to a persistent hope in the progressive betterment of this life in all of its aspects. As the ideals of democracy grew stronger, the way became very clear whereby man would be given a chance to live a fuller and richer life in accordance with his better nature; the whole world would soon and inevitably become a better place to live in. The theory of biological evolution was enunciated by Darwin and Wallace in the middle of the nineteenth century, promul- gated and popularized by Huxley and others, and socialized by Spencer. It dropped like an arsenal of bombs, as Professor T. V. Smith has said, into this restless, changing, democratic, and ro- mantic world, was caught up greedily, given a moral and social connotation by religious and philosophical thinkers, and became the cornerstone of a completely optimistic view of life. An easy belief in universal benevolent progress seemed more than ever justified by increasing material prosperity.' From the origin of the free public library in the middle of the last century through its subsequent development up to the ac- tual r6le which it plays in society today, one is constantly im- pressed with the vague and high-sounding assumptions as to its aim and function which have everywhere found utterance in the words of librarians, and of founders and friends of libraries. George Ticknor said in I85I: "I would establish a library that the best books of all sorts shall be made accessible to the whole people .. I would create a real appetite for healthy reading. This appetite, once formed, will take care of itself. It will in the great majority of cases demand better and better books."2 Later, Lewis H. Steiner stated, retrospectively and exuber- antly: "There is a divine right inherent to every human being to enter the halls of learning and seizing everything that could intensify and enlarge the intellectual powers, aspire to the at- tainment of all that tended to make them master of the world. * . . Libraries have become the freest instrument known to the nineteenth century for the elevation of the race from ignorance. ' Cf. Everett Dean Martin, Civilizing ourselves (New York, 1932), pp. I78 if. 2From a letter written to Edward Everett in i85I. See W. I. Fletcher, Public li- braries in America (Boston, I894), p. 17.
DEMOCRATIC FUNCTION OF PUBLIC LIBRARIES 3 A thirst for knowledge has seized the people."3 Much later an- other librarian said: "To foster idealism and to strengthen the struggling aspirations of the human spirit is the very essence of the library's service as an institution."4 Another writer de- clares: "The modern American librarian [is making the library] such a tool for furthering universal education as the world has never seen. Thus, from the beginning, the avowed purpose of public li- braries has been to offer all kinds of knowledge embodied in books to all sorts of people. In this way, it was thought, li- braries would further the eager quest by masses of readers for the universal enlightenment which is called for in a truly demo- cratic country. However, assuming that library service would yield a result of this kind does not, of course, make it true that it has done so, to the extent imagined. Today, economic and political conditions are such that librarians are being forced to examine these broad assumptions to find out what measure of truth lies therein; to determine more clearly the actual relation which exists between the library and the people whom it serves; and to explain the nature and to justify the results of library service. They are realizing that the hoped-for ends are not im- plicit nor realized automatically, but that "critical attention" to the "direction and character of its growth" is needed if the public library is to be a "true agency for education."6 The institution which, first of all, was to bring progressive enlightenment was formal, compulsory education. The people, in turn, were to make use of this education and take active part in advancing the social and political betterment of mankind. Education has always been bound up with the knowledge that is found in books, and this fact has naturally opened the way for the acceptance of the idea that books are essential for everyone. Thus, the ideal that had led to the establishment of free schools 3 "Future of the free public library," Library journal, XV (1890), C44. 4 A. S. Tyler, "Some aspects of library progress," Library journal, XLVI (I92I), 588. s D. C. Fisher, Why stop learning (New York, 1927), p. 55. 6 William Learned, The American public library and the diffusion of knowledge (New York, 1924), p. 75.
4 THE LIBR1IRY 9UARTERLY led logically, a little later, to the founding of free libraries as well. The origin and development of our free public-school system has been written about at length. We find very little, however, pertaining to the public library as an expression of, and as af- fecting, the social process. Mr. Arnold Borden associates the library movement with the establishment of the schools, stating that it was spoken of as the "crowning glory of our public schools"; that although government and philanthropic indi- viduals "influenced library expansion, yet its main incentive came from below, that is, from the desire for knowledge on the part of great numbers of people."7 Before the appearance of the free library as we know it today it is worth noting that the word "library" had a different mean- ing. The precursors of the public library had been the private libraries, the proprietary, academy, and society libraries, the college, university, and state libraries, none of these wholly free or tax-supported. The right of using the books was usually granted only to those who met prescribed conditions as to edu- cation, fees, and membership, although it is doubtless true that the serious student could obtain the privilege without subscrib- ing to all of the conditions. To what extent have these earlier forms of libraries been af- fected by the public library? We find that the proprietary li- brary, known also as the atheneum and mercantile library, has in large measure disappeared, having been transformed or in- corporated into the public library. A recent writer on rental libraries foresees, however, the early establishment, on a profit- able basis, of large rental or subscription libraries,' which would be similar in some respects to the proprietary libraries; a situa- tion which may be brought about by the present inability of the public library to supply enough current books to the public. The effect of the public library upon the other forms which 7 "Sociological beginnings of the library movement," Library quarterly, 1 (1931), 278-82. 8 Cf. Groff Conklin, "Manhattan rental library survey," Publishers' weely, CXXIV (I933), I 8o9.
DEMOCRATIC FUNCTION OF PUBLIC LIBRARIES 5 preceded it has never been clearly drawn; though, in surveying the library situation today, it would appear to have been mark- edly less than has been commonly supposed. Private libraries of those who can afford them continue to exist, as do the li- braries of learned societies. State libraries have increased in number and size. University and college libraries, many of which long antedated the public libraries, have grown strong as higher education has expanded, with a function but slightly modified by the existence of the free library. Specialized li- braries on law, medicine, theology, and history have existed from early times and continue to exist today with little thought of usurping another's function. During the last decade and a half of the nineteenth century a new type of library appeared, the "special" library, which now for more than a generation has occupied an important position in the library world and in the world of affairs. The special li- brary, so called for want of a better term, is the direct and in- evitable product of the machine age and of the era of specializa- tion in all fields of knowledge. Wealth has increased, education has expanded, and occupational opportunities have changed, re- leasing vast numbers from routine work and making it neces- sary for them to prepare themselves for other kinds of activity.g The older professions have increased their numbers and have required that their employees meet definite educational stand- ards. Business and industry in all of their forms have demanded highly trained executives and experts. Banks and financial houses, insurance companies, manufacturing and engineering plants, department stores, welfare and other bodies, must train their personnel, meet the informational needs of the executives and staffs, and keep in close touch with similar and related ac- tivities elsewhere. The direct necessity of meeting such definite requirements has resulted in the establishment of special li- braries which, through specialized collections of books and other forms of printed material, can satisfy these educational 9 Cf. W. C. Bagley, "The Upward expansion of mass education," in P. A. Schilpp (ed.), Higher education faces the future (New York, 1930), pp. 135-54.
6 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY and informational needs. Such libraries are connected not only with professions and industries but also with other fields in which research is being carried on. They include those devoted to the useful arts, as railroads, engineering, and chemical tech- nology; to business, as banking and finance, commerce, labor, and insurance; to the natural sciences, as chemistry, botany, geology; to the social sciences, as education, religion, legislation, public utilities; to the fine arts; to medicine; and to other fields. Thus, before and since the era of the free public library, all other libraries have been almost entirely selective institutions established for use under prescribed conditions. Particular needs of certain classes of readers have been met. With the ex- ception of the proprietary libraries, the various types which ex- isted before the public library continue to function today in in- creased strength and numbers. To these have been added the highly selective special library, a direct outgrowth of the pres- ent age of specialization. In distinction to all of these, the function of the free public library has been to serve the people as a whole, collectively; the masses, the general public, the ordinary folk, were to be supplied with books in preparation for the duties which democracy was thrusting upon them. From the beginning the public library has multiplied and flourished. It was to fill a broad and indefi- nite need and to be all things to all men; it was to open wide its doors and forward the upward surge of the people toward the enlightenment which comes from knowledge in books. Just as the ideal of American democracy, based upon a literal inter- pretation of the notion of equality of opportunity for all people, had found expression in a free educational system, so this same ideal has been the impulse back of public-library activity in its free distribution of books. In education, the movement away from selective forms of teaching to mass instruction had forced educators to bring changes into methods and curricula which would adjust these to the needs and limitations of an unselected group. So the pub- lic libraries, shorn of the selective features inherent in preceding forms of libraries, had assumed a less definite task; they, too,
DEMOCRATIC FUNCTION OF PUBLIC LIBRARIES 7 were making a brave attempt to meet the supposed needs of masses, who, it was thought, would throng their doors for fur- ther knowledge. We must say "supposed needs," since it is evi- dent from the beginning that librarians had no trustworthy way of judging the specific needs and interests of the individuals who composed their heterogeneous groups of patrons. There is, however, this difference to be drawn between our schools and our libraries in their methods of transmitting the culture of the world. Public education has been linked securely from the beginning with the church, the town, and the state. The connection of libraries with the state has been far more tenuous, due in part, perhaps, to philanthropic donors who have shared in their support; but due mainly, as Professor S. E. Le- land has pointed out, to the fact that the special taxes levied by independent library boards for library purposes have not been subject to the scrutiny of municipal budget-makers.I0 In education, on account of the connections noted, a directive and even coercive influence upon the youth of the country has been possible. This has been almost entirely lacking in relation to the clientele of the library which is composed of adults as well as children; a lack which tends to be perpetuated, one is in- clined to think, by a kind of sentimental veneration for books en masse which precludes, in some measure, the notion of the need for any kind of surveillance. Where in education youth is guided and regimented in its activity by state-supported teachers who are influenced by the authority of tradition in the form of established curricula, the only guide for service to the client6le of the library has been the variety of reading interests of library patrons as interpreted by the librarian. True, occasional social pressures restricting the librarian's choice have been brought to bear in the way of cen- sorship of certain books; the actual effect of this, however, has been small in comparison with the total amount of freedom en- joyed. On the whole, the public library has presented the curious anomaly of an institution which has been established for the I? "Obscrvations on financing public libraries," Library quarterly, II (1932), 348.
8 THE LIBRARY 9UARTERLY people and supported by the people, but whose direction has been left almost entirely in the hands of independent library boards; or, for most practical purposes, to individual librarians who have ruled according to personal convictions, opinions, or even idiosyncrasies. Wise and scholarly librarians they have often been, but pastors of the people, benign rulers, who have not necessarily been agents of demonstrated social needs. Another comparison may be drawn between education and library service. Professor Bagley has pointed out that in edu- cation "the tendency today . . . . is to hold the educational system responsible on every level for making the opportunities attractive, pleasant and profitable to all."",- He criticizes this tendency in putting too heavy a responsibility upon the teacher. Librarians have surpassed this effort of schoolmen in the en- deavor they have made to maintain the interest of their read- ers. In the beginning, as indeed up to recent times, the idea of' opportunity for all had seemed to imply that the desire and re- sponsibility for making full use of the free gifts of the library rested upon the individual reader. If books were supplied, it was supposed that natural human inclinations could be counted upon to do the rest, and that great numbers would gladly avail themselves of what was offered and would benefit accordingly. But ideals and convictions to the contrary, the notion that the thirst for knowledge for the sake of knowledge can be counted upon appears to be mostly romance. "The brotherhood of those who are curious to know" increases in membership but slowly. People need to be encouraged and, in the great majority of cases, guided in such a search; even then they must usually be convinced of its practical usefulness. Thus the duty of keeping the reader interested and satisfied has been shifted to the shoulders of the librarian, as in education it has fallen upon the teacher. The librarian must use his in- genuity and tact to the utmost to arouse and hold his patrons, the actual use of the library never being obligatory in any way, but resulting always from the purely voluntary urge of the pa- tron. This curious situation has led to much missionary work II Bagley, op. cit., pp. 135-54.
DEMOCRATIC FUNCTION OF PUBLIC LIBRARIES 9 by librarians in behalf of patrons, who are inclined at times to take undue advantage of such service. If the library patron finds that his interests and "felt needs" are met, he may presumably be counted upon to continue his use of the institution. If they are not understood and answered to his satisfaction, he will cease to use it. The severity of such demands upon the librarian can hardly be overestimated when one considers the diversity of interests in any large community. Well-meant and generous service may become vague and un- certain. John Dewey has said regarding educational objectives: "Some kind of intellectual oversight and direction is needed unless there is to be mere drift and waste." Applied to library service, this would mean that conjecture as to readers' require- ments must give way to the actual objective study of group and individual reading needs and interests for definite communities; on such a basis only can be built an effective method for the selection of books. We are told that institutions which endure rest upon the mores and are supported by public opinion.12 In i85o the ma- jority of the people were ready to favor the establishment of an institution which coincided with popular democratic thought and conviction. But any institution, once established, tends to become more stable and fixed than the public sentiment which has given rise to it."3 Thus the public library, as pure an expression perhaps as is to be found of the democratic ideal, proceeded to function on this original sentiment of democracy which itself was steadily and inevitably becoming modified, due to the impact upon it of social and political forces which were reshaping the thought of the world. The library, even more than other institutions, seems not to have been altogether a true part of the social process. In some way, it has been switched out of the current of social change, occupying a niche or eddy of its own. For a long time it seems " R. E. Park and E. W. Burgess, Introduction to the science of sociology (Chicago, 1928), p. 797. '3 The culture lag is discussed by W. F. Ogburn in his Social change (New York, I922), pp. i99-280; also briefly in E. E. Eubank, The Concepts of sociology (New York, 1932), pp. 369-70.
IO THE LIBRARY tUARTERLY to have been but slightly affected by the forces which have been changing the rest of the world. One looks in' vain in histories of culture and education for studies of the modern library as an active force which is making its impress upon the social fabric.'4 Due to the nature of its organization and of its service it has been possible for it to continue to function largely on its orig- inal indefinite ideals and, in a sense, to let the modern world go by. On the whole, the public library still has its eye on a state of society which it considers to be more or less permanent in na- ture. It is academic in its ideals, and to it the world's "best books" of literature and fiction are still of superimportance; it seems sometimes "unaware of the words, thoughts and things that science and invention have brought" but which in the long run must be heeded. The effect on general reading of the auto, the radio, the talkie, the news-reel, the tempo of modern life and of the machine age in general, is only confusedly sensed.'5 Not only our knowledge of the world, but the world itself, keeps changing from day to day. "The inescapable drive of change under the accumulation of ideas and traditions, under the relentless impacts of science and invention," make a fixed regime impossible. "An industrial civilization founded on tech- nology, science, invention, and expanding markets must of necessity change and change rapidly.",6 Any institution which does not change too, adapt itself to the times, and become part of the onward "drive of change," will be pushed aside to be left perhaps for a time to make a harmless life of its own. Public education, we observe, has shown for many years an encouraging effort to define its objectives. In civic instruction, 4 C. H. Judd in his recent Problems of education in the United States (New York, I933) surveys all of the modern educational tendencies but does not mention the public library as an educational agency, except for one brief quoted reference to the Readers' Advisory Service. Yet we are told that it is an educational agency such as the world has never seen. In The Educationalfrontier (New York, 1933), edited by W. H. Kilpatrick, no mention is made of the public library. Several librarians have noted its omission in the two volumes of Recent social trends in the United States (New York, I933). Is Cf. J. C. Dana, Changes in library methods in a changing world (Newark, I929). i6 C. A. Beard, I Charterfor the social sciences in the schools (New York, I932), pp. 28, 31
DEMOCRATIC FUNCTION OF PUBLIC LIBRARIES II for example, the endeavor is being made to study the social needs of pupils and to follow up the results of school education to determine the nature of its adaptation to a changing society.'7 Leading schoolmen have recognized as well the individual dif- ferences of temperament and ability among children which af- fect their learning power. On such bases educators are continu- ally urging modification and adaptation of curricula in accord- ance with the special needs and aptitudes of the pupils. As a matter of course, through suitably written textbooks and by other methods, the effort has long been made to adapt the materials of instruction to the background of the pupils. But the public library has so far formulated no very clear- cut objectives. The scope of its possible service, that of bringing the contents of books to those adult readers who can best avail themselves of such subject matter, is vast. Its course remains to be charted. To some extent the library is still "uncertain of its mission and of its power." It has been busy surmising and itself interpreting the supposed interests of its readers as a basis for providing books. Librarians have deemed it unnecessary, or perhaps they have so far considered it impossible, to verify these interests in terms of the social and practical values and satisfactions gained from the reading offered. Neither has it been prepared, in any whole-hearted way, to consider in terms of reading materials the needs of individual readers as determined by their qualifica- tions. That the contents of the books themselves should be adapted to average intelligent readers is an idea that is only beginning to gain ground. There are, however, some definitely encouraging signs that librarians, following an analogous tendency in education, are feeling the necessity for studying the needs of individual readers and of groups of readers. Certain investigators are trying to verify the reading interests of various homogeneous groups of library patrons in terms of what they say they like to read about.,8 We find librarians who are steadily recording in in- 17 Cf. Beard, ibid. I8 Douglas Waples and R. W. Tyler, What people want to read about (Chicago, 1931).
1 2 THE LIBRARY tUARTERLY telligent works a growing concept of the important task ahead of them; namely, that of offering to the individuals and groups which compose their library clientele a truly educative and se- lective kind of service. A few large libraries have been able, in spite of, although one can also say on account of, difficult economic conditions, to establish adult education departments through which the li- brary co-operates with all sorts of adult educational agencies. The endeavor is being made in various ways to make effective contacts with individuals and with groups to discover or to arouse their interest in reading and to offer them discriminating aid. The oldest service of this kind is the reference or information department through which the library supplies information and material needed by students and teachers, by civic and business clubs and organizations, and by general readers. A more recent service is that of the readers' adviser whose function it is to aid in the selection of readable and reliable books suited to indi- vidual readers, and to plan courses of reading for those who wish to read to some serious purpose or to some definite end, either cultural or practical. Young people's reading is being studied in order to prepare and guide the adolescent to meet the problems and interests of adulthood. Special aid in definite fields of subject matter is being given through well-developed departmental libraries; and through teachers' rooms, to teach- ers and students who require professional literature on pedagogy and on educational and related problems. Library service is ex- tended sometimes to hospitals through reading, grave or gay, adapted to the needs of individual patients; to the foreign-born, in an effort to help them to become adjusted to the new world. Efforts such as these indicate a tendency to substitute in some measure a selective service for the indiscriminate collective kind which frequently satisfied neither the general reader-nor the specialist-nor the librarian himself. But is it to be expected that public libraries can ever offer the kind of selective service that will satisfy the needs of specialists and scholars of various kinds ? Can their book collections or the service which they render cover the whole field of knowledge, as
DEMOCRATIC FUNCTION OF PUBLIC LIBRARIES 13 was formerly assumed to be their function, before specialization had resulted in extreme subdivision of subject matter? We have found that specialized libraries, antedating and co-existing with public libraries, continue to be devoted to definite fields of sub- ject matter, with the function of meeting the needs of special groups of patrons who are equipped to carry on investigations in these fields. Very special libraries, covering all sorts of specific subjects, have been called into existence by the requirements of smaller and more homogeneous groups and have assumed func- tions which public libraries, on the whole, have never attempted to fill. Within their narrower fields the chief effort is to carry over information and ideas found in printed material to those who need and can use such matter. The function of the special library and its relation with the public library was discussed at length during the two decades preceding the establishment of the Special Libraries Associa- tion in I909, and since that time as well. Some public librarians have not been able to accept easily the idea of relinquishing the assumed function of meeting all of the reading needs of all of the people; this seemed, at least ideally, to belong to their institu- tions. They assumed that their task was to recognize new needs as they arose and to make every possible effort to meet them. Where funds permitted, specialized collections were established within the larger libraries. But the majority of such libraries have found it impractical to carry this out on any large and intensive scale; not only are technical books and other forms of specialized printed material very expensive, but the more specialized they are the fewer are the patrons who will use them. Thus, even though it was considered by some that the public library "failed to do its duty" in not undertaking to build up such collections, the impracticability of doing so was early realized and the task was left to other bodies. Exceptions there have been, of course, where certain large and important libraries have been able to build up local collec- tions of great value, active business branches, and other special collections covering definite fields intensively. Yet, sooner or later, as fields of knowledge become more and more specialized and subdivided, the question will always arise, with respect to
14 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY every field: How far can or should the public library, supported by general taxation, undertake to cover ground which is of in- terest to specialists only? The problem becomes one, then, of distinguishing between the kinds of service which can and ought to be expected from the two types of libraries. As pointed out, a library which ex- ists to meet the interests of the general reader of varying degrees of ability and equipment has its task much less clearly marked out than one which acts as an agent in helping to promulgate definite knowledge through expert service to specialists. Where the interests of patrons seem to the librarian vague and all-in- clusive, books are apt to be chosen subjectively, that is, accord- ing to the librarian's standard of judgment alone. This may fre- quently lead to a service which does not coincide with the true needs of the readers. The special librarian, on the other hand, deals with a more circumscribed field of knowledge and with a clientele whose interests and equipment tend to be uniform. A knowledge of their definite needs furnishes an objective basis for the selection and use of books. Is it possible to define in part and perhaps limit the function of the public library in an effort to describe its service in more tangible and concrete terms? The apparent separation of pur- pose between public and specialized libraries need not be as complete, perhaps, as seems the case at first thought. The pri- mary aims of both relate to knowledge: in the case of one, to the spread of the fruits of knowledge among the people; of the other, to the extension, through aid given to research and study, of the boundaries of knowledge. Specialists have studied and are studying aspects and seg- ments of larger problems which have full social significance, however, only when the results are brought together again into a corrected relationship with the larger fields of thought. For the further improvement of situations these results must then be put to trial and into action by those who can manipulate them intelligently. If the true democratic ideal is to be realized, even in moderate measure, of extending a knowledge of these results to the intelligent layman in order to prepare him for par-
DEMOCRATIC FUNCTION OF PUBLIC LIBRARIES iS ticipation in their social utlization, it is obvlous that it must be made possible for him to come into contact with them and grasp their meaning. Thus one of the functions of the modern public library is clear, namely, the carrying over to general readers of the sig- nificance of worth-while results of investigations which have been carried on through the help of specialized libraries by scholars and specialists. But specialists usually write for spe- cialists in technical language which is not easily understood by general readers. Forward-looking librarians who are strength- ening their services for individuals realize the difficulty of the problem presented. In their effort to carry over to general read- ers the socially valuable results of research, they are confronted with the need for forms of writing adapted to the diverse re- quirements and equipment of varying types of readers, which will convey in a readable and accurate way the meanings de- sired. Librarians may well encourage writers to couch their findings in understandable and illuminating form, and, at the same time, improve their own equipment and facilities for distributing this product freely to eager readers. Knowledge adjusted to and as- similated by intelligent readers will become part of the social thought content, and will thus gradually enrich the life of the people. The public library, with the aid of authors, publishers, and the readers themselves, can in this way become a "unifying influence" in a world of diversity and specialization and through its service share in humanizing the world's best thought. For we can have faith to believe that the intelligent reading of worth-while books on important matters that are of mutual interest both to the reader and to the author will result gradu- ally in a clearer understanding of the changing concepts of soci- ety and all of its problems. This in turn will lead to a more effec- tive and enlightened control over social conditions, increase the probability of happier and more successful living, and in this way justify the vision of democracy. GRACE 0. KELLEY THE QUEENS BOROUGH PUBLIC LiBRARY JAMAICA, NEW YORK