THE BURNING OF BOOKS FRANCES E. HAMMITT IN OUR present society books are not often burned as a sign of condemna- tion, although they may be censored or suppressed. The idea of burning books, however, still exists. Hitler's book fire of May io, I933, shocked most people, but the notion of the device still lingers in social thought and bursts out in occa- sional manifestations-the threat of a mayor of Chicago to burn books which contradicted certain ideas of history, the proposals made by a governor of Georgia for the burning of books concerning the betterment of race relations, and the actual burning orders, in Missouri and Ohio, of books which were distasteful in language or content. Most of the literature concerning book-burning considers its chronological history in different countries; sometimes the chronological treatment is combined into a division by types of books so de- stroyed. Such methods enable an author to relate the causes, circumstances, and effects of each case; since every bobk is to some degree unique, the burning of in- dividual books is logically considered as a series of separate events. Other works which contain material on the burning of books treat the subject incidentally in connection with discussions of censor- ship, intellectual history, or the develop- ment of certain types of thought, prac- tices, and social institutions. This paper attempts neither approach; its purpose has been only to gather ma- terial on a few of the general aspects of the history of book-burning. Its aim is neither inclusiveness nor specialization; it might almost be considered a series of introductions. Since the discussion is lim- ited to cases in which books were actually burned, it is only indirectly concerned with the broader subject of censorship of literary productions. The first section takes up the societal backgrounds of the practice of book-burning; the second dis- cusses those who sponsored or directed the burning; the third relates some of the attempts at total eradication of books or literatures; and the last section is a gen- eral consideration of effects. THE BACKGROUNDS OF BOOK-BURNING Destruction of books by fire is only one aspect of the long history of censor- ship; it is also one aspect of the efforts of society, from immemorial time, to de- stroy by fire the persons who challenge its authority or the ideas which contra- dict its existing customs and beliefs. Social groups have always been intol- erant or resentful toward the noncon- formist. Sociologists and anthropologists have attributed this characteristic to the establishment and sanctification of prim- itive mores and institutions and to the existence of an underlying fear that de- viation from tradition will anger spiritual powers and menace the safety of the group. Herd instinct enforces conform- ity; the possible alteration and conse- quent destruction of the social order seems implied in any change-as one nobleman has said: "Any change, of any kind, at any time is bad."' The particular nonconformisms which I E. P. Cheyney, "Freedom and Restraint: A Short History," Annals of the American Academv CC (November, I938), i. 300
THE BURNING OF BOOKS 30I are most severely punished vary with the particular society. The most definite ac- tion is taken in fields in which mass feel- ing is strongest or in which group inter- ests are most distinctly evident. Men tend to punish most severely those who contravene the beliefs or institutions about which they feel most deeply; they are more likely to tolerate divergent opinion on subjects which do not touch their profoundest conv'ictions. Therefore, a list of the books sup- pressed or destroyed in any era may to some extent indicate the subjects upon which society or its ruling group felt most strongly at that time; in such a list one may in a sense trace the intellectual and spiritual trend of a civilization. In our society the books we censor or cen- sure, in lieu of burning, are in general those which are considered offenses against sexual morals or taste and, more rarely, those which tend rather directly to attack established governmental order and theories. Throughout previous cen- turies in the Western world there are comparatively few examples of censor- ship or destruction for offenses against taste and morals; the great majority suf- fered because of existing restrictions against speculative thought and for opin- ions contrary to orthodox theology or established political power. It is difficult, however, to determine the logic upon which it was decided whether individual books were to be suppressed, expurgated, forbidden, or burned; the distinctions defy classifica- tion. The probability is that the particu- lar circumstances, events, and authority affected the decision, rather than any judgment of innate quality or measure- ment of depth of feeling. The type of book sought most diligently for burning varied with the society and the author- ity; both tended to suppress most rigor- ously the opinions which tended to un- dermine their powers or to challenge their anderlying philosophies. The roster of the types of books burned is ecumenical in its inclusions; almost every branch of written intellectual production appears in it, and those in all walks of life are authors. Fire has always been one of the effec- tive arguments directed against men, their works, and their products of thought. Its use against nonconformists, heretics, and criminals, as well as against enemies, is a practice which has existed, usually with legal sanction, for many ages. Fire may be used for the purpose of actual destruction or merely to symbol- ize abhorrence. Primitive societies were accustomed to burning images; indeed, the practice of burning enemies in effigy still continues. The burning of obnoxious edicts or proclamations has been a com- mon reaction throughout history. Im- memorially the burning of either a repre- sentation of a detested person or his written name has been a device for vent- ing animosity.2 Rituals for exorcism often included the burning of a picture of the demon by whom the patient was pre- sumably possessed. The use of fire as a weapon against books is a reasonable transfer from the custom of burning objects or persons who inspired abhorrence or fear, since books, like men, are vehicles for the com- munication of thought. Implicit in the custom is the recognition of the possible effect of books and a fear of them which is almost as old as written literature. The final arbiter of censorship is the opinion of the popular majority; in the last analysis the continuing success of a 2 The case of Peter d'Osma in the fifteenth cen- tury presents an interesting variation of this type of burning. When his book, Treatise on Confession, was sent to the fire, his chair was burned with it.
302 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY program of censorship rests upon the willingness or acquiescence of the people. Apparently most of the book-burnings had popular approval; the populace in the main shared the detestation with which certain types of writings were re- garded and supported the burning of books containing ideas that were feared and detested. For example, a general ac- cord was evident concerning the neces- sity of exterminating heresy and the im- perative duty to maintain rightful secu- lar authority; the difficulties lay in the differing interpretations of what was heresy and what was rightful authority. Evidences of popular protests and at- tempted prevention of the execution of orders are seen when the group in power endeavored to continue the persecution of theories and ideas which were begin- ning to receive mass acceptance and which were no longer objects of censure to the bulk of society. Two general kinds of book-burning have occurred. The history of the world contains many examples of the eradica- tion of great groups of books and collec- tions and of attempts to wipe out entire literatures. Such wholesale destruction has been due either to deliberate efforts or to the havoc incidental to war and in- vasion. The second type of fiery war against books has been directed against individual books; such actions have been either destructive or symbolic in their purposes. In the first case, as in the de- liberate eradications of entire types of literatures, an attempt has been made to destroy all copies of a particular book. The invention of printing, however, made it almost impossible to secure all copies, and many burnings were admit- tedly symbolic. Book-burning as a general custom died out in Europe near the end of the eight- eenth century, toward the close of an era which had seen the rise of science, a struggle against the irrational and super- stitious in doctrines, and the growth of a belief in reason as the highest authority and in the concept of the natural rights of man. As these ideas attained general acceptance, the custom of book-burning declined, along with belief in witchcraft, extreme restrictions on the press, and the unquestioning acceptance of authority and absolute truth. THE BOOK-BURNERS Fire is a simple and direct answer to contradictory opinion. Books have some- times been burned by individuals or by undirected mobs; in general, however, the burning of books was carried out un- der the same auspices asorganized censor- ship-by the churches, by those in polit- ical authority, either the sovereign or the legislature, and by the universities. These institutions and their motives for the burning of books were often inter- twined and intersupporting, especially when the church and the state were them- selves politically interwoven. The recog- nized political authority often delegated the duty of censorship and destruction to the church or to the universities; con- versely, sometimes the church left the enforcement of its decrees to the secular authorities. The latter was the practice of most of the Protestant churches; they usually had no such power over civil af- fairs as did the Roman Catholic church and no such weapon as excommunication with which to implement their decrees. The motives behind the burnings were also often intermingled. Most of the edicts were issued on political and the- ological grounds; the church often had a deep interest in maintaining existent po- litical theories as well as religious ortho- doxy; the secular authorities had a simi- lar desire to enforce the authority of the
THE BURNING OF BOOKS 303 church over the people and to prevent speculation on religious thought. Also, it was often felt that the duty of the legis- lature lay as much in the preservation of men's souls from heresy as in the main- tenance of established government or the guardianship of civil and legal rights. Consequently, the border line between the church and religious zeal, on the one hand, and political authority and secular motives, on the other, is extremely in- distinct. For this reason the Roman Catholic church looms large in the history of book- burning; through the centuries its legal status as the sole "established" religion identified it with the state. Condemna- tions were sometimes made by papal de- cree; more often by the indexes of the church. These indexes were usually au- thorized by various councils of the church and prepared by special boards; individual ones were also published by the theological faculties of European uni- versities. It was the practice to destroy- usually by fire-books which were con- demned by decree or by inclusion on the indexes. Political motives and personal rivalries are evident in some of the church con- demnations, but much of the destruction was motivated by a real desire to save men's souls by preventing the reading of material which might shake their faith and so lead to heresy and damnation. In some instances the church not only burned books-and perhaps their au- thors1--but immediately prepared and published refutations of the heretical arguments and charges contained in the condemned books. In the English church the archbishops and other prominent churchmen often received from the political authority the power to censor and condemn books. German princes similarly often delegated authority to churchmen. While the sovereign's power of censor- ship was sometimes thus delegated to church authorities, he frequently chose to exercise this power himself. This is particularly true in the case of attempts at mass destruction of literature. Mo- tives for personal decrees were manifold; opinions had been distasteful to the sov- ereign for various reasons. Many con- demnations were directed by petty ani- mus; some works were condemned be- cause of personal predispositions, some from religious conviction, many from a fear that the principles expressed would weaken the sovereign's position or pre- rogatives. Parliaments and other state legisla- tive bodies often wielded power over books either by delegation or by their own authority. In old Rome, during the Republic and the Empire, the burning of books was a function of the Senate. The praetors were charged with the execution of the decrees; the burnings usually took place in the Forum.4 In France the park- ment (which in the early years of its ex- istence was, however, more a judicial than a legislative body) often allowed the church and the Sorbonne to supervise books, especially in theological matters; it usually enforced church decisions by state decree. Nevertheless, on occasion it passed condemnations on its own initi- ative.5 3 Punishment was in some cases confined to the book itself. However, often both church and secular authorities decreed to the author fine, imprison- ment, mutilation, or death. Sometimes the pub- lisher, printer, and bookseller, and occasionally the official licenser, were included in the sentences. 4 J. A. Farrer, Books Condemned To Be Burnt (New York: A. C. Armstrong & Son, [1892]), p. 3. S The parlement always claimed to have the final authority over books and condemnation, even if it did not exercise it directly. See G. H. Putnam, Books and Their Makers during Ike Middle Ages (New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, I897), II, 442.
304 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY The English Parliaments wielded great power over books and burned a number of them; considerable information is available concerning their procedures and motives. Their condemnations of "detestation" were passed directly by parliamentary decree or by the estab- lishment of such bodies as the Star Chamber, the High Commission, or the Stationers' Company. All of these at times had power to seize and burn books. Beginning with the Long Parliament, after I640 the matter was almost always determined by parliamentary decree. The House of Commons was usually the chief book-burning authority; at times the House of Lords decided to con- demn to the fire some letter or literary production found offensive to it or to one of its members. Sometimes both Houses concurred in such decrees. For a time, a committee of the Commons was itself given wide powers to seize and burn pub- lications.6 Since resolutions in either House were subject to vote, and the deci- sion was often one of personal feeling or party politics, many condemnations were decreed by close margins. Obviously, changes in the controlling political party led to reversals of opinion. Many symbolic burnings were decreed for the acts or messages of previous Par- liaments. Attacks on individual members of Parliament were likely to be punished by burning the offending document, and it has been remarked that parliamentary feelings were easily injured. Books or pamphlets considered destructive of par- liamentary liberties were almost certain to be sent to the fire. Parliamentary decrees were more tem- porary than those of the church or even of the sovereign; changeableness and in- consistency are more evident, and it may justifiably be said that policies were more factional and that personal spites and grievances were given more oppor- tunity for expression. A third institution concerned with book-burning is the university. What- ever the contributions to civilization and to knowledge made by the universities, their role in the history of censorship is a major one. Intertwined and inter- related with both political and theologi- cal organizations, they were subject to pressure from both. Sometimes the uni- versities were responsive to the opinions of different societal groups;7 and some- times they were a haven for dissenting thinkers; in general, however, they seem to have been much more responsive to constituted authority and to major groups than to rebellious or divergent opinions. The role of the universities as censors developed historically from their social and economic situations and from their theological and secular ties. Almost from their inception on the Continent, the theological faculties of the universities were extremely influential and often exer- cised a kind of theological dictatorship. They assisted in the preparation of church indexes of prohibited books and often prepared their own indexes or con- demnations.8 Some universities received papal authority to impose penalties for the printing and reading of heretical 6 C. R. Gillett, Burned Books (New York: Colum- bia University Press, 1932), II, 393. 7 Rashdall says that in the twelfth to fourteenth centuries the University of Paris was a channel through which the court addressed the nation and through which popular opinion was relayed to the sovereign (Hastings Rashdall, The Universities of Europe in the Middle Ages [new ed.; Oxford: Claren- don Press, I9361, I, 541-43). ' As early as 1210 the masters of the University of Paris participated in a synod at Paris which con- demned certain books to the fire (ibid., p. 355). In the papal index published in 1564 the theological faculties of all Europe were consulted.
THE BURNING OF BOOKS 305 works; some had power from the ruler or from the legislature. The burning of books was an early practice in the English universities. This is shown in a statement that a number of "constitutions" were "duly burned" at Carfax in I4II.9 Proof that the univer- sities were sometimes included in the stipulated sites for public burning may be found in an edict of James I in i6i i, in which a treatise by Conrad Vorstius was ordered to be burned in London and in the two universities."' University chancellors, along with churchmen, re- ceived authority from Parliament to ex- amine books. Besides burning on their own grounds books condemned by other authorities, the English universities sometimes them- selves decreed and even supervised the burning. Exeter College has the distinc- tion of presumably being the site, in I849, of the last public book-burning in England.", Probably the most notable book- burning by an English university is the Royal Bookfire of I683, which took place according to the Judgment and Decree of the Oxford Convocation.12 This listed twenty-seven doctrines judged "detesta- ble"; under most of these appeared the names of certain books judged guilty of advocating these doctrines. The books so condemned were publicly burned in the courts of the university. The document was written from the royalist standpoint and has been said to be one of the last formal attempts of the divine-right the- orists to justify their position. Parlia- ment gave legal enforcement to the con- demnation, and the decree was widely cited in various attempts to secure con- viction of certain authors or books. How- ever, authorities deriving their rights from sources other than divine eventual- ly came into power; in I7IO Parliament stated that the decree "contains in it several Positions, contrary to the Con- stitution of this Kingdom, and destruc- tive to the Protestant Succession, as by Law established," and formally con- demned the decree itself to the flames.33 Besides these burnings by institutions such as the church, the national political authorities, and the universities, it should also be noted that local author- ities, either civil or ecclesiastic, often de- creed "bonfires" within their own juris- dictions. There are also examples of holocausts conducted by individuals. In Spain dur- ing the fifteenth century almost any per- son of authority seems to have been able to decree a bonfire of books. Records also exist of deliberate destruction of books by their writers or owners for personal reasons. A biblical example appears in the story of Paul's eloquence at Ephesus, which led many to burn their "curious" books.'4 Savonarola's fire is historically well known; in that instance books were destroyed along with games, pictures, and articles of adornment. A seven- teenth-century English rector left direc- tions that after his death his large collec- tion of books on astrology were to be burned as "remnants of heathen idola- try."-I In the same century a former 9 Ibid., III, 13I and 13I nf. to Vorstius was a German, but James I made his appointment to the University of Leyden a political issue between England and Holland and forced his dismissal (J. M. Robertson, A Short History of Free- thought [3d ed.; London: Watts & Co., I9153, II, 22). " The book figuring in the incident was The Nemesis of Faith by James Anthony Froude (Farrer, Op. cit., pp. 143-44; some confirmation appears in Gillett, op. cit., II, 59I-92). 12 The text is given in Gillett, op. cit., II, 516-20. It is sometimes referred to as the "Oxford Decree." '3ibid., pp. 512-13. '4 Acts I9: I9. IS Gillett, op. cit., I, 4-5.
306 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Quaker attempted a public bonfire of his books on Quakerism.I6 Galileo's widow, his executrix, turned over his manu- scripts to her confessor, who burned many of them.17 Such examples could be multiplied; but each is an individual case, dependent primarily upon the per- sonality of the individual who caused the destruction. Mobs, too, have been book-burners. Destruction of books has often been due not to organized decrees of condemnation or to individual burnings but to mob wrath. In wars the soldiers and the popu- lace have probably caused more havoc and destruction than the decrees and de- cisions of rulers and leaders. Mobs have not only destroyed materials which were considered specifically abominable or which were deemed legitimate loot but have been executioners of entire collec- tions of books and libraries. Some instances should, of course, be noted wherein mob opinion and public support interfered to prevent censorship, repression, or burning.'8 But in each case it seems evident that most of these pro- tests arose because of the personal popu- larity of an author or his opinions; some- times, especially in the later days of the practice of book-burning, the indigna- tion represented a defense of popular liberties and a protest against press cen- sorship. There is no indication that such reactions were in any sense a demonstra- tion against the burning of books as a method of dealing with offenses; and since these burnings were in general sym- bolical, public opinion cannot be cred- ited with the attempt to preserve the books in question. In short, it may be said that society generally acquiesced in the burning of books, both through its institutional or- ganizations, such as the church, the state, and the universities, and through individuals and groups, who themselves often attacked books with fire. THE ERADICATION OF BOOKS The wholesale destruction of certain books or literatures has sometimes ac- companied wars, invasions, and revolts. In a few cases there have been deliberate attempts to annihilate certain litera- tures. Occasionally the destruction of all copies of a particular book has been the object. The incomplete records of civilization include many examples of wholesale demolition of books, especially as the concomitant of wars. Historians have lamented the loss; some have imputed to the destroyers a deliberate attempt to substitute one culture for another or have attributed to barbarian tribes "a morbid pleasure in destroying those works which bore evidence to the mental superiority of their enemies."'9 There seems, however, in most cases to be little direct evidence of such purposeful de- 1' A. L. Haight, Banned Books (New York: R. R. Bowker Co., 1935), p. 2I. Also P. H. Ditchfield, Books Fatal to Their Authors (London: Elliot Stock, 1895), p. 80. Is In China, for example, Goodrich notes that a storm of protest arose in Hunan against the burning of the writings of Hsieh Chi-Shih. The popular feel- ing was so strong that the emperor was forced to re- move several officials charged with the examination and burning of the books. It is indicated that this popular protest may have had a deterring effect, for there seems to have been no similar "heresy hunt" in Hunan for several decades. See L. C. Goodrich, The Literary Inquisition of Ch'ien Lung (Baltimore: Waverly Press, I935), pp. 24-25. In England, there were several occasions where popular support of an author was so great that mobs interfered with the execution of the orders for book-burning, and special protection was necessary for the hangman intrusted with the burning. For examples see Gillett, op. cit., I, 280, and II, 642-50. '9 F. S. Merryweather, Bibliomania in the Middle Ages (rev. ed.; London: Woodstock Press, I933), p. 20.
THE BURNING OF BOOKS 307 struction; the damage seems rather to be due to the indiscriminate use of fire as a weapon of war, to the incidental program of pillage, destruction, and mob license, and to the ravages of disuse and neglect consequent upon an invasion. The losses thus occasioned have been tremendous. The successive burnings of the library at Alexandria and the de- struction of the libraries at Pergamum and Serapeum are well known. It is said that during the barbarian invasions in the fifth century almost every book col- lection in Italy was destroyed or dis- persed. From the eighth through the thirteenth centuries the libraries of Con- stantinople were sacked again and again by Christian and by Turkish invaders and by the dissatisfied populace. In medieval Europe successive wars and invasions caused so much damage to books that one writer has remarked that the number which survived is much more surprising than the losses.20 The expulsion of the Moors from Spain was followed by a holocaust of Arabic books; more books in Arabic were burned after the sack of Tunis by Charles V.2x The great popular revolts, such as the Peasants' War in Germany, destroyed thousands of volumes which had been in the libraries of the church and the nobil- ity.22 The many wars after the Reforma- tion also took their toll. In the destruc- tion of the monasteries in England under Henry VIII books and manuscripts were looted, destroyed, and burned in great iumbers.23 During the French Revolu- -ion over four million books are said to have been lost.24 The remark of one wvriter about the destruction of monastic ibraries would be applicable to many such events: "The ignorant thus delight- Ld to destroy that which they did not Lnderstand, and the factional spirit of the more enlightened would not allow them to make one effort for the preserva- tion of those valuable relics . . . .)"25 These examples could be multiplied; anyone familiar with the history of the long wars of the world can add to the il- lustrations. Damage was tremendous; the loss to civilization of literatures is the counterpart of the loss of lives and prop- erty with which wars have defaced his- tory and retarded the development of peaceful endeavor. Apart from the destruction incidental to war, however, there have been on some occasions deliberate attempts to ob- literate an entire literature. Two of the most wholesale of these purges have taken place in China.26 In the third cen- tury before Christ, Ch'in Shih-huang or- dered all books to be burned except those on medicine, divination, and agriculture. The avowed purpose was to wipe out the past, so that history should begin with the first emperor.27 Another mass de- 20 Edward Edwards, Memoirs of Libraries (Lon- don: Truibner & Co., I859), I, 287-88. 2 J. W. Thompson, The Medieval Library (Chi- cago: University of Chicago Press, I939), p. 368. 22 The peasants are said to have considered manu- scripts a particular object of destruction. Their demolition of these tools of learning was directed rather specifically against the church and the nobles as beneficiaries of a culture in which they had no part (Thompson, op. cit., pp. 474-76). 23 The loss is calculated at half a million; many ancient libraries were destroyed. The destruction of the monasteries also meant the destruction of the centers of education for children, and there seems to have been no adequate substitute for the monastery schools for nearly a century (Cambridge History of English Literature, III, 56-6o). 4 Merryweather, op. Cit., p. 20 n. 2S Ibid., p. 24. 26The burning or suppression of literature by successive dynasties seems to have been fairly com- mon in China. The two cited are, 'however, the in- stances in which the attempted destruction was al- most complete in its purpose. 27 References to this event are made by a num- ber of writers. The name of Ch'in Shih-huang's min-
308 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY struction, perhaps greater in its devas- tation, took place under Ch'ien Lung in the eighteenth century. A systematized and thorough official search for the pro- scribed books characterized these de- crees, which were directed against all lit- erature reflecting the Manchus in an un- favorable light, all which had any tinge of rebellious tendency, and all which were unorthodox in thought or style. The suppression, expurgation, and destruc- tion of records make much of the writing concerning the history of China still sus- pect; only fragmentary and perhaps false data are available concerning the cen- turies immediately preceding Ch'ien Lung.28 Such wholesale exterminations are comparatively rare. However, there are records of many attempts to eradicate specific types of writing-usually on reli- gious grounds. In biblical history Anti- ochus attempted to root out the faith of the Jews and searched for the rolls of the Law to be burned. Alexander the Great burned the texts of the Mazdean religion. In the third century Diocletian attempt- ed to destroy all Christian literature; later Christian rulers tried to send all pagan writings to the flames. The Cor- dovan library in Spain was destroyed by Almanzor in the tenth century because he did not believe in secular literature.29 In later centuries the Inquisition and the indexes of the Church of Rome sent many books to the fire.30 In sixteenth- century England, royal commissioners were sent to Oxford University to purge its libraries of "popish" books; the "re- form," aided by popular looting and mob spirit, resulted in the practically complete destruction of the collections, including the famous "Duke Humphrey's Library."3' There have also been a series of attempts by Christians to secure the burning of Jewish books. While these, at- tempts at wiping out certain types of writings have not been attended by uni- form success, the destruction involved has been great. Besides these endeavors to eliminate great groups of books, there are some cases in which all copies of a particular book were singled out for destruction. Often an official condemnation of a book, or its symbolic burning, was accom- panied by an order for the surrender of all copies for the fire; but although some ef- fort might be made to gather as many as possible, the machinery for accomplish- ing the purpose was usually inadequate. Hence such an order, especially after the invention of printing, had little real effect upon the existence of the book. However, in a few cases the effort was so stringent or so successful that all or nearly all copies perished in the flames. A few examples of successful purges may be given. One of the first of which we know is that of Porphyry's Treatise against the Christians, burned in 388 A.D. by order of Theodosius the Great; so far as has been discovered, no copy re- ister, Li Ssu, is associated with it. For a longer de- scription see K. T. Wu, "Scholarship, Book Produc- tion, and Libraries in China" (unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Graduate Library School, University of Chicago, I944), pp. 34-37. 28 For an account of Ch'ien Lung's program see Goodrich, op. cit. A r6sum6 is given on pp. 44-53. 29 This is said to have contained over six hundred thousand books (E. A. Savage, The Story of Libraries and Book-collecting [New York: E. P. Dutton & Co., (I909)], p. I29). 3ORobertson says: "The destruction of books in Italy in the first twenty years .... [after the index of 1549] was enormous, nearly every library being decimated, and many annihilated" (Robertson, op. cit., I, 413). 31 It is of interest to note that mathematics books were included in the destruction because they con- tained crosses.
THE BURNING OF BOOKS 309 mains.32 When Servetus was burned in I553, his books and manuscripts per- ished with him in the fire; his works are now very rare.33 In the same century ap- peared the Trattato utilissimo del bene- ficio de Giesu crocifisso verso i ckristiani. This became immediately popular and was so thoroughly pursued and destroyed by the church that for many years no copy was known to exist.34 The book entitled Doctrine of the Fourth Commandment, Deformed by Pop- ery, Reformed and Restored to its Primi- tive Purity was written by James Oak- ford (or Okeford) in advocacy of a seventh-day Sabbath and published in England during the seventeenth century. Its divergence of opinion about the ob- servance of Sunday aroused the displeas- ure of Parliament, and the House of Commons ordered all copies burned. So successful were the magistrates charged with securing all copies that apparently none now exist.35 A catechism for children, written by a Baptist, Benjamin Keach, and entitled Tke Child's Instructor; Or, a new and easie Primer, called forth similar indig- nation. Its entire issue of fifteen hundred copies-including the Council's own copy-was destroyed by the Council in 1664.36 One of the best-known instances of a successful attempt to annihilate a book is the case of Tyndale's first translation of the New Testament into vernacular English. So zealously was it pursued that only one perfect copy survives.37 These are some examples of the de- struction of books of whose existence we have proof, even though the books them- selves have been lost.38 In the early cata- logs and bibliographies of manuscripts and books, titles are listed which pre- sumably were once part of these collec- tions. Of some of these there is no trace of survival;39 in many instances the in- formation given is so scanty that one may only guess at their contents. But to a list of books driven from existence should be added this unknown and anon- ymous legion of literature. THE RESULTS OF BOOK-BURNING There are no data for establishing the extent of all of these vast losses; the ef- fect of the burning of books can only be estimated. But in some instances it is possible to trace the direct results; in others, logical assumptions can be made. Consequences cannot, however, be en- tirely dissociated from the effects of all the programs of censorship and of re- pression. Nor can book-burning be said to have been a primary cause of loss of knowledge, since it was itself the out- come of the temper and civilization of the society which practiced it. Obviously, in many cases a society would not have been receptive to the spread of certain ideas even had the concepts been al- lowed freer expression. Book-burning, moreover, has not been 32 Farrer, op. cit., p. 5. 33 Ibid., p. 8. In regard to the few surviving copies of his Christianismi restitutio see also Gillett, op. cit., II, 590-9I. 34 A copy later come to light. The probable au- thor of this book was Aonio Paleario, who was hanged in Milan in 1570. 3SGillett, op. Cit., I, 251-52. 36 Ibid., II, 443-46. Keach re-wrote this book from memory; a new edition was published in Eng- land, and a Boston edition was issued in i685. 37 Haight, op. cit., pp. 13-14. 3J Similarly, some books survive which we know have been expurgated so successfully that no copy of the original uncensored version exists. 3 The accusation is occasionally made that scholars and bibliographers may have deliberately suppressed or destroyed certain manuscripts which might contradict their own works.
THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY responsible for so much destruction as has sometimes been indicated. Although it is true that great libraries and collec- tions have been destroyed, a few of the books often found their way to other places; many rare manuscripts now held in our libraries and museums have had a long history of world wandering. Books were sometimes removed to other li- braries; sometimes they came into the possession of private owners. In wars, while fire has destroyed thousands of vol- umes, valuable portions of collections have often been taken to enlarge the li- braries of the invaders.40 During the years when barbarian tribes overran Italy many books were taken to Con- stantinople, where they were preserved and copied in the eastern monasteries. In turn, many books from the East later found their way back into western Eu- rope when Constantinople underwent successive invasions. Tradition says that during the Dark Ages many books were preserved in Britain and Ireland.41 Dur- ing the days of the Inquisition copies of condemned books were included in the collection kept by Spanish kings in the Escorial.42 In the time of the destruction of the monasteries in sixteenth-century England, Henry VIII gave John Leland, the antiquarian, permission to rescue from destruction such books as dealt with events of English history.43 In China the early orders for the de- struction of books were thwarted by a few scholars who concealed some of the old Confucian tablets and other writ- ings.44 During the eighteenth-century mass destruction in that country, copies of condemned books were in some meas- ure acquired by Japanese, Korean, and French libraries.45 It has been noted that, especially after the invention of printing, total destruc- tion of individual books was rarely pos- sible. In most cases at least a few copies survived; and as long as even one copy of a book remained, it was a potential factor in the development of thought. In some instances condemnation really served to stress the importance of a book or a theory; those which otherwise might have escaped popular notice were thus called to the attention of a wider reading public.46 Condemnation was probably a contributory factor in the wide and rapid spread of Luther's work and influ- ence. The papal decree for the burning of Luther's effigy and his books in 1521 iS 40 Some of the great collections of Poland thus found their way into the imperial libraries of Russia. The huge holdings in the present libraries in Moscow and Leningrad are due in great measure to the con- fiscation of private libraries during the revolution in the present century. Similarly, many of the books taken from the libraries of the nobles who were guillotined or who emigrated during the French Revolution were placed in the National Library in Paris. 4' Thompson questions the accuracy of the state- ment (op. cit., pp. 102-4). 4 Preserved Smith, A History of Modern Ciuture, Vol. I: The Great Renewal (New York: H. Holt & Co., 1930), p. 352. 43 Regrettably, Leland had only partial success. Besides those he rescued, however, a few others sur- vived and found their way into college libraries and into private collections. 44WU says that the destruction under Ch'in Shih-huang was not so great as is generally supposed. In addition to those who defied the decree, certain officials were allowed to retain books, and the em- peror had his own collection. He comments, how- ever, that many of the books thus preserved were destroyed when Hsiang Yu fired the capitol in 207 B.C., and says that more damage was caused by this fire than by the proscription (op. cit., pp. 34-37). 4s Goodrich, op. cit., p. 43. 46 Mathew Tyndale is quoted to this effect re- garding the burning by the Grand Jury of Middle- sex of his essay entitled "Rights of the Christian Church," (G. H. Putnam, The Censorship of the Church of Rome [New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 19071, II, 265).
THE BURNING OF BOOKS 311 said to have created a fervid interest in his writings; in three months, four thou- sand copies of his Address to the German Nobility were issued; within five days, five thousand copies of his translation of the New Testament into the vernacular were sold.47 Many other examples can be given of books which ran into other editions soon after their public condemnation. Biddle's Twelve Arguments Drawn Out of Scrip- ture was condemned to the fire by the Commons in I647, but it was so popular that it was reprinted the same year.48 A signed edition of Bury's The Naked Gospel appeared only a year after its decree for burning.49 In 7 II, four ser- mons by William Fleetwood, bishop of St. Asaph, were published; the House of Commons, in the following year, con- demned the Preface as "tending to create discord and sedition" and ordered the book burned by the hangman in the Palace Yard of Westminster. But the Preface was reprinted in The Spectator (No. 384) and hence received far wider circulation than would have been pos- sible in its original form.50 A book's popularity sometimes arose solely from its condemnation. There are examples of volumes which were unin- teresting and unreadable and which would undoubtedly have been uninfluen- tial had not attention been so drawn to them. Then, too, many publishers and printers seem to have made special ef- forts to reprint books listed for condem- nation in various countries;5' for book- sellers a certain public was already se- cured for a book merely by its condem- nation. In the present day, comparable situations occur where publicity and in- creased sales result for a book from its in- clusion on a "banned "list. Many people may also agree with the opinion ex- pressed in Harper's Weekly, quoted by the author of a book condemned to the fire in Russia: "The burning of his books may be said to confer a distinction on an author when the work of destruction is decreed by the censors of an autocratic government. "152 This foregoing summary has indi- cated that the losses to scholarship and intellectual history through book de- struction have not been so complete as is sometimes thought. There is still no doubt, however, that they have been tremendous and in many cases irrepa- rable. Even if books were not always completely destroyed in areas ravished by war and riots, many fell into disuse, collections were abandoned, or unlet- tered invaders neglected to care for their acquisitions; and although some books may have been rescued from the flames, they were often thus lost to the world. We have no record of the wealth of ma- terials lost in the general carnage of the Dark and Middle Ages; indubitably, however, its loss had an effect upon the 47 Haight, op. Cit., pp. 12-13. 48 Farrer, op. cit., pp. I IOI- I. 49 Gillett, Op. Cit., II, 538. so Ibid., p. 634. St A similar situation appears in the compilation of the "James Index" prepared by Thomas James, keeper of the books at Oxford University in the sev- enteenth century. James's list, which was also used as a buying guide by later curators, was made up of books which had been condemned by the Roman Catholic church and which he felt should, for this reason, be purchased for the Bodleian library (Put- nam, The Censorship of the Church of Rome, II, 369- 75). 52 Quoted in L. F. Ward, Dynamic Sociology (2d ed.; New York: D. Appleton & Co., 1897), p. Xiii. The first edition of this book was burned by the czarist censors; this second edition contains an in- teresting preface regarding censorship and burning of the work.
312 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY knowledge and scholarship of that time, and it is possible that the consequent gap in historical records has given to later writers a distorted conception of the era. We do not know how great has been the loss entailed by the various great programs for annihilation of books and literatures; but it seems certain that each has had a disastrous effect upon records, education, and the spread of knowledge. SUMMARY The destruction of books either has been incidental to war and general so- cial upheavals or has been deliberately planned. In the latter case it has been one aspect of censorship, by which knowledge and ideas have been curtailed not only through material and psycho- logical endeavors at restriction before production but through attempts at violent suppression. The general social programs of repression and punishment for ideas which are nonconformist have had some direct effects in certain in- stances; the greatest consequence has been the curtailment of the spread of in- formation. There were those who did not write, those who did not print, those who did not teach-and those who could not learn. But book-burning cannot be con- sidered as a thing apart: it has contrib- uted to, and caused the limitations of, a civilization; it has also been the product and the result of that civilization.