Diversity and LIS Education: inclusion and the Age of Information Paul T. Jaeger, Mega M Subramaniam, Cassandra B. Jones and John Carlo Bertot College of Information Studies, University of Maryland, 4105 Hornbake Building, College Park, MD 20742-4345. E-mail: pjaeger@umd.edu, mmsubram@umd.edu, cbjones@umd.edu, jbertot@umd.edu While LIS continues to struggle with representation of populations traditionally consid- ered as core to diversity, socio-economic and technological changes have significantly increased the range of populations that are disadvantaged, underrepresented, and ex- cluded in terms of information. Drawing from studies of diversity in LIS education and professions, as well as national demographic data, this article: (1 ) examines understand- ings of diversity within the field; (2) analyzes the implications of diversity in education, recruiting, and scholarship; and (3) explores models for inclusive diversity education. This paper argues that the field needs to embrace a broader, more inclusive understand- ing of diversity to remain culturally relevant. Keywords: diversity, inclusion, underrepresented populations, education, research Introduction In long the struggled United States, with issues the LIS of diversity, field has long struggled with issues of diversity, representation, and inclusion. The "chal- lenges of diversity in LIS" was the focus of the keynote talk at the 92nd annual conference of the American Library As- sociation (ALA) nearly four decades ago (Jones, 1974). Since then, these issues have been examined in terms of LIS mas- ter's students, doctoral students, faculty, and staff; of information professionals in the information workforce; and of LIS research and pedagogy (e.g., Abudallahi, 2007; Adkins & Espinal, 2004; Bonnici, & Burnett, 2005; Buddy & Williams, 2005; Chu, 2002; Josey, 1993, 1999; Lynch, 2000; McCook & Lippincott, 1997; Win- ston, 1998). In spite of this attention, di- versity in LIS has not changed greatly over time, continuing to echo Wheeler's (2005a) statement that "realistically, there is no need for research regarding the re- segregation of library schools. Statistically speaking, there are few, if any, that have ever truly integrated" (vii). Yet, the scope of the discussion about diversity in terms of information and in- formation technology is rapidly expanding to include issues such as political, socio- economic, and technological divides. Having limited or no access to the Inter- net and Internet-enabled tools is now a tremendous social disadvantage in terms of education, civic participation, employ- ment, and other major life functions (Clark & Gorski, 2001; Norris, 2001; Vie, 2008). LIS needs to broaden its stand on diversity to embrace all populations disadvantaged in terms of information access. Popula- tions affected by issues of diversity and representation in LIS now include dis- ability, age, gender, socioeconomic status, language, literacy, sexual orientation, and geography, along with the areas of race, ethnicity and multiculturalism that have received most of the traditional focus in LIS. The purpose of this article is threefold: (1) to expand the discussion and definition of diversity within the LIS community; (2) to offer insights into the implications of diversity in promoting scholarship, in- struction, and understanding within LIS; and (3) to describe a model for inclusive J. of Education for Library and Information Science, Vol. 52, No. 2 - (Summer) July 201 1 1 66 ISSN: 0748-5786 © 201 1 Association for Library and Information Science Education
Diversity and LIS Education: Inclusion and the Age of Information 1 67 diversity education within LIS from which other LIS programs may benefit. Defining Diversity Racial diversity has traditionally re- ceived the most focus in LIS literature re- lated to diversity, in preparation to work with diverse populations, and in initiatives to diversify the profession. This approach makes sense within the historical context, as race and ethnicity were the first catego- ries that received legal protections from the mistreatment and marginalization that had been socially engrained. Over time, other populations have received varying levels of legal protection from discrimina- tion, such as that based on gender, sexual orientation, and disability. Within LIS, there has been tension about whether the field should focus on diversity in terms of race and ethnicity, in terms of legally protected populations, or in broader terms (Jones, 1999; Peterson, 1999; Welburn, 1999). However, much of the focus in LIS literature has been limited to diversity in terms of race and ethnicity (Jaeger, Frank- lin & Bertot, 20 1 0). Even the major Diver- sity Counts report issued by the ALA was focused almost exclusively on race and ethnicity, with some attention paid to gen- der (Davis & Hall, 2007). However, LIS as a profession cannot limit itself to focusing on increasing inclu- sion based on race and ethnicity or even based on populations protected from legal discrimination (Jaeger et al., 2010). As in- formation professionals facilitate access to information, to prepare students to work with the information needs and informa- tion behavior of diverse populations, LIS education should shift its focus from di- versity in terms of simple demographics to a focus on diversity as the populations that are underrepresented, disadvantaged, and underserved in terms of information. This definition of diversity should encom- pass populations that have traditionally been mistreated and marginalized in rela- tion to information needs and information behavior, as well as populations that are traditionally underrepresented in the LIS professions. Such a definition would be large enough to include legally protected populations based on race, ethnicity, gen- der, and disability, as well as populations with access challenges related to literacy, poverty, language, sexual orientation, and age, among others. In an information age, diversity should embrace the underrepre- sented, the disadvantaged, and the under- served if information professionals are to provide truly inclusive services. Preparing professionals for such practice begins in LIS schools. As the focus on racial diversity pre- dominates in LIS literature and pedagogy, it is the appropriate place to begin a re- view of diversity issues in the field. Ra- cial minorities constitute just 11.3% of the LIS student population, compared to 31.3% of the United States (US) popula- tion (Kim & Sin, 2008). Only 3.3% of li- brarians are Latino, as compared to 14.7% of the total population - a number pro- jected by Census Bureau to rise 24.4% by 2040. African Americans comprise only 6.0% of librarians, compared to 12.4% of the population (Lance, 2005; Winston & Walstad, 2006). In 2009, 76.5% of full- time LIS faculty members were white and 13.9% were Asian/Pacific - a far cry from anything approaching proportional representation among the US population (Wallace & Naidoo, 20 1 0). African Amer- icans comprise 5.9% of LIS faculty, and 2.5% of LIS faculty members are Latino (Wallace & Naidoo, 2010). The shortage in representation for LIS faculty into the future is likely to continue, as only 6.8% of the doctoral degree recipients from LIS Schools in the United States were African Americans from 1993 to 2007 (Franklin & Jaeger, 2007). Libraries and other information organi- zations, however, will be serving an ever more diverse national population. From 2000 to 2010, 83% of population growth in the United States was non-white (Mo- rello, 2010). Half of the population 18 and
1 68 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE younger is non-white, and minority births now account for 48% of children born in the United States (Associated Press, 2010; Morello, 2010). The diversity of the pop- ulation is increasing in every state in the United States with exception of West Vir- ginia (Associated Press, 2006). By 2050, minorities are projected to comprise 54% of the United States population (Associ- ated Press, 2010; Penny, 2008). Many places are already majority- minority, meaning that the majority of the population is non-white. Of the 3,141 counties in the United States, 303 - nearly 1 in 10 - are already majority-minority; in addition, in 1 of every 4 counties, there are more minority children than white children (Associated Press, 2010; U.S. Census Bu- reau, 2007). By 2005, California, Hawaii, New Mexico, and Texas were majority- minority states, with five more - Arizona, Georgia, Maryland, Mississippi, and New York - projected to join them in the next few years (U.S. Census Bureau, 2005). Many libraries are thus already located in areas where the majority of the population is non-white. The lack of racial diversity in LIS is reflected in the preparation of future in- formation professionals and in current in- formation practice. Historically, students pursuing master's degrees in library and information science (MLS) have been the focus of most efforts to improve diversity (Gollop, 1999; Jaeger & Franklin, 2007; McCook, 2000; Totten, 2000). In the first half of the twentieth century, initia- tives to diversify librarianship centered on the creation of library schools for Af- rican Americans at the Hampton Institute, Clark-Atlanta University, and North Caro- lina Central University (DuMont, 1986a, 1986b; Josey, 1970; Josey & DeLoach, 2000; Stephenson, 1991). This educational approach paralleled the prevalence of seg- regated library services in many parts of the country (Fultz, 2006; Gleason, 1941; Musmann, 1998). Since the 1 970s, there have been a num- ber of initiatives to increase the presence of underrepresented populations within library education, with efforts mounted at library schools such as University of Arizona, Clark-Atlanta University, Co- lumbia University, Florida State Univer- sity, University of Illinois, University of Maryland, University of North Carolina, North Carolina Central University, Rut- gers University, University of Toledo, and Wayne State University, as well as a long-running recruitment program under E. J. Josey at Pittsburgh (Gollop, 1999; McCook, 2000; Welbourne, 1994). Simi- larly, the Institute of Museum and Library Services (IMLS), the ALA, the Special Li- brary Association (SLA), the Association of Research Libraries (ARL), the Medical Library Association (MLA), the American Association of Law Librarians (AALL), and many state library organizations have employed a wide range of initiatives and funding programs to promote diversity in the library workforce (Kim & Sin, 2006; Malone, 2000; McCook, 2000; McCook & Geist, 1993; Subramaniam & Jaeger, 2010). IMLS, for example, funded mul- tiple long-running projects - such as Ari- zona State's Knowledge River, University of Texas' Honoring Generations, Univer- sity of North Texas' Rio Grande, and the multi-institutional Project Athena - to promote diversity in the library profession (Bonnici & Burnett, 2005; Hayden, 2004). Since the 1990s, however, the overall emphasis on diversity awareness and train- ing in LIS has actually decreased (Mestre, 2010). This dwindling emphasis is reflect- ed in the perceptions of librarians from un- derrepresented populations, the majority of whom feel the limited diversity in LIS faculty, staff, students, and professionals inhibits attracting students from underrep- resented populations (Kim & Sin, 2006). "If students are not aware of the range of issues of diversity, inclusion, and under- representation related to information and the ways to provide services that meet the needs and expectations of diverse popula- tions, these students will not be able to ad- equately serve their communities or their
Diversity and LIS Education: Inclusion and the Age of Information 1 69 profession" (Jaeger et al., 2010, p. 179). The lack of representation among librar- ians was even the subject of an Associated Press article that was published in major national newspapers like the Washington Post (Thomas, 2007). Although education and research about racial diversity in LIS includes focus on the wide range of dif- ferent racial, ethnic, national origin, and linguistic groups in the United States (e.g., Adkins & Hussey, 2006; Burke, 2007; Chu, 1999; Fisher, Durrance, & Hinton, 2004; Fisher, Marcoux, Miller, Sanchez, & Cunningham, 2004; Hughes-Hassell & Cox, 2010; Whitmire, 2003; Winston & Walstad, 2006), there still is abundant space for progress especially in the areas of recruitment and retention of librarians from diverse communities and assimilat- ing the knowledge of diversity into LIS curriculum. In spite of the increasing diversity of society, only 22.2% of recent LIS gradu- ates had the option to take a course related to diversity in their degree program, and only 2 1 .3% of LIS graduates indicated that they were prepared by their MLS program to work with diverse populations (Mes- tre, 2010). Few courses in LIS programs have a stated diversity component in the course description; of those that do, the clear majority of these courses are elec- tives (Subramaniam & Jaeger, 201 0). Tell- ingly, attempts to increase diversity in the profession and increase the responsiveness of the profession to the needs of diverse populations have not been focused on the MLS or doctoral curriculum (Kim & Sin, 2006; McCook, 2000; McCook & Geist, 1993; Smith & Moreno, 2006; Subrama- niam & Jaeger, in press). Instead, educa- tion initiatives have focused on trying to increase the presence of underrepresented, disadvantaged, and underserved groups without changing the curriculum to better reflect the needs of these groups or to pre- pare all librarians to be culturally compe- tent (Overall, 2009). This lack of attention in education carries into practice. For ex- ample, only 1 4 of the 1 07 libraries that are members of the Association of Research Libraries (ARL) have staff members iden- tified as coordinating diversity efforts, even though ARL as an organization has programs meant to increase professional diversity and awareness of diversity in academic libraries (Mestre, 2010). This failure to adequately address racial and ethnic diversity is compounded by the growing racial diversity of the United States and by the range of other popula- tions - socio-economically and geograph- ically disadvantaged, older adults, persons with disabilities, and gay, lesbian, bisexu- al, transgender, and questioning (GLBTQ) individuals, and among others - that need to be considered for information practice to be truly inclusive. These are not small populations. For example, there are 65 million Americans who have a disability, but we do not know how many informa- tion professionals, LIS students, or LIS faculty have a disability (Jaeger, 2009). Nor do we know how many persons with disabilities make use of libraries and their resources and services, a surprising situa- tion given that the ALA created its first set of standards for patrons with disabilities in 1961. However, many libraries initially lagged behind these commitments by the ALA to patrons with disabilities, and even now LIS programs are more likely to fo- cus on legal requirements related to access for persons with disabilities than the actual provision of effective services to patrons with disabilities (Gibson, 1977; Walling, 2004). While comprehensive studies of the representation of many of these underrep- resented, disadvantaged, and underserved populations in LIS has been lacking, the indications are problematic. The GLBTQ population serves as an excellent example of the neglect of the population in terms of education, practice, and research. The body of literature on GLBTQ librarians and library patrons is very small, but it clearly reflects discomfort in the lack of focus on GLBTQ issues in information services, in LIS education, and in the LIS profession
1 70 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE (e.g., Carmichael, 2000; Carmichael & Shontz, 1996; Cooke, 2005; Mehra & Bra- quet, 2007; Pruitt, 201 0). A recent study of members of gay men's book clubs found that gay men felt excluded from public li- braries, feeling their underrepresentation among librarians leads to a lack of inter- est in or understanding of their needs as library patrons (Pruitt, 2010). A review of the course and program descriptions of LIS schools reveals scant attention to GLBTQ issues, even in courses related to diversity (Subramaniam & Jaeger, 2010). The lack of focus on a population in LIS education and research should not be taken to mean that the traditional LIS em- phasis on race and ethnicity as the primary aspects of diversity results in students be- ing prepared to work with other diverse populations. People of low socio-econom- ic status present a telling example. Public libraries have been serving as "America's first responders to the economic crisis" (Rettig, 2009, n. p.) and are developing many innovative ways to provide infor- mation and social services to patrons in response to the crisis (Bertot & Jaeger, in press). However, library education re- mains primarily disconnected from these efforts, with some faculty even object- ing to focusing on the information needs of the poor (Bishop, Tidline, Shoemaker, & Salela, 1999; Gehner, 2010; Kinney, 2010). This equation of diversity to race in LIS, however, is part of larger trends in academia. In many academic institutions, diverse populations are not considered as a related set of groups, and interventions to address the needs of diverse popula- tions are not conceived in a holistic man- ner; instead most fields still view diversity in purely racial terms (Banard, Stevens, Siwatu, & Lan, 2008; Bourke, Strehorn, & Silver, 2000; Dona & Edmister, 2001; Hindes & Mather, 2007; Izzo, Murray, & Novak, 2008; Jaeger & Franklin, 2007; Pawley, 2006; Zeff, 2007). Among white faculty, diversity is predominantly con- sidered to be exclusively a racial issue (Banks, 2009). Similarly, most faculty members and academic programs do not view diversity as including disability (Ba- nard et al., 2008). These stances are rein- forced both by general perceptions that other populations do not face similar lev- els of social exclusion as racial minorities and by resistance among certain members of populations that have long been consid- ered diverse to expand the definition (Da- vis, 2002; Francis & Silvers, 2000). Further, though faculty generally re- spond positively to diversity training, in- tegration of the concepts from the training into educational practices is mostly limit- ed (Thompson, Snell, & O'Malley, 2009; Weimar, 1990). "Addressing attitudinal resistance among instructors is more com- plicated than supplying useful books and sponsoring workshops" (Simoni, Sexton- Radek, Yescavage, Richard, & Lundquist, 1 999, p. 93). In spite of numerous interven- tions in the field of education, for example, there is still a general lack of progress in preparing teacher candidates to deal effec- tively with diverse populations (McHat- ton, Keller, Shircliffe, & Zalaquett, 2009; Trent, Kea, & Oh, 2008). The presence of similar issues in other fields, however, cannot stand as an excuse in LIS. The issues are more pressing in LIS than almost any other field, as gradu- ates of LIS programs are entering careers that require working with diverse service populations every day of their working lives. Ultimately, LIS programs "must ac- cept responsibility for populating the pro- fession with a new generation of culturally competent librarians" (Wheeler, 2005b, p. 184). The seemingly intractable challenges of diversity, representation, and inclusion in LIS are the more painful for the fact that the professional stances of library organi- zations and libraries themselves, like the Code of Ethics and the Bill of Rights of the ALA, emphasize the inclusive creed of helping all of those who enter the library and of providing materials that reflect the diverse range of perspectives and groups
Diversity and LIS Education: Inclusion and the Age of Information 171 in society. The population served by li- braries is increasingly diverse and, in a number of communities and states, diverse populations are in the majority - and this trend will continue. The economic down- turn may simultaneously further increase usage and further diversify library demo- graphics, as many people who had not pre- viously used the library may need to begin using it. Regardless of the budget cuts that many libraries and library systems are fac- ing as a result of the economic downturn, a very diverse patron population is the real- ity of library service. LIS programs should prepare the profession for changing trends in demographics. It is time for LIS pro- grams to radically rethink their approach to the meaning of diversity and the breadth of coverage of diversity in LIS education, preparing students to work with the under- represented, the disadvantaged, and the underserved. It is time for LIS to "make diversity more inclusive" (Bowman & Jaeger, 2003, n.p.). Inclusion and Information Information underlies virtually every interaction, serves as a vital social and political equalizer, and provides a unify- ing thread throughout ail human actions. Given the importance of equal access to information by all members of society for education, civic participation, employ- ment, interaction with the government, and many other vital functions, it is essen- tial to frame the study of information in the most inclusive terms possible. While diversity is often considered as an issue of race and ethnicity, diversity includes a much broader range of concerns in in- formation services and includes all of the various underserved, disadvantaged, and underrepresented populations mentioned earlier. Future information professionals should be prepared in their education pro- grams to be ready to meet the information needs and ensure equal information access to these populations. Each underserved, disadvantaged, or underrepresented population has its own information needs and cultural perspec- tives toward information that need to be accounted for in education and practice. Different social groups have their own attitudes toward sources of information, methods of information access, and the value of different kinds of information that frame information behavior of the members of each social group, and the in- creasing electronic nature of information is heightening the varying nature of these approaches to information (e.g., Burnett, Besant, & Chatman, 2001; Burnett, Jae- ger, & Thompson, 2008; Chatman, 1999, 2000; Durrance & Fisher, 2002; Fisher et al., 2004; Fisher & Naumer, 2005; Hers- berger, 2002, 2003; Jaeger & Burnett, 2010). It is the responsibility of LIS educators to prepare future librarians to understand and meet the unique information needs of underserved, disadvantaged, and under- represented populations in physical and electronic settings. Without preparation for these kinds of issues, future informa- tion professionals will struggle to connect information with the populations who seek it. This preparation is particularly important in terms of electronic informa- tion, as equal access to the Internet is an issue where the disadvantaged are those "who have fought for civil rights in other areas of our society" (First & Hart, 2002, p. 385). Studies have demonstrated gaps in Internet access and usage by gender, race, age, literacy, disability, language, and ethnicity and most significantly socio- economic status (Fairlie, 2005; Fox & Livingston, 2007; Hamilton, 2002; Hoff- man & Novak, 1 998; Jaeger & Thompson, 2003, 2004; Lenhart, Rainie, Fox, Horri- gan, & Spooner, 2000; Livingston, 2010; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 2000; Spooner, Mer- edith, & Rainie, 2003; Spooner, Rainie, & Meredith, 2001). Currently, nearly 40% of U.S. homes lack Internet access and the percentage of households without Internet is 62% in ru-
1 72 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE ral communities (Horrigan, 2008, 2009). The library has become the established social institution for people with no Inter- net access, limited Internet access and lim- ited technological skill to seek access and assistance (Bertot, McClure, & Jaeger, 2008; Bertot, Jaeger, & McClure, 2010; Jaeger & Bertot, 2009). This role of the library has expanded significantly during the great recession, as many people - par- ticularly those of lower socio-economic status - have dropped their home Inter- net access and have nowhere but the local library to turn for access (Carlton, 2009; CNN, 2009; Horrigan, 2008; Nicholas, Rowlands, Jubb, & Jamali, in press; Van Sant, 2009). However, these realities are not suc- cessfully connecting with LIS education, research, and practice. A recent study of courses related to diversity among the larg- est LIS programs found that the number of courses with a stated diversity component in the title or course description is a very small slice of the total number of courses being offered by these schools, and many of such courses are electives that focus on a limited number of aspects of diversity (Subramaniam & Jaeger, 2010). IMLS has been very supportive of grant programs promoting diversity among students, but these programs have not yet translated into changes in representation of diverse populations among faculty in LIS and in- formation professionals (Subramaniam & Jaeger, 2010). While LIS research offers a nearly limitless set of opportunities to conduct research related to diverse popu- lations, most receive proportionally little attention (Jaeger et al., 2010). In short, most LIS programs include just enough diversity to ensure that the diver- sity requirement of the ALA accreditation process is satisfied, and few faculty are drawn to teaching and researching about a large portion of the population. As noted above, of the United States population, 14.7% is Latino, 12.4% is African Ameri- can, 21% is persons with disabilities, and the portion of the population compris- ing older adults will reach 20% by 2030 (US Census Bureau, 2010). While there is overlap between these different popula- tions, it is possible that LIS students are only being prepared to work with, and only represent, the minority of the United States population in terms of race, age, and ability. With the exception of LIS courses that educate future librarians in providing information for young adults and chil- dren (which have been integrated in all LIS curriculum addressing services pro- vided in public libraries, school libraries and museums), providing services to other diverse communities has not been aggres- sively pursued by library educators and researchers. While a segment of the litera- ture examines the provision of informa- tion services to diverse user populations (e.g., Maxey-Harris, 2010; Shachaf, 2008; Shachaf & Horowitz, 2006; Shachaf, Olt- mann, & Horowitz, 2008; Shachaf & Sny- der, 2007; Whitmire, 1999, 2001, 2003; Zoe & DiMartino, 2000), this literature has not translated into these areas as a fo- cus of many LIS courses. The rapid maturation of the informa- tion society and the increasing movement of educational, professional, and govern- mental functions partly or fully online have shifted the ground under the feet of LIS. To be truly included in society at this point, a person needs have access to information, mainly through the use of the Internet and Internet-enabled technol- ogies, services, and resources. Depending on the information need and information source, information access can require a range of literacies, including informa- tion, technology, civic, and more. As a result, the Internet era has widened the definition of diversity and inclusiveness to include people who lack information access or sufficient access due to literacy, economy, or geography, as well as people disadvantaged by the technology itself, such as older adults and persons with dis- abilities. For LIS professionals to provide inclusive information services, they need to be able to meet the needs of all of these
Diversity and LIS Education: Inclusion and the Age of Information 1 73 information-disadvantaged populations, all of whom bring different, and likely multiple, disadvantages to successfully navigate the evolving information envi- ronment. For LIS programs to prepare truly in- clusive information education and LIS professionals to provide truly inclusive information services, numerous social fac- tors and populations have to receive great- er attention in LIS education, research, and practice, including, but not limited to: race, ethnicity, gender, disability, age, sexual orientation, geography, literacy, technological literacy, Internet access, language, socioeconomic background, and national origin. This definition of diversity will need to remain flexible, as changes in technology and other social factors will shift which populations are underserved, disadvantaged, and underrepresented over time. All of these groups will have unique information needs, values, access ap- proaches, and behaviors. Yet, instead of confronting the new inclusion challenges of the twenty-first century, LIS is still unable to address the diversity concerns of the previous century. A sports cliche seems apt in this situation: it's time to go big or go home. More accurately, if LIS does not go big on diversity now, the majority of the US population may decide they do not feel they are adequately represented in and included by the library and its services, choosing to prioritize other sources of information and other community organizations. There has been a tremendous amount of fretting about the future of the library in face of new information technologies (e.g., Bak- er, 1996, 2001; Brophy, 2007; Brown & Duguid 2002; Buschman, 2003; Manoff, 2001; Tisdale, 1997). However, the fail- ure to prepare future librarians to provide inclusive services for diverse populations seems a much greater threat to the long- term viability of libraries as trusted and valued social institutions where people will seek the information they need. Going Big on Diversity The question, then, is what should LIS programs do to break the historical pat- terns? The most important change is a re- conceptualization of diversity in LIS on two levels - definition and intervention: 1. Definition - Diversity should be un- derstood in a sense of inclusiveness that includes both the traditional un- derstanding of diversity and the new groups that are information-disadvan- taged in the age of the Internet - the underrepresented, the disadvantaged, and the underserved. 2. Intervention - Innovative interven- tions should be conceived and imple- mented to accommodate the larger un- derstanding of diversity. Both of these elements need to be built directly into curriculum and practice. To be effective, a focus on diversity and inclu- sion needs to be a coherent element across the courses of a degree program, not just a stand-alone elective (Belay, 1992; Neely, 2005; Nilsen, 2004). Focusing on recruit- ing and admitting more diverse MLS students will not work if people from un- derserved, disadvantaged, and underrepre- sented groups do not see people like them- selves among library professionals and LIS program faculty, staff, and students (Ingle, 2006; Kim & Sin, 2006, 2008; Mc- Garvey, 2007; Piercy, Giddings, Allen, Dixon, Meszaros, & Joest, 2005; Umbach, 2006; Winston & Walstad, 2006). Diverse faculty members, in particular, are essen- tial in recruitment for diversity (Turner, Gonzalez, & Wood, 2008). Interventions to promote diversity in LIS can be conceptualized as a completely interrelated whole, with the complementa- ry approaches forming a "virtuous circle" to promote diversity (Franklin & Jaeger, 2009; Jaeger & Franklin, 2007). This vir- tuous circle model suggests that interven- tions to improve diversity in LIS should happen in multiple aspects of the field if
1 74 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE there is any chance of success. Recruiting is tied to representation among profession- als and among LIS faculty, and the pres- ence of diversity in the curriculum is re- lated to the diversity of the faculty, while the diversity of the faculty is dependent on the diversity of doctoral students. All aspects of diversity in the field depend on one another. Trying to recruit more di- verse master's students may seem like an easy solution to diversity, but it will not be sufficient to succeed. To have a chance to succeed, efforts should embrace both the breadth of diversity related to information and the number of aspects of the field af- fected by diversity issues. Developing LIS Diversity Programs Librarianship long ago made the com- mitment to diversity and inclusion as foundational elements of the profession. But based on the content of courses, state- ments on websites, and academic pro- grams available to students, a distressingly small number of LIS programs have com- mitted to diversity as a key focus in the development of curriculum. Even though the ALA accreditation guidelines for MLS programs include language that issues of diversity need to be covered to some ex- tent in instruction, few LIS programs have made diversity an explicit pedagogical fo- cus and a very small number of course de- scriptions include specific language about diversity. Diverging from this general state, some programs - such as the University of Cali- fornia Los Angeles and the University of Maryland - are engaged in efforts to make diversity a central component of their pro- grams and demonstrate the breadth of edu- cational options related to diversity that are available to LIS programs. At UCLA, the program emphasizes diversity in terms of cultural opportunities and organizations within the school, focusing primarily on inclusion of and opportunities to focus on specific populations. A significant portion of the school's website is also devoted to diversity issues (http://is.gseis.ucla.edu/ about/diversity.htm). These opportuni- ties at UCLA also include a core course in their archives program entitled Diver- sity, Ethics, and Change that "includes elements drawn from cultural and critical race theory, as well as a significant service learning component" (White & Gilliland, 2010, p. 245). The College of Information Studies at the University of Maryland has created an MLS track designed to expose students to the broad range of diverse populations they might work with as information profession- als. This program - the Information and Diverse Populations Concentration (http:// ischool.umd.edu/about/newinclusiveinfo. shtml) - was designed to prepare students to provide inclusive information services in their professional careers. The Concen- tration enables students to develop a range of practical and analytical skills to provide information and technology services to diverse populations in libraries, archives, school media centers, government agen- cies, and numerous other information set- tings. This approach was developed through extensive research and consultation with many community stakeholders to meet the needs of the employers and patrons of the region that the College primarily serves. A committee comprising members of the faculty, staff, MLS program, and Ph.D. program at the College was formed to develop the Concentration and accom- panying initiatives. Members of the Col- lege community who were not part of the Concentration development were given multiple opportunities to contribute and provide feedback about the program as it was developed. Discussions with public libraries, school libraries, academic libraries, ar- chives, and government agencies in the area provided a baseline for understanding the wide range of diverse populations in the area, as well as the service issues that regularly challenge information organiza- tions in the area. These community stake-
Diversity and LIS Education: Inclusion and the Age of Information 175 holders provided insight into the specific areas of preparation that Concentration students would need. Concurrent to these discussions, educators in other academic fields with a stronger established approach to preparing students to work with diverse populations were consulted, with the fo- cus of multicultural education being par- ticularly helpful. Courses and programs at other LIS schools were examined for different approaches on teaching diverse populations in LIS. The scholarly and pro- fessional literature of LIS, and education and research related to specific popula- tions, were consulted for further perspec- tives. All of these inputs shaped the goals and content of the new Concentration. The resulting Concentration embraces the wide definition of diversity that en- compasses the underrepresented, the dis- advantaged, and the underserved in terms of information. It is intended to prepare students to be culturally-aware informa- tion professionals who are ready to provide inclusive information services to popula- tions that are diverse in terms of gender, ability, language, literacy, socio-economic background, age, geography, and other factors. The Concentration will prepare students to design, develop, implement, integrate, and evaluate inclusive informa- tion services, resources, technologies, and outreach that serve diverse populations in various information environments, both physical and virtual. They will also learn about the social, political, educational, and ethical issues shaping service to diverse populations. Two new courses serve as the backbone of the Concentration: Diverse Popula- tions, Inclusion, and Information expos- es students to the range of diversity and inclusion issues related to information, while Information and Universal Usability emphasizes issues related to technology. A thorough review of all College courses was conducted to identify which courses already included a focus on diversity is- sues and which could be revised to bring greater emphasis to the already existing diversity content. For example, in the In- formation Policy course, the first several weeks are devoted to gaps in access and underserved populations, and these issues are then discussed in relation to every oth- er issue in the course. The Concentration was carefully designed so that students interested in any types libraries and infor- mation organizations could complete the course of study for any type of practice and for the Information and Diverse Popu- lations Concentration without taking any extra courses for graduation. Employing a virtuous circle approach to building the program, the Concentra- tion was developed as part of an expan- sive set of initiatives to promote education and research about diversity in LIS. These interrelated initiatives included establish- ing a diversity committee, forming of a student diversity organization, establish- ing an ongoing series of diversity lectures and events, and creating a new award for innovative efforts in diversity education and scholarship, among other endeavors (http://ischool.umd.edu/about/culture. shtml). Expanding on the virtuous circle notion, the College intends to recruit stu- dents in this concentration into the doctor- al program to help to foster a more diverse LIS faculty in the field. The first class of the Concentration began in fall 2010, with 27 students - a strong enrollment for a new program. These students are a mix of newly enrolled students and continuing students who have transferred into the Concentration. Con- currently the College received a generous grant from IMLS to provide scholarships, and a range of mentoring, internship, and professional development opportunities, for students enrolled in the Concentration. The College will iteratively improve the Concentration's curriculum and imple- mentation through solicitation of feedback from students and community partners via surveys and interviews. Feedback from community partners will be extremely im- portant, as the students in the Concentra- tion will have extensive opportunities to
1 76 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE intern at local information organizations that serve diverse populations and to be mentored by current information profes- sionals who work with these populations. Conclusion With the growing diversity of this in- formation society, more focus on issues of diversity, inclusion, and underrepresenta- tion in LIS is necessary for the continuing relevance of the field and the information professions. It is a matter not only of cre- ating a more diverse profession, but also of ensuring all professionals are ready to engage in culturally competent, inclusive information practices. If libraries do not adequately meet the needs of and provide inclusive services to the diverse range of populations that are currently under- served, disadvantaged, and underrepre- sented in terms of information, long-term library usage will suffer as society grows ever more diverse. In not that many decades, Latinos and African Americans will outnumber whites and Asian Americans. If the LIS profes- sions are still nearly bereft of the former populations by then, the library will likely not maintain its societal position as trusted and valued source of community informa- tion for the majority of the population. Similarly, failing to prepare students to meet the needs of the groups that have be- come disadvantaged and underrepresented due to social and technological changes will limit the relevance of the library to these populations. Just as significantly, a stronger focus on diversity and inclusion in LIS education, research, and practice presents a way for the field to create many new contributions to society. In a world defined by informa- tion and information technology, LIS is positioned to make significant contribu- tions to the nature of life in the informa- tion society. However, without a better representation and understanding of all of the diverse and underrepresented popula- tions in terms of information, LIS scholar- ship is at risk of irrelevance for the major- ity of the population. To meet the diversity challenges both new and old, LIS programs should: • Conceive of efforts to increase diversity in the field as interrelated, and work to simultaneously address representation issues among students, staff, faculty and professionals rather than relying on change coming through one population; • Frame diversity initiatives in terms of the inclusion of all populations diverse and underrepresented in terms of infor- mation; • Develop courses explicitly devoted to preparing students to work with the range of diverse populations related to information; • Create programs for students who wish to specialize in working with diverse populations; • Create opportunities for LIS students to intern or obtain field experiences in li- braries, museums, archives, or other in- formation organizations that primarily serve underrepresented and information challenged populations; • Tie educational efforts to promoting in- creased research about diversity, inclu- sion, and representation by faculty and doctoral students; and • Learn from innovative inclusive initia- tives developed by libraries and other in- formation organizations to serve diverse and underrepresented populations. While there are undoubtedly many oth- er productive approaches to help promote diversity efforts in LIS, these major ideas can provide a framework to strive for and build upon. Far ahead of LIS education, some li- braries have already decided to "go big" into diversity, linking traditional library services and new technological capaci- ties specifically to reach otherwise un- derserved populations. One approach is known as community-focused information services (CIS) - using new media technol-
Diversity and LIS Education: Inclusion and the Age of Information 1 77 ogies to enable users to create and share content about themselves, their social groups, and their communities (Bishop, Bazzell, Mehra, & Smith, 2001; Fisher et al., 2004; Srinivasan, 2006a, 2006b, 2007). Such CIS efforts reassert the public library as a vital community asset that can help connect patrons to locally-relevant infor- mation and provide new means through which to bring library services to under- served populations within diverse commu- nities (Becvar & Srinivasan, 2009; Boast, Bravo, & Srinivasan, 2007; Lyons, 2007; Mehra & Srinivasan, 2007; Caidi & A I lard, 2005). The Chicago area provides two key examples of CIS projects. NorthStarNet (http://northstarnet.org) is designed to link people from diverse populations across the various suburbs of Chicago's urban sprawl, while SkokieNet (http://skokienet. org) not only focuses on long-term com- munity members' interests - such as com- munity revitalization, child care, jobs, and housing - but also offers resources in their native languages to the new immigrant populations that frequently move to the area, including Indian, Korean, and As- syrian, among others. Activities that are of similar ambition and scope in preparing future librarians to work with and conduct research about diverse and underserved populations are desperately needed in LIS education. Training future librarians to embrace inclusion and understand the needs of diverse populations will ensure that programs like those mentioned above continue to emerge and flourish. Inclusion of all of the populations of society in information is a moral impera- tive of LIS education, research, and prac- tice. For a field that has explicitly stated its commitment to diversity and inclusion for nearly a century, played an important role in integration, and stood solidly for freedom of access from the McCarthy era to the Homeland Security era, the situa- tion with diversity remains challenging. In spite of the focus on diversity in the field by some faculty members and some schools, a discipline-wide commitment to diversity as a major and explicit aspect of education, scholarship, and practice has not been achieved. As a result, LIS has yet to address the diversity concerns of half a century ago. Those challenges with diver- sity have now been joined by numerous other challenges as many new populations struggle with inclusion and representation related to information due to the promi- nence of the Internet - and some of these populations are ascending to being major- ity populations and already are in some communities. Unless meaningful action occurs soon, LIS as a profession and libraries as a so- cietal institution risk becoming exclusive rather than inclusive. Such an outcome would be antithetical for the field and for the patrons, communities, educational or- ganizations, and governments that rely on libraries and other information organiza- tions to ensure equal access to informa- tion to all. Fortunately, LIS programs still have the opportunity to embrace an inclu- sive concept of diversity. The time to wait for diversity to come of its own volition is past: we need to move forward immedi- ately and proactively. References Abdul lahi, I. (2007). Diversity and intercultural is- sues in library and information science (LIS) edu- cation. New Library World, 108 , 453-459. Adkins, D., & Espinal, I. (2004). The diversity man- date. Library Journal 729(7), 52-54. Adkins, D., & Hussey, L. (2006). The library lives of Latino college students. Library Quarterly, 76 , 456-480. Alger, J. R. (1999). When color-blind is color-bland: Ensuring faculty diversity in higher education. Stanford Law & Policy Review, 10 , 191-204. Alger, J. R. (2000). How to recruit and promote mi- nority faculty: Start by playing fair. Black Issues in Higher Education, 17 , 160-163. Associated Press. (2006). Diversity growing across U.S. MSNBC. Available: http://www.msncb.com Associated Press. (2010, March 10). Minority ba- bies set to become majority in 2010. MSNBC. Available: http://www.msncb.com Baker, N. (1996). The author vs. the library. New Yorker, 72(31), 51-62.
1 78 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE Baker, N. (2001 ). Double fold: Libraries and the as- sault on paper. New York, NY: Random House. Banard, L., Stevens, T., Siwatu, K. O., & Lan, W. (2008). Diversity beliefs as a mediator to faculty attitudes toward students with disabilities. Jour- nal of Diversity in Higher Education , /, 1 69-1 75. Banks, K. H. (2009). A qualitative investigation of white students' perceptions of diversity. Journal of Diversity in Higher Education , 2, 149-155. Becvar, K. M., & Srinivasan, R. (2009). Indigenous knowledge and culturally-responsive methods in information research. Library Quarterly, 79 , 421-441. Belay, G. (1992). Conceptual strategies for op- erationalizing multicultural curricula. Journal of Education for Library and Information Science, 33, 295-306. Bertot, J. C., Jaeger, P. T. (in press). Implementing and managing public library networks, connec- tivity, and partnerships to promote e-government access and education. In S. Aikins (Ed.), Manag- ing e-government projects: Concepts, issues and best practices. Hershey, PA: IGI Global. Bertot, J. C., Jaeger, P. T., & McClure, C. R. (Eds.). (2010). Public libraries and the Internet: Roles, perspectives, and implications. Westport, CT: Li- braries Unlimited. Bertot, J. C., McClure, C. R., & Jaeger, P. T. (2008). The impacts of free public Internet access on public library patrons and communities. Library Quarterly, 78,285-301. Bishop, A. P., Tidline, T. J., Shoemaker, S., & Salela, P. (1999). Public libraries and networked information services in low-income communi- ties. Library & Information Science Research, 21 , 361-390. Bishop, A. P., Bazzell, I., Mehra, B., & Smith, C. (2001). Ayfa: Social and digital technologies that reach across the digital divide. First Monday, 6(4). Available: http://www.firstmonday.org/issues/ issue6_4/bishop/index.html Boast, R., Bravo, M., & Srinivasan, R. (2007). Return to Babel: Emergent diversity, digital re- sources, and local knowledge. Information Soci- ety, 23, 395-403. Bonnici, L., & Burnett, K. (2005). A web model of recruitment for LIS Doctoral Education: Weaving in diversity. In M. B. Wheeler (Ed.), Unfinished business: Race, equity, and diversity in library and information science education (119-130). Lantham, MD: Scarecrow Press. Booz Allen Hamilton. (2002). International e- economy benchmarking: The world's most effec- tive policies for e-government. Washington DC: Author. Bourke, A. B., Strehorn, K.C., & Silver, P. (2000). Faculty members' provision of instructional ac- commodations to students with LD. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 35(1), 26-32. Bowman, C. A., & Jaeger, P. T. (2003). Making di- versity more inclusive: Toward a theory for the representation of disability comprised of social, literary, and educational perspectives. Paper pre- sented at the 2003 American Education Research Association Conference. Brophy, P. (2007). The library in the twenty-first century (2nd ed.). London, UK: Facet. Brown, J. S., & Duguid, P. (2002). The social life of information. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press. Buddy, J. W., & Williams, M. C. (2005). A dream deferred: School libraries and segregation. Amer- ican Libraries, 36(2), 33-35. Burke, S. (2007). The use of public libraries by Na- tive Americans. Library Quarterly, 77, 429-461. Burnett, G., Besant, M., & Chatman, E. A. (2001). Small worlds: Normative behavior in virtual communities and feminist bookselling. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 52, 536-547. Burnett, G., Jaeger, P. T., & Thompson, K. M. (2008). The social aspects of information access: The viewpoint of normative theory of informa- tion behavior. Library & Information Science Re- search, 30, 56-66. Burnett, K., Subramaniam, M., & Gibson, A. (2009). Latinas cross the IT border: Understand- ing gender as a boundary object between infor- mation worlds. First Monday, 14(9). Retrieved from : http://firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ ojs/index.php/fm/article/view Article/258 1 /2286 Buschman, J. E. (2003). Dismantling the public sphere: Situating and sustaining librarianship in the age of the new public philosophy. Westport, CT: Libraries Unlimited. Caidi, N., & Allard, D. (2005). Social inclusion of newcomers to Canada: An information problem? Library & Information Science Research , 27, 302-324. Carlton, J. (2009, January 19). Folks are flocking to the library, a cozy place to look for a job: Books, computers and wi-fi are free, but staffs are stressed by crowds, cutbacks. Washington Post, Al. Carmichael, J. V, Jr. (2000). "They sure got to prove it on me": Millennial thoughts on gay archives, gay bibliography, and gay library history. Librar- ies & Culture, 31, 88-102. Carmichael, J. V, Jr., & Shontz, M. L. (1996). The last socially acceptable prejudice: Gay and les- bian issues, social responsibilities, and coverage of these topics in MLIS/MLS programs. Library Quarterly, 66, 21-58. Chatman, E. A. (1999). A theory of life in the round.
Diversity and LIS Education: Inclusion and the Age of Information 1 79 Journal of the American Society for Information Science , 50 , 207-217. Chatman, E. A. (2000). Framing social life in theory and research. The New Review of Information Be- haviour Research, /, 3-17. Chu, C. M. (1999). Literacy practices of linguistic minorities: Sociolingusitic issues and implica- tions for literacy services. Library Quarterly, 69 , 339-359. Chu, C. (2002). Ethnic diversity in library and infor- mation science. Library Quarterly, 72 , 136-138. Clark, C., & Gorski, P. (2001). Multicultural edu- cation and the digital divide: Focus on race, lan- guage, socioeconomic class, sex, and disability. Multicultural Perspectives , 5(3), 39-44. CNN. (2009). Hard economic times: A boon for public libraries. CNN.com. Retrieved from: http://www.cnn.com/2009/US/02/28/recession. libraries/index.html Cooke, J. C. (2005). Gay and lesbian librarians and the "need" for GLBT library organizations: Ethi- cal questions, professional challenges, and per- sonal dilemmas in and "out" of the workplace. Journal of Information Ethics, 14(2), 32-49. Davis, D. M., & Hall, T. D. (2007). Diversity counts. Chicago, IL: American Library Associa- tion Office for Research and Statistics and Office for Diversity. Davis, L. J. (2002). Bending over backwards: Dis- ability, dismodernism, and other difficulty posi- tions. New York, NY: New York University Press. Dona, J., & Edmister, J. H. (2001). An examination of community college faculty members' knowl- edge of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 at the fifteen community colleges in Mis- sissippl. Journal of Postsecondary Education and Disability, I4( 2), 91-103. DuMont, R. R. (1986a). The educating of black librarians: An historical perspective. Journal of Education for Library and Information Science, 26, 233-249 DuMont, R. R. (1986b). Race in American librari- anship. Journal of Library History, 21 , 488-509. Durrance, J. C., & Fisher, K. E. (2002). Online community information: Creating a nexus at your library. Chicago, IL: American Library Associa- tion. Elicker, J. D., Thompson, M. N., Snell, A. F., & O'Malley, A. L. (2009). A training framework and follow-up observations for multiculturally inclusive teaching: Is believing that we are em- phasizing diversity enough? Journal of Diversity in Higher Education, 2, 63-77. Fairlie, R. W. (2005). Are we really a nation online? Ethnic and racial disparities in access to tech- nology and their consequences. Santa Cruz, CA: University of California. Fisher, K. E., Durrance, J. C., & Hinton, M. B. (2004). Information grounds and the use of need- based services by immigrants in Queens, New York: A context-based, outcome evaluation ap- proach. Journal of the American Society of Infor- mation Science and Technology, 55, 754-766. Fisher, K. E., Marcoux, E., Miller, L. S., S&nchez, A., & Cunningham, E. R. (2004). Information behaviour of migrant Hispanic farm workers and their families in the Pacific Northwest. Infor- mation Research, 10('). Retrieved from: http:// informationr.net/ir/ 1 0- 1 /paper 1 99.html Fisher, K. E., & Naumer, C. M. (2005). Informa- tion grounds: Theoretical basis and empirical findings on information flow in social settings. In A. Spink, & C. Cole (Eds.), New directions in human information behavior (pp. 93-1 1 1 ). Neth- erlands: Springer. Fox, S., & Livingston, G. (2007). Latinos online: Hispanics with lower levels of education and English proficiency remain largely disconnected from the Internet. Washington, DC: Pew Inter- net and American Life Project. Retrieved from: http://www.pewinternet.org Francis, L. P., & Silvers, A. (Eds.). (2000). Ameri- cans with disabilities: Exploring implications of the law for individuals with disabilities. New York, NY: Routledge. Franklin, R. E., & Jaeger, P. T. (2007). A decade of doctorates: An examination of dissertations written by African American females in Library and Information Studies 1993-2003. Journal of Education for Library and Information Science, 48(31 187-201. Franklin, R. E., & Jaeger, P. T. (2009). Defining the virtuous circle: Building frameworks to increase iSchool doctoral student diversity. Paper pre- sented at the 2009 Future of iSchool Education Workshop, University of Maryland. Fultz, M. (2006). Black public libraries in the south in the era of de jure segregation. Libraries & the Cultural Record, 41, 337-359. Gehner, J. (2010). Libraries, low income people, and social exclusion. Public Library Quarterly, 29 , 39-47. Gibson, M. (1977). Preparing librarians to serve handicapped individuals. Journal of Education for Librarianship, 18, 123. Gleason, E. A. (1941). The southern Negro and the public library. Chicago, IL: University of Chi- cago Press. Gollop, C. J. (1999). Library and information sci- ence education: Preparing future librarians for a multicultural society. College and Research Li- braries, 60(4), 385-395. Hayden, C. D. (2004). Reaching out to the under- served. American Libraries, 35(3), 5.
1 80 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE Hersberger, J. (2002). Are the economically poor information poor? Does the digital divide affect the homeless and information access? Canadian Journal of Information and Library Science, 27(3), 45-63. Hersberger, J. (2003). A qualitative approach to ex- amining information transfer via social networks among homeless populations. New Review of In- formation Behaviour Research , 4, 63-78. Hindes, Y., & Mather, J. (2007). Inclusive educa- tion at the postsecondary level: Attitudes of stu- dents and professors. Exceptionality Education Canada 77(1), 107-128. Hoffman, D. L., & Novak, T. P. (1998). Bridging the racial divide on the Internet. Science, 280, 390-391. Horrigan, J. B. (2008). Home broadband adoption 2008: Adoption stalls for low-income Americans even as many broadband users opt for premium services that give them more speed. Washington, D.C.: Pew Internet and American Life Project. Retrieved from http://www.pewinternet.Org/~/ media//Fi!es/Reports/2008/PIP_Broadband_ 2008.pdf Horrigan, J. B. (2009). Obama 's online opportuni- ties II: If you build it, will they log on? Washing- ton, D.C.: Pew Internet and American Life Proj- ect. Retrieved from http://www.pewinternet.0rg/-/ media//Files/Reports/2009/PIP_Broadband% 20Barriers.pdf Hughes-Hassell, S., & Cox, E. J. (2010). Inside board books: Representations of people of color. Library Quarterly, 80 , 21 1-230. Ingle, G. M. (2006). How not to diversify the cam- pus work force. Chronicle of Higher Education, 55(6), 25. Izzo, M. v., Murray, A., & Novak, J. (2008). The faculty perspective on universal design for learn- ing. Journal of Postsecondary Education and Disability, 2/(2), 60-72. Jaeger, P. T. (2009). Persons with disabilities and intergenerational universal usability. Interac- tions, 16(3), 66-67. Jaeger, P. T., & Bertot, J. C. (2009). E-government education in public libraries: New service roles and expanding social responsibilities. Journal of Education for Library and Information Science, 50 , 40-50. Jaeger, P. T., Bertot, J. C., & Franklin, R. E. (2010). Diversity, inclusion, and underrepresented popu- lations in LIS research. Library Quarterly, 80, 175-181. Jaeger, P. T., & Burnett, G. (2010). Information worlds: Social context, technology, & informa- tion behavior in the age of the Internet. London: Routledge. Jaeger, P. T., & Franklin, R. E. (2007). The virtuous circle: Diversifying LIS faculties to create more inclusive library services and outreach. Educa- tion Libraries, 30(1), 20-26. Jaeger, P. T., & Thompson, K. M. (2003). E-gov- ernment around the world: Lessons, challenges, and new directions. Government Information Quarterly, 20(4), 389-394. Jaeger, P. T., & Thompson, K. M. (2004). Social information behavior and the democratic pro- cess: Information poverty, normative behavior, and electronic government in the United States. Library & Information Science Research, 26(1), 94-107. Jones, C. S. (1974). Reflections on library service to the disadvantaged. Chicago, IL: American Li- brary Association. Jones, D. (1999). The definition of diversity: Two views: A more inclusive definition. Journal of Li- brary Administration, 27(1/2), 5-15. Josey, E. J. (1970). The black librarian in America. Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press. Josey, E. J. (1993). The challenges of cultural di- versity in the recruitment of faculty and students from diverse backgrounds. Journal of Educa- tion for Library and Information Science, 34, 302-311. Josey, E. J. (1999). Diversity: Social and politi- cal barriers. Journal of Library Administration, 27(1/2), 191-201. Josey, E. J., & DeLoach, M. L. (2000). Handbook of black librarianship (2nd ed.). Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press. Kim, K-S., & Sin, S. J. (2006). Recruiting and retaining students of color in LIS programs: Perspectives of library and information profes- sionals. Journal of Education for Library and Information Science, 47( 2), 81-95. Kim, K-S., & Sin, S. J. (2008). Increasing ethnic diversity in LIS: Strategies suggested by librar- ians of color. Library Quarterly, 75(2), 153-177. Kinney, B. (2010). The Internet, public libraries, and the digital divide. Public Library Quarterly, 29, 104-161. Lance, K. C. (2005). Racial and ethnic diversity of U.S. library workers. American Libraries, 36(5), 41-43. Lenhart, A., Rainie, L., Fox, S., Horrigan, J., & Spooner, T. (2000). Who's not online: 57% of those without Internet access say they do not plan to log on. Washington, DC: Pew Internet and American Life Project. Retrieved from: http:// www.pewinternet.org Livingston, G. (2010). The Latino digital divide: The native born versus the foreign born. Wash- ington, DC: Pew Internet and American Life Project. Retrieved from: http://www.pewinternet. org
Diversity and LIS Education: Inclusion and the Age of Information 181 Lynch, M. J. (2000). What we now know about li- braries. American Libraries, 31(2). 8-9. Lyons, C. (2007). The library: A distinct local voice? First Monday, 12(3). Retrieved from: http://www.uic.edu/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index. php/fm/article/view/1629/1 544 Malone, C. K. (2000). Toward a multicultural American public library history. Libraries & Cul- ture, 35, 77-87. Manoff, M. (2001). The symbolic meaning of li- braries in a digital age. Portal: Libraries and the Academy, 7,371-381. Maxey-Harris, C. (2010). Multicultural e-resources: An exploratory study of resources held by ARL libraries. Behavioral & Social Sciences Librar- ian, 29( 1 ), 65-80. McCook, K. d. I. P. (2000). Introduction. Library Trends, 49( 1), 1-5. McCook, K. d. I. P., & Geist, P. (1993). Diversity deferred: Where are the minority librarians? Li- brary Journal, 7/5(18), 35-38. McCook, K. d. I. P., & Lippincott, K. (1997). Li- brary schools and diversity: Who makes the grade? Library Journal, 122(1), 30-32. McGarvey, K. (2007). A new look at diversity. Rochester Review, 69(3). Retrieved from: http:// www.rochester.edu/pr/Review/V69N3/feature 1 . html McHatton, P. A., Keller, H., Shircliffe, B., & Zala- quett, C. (2009). Examining efforts to infuse di- versity within one college of education. Journal of Diversity in Higher Education, 2, 127-135. Mehra. B., & Braquet, D. (2007). Library and in- formation science professionals as community action researchers in an academic setting: Top ten directions to further institutional change for people of diverse sexual orientations and gender identities. Library Trends, 56 , 542-565. Mehra, B., & Srinivasan, R. (2007). The library- community convergence framework for commu- nity action. Libri, 57(3), 123-139. Mestre, L. (2010). Librarians serving diverse popu- lations: Challenges and opportunities. Chicago, IL: ALA Editions. Morello, C. (2010, May 9). Suburbs taking on more diverse look. Washington Post, CI, CI. Musmann, K. (1998). The ugly side of librarian- ship: Segregation in library services from 1900 to 1950. In J. M. Tucker (Ed.), Untold stories: Civil rights, libraries, and black librarianship (pp. 78- 92). Champaign, IL: University of Illinois. Neely, T. Y. (2005). Minority student recruitment in LIS education: New profiles for success. In M. B. Wheeler (Ed.), Unfinished business: Race, equity, and diversity in library and information science education, pp. 93-1 18. Lantham, MD: Scarecrow Press. Nicholas, D., Rowlands, I., Jubb, M., & Jamali, H. R. (in press). The impact of the economic down- turn on libraries: With special reference to uni- versity libraries. Journal of Academic Librarian- ship. Nilsen, K. (2004). LIS education for multicultural- ism and diversity. Feliciter, 50( 1), 17-18. Norris, P. (200 1 ). Digital divide: Civic engagement, information poverty and the Internet worldwide. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and De- velopment. (2000). Understanding the digital di- vide. Retrieved from: htto://www.oecd.ore Overall, P. M. (2009). Cultural competence: A con- ceptual framework for library and information science professionals. Library Quarterly, 79, 175-204. Pawley, C. (2006). Unequal legacies: Race and multiculturalism in the LIS curriculum. Library Quarterly, 76, 149-168. Penny, T. (2008, August 14). U.S. white popula- tion will be minority by 2042, government says. Bloomberg News. Retrieved from: http://www. bloomberg.com Peterson, L. (1999). The definition of diversity: Two views: A more specific definition. Journal of Library Administration, 2 7( 1 /2), 1 7-26. Piercy, F., Giddings, V., Allen, K., Dixon, B., Meszaros, P., & Joest. K. (2005). Improving campus climate to support faculty diversity and retention: A pilot program for new faculty. Inno- vative Higher Education, 30( 1 ), 53-66. Rettig, J. (2009). Once in a lifetime. American Li- braries. Retrieved from: http://americanlibra- reismagazine.org/columns/junejuly-2009/once- lifetime Shachaf, P. (2008). Cultural diversity and informa- tion and communication technology impacts on global virtual teams: An exploratory study. Infor- mation & Management, 45 , 131-142. Shachaf, P., & Horowitz, S. (2006). Are virtual ref- erence service color blind? Library & Informa- tion Science Research, 28 , 501-520. Shachaf, P., Oltmann, S. M., & Horowitz, S. (2008). Service equality in virtual reference. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 59, 535-550. Shachaf, P., & Snyder, M. (2007). The relationship between cultural diversity and user needs in vir- tual reference services. Journal of Academic Li- brarianship, 33, 361-367. Simoni, J. M., Sexton-Radek, K., Yescavage, K., Richard, H., & Lundquist, A. (1999). Teaching diversity: Experiences and recommendations of American Psychological Association Division 2 members. Teaching of Psychology, 26, 89-95. Smith, D. G., & Moreno, J. F. (2006). Hiring the
1 82 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE next generation of professors: Will myths remain excuses? Chronicle of Higher Education, 53(6), 22. Spooner, T., Meredith, P., & Rainie, L. (2003). Re- gional variations in Internet use mirror differenc- es in educational and income levels. Washington, DC: Pew Internet and American Life Project. Re- trieved from: http://www.pewinternet.org Spooner, T., Rainie, L., & Meredith, P. (2001). Asian-Americans and the Internet: The young and the connected. Washington, DC: Pew Inter- net and American Life Project. Retrieved from: http://www.pewinternet.org Srinivasan, R. (2006a). Where information society and community voice intersect. Information So- ciety, 22, 355-365. Srinivasan, R. (2006b). Indigenous, ethnic and cul- tural articulations of new media. International Journal of Cultural Studies, 9, 497-518. Srinivasan, R. (2007). Ethnomethodological archi- tectures: Information systems driven by cultural and community visions. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 58, 723-733. Stevenson, K. C. (1991). Annette Lewis Phinazee and the North Carolina Central University School of Library and Information Science, 1970-1983. In B. F. Spellers (Ed.), Educating black librar- ians (pp. 1 13-140). Jefferson, NC: McFarland & Company. Subramaniam, M., & Jaeger, P. T. (2010). Model- ing inclusive practice?: Attracting diverse faculty and future faculty to the information workforce. Library Trends, 59(1/2), 109-127. Tisdale, S. (1997). Silence, please: The public li- brary as entertainment center. Harper's Maga- zine, March, 65-73. Totten, H. L. (2000). Ethnic diversity in library schools: Completing the education cycle. Texas Library Journal, 76( 1), 16-19. Trent, S. D., Kea, C. D., & Oh, K. (2008). Prepar- ing preservice educators for cultural diversity: How far have we come? Exceptional Children, 74 , 328-350. Turner, C. S. V., Gonzalez, J. C., & Wood, J. L. (2008). Faculty of color in academe: What 20 years of literature tells us. Journal of Diversity in Higher Education, I, 139-168. Umbach, P. D. (2006). The contribution of faculty of color to undergraduate education. Research in Higher Education, 47(3), 317-345. U.S. Census Bureau. (2005). Texas becomes na- tion's newest "majority-minority" state. Wash- ington DC: Author. Retrieved from: http://www. census.gov U.S. Census Bureau. (2007). More than 300 coun- ties now "majority-minority ." Washington DC: Author. Retrieved from: http://www.census.gov Van Sant, W. (2009, June 8). Librarians now add social work to their resumes. St. Petersburg Times. Retrieved from: http://www.tampabay. com/ Vie, S. (2008). Digital divide 2.0: "Generation M" and online social networking sites in the compo- sition classroom. Computers and Composition, 25(1), 9-23. Wallace, D. P., & Naidoo, J. (Eds.). (2010). Library and information science education statistical re- port 2009. Chicago: Association for Library and Information Science Education. Walling, L. L. (2004). Educating students to serve information seekers with disabilities. Journal of Education for Library & Information Science, 45, 137-148. Weimar, M. (1990). Improving college teaching: Strategies for developing instructional effective- ness. San Francisco, CA: Josey-Bass. Welbourne, J. C. (1994). Achieving black eco- nomic self-reliance: The urban public library strengthens the economic base of its commu- nity. In E. J. Josey (Ed.), The black librarian in America revisited (pp. 122-132). Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow. Welburn, W. C. (1999). Multicultural curriculum in higher education. Journal of Library Administra- tion, 27(1/2), 157-169. Wheeler, M. B. (2005a). Foreword. In M. B. Wheel- er (Ed.), Unfinished business: Race, equity, and diversity in library and information science edu- cation (pp. vii-ix). Lantham, MD: Scarecrow Press. Wheeler, M. B. (2005a). Faculty development and cultural diversity in teaching: LIS education's last frontier. In M. B. Wheeler (Ed.), Unfinished business: Race, equity, and diversity in library and information science education (pp. 181- 192). Lantham, MD: Scarecrow Press. White, K. L., & Gilliland, A. J. (2010). Promoting reflexivity and inclusivity in archival education, research, and practice. Library Quarterly, 80, 231-248. Whitmire, E. (1999). Racial differences in the aca- demic library experiences of undergraduates. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 25(1), 33-37. Whitmire, E. (2001). The relationship between undergraduates' background characteristics and college experiences and their academic library use. College & Research Libraries, 62, 528-540. Whitmire, E. (2003). Cultural diversity and under- graduates' academic library use. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 29(3), 148-161. Winston, M. (1998). The role of recruitment in
Diversity and LIS Education: Inclusion and the Age of Information 1 83 achieving goals related to diversity. College and Research Libraries , 59(3), 240-247. Winston, M., & Walstad, K. (2006). Recruitment and diversity: A research study of bilingual ism and library services. Library & Information Sci- ence Research, 28 , 390-406. ZefT, R. (2007). Universal design across the curriculum. New Directions for Higher Education , 137 , 27-44. Zoe, L. R., & DiMartino, D. (2001). Cultural diver- sity and end-user searching: An analysis by gen- der and language background. Research Strate- gies, 17 , 291-305.