I want to put forward a speculative thesis: that the ideology of the Library of Congress’s decorative program is a reflection of the teachings and humanitarian tenets of Unitarianism. I have come to this curious belief, having spent many years writing on Gilded Age mural painting and studying and lecturing on the library’s varied decorative programs. Of all the large‐scale architectural projects of that spectacular age, the Library of Congress with its elaborate mural and sculptural programs remains the most impressive. It was a grand undertaking and included the efforts of numerous architects, designers, and workmen and the contribution of fifty‐five sculptors and painters. When it opened in 1897, it was the most talked about building in America. Thousands thronged to see its public spaces, and newspapers and critics acclaimed it as a monument to civilization.2 At some point in my study of this remarkable building, I began to compare it to European monuments, particularly the Vatican. As is well known, the Vatican, in addition to housing one of the world’s great libraries, is embellished with murals by the leading artists of Italy, most notably Michelangelo and Raphael. The Vatican of the Renaissance also housed the government offices of the Papal States, in a way analogous to the U.S. Capitol and its attendant library, and served as an important model both functionally and decoratively for America’s new national library.3 Artists of the Gilded Age were so inspired and enamored of the Italian Cinquecento that they dubbed the era in which the Library of Congress was built the American Renaissance. Ideologically, however, what informs the decoration of the Vatican is Roman Catholicism—the state religion of Italy, then and now. Could this also be true for the United States? Was there, I wondered, a “state religion” that might be said to govern the decoration of the Library of Congress, and was it possible that the state religion represented on the walls of the Library of Congress, particularly the reading room rotunda, was Unitarian? I came to this peculiar argument through marriage. My husband, of forty‐some years, is both a Harvard graduate and a Unitarian, and I continued my fascination with Harvard men in my graduate work on William Morris Hunt, who was also a Unitarian and a member of the Harvard class of 1847. In a monograph on Hunt, I concluded that it was the impress of Unitarianism’s secular faith on civic culture that influenced his mural program for the Albany statehouse. Hunt’s large‐scale lunettes completed in 1878, The Flight of Night and The Discoverer, are among the earliest mural paintings done for a public building by an American artist, and they ushered in an era of American mural painting that saw its earliest flowering in the program for the Library of Congress. Since then, I have fleshed out my ideas, identifying ways in which the cultural ambitions of Boston Unitarians became nationalized and were reflected in the concept and construction of the Library of Congress. My inquiry, albeit cursory, is supported by the work of the literary historian Lawrence Buell and the writings of several important Unitarian figures that, over the course of the nineteenth century, evolved a vision of American culture reflective of a devotion to “the Gospel of literature and art” [3, p. 416]. The commitment to this gospel is visited by Buell in his article “The Literary Significance of the Unitarian Movement,” which begins with a quotation from Barrett Wendell’s early twentieth‐century A Literary History of America in which Wendell writes, “almost everybody who attained literary distinction in New England during the nineteenth century was either a Unitarian or closely associated with Unitarian influences” [4, p. 163]. And further along Buell quotes George Willis Cooke’s contemporaneous Unitarianism in America, “for it is the Unitarian writers who have most truly interpreted American institutions and American ideals” [4, p. 164]. Buell wants to discount the claims of these authors as “artifacts of late‐century Brahmin ethno‐centrism,” yet he cannot discount the support Unitarians gave to American art and literature as their means of raising “ethical consciousness” [4, p. 165]. Significantly, these summaries of the influence of Unitarianism were written simultaneously with the opening of the Library of Congress. Exemplifying this commitment is a heterodox group of writers and thinkers from the Boston area, all of whom were Unitarians: Thomas Bulfinch (1796–1867), mythologist; George Bancroft (1800–91), historian; Ralph Waldo Emerson (1803–82), essayist and philosopher; James Freeman Clarke (1810–88), minister and religious leader; Charles Eliot (1834–1926), university president; and the one outlander but resident of New England, Justin Morrill (1810–98), politician. The first four had direct bearing on Hunt’s choice of subject matter and in a larger sense influenced a desire for a national library that was materially aided by Eliot and Morrill. The stature today of the Library of Congress was summarized recently by John Y. Cole, librarian and historian of the Library of Congress: it is “an unparalleled world library. The scope of its collections is universal and not limited by subject format, or national boundary. Half of its collections are in languages other than English, and approximately 460 languages are represented. … This huge and diverse accumulation includes larger Arabic and Hispanic American collections than exist in the Arabic world and or in Latin America and the largest Chinese, Japanese, Korean, Polish and Russian collections outside of those respective countries” [5, p. 385]. Where did this ambition come from: an ambition to create virtually overnight a world‐class library housed in a grand beaux arts building replete with an array of paintings and sculptures executed by a new generation of American artists? The answer to this question, I believe, resides in a consideration of my earlier assertion of the outlandish idea that Unitarianism is a state religion of America. What originally led me to my thesis was the appearance of Anahita, a Persian goddess and Zoroastrian deity, the improbable central figure of William Morris Hunt’s mural, The Flight of Night (fig. 1). As far as can be determined, Hunt’s rendering is the only known image of her in Western art. Hunt began his obsession with Anahita as early as the 1850s and over the next thirty years created charcoal and watercolor studies, paintings, and a sculptured relief that culminated in the Albany mural. The figure of Anahita is based on a poem of the same title that William, when a student in Paris, received from his brother Levitt, who had discovered it while he was studying in Heidelberg, which, at the time, was a renowned center for the study of Near Eastern culture and languages. As described in the poem (which was translated from a Persian poem by an unknown, perhaps Sufi, poet), Anahita is “enthroned upon her car of light … circling down the lofty heights of heaven” [6, p. 152]. Glancing warily to her left in anticipation of dawn’s arrival, she urges forward three horses who charge across the late night sky. All are elements that Hunt incorporates into his painting. Fig. 1.— William Morris Hunt, study for The Flight of Night, ca. 1878. Oil and chalk on canvas, \documentclass{aastex} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{bm} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{pifont} \usepackage{stmaryrd} \usepackage{textcomp} \usepackage{portland,xspace} \usepackage{amsmath,amsxtra} \usepackage[OT2,OT1]{fontenc} \newcommand\cyr{ \renewcommand\rmdefault{wncyr} \renewcommand\sfdefault{wncyss} \renewcommand\encodingdefault{OT2} \normalfont \selectfont} \DeclareTextFontCommand{\textcyr}{\cyr} \pagestyle{empty} \DeclareMathSizes{10}{9}{7}{6} \begin{document} \landscape $62\times 99$ \end{document} inches. Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. How can we account for Hunt’s choice of such an obscure subject for the Albany statehouse and an American audience? What would the public of this era have understood the mural to mean? This is not a trivial question since Hunt’s painting was the first civic mural done by an American artist in the United States and as such received a great deal of public attention and garnered lengthy discussions in contemporary newspapers, which were both learned and complimentary of Hunt’s achievement. In 1855, Thomas Bulfinch, whose father was the architect Charles Bulfinch and whose brother was the Unitarian theologian Stephen Greenleaf Bulfinch, published his Age of Fable, which was later incorporated into Bulfinch’s Mythology, which is still in print today.4 So closely associated is his name with the writing of mythology that the man himself has been lost. Few are aware that he was an American and a Unitarian and that his works were published midcentury in Boston. His intent was to popularize mythology so that “the reader of English literature, of either sex, who wishes to comprehend the allusions so frequently made by public speakers, lecturers, essayists, and poets, and those which occur in polite conversation” could do so, and to this end, he included references to these legends in literature [7, p. 5]. Further, and this is particularly true of the Age of Fable, Bulfinch expanded the reach of mythology beyond the classic legends of Greek and Rome to include histories of other religions and their deities and stories, including Persia and the story of Zoroaster. Emerson, the leading voice of intellectual culture in the United States, was a proponent of a more inclusive, universal cultural view and admired Persian poetry, as did his Cambridge contemporary Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, so that by the 1870s, and the time of Hunt’s full exploration of the Anahita theme for the Albany state capitol, there were Unitarian writers and thinkers in New England who were similarly involved in placing the American experience within a larger world culture beyond Europe and certainly to include the Middle East. It is a commitment that was extended through the life work of one of the most influential Unitarian thinkers at midcentury, James Freeman Clarke, whose book The Ten Great Religions, an Essay in Comparative Theology (1871) first appeared in 1868 in six installments in the Atlantic Monthly, which Buell asserts was the Boston Unitarians' “most prestigious literary magazine” [4, p. 164]. Clarke served on the state board of education and was a trustee of the Boston Public Library and a stalwart member of Harvard’s Board of Overseers. As a theologian, he devoted a great deal of time establishing a new field of ethnic or comparative religions, a passion that was formalized with the publication of Ten Great Religions. The book’s frontispiece contains an untitled, circular diagram, which has at its center not Christianity but Judaism. Christianity, however, forms the interior of the circle, which is segmented by eight lines. The termination of each line on the diameter of the circle points to a different nation or world religion, including Scandinavia, China, Egypt, Islam, Greece, Buddhism, Brahmanism, and Zoroaster. What is extraordinary about this circle, and Clarke’s book, is that it does not promote the Unitarian faith. Instead, it is a respectful, learned history and explanation of the world’s religious practices, which he likened to the study of “Comparative Geography, with universal history and with ethics.” Furthermore, it was his expectation that comparative theology shows “the relation of each partial religion to human civilization, and observes how each religion of the world is a step in the progress of humanity” [8, p. 3]. As pertains to Zoroastrianism, Clarke considered it as one of the early manifestations of monotheism and thus a break from the polytheism of Greek and Roman religions. One of its central tenets was the concept of dualism that he explained as the eternal fight between good and evil, a conflict symbolized as the clash between Ormazd (light and goodness) and Ahriman (evil and darkness). Anahita (whom he does not mention) was associated with the latter as a symbol of the flight of night before the dawn of enlightenment. Hunt no doubt knew of Clarke’s work since his daughter, Lillian Freeman Clarke, was one of Hunt’s students, and evidence of the painter’s interest, not only in Zoroastrianism but in dualism, is manifest in his murals. The Flight of Night was conceived as a pendant of Hunt’s second mural, The Discoverer (fig. 2), placed on an opposite wall across the broad space of New York’s assembly chamber. In the painting, Christopher Columbus is rendered as a standing, brooding, Hamletlike figure in a small boat guided by four female allegorical figures. An American hero born in the Renaissance, Columbus in the nineteenth century was viewed as the symbol of visionary genius and enlightenment. In contrast, the figure of Anahita represented barbarism and ignorance before the dawn of civilization and was interpreted simultaneously as a Zoroastrian goddess, a seated Aphrodite, or Luna—a figure who combined Near Eastern, Greek, and Roman mythological traditions [6]. By pairing these two personifications—Anahita as a symbol of Europe’s cultural decline and Columbus as America—Hunt suggests that part of Columbus’s mission was the regeneration of Western civilization after centuries of corruption and neglect. Extending this idea of a European connection is Hunt’s employment of a Baroque‐style composition, which was praised as representing a sophisticated understanding of European monumental art and a grand example of an American artist’s ability to adopt its tenets for an American building.5 Fig. 2.— William Morris Hunt, study for The Discoverer, ca. 1878. Oil on canvas, \documentclass{aastex} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{bm} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{pifont} \usepackage{stmaryrd} \usepackage{textcomp} \usepackage{portland,xspace} \usepackage{amsmath,amsxtra} \usepackage[OT2,OT1]{fontenc} \newcommand\cyr{ \renewcommand\rmdefault{wncyr} \renewcommand\sfdefault{wncyss} \renewcommand\encodingdefault{OT2} \normalfont \selectfont} \DeclareTextFontCommand{\textcyr}{\cyr} \pagestyle{empty} \DeclareMathSizes{10}{9}{7}{6} \begin{document} \landscape $64\times 99$ \end{document} inches. Destroyed. To put Hunt’s accomplishment into perspective and to provide insight into the conceptual change in American history painting (from narrative to allegory) that Hunt’s two murals inaugurated—and that culminated in the murals at the Library of Congress—it is necessary to compare his rendering of Columbus with that of John Vanderlyn’s \documentclass{aastex} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{bm} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{pifont} \usepackage{stmaryrd} \usepackage{textcomp} \usepackage{portland,xspace} \usepackage{amsmath,amsxtra} \usepackage[OT2,OT1]{fontenc} \newcommand\cyr{ \renewcommand\rmdefault{wncyr} \renewcommand\sfdefault{wncyss} \renewcommand\encodingdefault{OT2} \normalfont \selectfont} \DeclareTextFontCommand{\textcyr}{\cyr} \pagestyle{empty} \DeclareMathSizes{10}{9}{7}{6} \begin{document} \landscape $12\times 18$ \end{document} –foot painting Landing of Columbus (fig. 3) installed in 1847 in the U.S. Capitol rotunda. Vanderlyn, like Hunt, had been trained in Europe and, along with four other early nineteenth‐century artists, created eight American history paintings in a grand‐manner style for the walls of the Capitol.6 Fig. 3.— John Vanderlyn, Landing of Columbus at the Island of Guanahani, West Indies, October 12th, 1492, 1847. Oil on canvas, \documentclass{aastex} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{bm} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{pifont} \usepackage{stmaryrd} \usepackage{textcomp} \usepackage{portland,xspace} \usepackage{amsmath,amsxtra} \usepackage[OT2,OT1]{fontenc} \newcommand\cyr{ \renewcommand\rmdefault{wncyr} \renewcommand\sfdefault{wncyss} \renewcommand\encodingdefault{OT2} \normalfont \selectfont} \DeclareTextFontCommand{\textcyr}{\cyr} \pagestyle{empty} \DeclareMathSizes{10}{9}{7}{6} \begin{document} \landscape $12\times 18$ \end{document} feet. U.S. Capitol, Washington, DC. Vanderlyn’s Landing of Columbus was emblematic of an era preoccupied with the construction of a national history. It began in earnest in 1834, when George Bancroft, the son of a Unitarian minister and himself president of the American Unitarian Association from 1825 to 1836, published his landmark History of the United States. It was Bancroft’s singular accomplishment to situate the history of the United States within the larger Atlantic World. All of the stories contained in the rotunda paintings can be found in this volume, and all link the American story to its European origins in paintings that include the pilgrims leaving from Holland, the legend of Pocahontas (who famously married an Englishman), the Spanish explorer Hernando De Soto, and, of course, the Italian Christopher Columbus (who sailed for the Spanish Crown).7 But Vanderlyn’s interest in the Columbus myth began even earlier, at the beginning of the century, through his friendship with the poet, diplomat, and Hartford wit Joel Barlow, who in 1787 published his epic poem The Vision of Columbus, which was revised twenty years later as The Columbiad. Both men were living in Paris when Barlow invited Vanderlyn to illustrate a special edition of The Columbiad. While the artist never completed the planned engravings, he returned to the subject when he received the theme of Columbus for the rotunda commission in 1837. By this time, the subject had become part of a national history that was insured by the fiftieth anniversary of the signing of the Declaration of Independence. The pluralism of the Jacksonian era also promoted a more inclusive reading of our early history, a reading that went beyond the recent events of the American Revolution to celebrate historic events and heroes and heroines whose sacrifices and courage prefigured the later establishment of a free nation. Such sentiments also prompted Washington Irving to write his authoritative The Life and Voyages of Christopher Columbus. First published in 1828, it was based on original documents Irving translated when serving as an aide to camp to the American ambassador to Spain. It was Irving’s description of the first landing on the island of Guanahani (now San Salvador), October 12, 1492, that Vanderlyn faithfully recreated (see fig. 3). In the foreground, Columbus is seen slightly to the right of center. Dressed in a red waistcoat and cape like a Spanish grandee, he steps forward and with a rhetorical flourish displays in his left hand the flag of his Spanish sovereigns Ferdinand and Isabella. In his right, his sword is thrust downward, signaling, perhaps, the essentially peaceful nature of his voyage. Immediately behind him, the principal members of his crew assume a variety of expressive poses. Further back, other sailors display surprise, delight, and even greedy opportunism in their mistaken belief that gold covered the ground. Although not visible in figure 3, at the right are naked indigenous natives who gaze in discreet surprise at these mysterious strangers. Vanderlyn, in an attempt at topographical accuracy, includes tropical foliage and brilliantly plumed birds. Thirty years later, William Morris Hunt, like Vanderlyn, painted an image for a public building, but his was vastly different in meaning and follows more closely the symbolic importance Bancroft gave to the voyage of the discoverer. In the opening sentence of his six‐volume opus, Bancroft asserted the voyage's historical importance not only for the United States but for the world: “the enterprise of Columbus, [was] the most memorable maritime enterprise in the history of the world” [11, vol. 1, p. 7]. In contrast to Vanderlyn’s richly detailed tableau of Columbus—surrounded by his soldiers, planting the Spanish flag in the New World—is Hunt’s The Discoverer in which a standing figure dominates a symbolic interpretation of the admiral’s historic voyage.8 The use of allegory in Hunt’s work enabled him to render a more nuanced interpretation of America’s troubled past and, with its pendant The Flight of Night, its millennial future. In Hunt’s painting (The Discoverer; fig. 2), it is dawn somewhere at sea. The brooding figure of Columbus stands in the middle of a small boat. Behind him is the figure of Fortune; in the waves surrounding the front of the boat are the female personifications of Faith, Hope, and Science, the last figure reappearing as the personification of the United States in Edwin Blashfield’s Library of Congress mural. When Hunt’s mural was unveiled, Fortune was described as “a winged figure of fine proportion [who] steers the boat.” The other figures were termed “three naiads, who may be Science, Poetry, Imagination, Art, Hope, Faith, or any other human attributes” [6, p. 181]. A more complete identification of these figures was included in a pamphlet written by Hunt’s wife, Louisa, in 1888, at the time the murals were covered over. She begins her description with Faith, who with her back to the viewer is the foremost of the three. Floating on the crest of a wave, she buries her face in her arm. The most prominent of the three middle figures is Hope, who faces forward supporting herself on the bow, gesturing with her right arm toward the horizon. To her left is Science, who faces Columbus, extending a scroll or map for his consultation. Altogether, this allegorical construction is a highly personal recasting of traditional symbols—Faith, Hope, Science, and Fortune—into a modern meditation on the uncertainties facing the state and country at the end of Reconstruction. Of the four female personifications, only Hope, gesturing toward the New World and the future, offers an optimistic note. In contrast, the other three personifications—Faith, Science, and Fortune—suggest deeper, darker meaning for late nineteenth‐century America. The most poignant is Faith who, unlike the others, hides her face, an unambiguous gesture that suggests both the distrust of Columbus’s adventure and her own decline in power during the nineteenth century as religion was challenged by Darwin’s theory of evolution and by the ascent of the technological age. At the Philadelphia centennial, celebrated only a few years earlier, American society was introduced to some of the most astonishing scientific and engineering miracles of the age—electricity, the steam engine, the telephone—certain challenges to the power of faith as men and women increasingly demonstrated their determination to conquer and control nature. This idea is further reinforced by the nearby presence of Science who, placed nearer the boat, assumes a central role as navigator and guide, suggesting that man’s dependence on science now replaced his earlier one on religious faith. Yet there is a fourth figure, larger and more commanding, who is placed inside the boat and who controls the tiller and the fate of the ship—perhaps the ship of state. This is Fortune, who by her placement and function supersedes both faith and science in the affairs of man and, in the context of the Columbus legend, the fate of civilization. This is to suggest that our destiny is beyond the control of either rational behavior, that is, science, or belief in God. The whole painting, then, is a curious amalgam at once contemplative and despondent that challenges our common assumptions regarding official art: art that we normally imagine should be uplifting and patriotic, containing propagandistic images glorifying the state and promoting the status quo. While Hunt’s painting The Discoverer can be placed in the same continuum with Vanderlyn’s The Discovery of Columbus, the same cannot be said for Hunt’s mural, The Flight of Night, with the Zoroastrian goddess Anahita as its centerpiece. For this source, we must look to the intellectual climate of Boston, where Hunt lived for most of his adult life, and Harvard and Unitarianism. This desire to link the Greco‐Roman tradition to the Orient was a manifestation of much research, historical and philological, undertaken in Boston, often by Unitarians who sought to find commonality among all cultures. These learned amateurs, Emerson and Longfellow among them, were fascinated with the religious literature of India and Hinduism, China and Buddhism, as well as Persia and Zoroastrianism. Their research, whether in person or through books, took them to Germany, particularly Heidelberg, where philological inquires were being conducted that examined the linguistic basis of non‐Western languages and brought into translation an enormous literature previously unknown. For instance, Emerson published in the October 1842 issue of Dial the poem “Saadi” by a Persian poet, and in his Poems, published in 1847, he included a translation from German of “The Book of the Cupbearer” by the poet Hafiz.9 Another example was the poem “Anahita,” which Levitt Hunt sent to his brother William Morris Hunt. Hunt’s New York state murals, therefore, I contend, serve as precedent for the mural program for the Library of Congress, which, after Hunt’s Albany undertaking, was the largest permanent decorative project done at the turn of the century. Specifically, I believe that the symbolic program of the Library of Congress represented a desire to link national democratic purpose to world art, world literature, and universal culture and that this ambition, which reflected the aspirations of the library itself, was embedded in the secular worldview held by Unitarians. Furthermore, this speculation helps account for the important shift in iconography from the earlier history paintings and patriotic sculpture of the library’s first home, the U.S. Capitol, to the humanistic content of the library’s turn‐of‐the‐twentieth‐century decorations. The embodiment of this shift is Edwin Blashfield’s collar mural, The Evolution of Civilization (fig. 4), which surrounds the oculus of the dome of the library’s reading room, refining Hunt’s references to Western European and Middle Eastern traditions by linking them to the accomplishments of the United States. Overall, the mural is composed of twelve winged personifications—larger‐than‐life sized, male and female—who sit on a low brick wall. To the right of each figure is a plaque with its designation; below each plaque is a word written on a scroll‐like form indicating the contribution made by the nation or epoch. For instance, to the right of the robed, winged, female figure is a tablet that identifies her as the Middle Ages, below which is a narrow banner that reads, “Modern Languages.” Fig. 4.— Edwin Blashfield, The Evolution of Civilization, 1895–96. Oil on canvas. Collar mural, interior of dome, reading room, Library of Congress, Washington, DC. Courtesy of Library of Congress. The figures are arranged chronologically and, broadly speaking, progress from eastern Mediterranean civilizations, to the Middle Ages, to the Renaissance, and then to various nation‐states—Germany, Spain, England, and France, ending with the United States. Given its central location within the building, it is my contention that Blashfield’s mural is key to an understanding of the library’s entire decorative program. Blashfield’s The Evolution of Civilization, with its allegorical figures representative of world cultures, is a manifestation of an American ambition to situate itself within the context of world culture, which is contrary to regarding American society of the nineteenth century as nativist or parochial. Instead, it is an expansionist view celebrated and promoted in the writings of Boston Unitarians—Bulfinch, Emerson, Longfellow, and Clarke—and reflected in the new graduate curriculum introduced by Charles Eliot at Harvard. Based on a German system of higher education, Harvard’s graduate studies were among the earliest in the nation and propelled the college from a preparatory school for Unitarian ministers to its status as a world‐class university. Other universities would follow at the end of the century: Columbia and New York University. Blashfield’s mural also extends the symbolism of Hunt’s murals in which Europe is represented by Columbus, and the Middle East by the figure of Anahita. His Library of Congress mural also represents an important shift that took place in the concept of civilization, specifically in how the United States conceived the term, during the second half of the century. This shift can be traced through a comparison of Blashfield’s mural to Asher B. Durand’s Progress; or, The Advance of Civilization (fig. 5), painted in 1853 shortly after the installation of Vanderlyn’s rotunda mural. Fig. 5.— Asher B. Durand, Progress; or, The Advance of Civilization, 1853. Oil on canvas, \documentclass{aastex} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{bm} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{pifont} \usepackage{stmaryrd} \usepackage{textcomp} \usepackage{portland,xspace} \usepackage{amsmath,amsxtra} \usepackage[OT2,OT1]{fontenc} \newcommand\cyr{ \renewcommand\rmdefault{wncyr} \renewcommand\sfdefault{wncyss} \renewcommand\encodingdefault{OT2} \normalfont \selectfont} \DeclareTextFontCommand{\textcyr}{\cyr} \pagestyle{empty} \DeclareMathSizes{10}{9}{7}{6} \begin{document} \landscape $48\times 72$ \end{document} inches. Property of the Westervelt Collection and displayed in The Westervelt‐Warner Museum of American Art in Tuscaloosa, AL. In Durand’s painting, the advance of civilization begins on the left in the darkened foreground, where three Native Americans, barely visible at the base of a tall tree, symbolize the wilderness. They view with amazement the activated spectacle of settlement stretched out below them. Situated on the left bank of the harbor, the Native Americans are physically separated from civilization by a forbidding chasm, a waterfall, and a stand of mountains at the water’s edge. The rays of a rising sun barely penetrate their uncultivated aerie. In contrast, civilization is pictured in full sunlight. Given its commission by the railroad magnate Charles Gould, it is not surprising that in the mid‐1850s, progress, which in the painting’s title is linked to civilization, is represented by getting the goods to market by foot, wagon, barge, railroad, and ship. The transport of hay and cattle, along with the plowing of fields, canal traffic, telegraph wires, a church, a train, and in the far distance (discernible in the original) steamboats and factories, marks the course of progress. Durand’s view of American civilization and its expansionist values held sway until at least 1893, when Frederick Jackson Turner read “The Significance of the Frontier in American History” at the World’s Columbian Exposition. As Turner, a lifelong Unitarian, theorized, with the closing of the West, the country needed to find new worlds to conquer. These frontiers were not necessarily territories of the earth but the territories of the mind: science, literature, and the arts. Turner further articulated this idea in an essay written twenty years later: “As we turn from the task of the first rough conquest of the continent there lies before us a whole wealth of unexploited resources in the realm of the spirit [which includes] arts and letters, science and better social creation, loyalty and political service to the commonweal” [13, p. 157]. The establishment of a national library furthered this new concept of civilization and came to serve as the centerpiece for America’s cultural ambitions. In response to this shift in national ambitions from the settlement of new territories to the expansion of the mind, Blashfield reconceived Durand’s familiar trope of civilization—a sunlit vista of settlement and commercial progress, set against the dark, untamed wilderness—as a grand allegory narrated by personifications of the twelve great epochs in human history. In this way, Blashfield’s mural The Evolution of Civilization represented a new concept of civilization that, at the turn of the twentieth century, was embedded in the philosophy of Unitarianism and the library’s vast collections. In the late nineteenth century, Unitarianism, which in response to its devotion to the abolitionist cause had new congregations far beyond New England, was viewed as a practical, humanitarian religion, one that instilled in its followers a dedication to ethical behavior and a commitment to civic duty. While many of us may be vaguely aware of these tenets, it is important to keep in mind that they are nonsectarian and that Unitarianism in its secularization of faith is a radical departure from mainstream American Protestantism. Anti‐Trinitarianism emerged in Europe shortly after Martin Luther’s apostasy in the sixteenth century, and early forms of Unitarianism began to emerge two centuries later in New England in the wake of Calvinist abuses after the Great Awakening. From the beginning, Unitarianism and its early variants—Arminianism and Arianism—advocated toleration, free inquiry, use of reason, and faith in man as the fundamental dictates of their religious practice. These beliefs were also espoused by their contemporaries, the Deists, and were fundamental to the principles articulated in the Declaration of Independence. And it might be said that Unitarianism is the religion most compatible with the evolution of a democratic nation—in sum an ideal religion for a modern civilization. This assertion is somewhat verified, if we can trust the listings in Cooke's 1902 Unitarianism in America, written shortly after the establishment of the International Council of Unitarians and consolidation of Unitarianism after the Civil War. Many of the nation’s leading thinkers, historians, and writers were nominally Unitarian: Thomas Jefferson, John Adams, Charles Sumner, Horace Mann, Peter Cooper, Margaret Fuller, Louisa May Alcott, Francis Parkman, William H. Prescott, Oliver Wendell Holmes, Samuel F. B. Morse, William Cullen Bryant, Nathaniel Hawthorne, and Charles Eliot Norton [3]. Blashfield’s painting is the centerpiece of the reading room rotunda, which includes architectural sculpture and wall texts; together they form an integrated artistic program that communicates the library’s purpose and function. Now known as the Thomas Jefferson Building, the 1897 structure was built opposite the east side of the Capitol and is today one of three buildings that house the Library of Congress. The original building’s exterior is relatively plain, exemplifying a restrained, schooled reference to Italian Renaissance architecture [14]. The building’s interior, modeled on the Charles Garnier’s Paris Opéra, is another story. No expense was spared in the acquisition of prized marbles, ornamental tile work, and gilded plaster, as well as mosaics, paintings, and sculpture. Prized among others were the multiple personifications and allegories created by a team of muralists with subjects appropriate for a library, such as John White Alexander’s The Evolution of the Book. Composed of six lunettes, Alexander’s panels (as do others in the building) relate both to the library’s function and to the evolution of universal knowledge. But even before there were plans for such elaborate decor, there was an overarching ambition to create an encyclopedic national library. But from what set of desires did such an ambition spring? Given the parochial, isolationist history of previous generations, it is surprising that by the end of the nineteenth century the United States had committed itself to creating a library that would compete with the greatest in the world. A cultural itch had emerged in the soul of the Republic, and America wanted to prove that it was indeed the heir to the great Western traditions of Europe and that it was civilized. Ironically, this was also the era in which the United States was expanding its dominion in the Caribbean and the Pacific‐imperialist goals that, while never on the scale of England or Spain, reflected similar European impulses. But also reflective of European impulses was the concept of civilization whose roots were in the English Enlightenment. In Great Britain during the mid to late eighteenth century, the institutions of civilizations—museums, universities, libraries, art societies—were established and royally endowed. This same impulse occurred a century later in the United States, when America’s most famous educational and cultural institutions were created. These include, at random, the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston; the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York City; and the Art Institute of Chicago; Johns Hopkins and Stanford universities; the University of Chicago; and the transformation of Harvard, Columbia, and New York universities, among others, from colleges to PhD‐granting research universities. After the public success of the architectural and decorative programs of the 1893 World’s Columbian Exposition Court of Honor, national societies of sculptors and mural painters were formed, as well as municipal art societies and garden clubs. One‐third of the artists who participated in the decorative programs at Chicago’s World Columbian Exposition went on to participate in the decoration of the Library of Congress, including the sculptors Theodore Baur, Daniel Chester French, Frederick MacMonnies, Philip Martiny, Edward Clark Potter, Bela Pratt, Augustus Saint‐Gaudens and his brother Louis, and Olin Levi Warner, as well as the painters Edwin Blashfield, Kenyon Cox, William de Leftwich Dodge, George W. Maynard, Walter McEwen, Gari Melchers, Robert Reid, Walter Shirlaw, and Edward Simmons.10 Their combined efforts helped establish and perpetuate a new national visual culture and contributed to the country’s efforts to represent an American civilization. By century’s end, the United States could demonstrate to Europe that we were the “new dispensation,” the rightful inheritor of Western culture, and the keeper of the flame of the Enlightenment ideal.11 These ambitions were first articulated by the Deist (or Unitarian, depending on what biographer is cited) Thomas Jefferson, who donated his library to the federal government for use by Congress since as he said, “there is, in fact no subject to which a member of Congress may not have occasion to refer” [5, p. 386]. The library’s expanded mission can be credited to Vermont Senator Justin Morrill and Ainsworth Spofford, who was the chief librarian in 1870, when the Library of Congress was still located in the Capitol. Morrill, a Unitarian, was the powerful and popular chairman of the Senate Committee on Buildings and Grounds and took immense pride in the appearance of the Capitol Building and its surroundings. It was Morrill who lobbied to create a new library building, not a temporary extension, on the Capitol’s east side. In the 1870s, the congressional library collection, intended as legislative reference, was unexceptional and undistinguished. This was the same year, however, that the nation’s copyright law was enacted, with the requirement that two copies of all registered materials had to be deposited with the Library of Congress. Books began to spill out of its small rooms on the second floor of the Senate wing, and the need for more space was imperative. Morrill and Spofford seized this opportunity to create a national library, an institution that Spofford believed, and Morrill no doubt seconded, with its “centralized accumulation of knowledge, was a necessity for an enlightened nation” [16, p. 472]. Over the next thirty years, this ambition became nothing less than the creation of a library that today ranks with the great national libraries of the world. Morrill, who was the author of the historic Land Grant College Act in 1862 and oversaw the completion of the Washington Monument for the Capitol Mall, had been a Unitarian all of his adult life and was committed to a program of national popular education and the expansion of knowledge. These ambitions were not articulated architecturally until 1888, when General Thomas Lincoln Casey replaced the original architectural firm, Smithmeyer and Pelz. Casey was the confident and able chief of the Army Corps of Engineers who had recently overseen the successful completion of the long‐delayed Washington Monument. It was feared at the time that given Casey’s lack of architectural training, the library was destined to become yet another boring monument to the bureaucratic bottom line. Yet the appointments of Casey and his assistant Superintendent Bernard Green and, in 1892, his son, Edward Pearce Casey, would lead over the next ten years to a dramatic change in the development of the building’s architectural ornamentation, interior decoration, and symbolic meaning. When completed, even before there were tables and chairs for readers or books on the shelves, its interior grandeur attracted 1,500 visitors a day. But what inspired this commitment to both beauty and utility in a federal building? While the elder Casey oversaw the speedy completion of the building, it was Green (the Harvard graduate and Unitarian) and Casey’s son, Edward (trained at the École des Beaux‐Arts), who spearheaded plans for the elaborate interior decoration of the building. Beginning with the first meeting in 1894 with representatives of the newly formed National Sculpture Society—John Quincy Adams Ward, Augustus Saint‐Gaudens, and Olin Warner—both Caseys and Green committed themselves to hiring professionally trained American artists to contribute to the building’s decoration. Over the next three years, twenty sculptors, twenty‐three painters, and seven decorator/craftsmen were hired for the job that was finished in record time. The Library of Congress then became the first official building in the United States to fully assimilate the French beaux arts ideal of the integration of painting, sculpture, and architecture. Based on principles of classic design promulgated at the École des Beaux‐Arts in Paris, it became the defining style of the American Renaissance when it was unveiled at the World’s Columbian Exposition in 1893. This aesthetic had a profound impact on the design of civic buildings and city planning for the next fifty years, including the design of the Library of Congress. And many of the artists—muralists and sculptors alike—associated with the fair were called on to contribute to the decoration of the nation’s library. From all accounts, Casey the younger and Bernard Green maintained a highly successful collaboration. Casey contributed the design knowledge he had gained from his study in Europe; Green contributed the ideological commitment that reflected his Unitarian background. In addition to being a civil engineer, Green was also an active member of All Soul’s Church in Washington, a Sunday school superintendent, and a member of the American Unitarian Association and the Unitarian Club. In other words, he was well indoctrinated into the ethos of this pragmatic, freethinking religion—one that instilled in its followers a dedication to ethical behavior and a commitment to civic duty instead of a blind faith in church dogma—in a mold similar to that of his indirect boss, Morrill. Before discussing what bearing these assertions might have on the building’s decorative program, I want to start with a description of the rotunda, which of all the areas of the building contains the richest and most complex iconographic scheme. The rotunda is physically and symbolically the heart of the building. On entering this octagonal‐shaped room, one is impressed by its soaring height and the glowing colors of ivory‐tinted plaster, golden marbles, and the gilded interior of the dome that rises 125 feet above the galley floor. One hundred feet in diameter, the rotunda is encircled by eight heavy arches that spring from massive piers, which together support the high dome. Atop each pier are tinted plaster statues representing a “characteristic feature of civilized life and thought” [14, p. 72], above which are inscriptions chosen by Harvard’s then president, Charles Eliot. Below them, and perched on a wide balustrade, are sixteen bronze figures in sets of two that represent “men illustrious in the various forms of thought and activity” [14, p. 64]. Surmounting all is the mural by Edwin Blashfield, The Evolution of Civilization (fig. 4), which surrounds the oculus of the dome. The iconography of the rotunda is articulated by four interrelated programs. The first is Blashfield’s twelve personifications of the world’s leading civilizations, which according to Herbert Small, author of the first (and still the best) guidebook to the Library of Congress murals, “represent the 12 countries, or epochs, which have contributed most to the development of present‐day civilization in this country” [14, p. 72]. The other three programs include Eliot’s eight inscriptions and their authors, the eight sculptural personifications of important aspects of civilized life and thought, and the sixteen portrait sculptures of “typical representatives of human development and culture.” It is within this context that Blashfield’s mural The Evolution of Civilization can be understood as a summary of the idea that the United States, by the end of the nineteenth century, considered itself to be among those “peoples who,” in Small’s words, “have most contributed to the world’s intellectual development” or one among equals [14, p. 72]. The mural begins (fig. 6) with the image of Egypt, who represents “written records” or the beginning of written history, as opposed to the prehistoric or oral tradition. This idea is expanded through Blashfield’s addition of hieroglyphics on the cartouche Egypt holds in his left hand. It is the personal seal of King Mena, who is regarded as the first Egyptian king mentioned in the historic record. History is further represented by the placement of papyrus rolls in the vessel to the figure’s right. Egypt also holds symbols of the culture’s belief in the immortality of the soul, as seen in the image of the Tau, or cross, and the winged ball between his legs. Fig. 6.— Edwin Blashfield, America, Egypt, Judea, detail from The Evolution of Civilization, 1895–96 (see fig. 4). Proceeding chronologically, the next figure (partially visible on fig. 6) is the female personification of Judea, whose contribution is religion. Blashfield underscores this idea through the woman’s raised arms, which are meant as a gesture of supplication. Beneath her robes is the ephod, or vestment, worn by the high priests, on which are inscribed the names of the Twelve Tribes of Israel. Beyond Judea is Greece, with the attribute of philosophy.12 Her figure is an enlarged representation of a Tanagra figure. The lamp to her right and the scroll in her lap are emblems of wisdom, while her diadem could be a reference to “Athens and the Mother of Philosophy” [14, p. 73]. Next in line is the image of Rome, dressed as a centurion, with the attribute of administration. In Small’s words, “The whole conception is that of the just but inexorable administration of Rome founded upon the power of its arms. One foot is planted upon the lower drum of a marble column, signifying stability. His right arm rests upon the fasces, or bundle of rods, the typical emblem of the Roman power and rule. In his right hand he holds the baton of command” [14, p. 73]. Rome is followed by Islam, who represents physics and more broadly science since the figure is presumably consulting a book, barely seen on the left, that contains mathematical calculations. At his feet is a glass retort, an emblem of chemistry. The Middle Ages, which were thought to span the period from the fall of the Roman Empire to the discovery of America, are represented as a robed female figure, with the contribution of modern languages, or the evolution from Latin as the official language of Europe to the later emergence and dominance of Teutonic languages. The figure also has a sword, a casque, or helmet, while at her left is a model of a Gothic cathedral, below which is the papal crown and the keys of St. Peter, collectively signifying, in Small’s words, “medieval devotion and the power of the Church” [14, p. 74]. Next in line is Italy, the Italy of the Renaissance, whose designation is the fine arts. She is shown with symbols of four of them. Painting is represented by the palette she holds in her left hand and by the brush in her right. Sculpture is represented by the model of Michelangelo’s David to her left, architecture by the composite column, and music by a violin; the latter two are at her feet. Succeeding Italy is Germany, representative of the art of printing, a contribution with particular significance for a library. Germany is a printer who examines proof sheets just pulled from the press behind him. Supplementing this image are an ink roller and a stack of paper on which he rests his feet. Moving on, we come to Spain, who is regaled as a conquistador and is emblematic of discovery. He wears a crested helmet and a leather jerkin and has two swords near to hand. His right hand is on a tiller, behind him is a globe, and at his feet is a model of a sixteenth‐century caravel. In Blashfield’s mural, discovery is an achievement of Spain, rather than a defining trope of American exceptionalism as rendered in Vanderlyn’s Landing of Columbus or as an allegorical link to a European past in Hunt’s The Discoverer. England is next, a female figure dressed in Elizabethan costume that represents literature. In her lap is the title page of the first edition of A Midsummer Night’s Dream. To her left is France, an emblem of emancipation, dressed in the “characteristic garb of the First Republic” [14, p. 75]—a jacket with a tricolor scarf and liberty cap with cockade. She holds in her left hand a scroll with the words “Les Droits de l’Homme,” the Rights of Man adopted by the French Assembly in 1789. Surrounding her are the martial emblems needed to maintain these rights: the cannon and the sword. Symbolic of calling the troops to arms are the bugle and the drum under her right arm. It is surprising that it was France and not the United States who illustrated liberty. Instead, Blashfield believed science was our most distinguished contribution to civilization. America is not personified as a female but rather as an engineer (fig. 6) clad in the costume of a workman, a mechanic. At his feet is a dynamo, the machine that would later inspire Henry Adams to equate the might and mystery of technological advancement with the power and spirituality of the Virgin Mary.13 But how can we account for this enormous shift in the concept of civilization from the 1850s to the 1890s that my earlier comparison of Durand’s painting and Blashfield’s mural underscores? And how do we explain Blashfield’s use of the word “evolution” in his title? While Darwin’s evolutionary theory may be one source, Blashfield’s view of civilization is one that it is cumulative and assimilative, not progressive, meaning that Blashfield’s conception cannot be seen as a more primitive society being superseded by one that is more advanced. Underscoring this interpretation is the mural’s nonhierarchical, circular format in which Blashfield’s mural presents, for instance, the United States as Science, not in triumphant ascendancy but as one nation among equals. Blashfield has not created a hierarchal scheme in which civilization advances—the older trope of Durand. Instead, his mural details the contribution each era makes to the evolution of civilization. His new concept is an outgrowth of a more nuanced reading of Darwin and the new findings of anthropology and the behavioral sciences and, I might add, the egalitarianism and house‐of‐many‐rooms approach to human experience and religious faith of Unitarianism. Blashfield, however, was not a Unitarian, but before moving to Paris to train with the French academic painter and muralist Léon Bonnat, he had studied briefly with Hunt in Boston. Of all the late nineteenth‐century muralists, it is Blashfield who furthered Hunt’s legacy, extending it to the establishment of a national art and the creation of modern, secular subject matter for mural painting.14 In addition to being an articulate advocate for American mural painting, Blashfield was also an impassioned promoter of what was termed at the time as “municipal art” and of collaboration between artists and architects, devoting an entire chapter to the topic in his 1913 book, Mural Painting in America [19]. The various principles and ideals that he articulates there (which were based on a series of public lectures he gave at the Art Institute of Chicago) were learned firsthand through his participation in the decoration of the Library of Congress. And it is in the rotunda, where his collar mural serves as the capstone, that the integration of the arts of painting, sculpture, and architecture finds its first and fullest expression in the United States. Midway between Blashfield’s collar mural and the floor, and clustered around the richly ornamented circular arcade, are the three other components of the rotunda’s iconographic program. Below it, on the balustrade, are sixteen larger‐than‐life‐sized bronze sculptures of philosophers, authors, scientists, historians, inventors, and so on. In between and above these sculptures are eight plaster personifications of symbolic statues or personifications of religion, commerce, history, art, philosophy, poetry, law, and science. Surmounting both the human figures and the personifications are eight large tablets with inscriptions chosen by Eliot. Closest to Blashfield’s mural, the inscriptions amplify but do not directly correlate with Blashfield’s cosmology. They do, however, relate directly to the personifications below them. Again, starting on the east is a quote from James Russell Lowell, which is placed above the representation of art based on a sketch by Augustus Saint‐Gaudens. A citation from Alfred Lord Tennyson is above the image of history by Daniel Chester French. And a passage on the East India trade by the seventeenth‐century English economist Dudley North is above the personification of commerce by John Flanagan. The other personifications are religion, science, law, poetry, and philosophy. Knitting together and augmenting these seemingly disparate figures and ideas are the sixteen bronze sculptures placed on the balcony’s balustrade. They are paired not within their respective sections but with their counterparts on the other side of a given pier. For instance, starting on the east, the cycle begins with Beethoven, who appears on the same section of balustrade as Plato. Yet in fact he is linked to Michelangelo on the other side of the clustered column underneath the representation of art. Seemingly disparate groupings, the figures are paired, ancient and modern: Michelangelo and Beethoven; the Greek Herodotus and Edward Gibbon, the eighteenth‐century British historian; Columbus and the American Robert Fulton, inventor of the steamboat; Moses (Old Testament) and St. Paul (New Testament); Sir Isaac Newton and Joseph Henry, a scientist and first secretary of the Smithsonian; the Greek jurist Solon and Chancellor James Kent, a nineteenth‐century legal scholar who wrote Commentaries on American Law; Homer and Shakespeare; and Plato and Bacon. The older generations of artist, historian, explorer, prophet, natural philosopher, statesman, and poet provide the inspiration and foundation on which successive generations of musician, writer, inventor, saint, scientist, jurist, playwright, and thinker built. Collectively, they manifest the ascension of thought and creativity from the corporeal representation of a given category of knowledge or creativity to a personification of the category. Crowning both the material and the symbolic is the text or word, the product of human thought and inspiration. The entire program has an intellectual nuance that we no longer understand or can appreciate, but altogether these figures represented modern civilization. But what did the concept of civilization mean in the Gilded Age, and where did this rather grand ambition come from? And to return to an earlier question, why was it important for the United States to envision itself as a civilized nation, one among equals? How was the study of early history, religion, philosophy, science, foreign languages, fine arts, literature, and government—embodied both in Blashfield’s mural and the collections of the Library of Congress—linked to national purpose? The institution more than any other that promoted Unitarian thought was Harvard. While never explicitly claimed, Harvard was the nation’s unofficial university, and it was Unitarian in the same way that Yale was Congregationalist or Columbia, Episcopalian. Throughout the nineteenth century, the history of American Unitarianism was intertwined with the history of Harvard, and its post–Civil War president, Charles Eliot, was the most admired educational leader in America. Eliot’s presidency, which he assumed in 1869, marked a new era not just for the university but for American education—from elementary schools to graduate schools. From the beginning, he advocated the value of a liberal arts education in contrast to centuries‐old theological training. Furthermore, liberal arts, as defined by Eliot, included the humanities and the sciences. He was also a leader in the newly formed National Education Association, founded to improve the standards of the county’s elementary and secondary educational systems. To advance his ideas, he lectured and published extensively, including an address he gave in 1896 (titled “Five American Contributions to Civilization”), which was published later that year in the Atlantic Monthly and then served as the title piece for a collection of his essays published a year later (coincident with the opening of the Library of Congress). Eliot began his inquiry by enumerating the contributions of various cultures and nations over the past “forty centuries of history” in a manner roughly consonant with the organization of Blashfield’s mural program: “The Hebrew race … made supreme contributions to religious thought [Judea]; and the Greek, … to superlative philosophy, architecture, sculpture and drama [philosophy]. … The Roman people [centurion] developed military colonization, aqueducts, roads and bridges, and a great body of public law … the Italians … developed … the fine arts [symbols of the palette, brush, and Michelangelo’s David]. … England … contributed … representative government and public justice … France … taught the doctrine of individual freedom [emblem of emancipation]” [20, pp. 1–2]. After this brief summary, Eliot then went on to detail America’s contribution but does so within a surprising and deeply moving context that is not referenced in Blashfield’s work or in the accompanying rotunda decorations. The context is Eliot’s intensely felt and forcefully expressed antiwar sentiments, and it was his belief that the greatest contribution made by the United States was “the abandonment of war as the means of settling disputes between nations” [20, p. 2]. While it is easy to quarrel with his assertion, it forms the basis of an important conceptual shift in the image of the hero. Eliot contended that there were those who believed that “war develops certain noble qualities,” which he countered by asserting that “modern social and industrial life affords ample opportunities for the courageous and loyal discharge of duty” [20, pp. 9, 11]. His premier example of a modern hero was “the locomotive engineer, the electric lineman, the railroad brakeman, the city fireman, and the policeman” [20, p. 12]. In other words, the exemplary American contributor to modern civilization is Blashfield’s engineer.15 A more direct contribution made by Eliot to the embellishment of the rotunda were eight quotations that were inscribed on the marble plaques placed on pendentives right below the string course of the dome. So in a sense, Harvard/Unitarian ideals are literally embedded in the walls of the Library of Congress. Obviously, more work needs to be done to flesh out my hypothesis. Specifically, a more detailed assessment needs to be made in order to limn the influence of Unitarian thought on the cultural and social achievements of the Gilded Age. And more exploration of the interconnections of the various historical and allegorical figures and inscriptions on the rotunda walls is needed. But I want to return to and clarify my assertion that Unitarianism is America’s state religion. What I do not mean is that the Unitarians are imposing their non‐Trinitarian theology on this most Christian of nations. Rather, it is their devotion to reason, free inquiry, education, and science, which at the end of the nineteenth century included Darwin’s theory of evolution. At the same time, I need to justify the reasons for my choice of such a varied group of artists: Vanderlyn, Durand, Hunt, and Blashfield. This is an assemblage that probably has never been made by historians of American art, yet these were the leading artists of their day. Even Vanderlyn, old and despondent when awarded his Capitol commission, was still admired by his fellow artists, not the least of whom was Durand, who bought Vanderlyn’s most famous painting, Ariadne, when the venerated painter was broke. Durand, after the death of Thomas Cole in 1849, was the leader of the Hudson River School. After the Civil War, Hunt was the most influential painter in Boston, and at the turn of the century, Blashfield became the dean of American mural painting after the death of John La Farge. These were experienced artists attentive to the demands to create an art expressive of a new nation’s highest ideals. In the works cited, they moved beyond the familiar tropes of the American Revolution, finding pictorial means by which to express the aspirations and purpose of a democratic state. Of necessity, they relied on European models—their task was to find new symbols or imbue old ones with new (modern) meaning. Over the course of the century (beginning with Vanderlyn and his fellow artists who were assigned the second rotunda commissions), the European stories of the country’s prerevolutionary past became Americanized. In Durand’s antebellum painting, this nationalistic effort was focused on the landscape that he organized to create, literally, a broad panorama of American progress in which its wilderness state is civilized. Hunt’s murals, with their expression of doubt and uncertainty, challenged the optimism of an earlier era by deploying the language of allegory to illuminate the nation’s coming of age. Blashfield, in his crowning mural for the Library of Congress, incorporated in unexpected ways aspects of all the previous works. The image of the discoverer, as a personification of Spain, is found in Vanderlyn’s and Hunt’s paintings. Blashfield and Durand both tackled the complex idea of civilization—one illuminates its evolution, the other its progress. For Durand, civilization was a by‐product of a market economy and native industry. In contrast, Blashfield's representation of civilization summoned the world’s cultures and their contribution to language, religion, philosophy, the fine arts, exploration, literature, emancipation, and science. By the turn of the twentieth century, “Western Civilization” had become scientifically organized; secularized; and, with the Library of Congress as a case in point, construed as beneficial for the advancement of democracy. Knowledge was no longer the sole province of the church, the monarchy, the nobility, or the wealthy. A founding principle of the Library of Congress was that all knowledge—scientific, literary, historic, and artistic—was to be made available and accessible to the entire nation. It is this ecumenical spirit of the library’s collecting policies that resonates in Unitarian teachings, which in the late nineteenth century urged that “religion be brought into harmony with philosophy and science, and Christianity reconciled with the modern spirit” [3, p. iv]. 2.  The noted architectural critic Russell Sturgis reported, “The interest which this great crowd takes in the decoration of the building, its long and curious study of the details and the evident enjoyment which it takes in the novel spectacle of a building really rich and refined in its decorative character, is an inspiring one to any person who hopes for the growth of a living interest in fine art” [1, p. 298]. 3.  I think that the Hôtel de Ville, or City Hall, in Paris served as a more immediate, modern, secular model. It was completely refurbished in the 1880s with an extensive number of complex mural programs by a variety of academic artists. Many of the artists who participated in the decoration of the Library of Congress trained in Paris with the same artists who created murals for the Hôtel de Ville (see [2]). 4.  Bulfinch’s Mythology is a compilation of three works—The Age of Fable; or, Stories of Gods and Heroes (1855), The Age of Chivalry; or, Legends of King Arthur (1858), and Legends of Charlemagne; or, Romance of the Middle Ages (1863)—compiled by Edward Everett Hale and published posthumously in 1881. 5.  Tragically, Hunt died the same year (1879) the murals were unveiled. Compounding this loss was the discovery, ten years later, of leaks in the roof of New York state’s assembly chamber. Because the damage could not be repaired, a false ceiling was constructed, which effectively concealed The Flight of Night and The Discoverer forever. 6.  The first four works to be installed were by John Trumbull, a New York rival of Vanderlyn’s, whose paintings were based on various incidents relative to the Revolutionary War. Trumbull had hoped to obtain a second commission to furnish paintings for the remaining four panels since he had sketches for seven other subjects, all of which he had been working on since the 1790s when he was in London studying with the dean of British history painting and president of the Royal Academy, the American‐born Benjamin West. Congress, however, delayed in its deliberations, and it was not until 1836 that a joint committee was appointed to “contract with one or more competent American artists for the execution of four historical pictures upon subjects serving to illustrate the discovery of America; the settlement of the United States; the history of the Revolution; or of the adoption of the Constitution. … The subjects to be left to the choice of the artists under the control of the committee” [9, p. 143]. By February 1837, four artists had been selected: John Vanderlyn, Robert Weir, Henry Inman, and John Gadsby Chapman. In addition to Vanderlyn’s Columbus, which was installed in 1847, there were Weir’s Embarkation of the Pilgrims at Delft Haven Holland, July 22nd, 1620, installed in 1843, and Chapman’s Baptism of Pocahontas at Jamestown, Virginia, 1613, installed in 1840. Inman, who had proposed a painting based on the adventures of Daniel Boone, died before he completed his work and was replaced by the westerner William H. Powell, whose Discovery of the Mississippi by De Soto, A.D. 1541 was installed in 1855. 7.  George Bancroft’s multivolume History of the United States was begun in 1834. Bancroft was a Harvard graduate, member of the Harvard faculty, and a Unitarian (see [10]). 8.  Hunt had, in fact, painted (a decade earlier) a standing image of Hamlet, in an almost identical pose [5, fig. 74]. 9.  See [12], p. 4701. It should also be noted that Zoroaster is mentioned throughout Hafiz’s poem. 10.  Frederick MacMonnies and Daniel Chester French contributed full‐scale sculpture for the basin of the Court of Honor, while Baur, Pratt, and Potter (who also created animal sculpture for the fairgrounds) collaborated with French on the peristyle at the basin’s east end. Karl Bitter and Dodge contributed to the decoration of Richard Morris Hunt’s Administration Building, while Augustus Saint‐Gaudens, Martiny, and Maynard collaborated with the architectural firm of McKim, Mead, and White on the decoration of the Agricultural Building. George B. Post’s Manufactures and Liberal Arts Building had by far the greatest number of painters: Blashfield, Cox, McEwen, Melchers, Reid, Shirlaw, and Simmons. Martiny and Warner also created sculpture for Charles Atwood’s Palace of Fine Arts. 11.  The term “new dispensation,” as regards the appearance of mural painting in American buildings, was used by the architectural critic Henry Van Brunt in an article written after the unveiling of John La Farge’s work at Trinity Church, Boston, and William Morris Hunt’s murals at the Albany statehouse [15]. 12.  Greece (and Blashfield's mural subjects described in subsequent paragraphs) is not visible in this article's figures. 13.  Adams devoted an entire chapter to this subject in The Education of Henry Adams [17, pp. 379–90]. 14.  Blashfield's ideas concerning the role of mural painting in American were first articulated in an article [18] at the time he was working on his Library of Congress mural and continued in subsequent talks, articles, and books. 15.  The other contributions made by America to civilization are religious toleration, manhood suffrage, ethnic diversity (in Eliot’s words, “the welcoming of newcomers” [20, p. 34]), and the “diffusion of national well being” [20, p. 33].