"DEUCEDLY INDEPENDENT": A BIOGRAPHICAL OVERVIEW OF THE LIBRARY CAREER OF ELEANOR WEIR WELCH Karen A. Schmidt' Historical analyses of women in the library profession in the United States generally revolve around discussions of those best known to the field: for example, Isadore Mudge, Linda Eastman, and Katharine Sharp. This biographi- cal essay on Eleanor Weir Welch, an Illinois academic librarian most active in the second quarter of this century, broadens our understanding of women in the library profession by examining the career of a lesser-known figure who yet emerges as a librarian of substantial achievement. Introduction "She has not the temperamental fitness for the exercise of large au- thoritative control over a mixed staff ... is not in touch with the world of affairs . . . is distinctly unbusinesslike . . . shuns rather than courts responsibility ... is conservative and afraid of legitimate experiments ... [and] lacks originality . .. and a sense of proportion and the power of taking a large impersonal view of things." Reporting the results of a survey of one hundred libraries and women's positions therein, Salom6 Fairchild found in 1904 that women were perceived to lack those posi- tive characteristics that would assure them success and positions of authority [1, p. 160]. Indeed, women librarians seem historically to have been defined more by what they were not than by what they were or could be. Dewey noted that women were handicapped by a lack of mobility, delicate physique, emotionalism, a willingness to work for less pay, and conservatism. Even with good health, business training, and permanence of plans, he main- 1. University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Library, Acquisitions, Room 246D, 1408 W. Gregory Drive, Urbana, Illinois 61801. [Library Quarterly, vol. 55, no. 3, pp. 300-315] K 1985 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-25 19/85/5503-0004$0 1.00 300
ELEANOR WEIR WELCH 301 tained, a woman "will still usually have to accept something less than men because of the consideration which she exacts and deserves on account of her sex" [2, p. 91]. Putnam proposed that women were "limited by some prejudice in favor of that other sex. If this exists, it can only be due to convictions based on observation and experience." He exhorted women to adopt manliness (the absence of which causes women "to be peevish toward the smaller ills") and a sense of propor- tion, to develop the inventive faculty, to show initiative, and to be dynamic [3, p. 91]. Women were portrayed as natural children's librari- ans but unnatural administrators. Women librarians who have been chronicled in the traditional histor- ical literature, luminaries such as Katharine Sharp, Isadore Mudge, and Linda Eastman, sometimes are viewed as exceptional women, able by some massive effort to overcome the innate female weaknesses and excel despite themselves. But what of those women not in the vanguard of the library profession? Are they unknown because they could not overcome the deficits brought by their sex, or were they, too, successful in their own right, with work lesser known but still worthy and useful? The example of a little-known figure, Eleanor Weir Welch, who was a librarian for forty-two years from 1917 to 1959, documents the profes- sional life of a woman who, though not famous, was, nonetheless, a person of achievement. Clearly, the image of women librarians some- times put forth-as delicate and emotional-did not characterize Welch. Welch achieved success in her areas of interest, academic library administration and teacher-librarian training. She rarely vacillated, usu- ally spoke her mind, and had creditable business sense, a firm philoso- phy of librarianship, and a good deal of spirit and common sense. Much of this spirit was still in evidence in interviews with her, and one senses with what success she pursued her career when one talks to her col- leagues. One may reasonably suppose that Welch was not atypical; certainly she does not view herself as such. If anything, she might be thought to epitomize the characteristics of a bright and motivated woman of the period. The fact that her successes were limited and local, and her career not of national significance, only serves to underscore the value of reviewing her accomplishments. Grotzinger has pointed out that the paucity of historical material on women librarians should not be judged as being indicative of the contributions or strengths of women in the profession [4, p. 141]. Welch may well exemplify the thousands of librarians who never have been, and never will be, Deweys or Sharps or Searses but whose very real personal successes fill out the history of librarianship.
302 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Early Years: Becoming a Librarian Eleanor Weir Welch was born in 1892 in Summerset, Iowa, to Robert L. and Annie Eleanor Weir Welch. Her father, a minister, seems to have encouraged her intellectual bent and love of study and reading. Her first library memory was of a close family friend, a Miss Humphries, who was a librarian in Redlands, California, and whom Welch credits with first introducing her to the idea of a woman becoming a librarian. One of the new breed of educated women, Welch received her bachelor's degree in German cum laude from Monmouth College in Illinois in 1914. Following the pattern of most educated young women of the period, she began teaching high school language courses in Iowa, first in Allerton for a year, then in Mount Ayr, where she had moved with her family. "I was a teacher because it was the thing you did when you finished college," she recalled. "And I got awful bored with it. It was the same thing; you studied and read more and read more and read more and your pupils couldn't keep up with you ... at least they didn't; they could have but they didn't" [5]. While teaching at Mount Ayr, she first showed an interest in librari- anship by making assessments of items that the public library there needed. A friend there assisted her, put her in touch with the American Library Association to purchase library aids, and introduced her to Dewey's work. To advance in the teaching profession, perhaps to teach on a university level where students were better motivated, Welch knew that she would have to study German much more thoroughly. She also knew that a teaching career was not what she wanted. Her interest in the Mount Ayr Public Library gained her the post of librarian there in 1917. By 1919 she had enrolled in the New York School at Albany, and her career in librarianship had begun. "I went to Albany. I just felt it was the school to go to, it was the first one and I decided I'd go under Dewey and I just wrote and applied and to my amazement I was admitted." The Albany school at that time was one of only three library education programs in the country that de- manded a college degree of its applicants for admission [6, p. 192]. Actually, Dewey was no longer associated with the school, but he had left his mark there, and his name seems to have been a continuing attraction to students. At the time Welch entered Albany, library education was undergoing significant changes. The Williamson report had not yet been written, but the problems it identified were being addressed. The division between clerical and professional duties was just beginning to be distinguished in library course work; the majority of classes dealt with details and tech- niques and very little theory. As Brand and others have noted, the
ELEANOR WEIR WELCH 303 divorce from Columbia University that preceded the creation of the Albany school did not change the program content, which was techni- cally oriented, lacked a theoretical basis, and suffered from a nonacademic environment [7, p. 36]. It is hard to imagine that Welch would have been intellectually stimulated by the work there. She remem- bers that the fifty people in her class studied "just the things you do when you're going to be a librarian ... cataloging ... and classification and so forth" [5]. Yet the zealousness of the library profession at this time still seems to have been imparted to Welch, as her later work shows. Welch stayed at the Albany school for one year, returning in 1925 to finish her course work and earn her certificate. In 1920 she accepted a position as head librarian at the Wisconsin State Teachers College at Stevens Point, where she stayed until 1929. In these intervening years she returned for more library education, probably attending courses throughout the summer months at Columbia University, where she earned her M.S.L.S. in 1928. Both Minnie Sears and Isadore Mudge, whom Welch knew well at Columbia, must have been important influences on her philosophy and practice of librarianship. Sears in particular seems to have imparted a love of cataloging and an understanding of its role in library use; Welch would later choose to teach cataloging, and she was decidedly particular in recruiting catalogers to work at the Illinois State Normal University Library. Move to Illinois State Normal University Columbia gave Welch a solid basis in library education and the philoso- phy of librarianship. In the summers of 1928 and 1931, she was a visiting lecturer in library education at McGill University, but teaching was not her first choice. By this time in her life, she was ready for new challenges. Through meetings of the American Library Association (ALA) she had become acquainted with Gertrude Andrews, who was an assistant librarian at the Illinois State Normal University in Normal, Illinois. In 1928, the Normal University had lost its librarian of thirty- nine years with the death of Angeline V. Milner. Andrews was acting librarian in 1928 and came to the ALA annual conference in West Baden, Indiana, seeking a replacement for Milner. Welch's family had moved to Paxton, Illinois, by that time. With the family move, and the prospect of a greater challenge and more money, she agreed to come to Normal for an interview. President David Felmley, she remembers, "looked at me and said, 'Huh! You're not very big, are you?' I said, 'Do you have to be?'" [5].
304 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY In 1929, when Welch first came to ISNU, the library was housed in rooms over the gymnasium. It contained some 50,000 volumes, em- ployed five full-time staff members-none of them formally trained librarians-and was open sixty hours a week. This library had been created in 1889, at the insistence of the students, by uniting the Wright- onian and Philadelphian society libraries as well as a number of class- room collections. At the suggestion of the university president, a perma- nent position of librarian was established, and in 1890 the first incum- bent was appointed, Angeline V. Milner (or "Ange."-with a period-as she was universally known in speech and in print). Milner was a life-long resident of Bloomington who, through family friendships, was allowed to attend biology classes in Normal. This background enabled her to be chosen by the university first to mount specimens for the natural history museum on campus, later to produce a catalog of the museum's scientific books, and finally to be appointed the first librarian. She had no formal college education or professional training. Describing Milner's career in later years, Welch documents the fact that she relied on articles from the Library Journal, guidance from public librarians in the area, and library institutes to provide her with the needed expertise [8, p. 182]. Her application of these aids brought to the library a variety of different ideas and projects, including a bibliographic instruction program begun in 1892, a children's library collection, and an assortment of audiovisual material, including stereographs, pictures, and slides. In contrast, Welch could claim both a formal college education and extensive training in librarianship. She brought a different spirit and special knowledge to the library that was to bring it forward as a more active center of the university. Although the library had already been defined conceptually when Welch assumed the directorship in 1929, the changes she made in administrative practices and in library policies amply justified her formal training and prior experience. It is difficult to reconstruct just how Welch proceeded to improve on the library's strengths, to correct weaknesses, and to initiate her own ideas (for a summary of the library's growth during her tenure, see App. A). One of her first tasks was to retrieve from the university president's office the responsibility for reviewing and approving every book order generated by the library. She placed book selection in the hands of the faculty and library staff, filling in gaps in important areas, selecting whole collections in other areas. Building what she felt was a basic collection, within four years Welch had increased the book stock by over 20,000 titles. Meanwhile, she also encouraged the use of the library, so much so that her reports tell of library rooms desperately over- crowded but popular, with "students ... sitting on the window sills and . . . books piled in every possible place" [8, p. 187].
ELEANOR WEIR WELCH 305 Another task to which she quickly applied herself was the establish- ment of the laboratory school library. The laboratory school was an important and popular concept in teacher-training institutions. Librar- ies serving these schools allowed children the advantage of choosing among an array of topics and reading levels. Teachers, too, benefited from observation of reading habits and the opportunity for guiding students' selections. When Welch came to ISNU, there was a well- established laboratory school, but no space available in the library for a children's room. ISNU faculty and teachers in training chose a few books each week for the laboratory school classes, allowing each child to read one book per week. Faculty frequently complained that this situa- tion prevented them from supervising students' reading adequately. A separate children's collection in the library, which elementary students could visit on a regular basis, would have been enough to alleviate the problem. Welch went one better; she established a library within the laboratory school itself and then sought funding for a librarian to staff it [9]. The establishment of a laboratory school library was only one part of a larger effort on Welch's part to upgrade the library. Another of her first concerns was the comparison of the library holdings, expenditures, and services with nationally established standards provided by the American Association of Teachers Colleges. Although ISNU had satisfied accredi- tation standards when inspected in 1929, Welch found the library falling behind in materials budget and staffing levels. Although she rarely used her annual reports to the president to report more than statistical growth, in 1931 Welch began a campaign in her reports to upgrade university support of the library. Typical of her nature, when one report did not produce results, another followed. In her 1934 annual report, she protested that "ISNU is the only teacher's college in Illinois without a trained children's librarian who is especially fitted to direct reading tendencies among the pupils of the practice school, to direct library club work and to connect the library with the various practice schools" [9]. A special report to the president in 1935 identified not only those areas that Welch felt needed attention but also potential solutions, including means for increasing the materials budget in specific areas [10]. Welch's report was a succinct statistical presentation of facts. It must have been well received: her 1936 annual report shows a more than $3,000 in- crease in the materials budget, with a new laboratory school librarian administering a collection of 5,044 volumes [11]. Other areas of library administration and policy received the same sort of attention from Welch. In 1935, while concentrating on building the collection, she also devised ways of assuring balanced growth. She had encouraged teaching faculty to take an active role in selecting titles
306 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY for the library but felt there needed to be an allocation of the materials budget to prevent some areas from growing too quickly and others from suffering neglect. She presented the president with an analysis of the materials budget based on number of students and courses, types of classes, relative cost of books by subject, and anticipated course growth. Although not a revolutionary concept in library circles, it did represent a new approach for ISNU, where previously titles had been bought on a demand basis, with little guidance from the library or university admin- istration. Her proposal was accepted and implemented in the new fiscal year. The success of Welch's administration in collection development and budget increases highlighted the need for a library adequate to serve the needs of the university. ISNU had never had a building devoted solely to library use, although the need for one had been there even before Welch's arrival. She again used her annual report as a tool for expres- sing this need. Her written campaign this time was couched in under- statement; the 1934 annual report stated simply, "The need for a new building for library purposes only is too obvious to need comment" [9]. If lengthy memoranda were written detailing the problem, they do not now exist in the archives. It is not hard to imagine that she simply let the condition of the library speak for itself. Funding for the building finally came in 1937, with $300,000 appro- priated by the Illinois State Legislature and a further $245,000 provided by the federal government through a Public Works Administration grant [12, p. 1066]. When planning for the building, Welch was in her element. In anticipation of the funds being granted, Welch spent much of 1936 surveying academic libraries across the country, seeking the best library design for ISNU. She liked the layout and size of the Massachu- setts State College Library at Amherst and corresponded with the librar- ian, B. Wood. "I will probably take advantage of your kindness and write to you several times if the plans for the building materialize. Since we are a State Institution it will probably mean that we will have a State Ar- chitect to do the planning, and it remains to be seen how much the library will be considered" [13]. Library plans were submitted in May of 1938, and she considered every detail carefully, submitting specific com- ments and criticisms throughout each phase. She worked closely with the Library Bureau in purchasing every item of furnishing, and wrote to colleagues across the country seeking advice on flooring, lighting, traffic patterns, and furniture. When selecting chairs, she invited students to try out various styles for comfort and durability [14]. The final product made Welch and the university proud. Dedicated in 1939 to the memory of Ange. Milner, Milner Library was then a lovely Georgian building erected on the campus quadrangle. Built to house 180,000 volumes, it
ELEANOR WEIR WELCH 307 was designed so that stack additions could be added easily in the future. Welch was justifiably proud, as her several articles on the building show (see App. B). The building and its thoughtful details epitomized Welch's bent for careful planning and foresight. "The library," she wrote in 1940, "became a true college library. While it was to be the least expen- sive of the state college 'new' libraries, its influence in use of color and design and its special services has been felt throughout the colleges of the midwest" [8, p. 189]. The activity to which she was most devoted was the establishment of a library science program at ISNU. Ever since the late 1920s, when ALA's Board of Education for Librarianship (BEL) converted the fifth-year library degree from a master's to a bachelor's degree, teacher-librarian training had posed a controversy. The BEL decision, based on a recom- mendation offered by the Association of American Universities, caused confusion over what constituted professional and what paraprofessional degrees and particularly engendered discussions in the literature on teacher-librarian training [15, p. 2101. With the years of experience at teacher-training institutions, Welch seemed to harbor little confusion herself on the matter. She had long recognized that teachers often obtained positions in which they were called on to provide library service of some sort. The program of bibliographic instruction created by Ange. Milner may have been adequate for aiding in the use of the college library, but it failed to provide the needed information on the establish- ment and maintenance of school library collections. If teachers pursued graduate education, it usually was not in library science; hence, Welch believed, the teachers and, as a result, the school libraries suffered from a general ignorance of library practice [16, p. 7]. Her program in library science began informally and, as with most of her other projects, as a clearly defined need in an annual report. She first requested aid to teach university courses in bibliography, librari- anship, and the use of books and the library in 1934 [9]. It appears she taught a few courses herself for some years. By 1940, she had hired a librarian to teach library science courses exclusively. By 1948, the courses had become instrumental to teacher training, not only through her own efforts, but also because teacher-training standards were recog- nizing the value of such training. Welch had by then succeeded in making library science a minor for a bachelor's degree, with eight to ten courses taught throughout the year. By 1958, the program had grown to such popularity that it was made a major field of study. Reminiscent of her own experiences as a student in the early part of the century, when as much emphasis was given to the personal characteristics of librarians as to their skill, the design of the program was pure Welch. Teacher librarians, she insisted, should have, among other characteristics,
308 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY "poised graciousness and acceptable good manners ... enthusiasm for and belief in their profession . . . a sense of relative values . .. [and] a desire to continue learning." In addition to regular library science stud- ies, the major should provide "an appreciation of the arts ... hoping the student will be inspired to continue study . . . [and] give the fundamen- tals of science, the intellectual, cultural and social development of west- ern civilization, [and the] ability to speak in public" [ 17]. Although never intended to compete with or replace the library science master's pro- grams in the state, the teacher-librarian program under Welch's direc- tion was rigorous, so much so that she once admitted that "perhaps she was expecting too much from her people" [18]. In the early years of the program, in recognition of her own time constraints and shortcomings, Welch had the foresight to hire the respected Illinois librarian Eunice Speer to direct the program and was able to work out a system of articulation with the library degree program at the University of Illinois at Urbana library school. In another important area, personnel, Welch realized improvements and laid the groundwork for future successes of new librarians. She had started at ISNU with a staff of four untrained library workers; within ten years she had added five professionally trained librarians. Although she did this at the cost of losing nonprofessional staff, it appears she felt the library's strength lay in its high-level professional staff. Students were in abundance then as a result of federal programs and state-funded work scholarships, and she used this less expensive labor effectively. By the time she left, the library employed eleven librarians, four support staff, and many students. Except for Welch's appointment in 1929 as an assistant professor, no other librarian enjoyed faculty status at ISNU for several years. An examination of course catalogs indicates that by 1947 Welch had suc- ceeded in getting her librarians the faculty rank of assistant professor. Former ISNU president Robert Bone, whom Welch served from 1957 to her retirement in 1959, recalled that early in his administration he discussed with Welch the rank of Milner librarians [19]. At the time the issue was brought up, he remembered, librarians who had served at least seven years and who held the appropriate graduate degree could be appointed with the rank of assistant professor but could be promoted no further. Subsequent meetings on this issue between Bone and the Teachers College Board-closed meetings with no minutes taken resulted in Welch's promotion to associate professor and the lifting of a salary ceiling on librarian positions. The practice of the board, generally, was to award full faculty status to those holding the doctorate, with only provisional faculty status given to librarians and other less-qualified instructors. Although Welch did not win this point entirely, she did
ELEANOR WEIR WELCH 309 succeed in introducing the concept of librarians as faculty to ISNU and was able to aid her librarians financially. Welch's efforts in this area allowed succeeding library directors to attain for their librarians status equal to that of the teaching faculty. Bone remembered, too, that it was Welch who proposed enhancement of support-staff wages through the Civil Service Commission in Springfield; with his support, she was able to improve staff pay. As a supervisor, she was apparently strict but fair. "What she de- manded of others she herself did," one librarian commented. Welch herself recalls the time that President Fairchild suggested she take some time from work every other day for one of her favorite pastimes, riding her horse, Zephyr. "Justin," she told him, "that's not fair to the other staff members" [5]. Welch seemed to develop a rapport with students as well. Unusual evidence of this can be seen in the war letters to her from former students who worked in the library. During World War II, many of her male students left for Europe and wrote to her regularly. Welch saved a portion of the letters in a file on the library's activities concerning World War 1I. The students wrote to her on every conceivable subject: their fears, their surroundings, and their hopes for the future. "The day I enroll in a library school," wrote one young man in 1944, "I shall really be grateful for all that you have taught me, but I am grateful now, too" [20]. Ever mindful of her library, Welch used this correspondence as an opportunity to get a number of war-related documents from overseas for the library collection, making a special effort to build a collection of propaganda materials. She involved herself in the Illinois War Council's Women Leaders in the War Activities of Illinois and faithfully followed all ALA's suggestions for providing information on the war effort. Bone remembered Welch as a dedicated individual who "was not ambitious for herself but for the library.... One reason I liked her as an administrator is that she didn't hesitate to disagree with me, or argue with me-never unpleasantly, but she would argue with me, and she would sit there and her voice would get-almost emotional, and she would hold on to it [until] a decision was made. I don't think she was ever afraid of me" [19]. Welch had little to fear. She dedicated herself to the ISNU library, establishing needed collections and services and producing a fine build- ing and a creditable library science program. She increased and up- graded the staff and laid the groundwork for many Milner Library features such as the Teaching Materials Center, the Rare Book Room, and an active and continuing Friends of the Library organization. Her retirement in 1959 appears to have been a quiet affair; there is no mention of it in the student newspaper. But Welch was remembered
310 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY fondly by the editors of the 1959 ISNU yearbook for her cry, "We need librarians!" [21, p. 224]. Public Life To her association activities, Welch brought the same sort of persistence and planning as she did to her work at ISNU. Welch's interest in organizational work was limited to those areas that would enhance her understanding and execution of her role as director of Milner Library and to which she felt she had the most to offer. The political power and personal recognition often associated with organizational offices appear to have had little influence on her decision to become involved in any activity. She participated in the work of the Illinois Library Association, the American Library Association, and the American Association of University Professors, most actively during the last two decades of her career. That she delayed such involvement suggests the order of priorities for her professional life; not until she thought her own library was running smoothly did she begin to accept any major assignments within organizations, although the opportunities presented themselves, if for no other reason than by virtue of her title. Her role as library director in a teacher-training institution provided the background for her role in ALA. Within months of coming to ISNU she chaired the ALA Normal School Librarians' Conference's midwinter meeting [22]. But it was not until after 1938, when the ALA Teacher's College Libraries Section became part of the College and Reference Section, that she took a more active role in ALA. She seemed to be one who "accomplish[ed] more by talking than by writing" [23], making use of ALA conferences to recruit new librarians and exchange ideas. Al- ways active in the work of the Teacher's College Libraries Section, in 1942 she accepted the chair of the Libraries of Teacher-Training Insti- tutes Committee ("an awful title," she protested) [24], and her corre- spondence as an officer reveals more of her perceptions of the role of the library, the work to be done, and her approach to life. Coming during World War II, when ALA was not meeting regularly to conduct its business, her committee appointment as chair lasted from 1942 to 1948, much longer than the customary year. "I have found," she wrote to Ben Powell in 1943, "that people are loathe to undertake committee work and special assignments when they know there is no meeting in the summer to which they can report" [24]. True to her concerns at ISNU, one of her major goals as chair of the committee was the establishment of standards for teacher-librarian training. She con- sidered the existing ALA standards "a bit vague and easily stretched to
ELEANOR WEIR WELCH 311 fit any situation. Since there is such a great shortage of teachers and an unusual shortage of people with teacher-librarian training, there will be, doubtless, a greater tendency than usual to put people without any knowledge into library positions in the smaller schools of the United States" [25]. In her role as chair of this committee for so many years, she most frequently was involved in developing programs of substance for those times when the section could meet. She rarely spoke herself but seemed constantly to ferret out others whom she admired to promote interest and discussion on teacher-librarian training. In 1946, she was in charge of the ALA section program and brought in Margie Helm, librarian at Western Kentucky State Teachers College in Bowling Green, as her main speaker. "I hesitate to assign a definite topic to you, but if you could talk on something like this, 'The Teacher College Student Should be a Well-Read Person.' It is impossible to have children in school who will acquire some cultural tastes unless they catch it from their instructor.... It rather provokes me that the usual teaching staff think that the college library can put on a campaign that will produce such people over night, without allowing the student the time and the quiet to acquire a knowledge of the better things" [26]. During the war, College & Research Libraries frequently served as the "conference" in lieu of meetings, and Welch was called on to produce an issue dedicated to the work of her section. The editor, Ernest J. Reece, requested that Welch submit a piece herself for publication; letters to colleagues and to Reece reveal some of her unease in performing "cen- ter stage." When she was first approached, she confessed to her close friend Barcus Tichenor, "I have always felt the disadvantage of having to take research in the college proper and the high school and the elementary school and work over their suggestions to fit teacher college needs, and yet when it comes right down to it I cannot think of topics to discuss" [27]. She settled on the topic "Libraries and the Coming of Workshops," conducted a survey to obtain data, and in March 1944 finally published the article. A survey of Welch's publications shows them to have been concerned exclusively with practice and mostly with her own library setting. Within the state, Welch served her profession on many levels, most notably as the Illinois Library Association vice president (1951-52) and president (1952-53). She was a frequent speaker at statewide meetings on the topic of school library service and teacher-librarian training, but as president she maintained a status quo office, with few innovations or changes. Near the end of her tenure as president, however, she issued her one substantive presidential message on a topic of increasing con- cern to her and to others, censorship. A conservative and censorial atmosphere, attendant on the McCarthy era, had developed. Librarians,
312 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY firm proponents of intellectual freedom by the 1950s, were becoming alarmed. "We can be a strong profession only when all librarians everywhere in every type of library join together," she wrote. "If we share our special knowledge, the profession can go forward. Librarians have given books an important place in our culture-so important that books are being attacked by those who fear a free mind and the disci- pline of individual taste and conscience, and by those who fear that their complacency may be disturbed. In this day of growing community ten- sions, we need more than ever to be one profession of librarians who will stand together so that there can be no premium on ignorance" [28, p. 94]. Through her work with the American Association of University Pro- fessors, Welch also expressed a more general interest in higher educa- tion in Illinois. In 1950 and 1951, Welch served as secretary of the association's Illinois Chapter Committee on the Survey of Higher Educa- tion. Charged with the responsibility of making both general and specific recommendations on the status and direction of higher education in Illinois, the committee, during Welch's tenure, addressed the issue of administrative control. One faction of the committee pushed for a single autonomous board for all institutions in Illinois, another for separate boards for the University of Illinois and for other institutions. Welch fell in with the former group, as was consistent with her desire to eliminate unnecessary duplication of effort and to consolidate and build a board with strength that could obtain for her school the same benefits given to other state institutions [29]. All Welch's activities outside her library had the common thread of supporting in some manner her work at ISNU. If any personal ambi- tions were present, they were secondary considerations only. More than once Welch turned down offices when she felt her library needed her more (see, for example, [30]). Conclusion In many ways, Welch remains an elusive individual, shy in her personal life, reticent about her achievements, but a dedicated and effective librarian. "Deucedly independent," she called herself [5], and indepen- dent she was, listening first and always to the dictates of her own heart. Welch was not a luminary, not in the vanguard of activities, except perhaps in her work with the training of teacher librarians. In this sort of quietly competent professionalism, however, may be found a closer definition of women librarians in the first half of the century. "I tried to make the librarian a person of opinion who knew what ought to be done and did it," Welch said. "I enjoyed it greatly; the whole show I enjoyed.
ELEANOR WEIR WELCH 313 And if I didn't like it, why, I did something. That's all you can do." She recognized the needs of her library and institution and fought for the means to satisfy them. She could not easily be classified as a feminist, was never a suffragette, but was aware that society could impose a role on her, a role she seemed to shun. "I felt that a woman had as much ability, and often more, than a man in the position. But I didn't think anything of it; it was just so. Probably I was discriminated against, but I don't think it was so much the fact that I was a woman as the fact that my ideas were discriminated against" [5]. Welch will never be remembered in the same sphere as Mudge, Eastman, or Sharp. Her arena was much smaller and her ideas less than revolutionary. She remains, however, a product of her era. As such she exhibited few of those failings thought common to women of this pe- riod. The story of her solidly successful career suggests that women librarians of her time may have had to struggle not so much with self as with their profession and the environment in which it was practiced. Appendix A GROWTH OF ISNU LIBRARY UNDER WELCH'S ADMINISTRATION NON- PROFESSIONSL PROFESSIONAL STUDENTS STAFF STAFF MATERIALS ENROLLED VOLUMES Employed, Employed, BUDGET (N) (N)* FTE FTE ($) 1929 1,227 50,000 1 4 3,757 1935 1,859 69,917 2 4 7,796 Increase (%) 5 4 ... . .. 107 1939 1,820 90,925 6 2 10,303 Increase (%) 0 4.4 ... ... 32 1949 2,321 147,949 10 3 20,554 Increase (%) 2.8 6 ... ... 99.5 1959 3,424 174,948 1 1 4 36,553 Increase (%) 4.8 1.8 ... ... 78 SOU'RCE.-[31, 321. Figures from annual reports differ from figures provided in other documents. In most cases the annual report figures are lower than those reported elsewhere. Appendix B A Chronological Bibliography of Eleanor Weir Welch "The Training School Library of the State Teachers College: Need and Admin- istration." M.S. thesis, Columbia University, 1928. "Training the Teacher-Librarian." Illinois Libraries 22 (November 1940): 7.
314 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY "Milner Library." Library Journal 65 (December 15, 1940): 1066-67. "Propaganda and the Library." Illinois Libraries 24 (May 1942): 85-86. "War Changes in the College and Their Implications for the Library." Illinois Libraries 25 (January 1943): 56-59. "Libraries and the Coming of Workshops." Colkge & Research Libraries 5 (March 1944): 142-47. "Unlimited Library Service in the Elementary School." Illinois Libraries 31 (Janu- ary 1949): 22-27. "Milner Library." Illinois Libraries 34 (February 1952): 39-43. "A Library Grows Up." Journal of the Illinois State Historical Society 50 (Summer 1957): 176-89. "School Librarians Are Teachers." Illinois Libraries 40 (March 1958): 197-98. REFERENCES 1. Fairchild, Salomk Cutler. "Women in American Libraries." LibraryJournal 29 (Decem- ber 1904): 160. 2. Dewey, Melvil. "Women in Libraries: How They Are Handicapped." Library Notes 1 (October 1886): 89-92. 3. Putnam, Herbert. "The Prospect: An Address before a Graduating Class of Women." Library Journal 37 (December 1912): 651-58. 4. Grotzinger, Laurel. "Biographical Research in Women Librarians: Its Paucity, Perils, and Pleasures." In The Status of Women in Librarianship, edited by Kathleen Heim. New York: Neal-Schuman, 1983. 5. Interview with Eleanor Weir Welch. Bloomington, Illinois, May 17, 1982. 6. Shiflett, Orvin Lee. Origins of American Academic Librarianship. Norwood, N.J.: Ablex, 1981. 7. Brand, Barbara. "Sex-Typing in Education for Librarianship, 1870-1920." In The Status of Women in Librarianship, edited by Kathleen Heim. New York: Neal-Schuman, 1983. 8. Welch, Eleanor Weir. "A Library Grows Up."Journal of the Illinois State Historical Society 50 (Summer 1957): 176-89. 9. Welch, Eleanor Weir. Annual Report to the President. 1934. Illinois State University Archives, Normal, Illinois. Milner Library Papers. File "Library-Annual Reports- 1914-1935." 10. Welch, Eleanor Weir. "Library Budget." Report to the President. Illinois State Univer- sity Archives, Normal, Illinois. Milner Library Papers. File "Library Budget-1923- 1963." 11. Welch, Eleanor Weir. Annual Report to the President. 1936. Illinois State University Archives, Normal, Illinois. Milner Library Papers. File "Library-Annual Reports- 1936-1960." 12. Welch, Eleanor Weir. "Milner Library." LibraryJournal 65 (December 15, 1940): 1066- 67. 13. Welch, Eleanor Weir, to Wood, B. B. July 8, 1937. Illinois State University Archives, Normal, Illinois. Milner Library Papers. File "Library-Building: Correspondence, concerning Building and Equipment, 1937-1941." 14. Welch, Eleanor Weir. Personal Notes on Equipment. Illinois State University Ar- chives, Normal, Illinois. Milner Library Papers. File "Library-Building: Correspon- dence, concerning Building and Equipment, 1937-1941."
ELEANOR WEIR WELCH 315 15. White, Carl M. An Histonrcal Introduction to Library Education: Problems and Progress to 1951. Metuchen, N.J.: Scarecrow Press, 1976. 16. Welch, Eleanor Weir. "Training the Teacher-Librarian." Illinois Libranres 22 (Novem- ber 1940): 7. 17. Welch, Eleanor Weir. Memorandum to the Curriculum Committee. N.d. Illinois State University Archives, Normal, Illinois. Milner Library Papers. File "Library Science- Course Outlines-1958-1965." 18. State College Librarians' Meeting. Minutes. November 1954. Illinois State University Archives, Normal, Illinois. Milner Library Papers. File "Welch, Eleanor W.-State College Librarians." 19. Interview with Robert Bone. Normal, Illinois, September 9, 1982. 20. Bartolini, R. P., to Welch, Eleanor Weir. Postmarked 1944. Illinois State University Archives, Normal, Illinois. Milner Library Papers. File "Welch, Eleanor W.- Correspondence." 21. Illinois State Normal University. Index 1959. Normal: Illinois State Normal University, 1959. 22. ALA Normal School Librarians' Conference Meeting. Minutes. December 30-31, 1929. University of Illinois at Urbana Archives, Urbana, Illinois. ALA Archives. Box 1. 23. Welch, Eleanor Weir, to Schaupp, R. F. January 15, 1957. Illinois State University Archives, Normal, Illinois. Milner Library Papers. File "Welch, Eleanor W.- Correspondence." 24. Welch, Eleanor Weir, to Powell, B. E. May 11, 1943. University of Illinois at Urbana Archives, Urbana, Illinois. ALA Archives. File "A.C.R.L.-Libraries of Teacher- Training Institutes-Correspondence, Programs, Minutes, Papers, Publications." 25. Welch, Eleanor Weir, to Floyd, Mary. February 5, 1943. University of Illinois at Urbana Archives, Urbana, Illinois. ALA Archives. File "A.C.R.L.-Libraries of Teacher-Training Institutes-Correspondence, Programs, Minutes, Papers, Pub- lications." 26. Welch, Eleanor Weir, to Helm, Margie. March 14, 1946. University of Illinois at Urbana Archives, Urbana, Illinois. Archives. File "A.C.R.L.-Libraries of Teacher- Training Institutes-Correspondence, Programs, Minutes, Papers, Publications." 27. Welch, Eleanor Weir, to Tichenor, Barcus. November 10, 1942. University of Illinois at Urbana Archives, Urbana, Illinois. ALA Archives. File "A.C.R.L.-Libraries of Teacher-Training Institutes-Correspondence, Programs, Minutes, Papers, Pub- lications." 28. Welch, Eleanor Weir. "Message from the President." I.L.A. Record 6 (June 1953): 94. 29. AAUP Committee on Survey of Higher Education. Minutes. November 9, 1950. Illinois State University Archives, Normal, Illinois. Milner Library Papers. File "Welch, Eleanor W.-A.A.U.P.-Committee on Higher Education-Illinois-1950- 1951." 30. Welch, Eleanor Weir, to Lancaster, J. H. October 29, 1948. Illinois State University Archives, Normal, Illinois. Milner Library Papers. File "Welch, Eleanor W. A.C.R.L." 31. Welch, Eleanor Weir. Annual Reports to the President. 1929. 1935. Illinois State University Archives, Normal, Illinois. Milner Library Papers. File "Library-Annual Reports- 1914-1935." 32. Welch, Eleanor Weir. Annual Reports to the President. 1939. 1949. 1959. Illinois State University Archives, Normal, Illinois. File "Library-Annual Reports- 1936-1960."