LIBRARY ARCHITECTURE AND BUILDINGS RALPH E. ELLSWORTH rrHuE end of an era in library archi- tecture and building planning, as l symbolized by the dedication of Yale's Sterling Library in 1931, coin- cides with the introduction of the Li- brary Quarterly. Although library ar- chitecture was not a subject for investi- gation in the early years of the Grad- uate Library School, the same spirit that filled the Library Quarterly with new research also revolutionized think- ing about library buildings when grad- uates of the Graduate Library School found themselves in positions at a time when new buildings were being planned. If it can be said that the Library Quarterly symbolized a shift in inter- est from the purely bibliophilic aspects of librarianship to the use and users of libraries, so the new spirit in library architecture shifted from a purely aes- thetic approach to planning to one based primarily on the use and users of buildings. It is almost impossible in the year 1954 to project one's self back into an honest presentation of the spirit of library planning in 1930. To say that a library should be planned to house books and to permit readers to use them under conditions of maximum convenience seems trite in 1954. It was not so in 1930. One art critic summed up the situation as follows: When Messrs. McKim Mead and White "lifted" Labrouste's library of Ste. Genevieve and set it down, somewhat altered in transit, opposite Richardson's Trinity Church in Bos- ton, they may have expressed some modem idea or other, but they did not create a build- ing well adapted to the uses of a library. Nor did Messrs. Carrere and Hastings succeed any better with the New York Public Library, which is a striking expression of the modem idea of conspicuous waste, and a very poor one of the ineluctable fact that a library is a place in which to house books, and to read them.l Architects planned libraries prior to 1931, and their conception of their function was that the entire building, and each part of it, even the corridors, was to be superlatively beautiful-a work of art. Each room was to be a beautiful, self-sufficient gem. Since truth was beauty and vice versa, the results would be truthful (i.e., useful) if they were beautiful. And was not the library in each community the cli- mactic monument to society's faith in culture? When the architect finished his work and the dedication was concluded, the building was turned over to the librar- ian, and it was up to him to make it serve the purposes of the library. He might even comment, in a low whisper, as Andrew Keogh did at Yale, that the library was on the inside. Formerly, when the librarian wrote up his build- ing for the Library Journal, his descrip- tion was primarily architectural in na- ture. The uses to which he proposed to put the building were seldom men- tioned. These statements sound today as though one were making fun of archi- tects of the earlier period. This is not I Suzanne La Follette, Art in America (New York: W. W. Norton & Co., 1929), pp. 274-75. 66
LIBRARY ARCHITECTURE AND BUILDINGS 67 so. Times have changed. Today, the librarian and a planning committee control the early stages of planning. They write the program and lay down the description of the functions the building is to serve. The architect's task is to create a building that will perform the functions described in the program. There are no limitations placed on the right of the architect to create beauty, as long as the provi- sion of "beauty," as such, does not waste money or interfere with the de- sired operations of the building. There were exceptions prior to 1930, and there are now. One might mention the University of Illinois library erect- ed in 1929, and the Sullivan Memorial Library of Temple, in 1936. There were librarians prior to 1930 who thought in the modern manner (e.g., M. L. Raney, Phineas Windsor, and Joseph Wheeler), and there are some in office today who do not. It is the general picture that is being discussed in this paper. Library architects prior to 1931 worked in the same spirit as did other architects of the time. There were no architects who designed only libraries. Furthermore, the conception of library activities as held by librarians at that time offered architects no compelling mandate to build anything new or dif- ferent. And if librarians resented their subordinate, and often nonexistent, role in planning new buildings, they regis- tered their feelings in a manner so mild that hardly any architect was intimi- dated. It simply would not have oc- curred to that generation of librarians to rise up and brazenly seize the plan- ning reins. And they did not, although they sometimes won their way with subtle and winsome wiles. And then there was Joseph Wheeler. Architects, too, now live by a new conception of their work. "Form fol- lows function," now a tiresome cliche' really did represent a new spirit in architecture in the 1920's and 1930's and today. The best of the architects did begin in that period to follow the principle that beauty was achieved only when the structure performed the task for which it was designed and that the operations to be carried out in each building would somehow eventually de- termine the exterior shape and appear- ance of the building. Planning began with the inside, not with a preconceived exterior shape and design. Or, if the latter was essential (as at Princeton or the University of Georgia), the architect really tried to make the style fit the function. Thus far, in the new spirit, there has been no new library design that can be recognized as such except that the new buildings do not look like the old Gothic libraries. They tend to be boxlike, with little superficial ornamen- tation. The towers have gone. Ohio State University's architect wanted one on the addition to that institution's library, but he was talked out of it by a committee. In the smaller college and public libraries there has been a flow- ering of attractive buildings in many styles, but almost all the large libraries are cubular. The planning of new buildings took on a new aspect during World War II when the Co-operative Committee on Library Building Plans was organized. A group of strong-minded and highly articulate librarians, some of the coun- try's best architects, and representa- tives of faculty library committees sat down to talk out the problems of plan- ning libraries. There was mutual re- spect on all three sides of the triangle,
68 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY and the brilliant cohesive leadership of Dean John E. Burchard helped both architects and librarians extend their thinking beyond the old stereotypes and cliches. This committee established new procedures wrote them out,2 wound up its affairs, and passed out of existence, to be replaced by a series of institutes of the American Library Association for each type of library. Its new procedures consisted of the following steps: (1) preparation of a statement of the library program by the librarian and the architect, which was presented to the group for criti- cism; (2) employment of a consultant to assist with expert advice at all stages of the planning; and (3) preparation of preliminary plans which were also submitted for group criticism. These are now standard procedures, almost always followed. The results have be- gun to show themselves in the new buildings. Libraries can be used as li- braries, and new conceptions of library service are emerging. Any attempt to trace the evolution of the tremendous changes in concep- tions of library service, and to assign credit where credit is due, is fraught with danger. Ernest Reece's "Library Buildings and Planning," in Library Trends, I (July, 1952), 136-55; Bur- chard, David, and Boyd's Planning the University Library Building, chapter ix; W. W. Bishop's, "The Historical Development of Library Buildings," in Library Buildings for Library Service, edited by Herman H. Fussler (Chi- cago, 1947), pages 1-11; and Alfred M. Githens', "The Evolution of a Li- brary," in the Library Journal, LXX- VIII (December 15, 1953), 2131-37, represent several attempts. The difficul- ty is that no one person understands fully the changes in conception of serv- ice that are taking place in all types of libraries-school, public, college, and special libraries. Nor is it easy to eval- uate the contributions of experts in the commercial firms manufacturing library equipment-particularly those of Angus S. Macdonald-during the 1930's. The author's own difficulties in attempting to show how basic intellec- tual forces in colleges and universities influence library design3 suggest that we have paid too little attention to the underlying social and intellectual forces that have resulted in demands for new conceptions of service. Certain lines of influence seem clear, and these can be stated briefly as follows: First, the adoption of an organiza- tion of service based on a subject ar- rangement as found in several large public libraries (Cleveland, Los An- geles, Rochester, and Enoch Pratt) did not begin to be felt in universities (ex- cept in departmental libraries, such as the Life Science Library at the Univer- sity of California and the Social Sci- ences Reading-Room of the Univer- sity of Chicago) until after Colorado and Brown opened their new buildings late in 1939. These two buildings (one a remodeling of an existing building and one a new structure), each planned without knowledge of the other, differed considerably in their conception of the word "divisional." Brown grouped a 'J. E. Burchard, C. W. David, and J. P. Boyd (eds.) Planning the University Library Building (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1949). s R. E. Ellsworth, "The Library Building and the Reader," in Burchard et al. (eds.), Planning the University Library Building; and The Sig- nificance of the Divisional Reading Room Plan for University Libraries ("University of Colorado Studies: Series A," Vol. XXVI, No. 4 [Boulder, Colo., November, 19411).
LIBRARY ARCHITECTURE AND BUILDINGS 69 small number of books into existing reading-rooms without integrating the staffs or other types of materials, whereas Colorado created separate, fairly large reading-rooms, staffs, and all types of materials (except govern- ment documents) for five divisions: Lower (General Education), Science, Humanities, Social Sciences, and Gen- eral Reference. In 1940 Rockford Col- lege also adopted the idea for its library. After 1940 the first large university library to use the subject divisional plan was that of the University of Nebraska; it merged all types of mate- rials and services into the divisions and, for reasons of fire codes, provided a corridor to separate the reading-rooms from the stacks. A separate general reference room, however, was eliminat- ed. Since then the idea has been fre- quently used, sometimes without rea- son (that is, when no divisional cur- ricular pattern existed, or when the existing building was unsuitable, as at Drake University, or when the faculty thinking was largely in departmental terms). The plan has been misunder- stood by critics who failed to study it in operation and who attributed to it purposes and organizational patterns that were not intended. Frequently overlooked today, though a part of my own thinking in 1938, when the Colorado building was being planned, was the idea that the subject division involved far more than a meth- od of shelving books.4 It was to be the basis for a realignment of library staff functions, and its ultimate purpose was to lay a sound basis for bringing aca- demic library service more clearly into the teaching and research activities of the university. This did not seem fan- tastic in 1938, nor does it today, even though librarians are not hopeful that the actual merging can ever take place. It is the purpose of this article not to argue the wisdom of the merging but rather to record the fact that one of the reasons for adopting the divisional plan at Colorado was to make the merg- ing possible. To some extent the idea has bogged down over the question of faculty rank for librarians. Nevertheless, the facts are that many of our professional ac- tivities are rapidly becoming mecha- nized or made obsolete and unnecessary and are, therefore, falling into the hands of the subprofessional staff. The ones that will remain at the profession- al level will best be done by librarians who will, by virtue of their ability and training, work so closely with the facul- ty that they will in a functional sense be a part of the faculty.5 But the unit of control will have to be smaller than an over-all reference department and larger than subject departmental librar- ies. Thus, the place of the divisional library. A second line of influence affecting all types of libraries concerns the term "modular." Angus Snead Macdonald conceived this method of planning li- braries as a result of his experiments in expanding the dimensions between stack uprights in order to enable librar- ians to use stack space for other li- brary operations when it is not needed to house books. His first statement, prepared with the help of Alfred M. ' R. E. Ellsworth, "The Training of Divisional Reading Room Librarians," College and Research Libraries, VI (December, 1944), 4-8. ' James S. Sandoe, "Riderless Horses and Empty Stables," Educational Theatre Journal, II (1950), 239-45.
70 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Githens, marked a turning point in li- brary architecture.6 Antecedents for present-day expres- sions of the idea can be found in the Enoch Pratt Free Library and in the Library of Congress Annex. Skidmore College used the idea for two floors of its building in 1940. The author at- tempted, without success, to persuade C. Z. Klauder to use it in the Univer- sity of Colorado Library in 1938, the reason for refusing being that it "re- stricted the fancy of the architect." Colorado State College used a modified version of it in 1939. The University of Iowa decided in 1944 to adopt the principle but did not complete its build- ing until 1952. Hardin-Simmons and the North Dakota State College were the first fully modular buildings, though Princeton used the idea, with wet con- struction, for the lower stories of its building. When the State University of Iowa decided in 1943 that it intended to try out several new conceptions of undergraduate service, it was aware that some, if not all, of these would fail and have to be abandoned. But, since these programs demanded spe- cial quarters, the old type of library building was not suitable. This led to a study of Macdonald's article and to the modular idea. When Macdonald was first approached late in 1943, he had given up hope, as revealed in cor- respondence with the author, that any- one would adopt the idea. At Iowa's request, he began, with Gilbert Fish, to restudy its engineering aspects. The following year he built the mock-up in Orange, Virginia, that was responsible for convincing librarians and architects that the idea had possibilities. Like all new ideas, this one has gone through the typical stages of evolu- tion. The first expressions were sen- sible. Then the professionals began to carry the idea astray (i.e., floor thick- nesses of five feet in order to accom- modate Louverall lighting because someone had heard that light fixtures installed flush with the ceilings created light spots and were, therefore, bad!) and to disregard the spirit of simplicity and economy that brought the idea into being. That the idea did disturb architects, there is no doubt. One of them, Ralph A. Walker, wrote as fol- lows: Out in Iowa there is a new library whose ceiling heights are those of the average stack and great expanses of area are given over to hunchbacked minds whose visual horizons are bound by metal pan ceilings and ranges of books, all neatly and specially placed so that one field of knowledge is forever caged within its own boundaries. The librarian, a brlliant man, is trapped within the impossible problems generated by universities of thirty thousand students or more.7 One has only to see the building indi- cated to understand Mr. Walker's con- cern. Fortunately, there are many prac- ticing architects who know that there is more than one kind of philosophy of aesthetics. Librarians, too, reveal their own pe- culiar kind of professional perversity. Now that they have been given the kind of flexibility they have always yearned for, some of them immediately begin to pine for the olden days. Mr. Keyes Metcalf, one of the wisest of modern librarians, at the June, 1954, American Library Association Buildings Insti- tute, said that he did not like the mod- o Angus Snead Macdonald, "A Library of the Future," Library Journal, LVIII (December, 1933), 971-75, 1023-25. 7 "The Architect and the University Library," paper read at the Club of Odd Volumes, March 21, 1951. Published in a pamphlet entitled Books in Libraries (privately printed).
LIBRARY ARCHITECTURE AND BUILDINGS 71 ular idea because it permitted lazy li- brarians to postpone careful planning until after the building was finished. Taken literally, Mr. Metcalf is, of course, correct. But that is about as absurd as saying that trout anglers should not wear hip boots because some of them are tempted to go into too deep water and get their feet wet. The real contributions and maximum usefulness of the modular idea cannot be determined now. A decade of ex- perience and study must elapse, and the first generation of uncritical enthusiasts and unbending opponents must go its way. No one who will take the trouble to observe the new modular buildings in operation can deny that they meet the librarian's need for flexibility and that they can house any library pro- gram now in existence or in the dreams of the most visionary librarian. Future applications would seem to be deter- mined by two factors: (1) Is flexibility needed-in the entire building or in certain areas only? (2) Does the idea satisfy people aesthetically? A third line of influence has been the desire on the part of librarians and architects to make libraries physical- ly inviting, informal, and easy to use. Enoch Pratt was perhaps the library that started this trend with its side- walk-level display windows and its open-shelf subject divisions immediate- ly accessible to readers. Today this in- fluence has led to new approaches in the use of color, to new furniture de- sign, to lounges with facilities for cof- fee hours and receptions, to the use of modern art as decoration, and to ac- ceptance of the idea that the needs and habits of people are an important element in determining the nature of a library building. It is not necessary to document this trend beyond saying that most of the libraries erected since World War II illustrate it. Typical ex- amples would be Rice Institute, Prince- ton, Georgia Tech, Massachusetts In- stitute of Technology, the Fort Worth Public Library, the South Chicago branch of the Chicago Public Library, the Bellingham, Washington, Public Library, and the Whittier, California, School Library. In other words, a li- brary is no longer an instrument which an architect can shape to satisfy his desire to create beauty; it is a machine planned to facilitate certain human ac- tivities under conditions of maximum beauty and convenience. Each type of library has developed its own manifestation of this influence. In the public library typical elements are found: a street-level entrance with attractive displays near the entrance; on the main floor an open-shelf collec- tion of books selected on a subject basis; subordination of the loan desk as a symbol of the old-fashioned bar- rier between the reader and the book; a control point near the entrance; gen- erous staff facilities; a significant loca- tion of the children's library (often with its own separate entrance); ade- quate facilities for the use of audio- visual materials; rooms for group dis- cussions of adult education functions; generous use of glass walls and internal movable partitions instead of bearing walls. The following quotation by a British writer in the London Times Lit- erary Supplement catches the spirit very well: Inside the library, in this flourishing town in the Deep South, it is beautifully cool. The library is a refuge during the steaming sum- mers when the temperature is in the nineties, the feet stick to the baking pavements and even the native is blinded by the sun. Every- thing is done to welcome the passer-by who
72 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY drops in not necessarily to read or to choose a book but perhaps to rest or to meet friends. The aim of the Chief Librarian, he says, is to make his library a rendezvous where people will be comfortable and feel at home, where the young may take pleasure in making ap- pointments as they might at the drug store or the movies. So the library is air-conditioned, it has comfortable chairs, pictures, and post- ers, a browsing room, friendly curators and- constant music. The last is an innovation not unanimously approved but generally popular, which illustrates, perhaps, the distracting in- fluences with which the potential reader has to deal. The librarian regards himself as a business man like any other. He wants to sell the idea of reading. So just as the Church, in this Bible belt, has turned itself into a sort of gi- gantic friendly society with social activities, fashion parades, and every sort of entertain- ment thrown in and has attracted thereby enormous congregations, so the library au- thorities want to attract readers by providing them with subsidiary pleasures. In the library proper the gramophone music provided is re- spectable but not too heavy. It is also inter- mittent, with pauses for recuperation. In the art room, from which admirable reproductions of modern masters can be borrowed free of charge and in which the walls are hung with modem paintings, the music is classical and continuous. The art room is a sort of Third Programme to which a reader-listener gradu- ates from downstairs. In the basement there are meetings of local cultural organizations such as the Ballet Theatre. In fact, the li- brary is the centre of civic culture. This broad conception, generous, friendly and enlight- ened, is so admirable that an observer must wish to see it applied, though more quietly, in English towns. From the point of view of salesmanship it is a great success. The library and its branches are always full of people; more surprisingly, the books are actually bor- rowed in large numbers. A library user must often wait even for the works of rather eso- teric English novelists like Mr. Henry Green. The visitor gains an impression from the li- brarian and the shelves of a great reading nublic.8 In the college and university field, one finds many of the same manifesta- tions-flexible interiors; arrangement of material by subject rather than by type of material; subordination of bar- riers between readers and books; locat- ing collections and services in prox- imity to the main entrance according to the frequency of their use; group- ing of materials by "family" groups (University of Cincinnati in 1931); audio-visual rooms; grouping of mate- rials according to student needs (e.g., Harvard's threefold service buildings- Lamont, Widener, and Houghton); and a grouping of services so that the high- est possible quality of staff can be se- cured (University of Nebraska). A fourth-the geographic or section- al-influence on library buildings has come about in a curious manner. In 1931 Gilchrist proudly commented that, in planning the new University of Rochester library, the University archi- tects visited libraries "as far West as the University of Minnesota."9 This was, and to some extent still is, the attitude of eastern librarians and archi- tects. But today many of the most in- teresting examples of new thinking are found west of the Mississippi (Wash- ington State College, Oklahoma A. & M. College, University of Colorado, University of Nebraska, Rice, North Dakota State College, State University of Iowa, Tacoma, Washington, Public Library, Whittier, California, School Library, Colorado State College of Education, St. Cloud, Minnesota, State Teachers College, and the F. B. Ross branch of the Denver Public Library, to mention a few.) Further, since universities and the cities of the West were expanding and ' September 17, 1954 p. 1. 'Library Journal, LVI (April 15, 1931), 343- 46.
LIBRARY ARCHITECTURE AND BUILDINGS 73 changing their method of growth dur- ing a time when the eastern universities and cities were relatively static, it was inevitable that the early advocates of libraries with flexible, or adaptable, in- teriors would be listened to in the West. Two prominent examples may be cited. In 1939 Sydney B. Mitchell wrote that "the library building should be of a relatively temporary character, or . . . it should be so constructed that its arrangement and use can be altered with the least expense,"'0 and Miss Al- thea Warren commented in 1944 that "the American city changes so dizzily that it is often just as well if buildings are not eternally enduring."1' It should be noted in this connection that, just as Harvard achieves its flexi- bility through the division of three buildings, so the large city systems achieve theirs by an arrangement of mobile or adaptable branch buildings. A. M. Githens proposed in 1945 that branches be located and built in such a way that they can be converted to com- mercial use if the need occurs,'2 and this principle has been generally ac- cepted. Dozens of examples have been described in the Library Journal. A fifth influence has been the appli- cation of new theories of administrative procedure. As late as 1931 librarians worked in positions that usually in- cluded all levels of work from the most difficult to simple clerical work. Today, each library operation has been ana- lyzed and measured and grouped ac- cording to level of complexity and as- signed to workers who have been trained for each level of work. Today, the nonprofessional part of a university library staff is usually at least as large as the professional. Similarly, library operations have been analyzed accord- ing to their physical relationships and are usually grouped so that "function flows smoothly and directly." This means that library interiors are ar- ranged in such a manner that the tech- nical processes are in the correct rela- tionship to the reference departments, the charging desks, and the stacks. And the library is planned so that a book "flows smoothly and directly" from the shipping-room eventually into the hands of the reader, at a point relatively close to the guard desk at the main entrance to the buildingl The architect is not allowed to interfere with this arrange- ment, nor does he wish to, because he too is seriously trying to make "form follow function." A sixth influence is the development of new building methods and materials. Dry construction, made feasible by new welding techniques, has made modular planning possible, although only three libraries (Georgia, Hardin-Simmons, and North Dakota State College) have made full use of the method. Also, fluorescent lighting has freed libraries from reliance on natural lighting and thus permits a more economical mass- ing of a building. Widespread use of artificial means of circulating air and of air-cooling equipment has, of course, accompanied this new development. Most of the new large buildings are planned without light wells, and older buildings are filling them in. New theories of light levels and effects were proposed in 1938. Logan's research has revolutionized thinking in this re- spect.18 Lighting of school libraries has 'Library Journal, LXIV (1939), 535. " Library Journal, LXIX (1944), 1076. "aLibrary Journal, LXX (1945), 609. 13 H. L. Logan, "Lighting Libraries," Library Journal, LXXVII (1952), 2125-29.
74 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY been studied more intensively than lighting in other types of libraries. During the latter part of World War II, library equipment manufacturers (Remington-Rand leading with their "New Trends" lines) began designing new styles of furniture-including met- al chairs-and as a result the new libraries have lost their drab, institu- tional, "golden-oak" atmosphere. Rice, Oklahoma State, Georgia Tech, and Massachusetts Institute of Technology have achieved remarkable results in this respect. Tables without aprons are a great boon to readers who like to cross their legs while reading. Smoking is permitted in a few libraries, and lounge chairs are abundant. Table chairs are now designed to support the backs of readers to permit a longer reading period without fatigue. The new furniture affects the appearance of library interiors, while such things as intercommunication devices, microfilm and microprint readers, teletype ma- chines, xerography reproducers, photo- chargers, television receivers, etc., have changed the ways in which libraries are used. Widespread use of motion pic- tures and other audio-visual instru- ments have forced the provision of special soundproofed listening-rooms and equipment. Group discussion rooms have of course been necessary in pub- lic libraries for a long time. Several other mechanical innovations may be mentioned. For example, free- standing bracket shelving has made possible the assembling of large num- bers of books in reading-rooms and the opening of cases in the stack areas. Angus Snead Macdonald's development of a compact storage stack for the Mid- west Inter-Library Center has caused other stack manufacturers to develop their own versions, and today five kinds are on the market. The older practice of building in card-catalog cabinets has disappeared. Mechanized janitorial service has forced architects to remem- ber to provide adequate rooms for the housing of the necessary equipment. In speculating about the future de- velopment in library planning, it seems clear that changes in building planning will now occur more frequently because of the changing role of each type of library than because of new architec- tural conceptions, building methods, and materials. To be specific, no one can be sure what the central building of a public library system will be like in a large city. The expansion of the suburban shopping centers plus pos- sible civil defense developments may be the determining factors. Television, in itself, apparently will have little in- fluence, except as it opens up new ap- proaches to adult education. Develop- ments such as can be seen at the Louis- ville Public Library and Western Re- serve University should be watched. As yet, no set pattern for adult education is evident, except that people learn eas- ily from television, if they like what they see. In any case, it is the branches rather than the central library that will be affected-maybe! Within universities and colleges the trend is likely to be the other way. The departmental libraries in existing build- ings can seldom expand readily, and, besides, the faculties in the science de- partments are finding themselves more and more obliged to use materials in other libraries. Thus, it would not be surprising if the departmental libranres remain static and if more direct mes- senger service from the main library expanded, possibly by depending on quick-copying devices. Within the main buildings them-
LIBRARY ARCHITECTURE AND BUILDINGS 75 selves many conflicting developments are at work, and no one can predict the outcome. Regional storage centers will surely eliminate the necessity of in- definite expansion on each campus. Li- braries may need to acquire fewer old books and special collections in the fu- ture, but, on the other hand, the rate of new publication is increasing, and li- braries have few oriental materials as yet, nor have librarians reckoned with what will happen when Russian mate- rials are available and when the Orient and Africa and South America become industrialized-as they surely will. Nor have librarians made more than a be- ginning at collecting the primary source material of our own time. In my opin- ion, libraries will add more than they will subtract. The demands on college and univer- sity libraries for research probably will not cause radical changes in their in- terior planning, but the demands for teaching will. The impetus that Prince- ton and Iowa gave to the concept of a teaching library-laboratory is increas- ingly being felt, despite ridicule from some members of the library profession. It is quite possible that the liberal arts colleges will be separated from the large universities, to be relocated into many strong but small colleges like Oberlin, Mills, Reed, and Amherst. It would not be surprising to see these grafted onto the many already existing teachers' colleges. If this happens, the role of the university library will be clarified; on the other hand, strong col- lege library collections by the hundreds will have to be developed. It is in these that one would look for adoption of the library-laboratory concept. In the newer university libraries that have anticipated it, one can find a siz- able number of faculty members in the building all day, except when they leave to lecture to large classes. This already has led to the need for enlarged staff rooms, provisions for smoking and talk- ing, telephone service to large numbers of research offices, and demand for six- teen-hours-a-day access to the building. All these affect library architecture. Libraries of the future may not be "modular," but woe unto those that are not adaptable!