What's Everybody Talking About? Message Functions and Topics on Electronic Lists and Newsgroups in Information and Library Science Barbara M. Wildemuth, Lisa Crenshaw, William Jenniches, and J. Christine Harmes The use of listserv software and Usenet newsgroups to support discussion among professionals in library and information science has become commonplace in the 1990s. The current research was conducted to find out which topics of discussion are dominant and which functions are performed by the messages posted to discussion groups in library and information science. In fall 1994, twenty-one students in an introductory course on communication processes completed analyses of fourteen different electronic lists or newsgroups as their term projects. Messages on each list or newsgroup were captured for approximately one month. Each message or partial message was described, in terms of its topic and its function, and frequencies were calculated. The topics most frequently discussed in each group were reasonably consistent with the group's stated purpose. In addition, technology topics were frequently discussed, as well as topics related to the library's clientele. The most common message functions were announcements, queries, and responses of various types. Comments made in the context of free-wheeling discussions also were common on some of the lists, but were rare on others. In addition to providing some baseline data on the topics and functions of messages in computer-mediated discussions, this study accomplished two pedagogical objectives: to introduce new students to elec- tronic discussion groups as a channel for professional communication, and to intro- duce them to content analysis as a research method. As technology continues to make an in- creasing impact on the information pro- fession, the range of options for professional communication is broad- ening. The use of listserv software and usenet newsgroups1 to support discus- sion among professionals in informa- tion and library science has become commonplace in the 1990s. A reference question that earlier would have gone unanswered, or at least would have re- quired a great deal of extra phoning, can now be posted on an electronic list or newsgroup, where it stands a much greater chance of being answered promptly. A management issue that ear- lier would have been resolved by relying only on local resources and experiences can now be informed by the opinions of many others - geographically distant - who have had similar experiences. As an information professional concentrates Spring 1997 137
1 38 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science About the Authors Barbara M. Wildemuth is Associate Professor, and Lisa Crenshaw and William Jenniches are completing their MS degrees, at the School of Information and Library Science, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill. /. Christine Harmes is Coodinator of Night Services and reference librarian, North Carolina State University. Manuscript received June 1996; accepted September 1996. on a particular area, computer-medi- ated discussion groups can support this specialization; they allow experts to converse with each other and simulta- neously create a forum where those new to the area can tap the resources of an established group. As Oberg notes, par- ticipation in an electronic list or news- group "helps keep librarians aware of new developments in the field, resolve practical problems, clarify theoretical issues, and minimize professional isola- tion through communication and col- laboration."2 This type of computer-mediated communication is becoming the object of studies, addressing such questions as which lists and newsgroups are being used, and for what purposes. The cur- rent study adds to this research. As part of an introductory course on communi- cation processes, students were offered the opportunity to undertake an analy- sis of the topics and functions of the messages posted to an electronic list or newsgroup pertaining to information and library science. This assignment had two pedagogical purposes: to intro- duce new students to this form/medium of professional communication, and to introduce students to content analysis as a research method. Twenty-one stu- dents participated in the study, each analyzing the contents (subject matter and message function) of the messages posted to one list and completing a re- port of their results. Fourteen discus- sion groups were covered by the twenty-one participating students. The instructor and three of the students worked together to consolidate the indi- vidual studies. Background Computer-mediated communication among scientists, social scientists, and humanities scholars is commonplace.3 About 25 percent of the respondents to Schaefermeyer and Sewell's4 online survey sent or received more than ten e-mail messages per day, most often us- ing it to seek information. McClure5 and his colleagues found that twenty-eight of the thirty- five researchers they inter- viewed used e-mail daily, and nineteen of them used an electronic bulletin board at least once a week. In an early study of EIES, an online conferencing system, Hiltz6 found that use of e-mail for communication with intellectual peers was related to an increase in the total amount of communication within a scientific specialty. Computer-medi- ated communication was used in place of telephone and mail by some scien- tists, but there was no decrease in travel to professional meetings and many of the study participants reported an in- crease in their reading of scientific jour- nals and in their communication with local colleagues. It seems likely that the accessibility of computer hardware and network access has allowed scientists and scholars to incorporate the use of Volume 38, Number 2
What's Everybody Talking About? 1 39 e-mail into the routine of their research practices.7 Many librarians also have access to the necessary hardware and networks, and similarly participate in various forms of computer-mediated communication. Those who responded to Kovacs, Robin- son, and Dixon's online survey8 said that they spend an average of seven hours per week using e-mail. Ninety percent of the respondents to Cromer and Johnson's online survey9 said that they read LIBREF-L daily. The special librarians surveyed online by Ladner and Tillman10 subscribe, on average, to more than three electronic bulletin boards or lists per person. Eighty-seven percent of the respondents to Neufeld's online survey11 used e-mail daily and 93 percent subscribed to three or more electronic discussion groups. Not all studies have found such a high level of use (for example, Abbott's study of e- mail use by community college librari- ans).12 Nevertheless, most studies indicate that librarians' use of computer- mediated communication channels par- allels that of scholars and scientists. If the subscribers to an online dis- cussion group are considered members of an invisible college13 it is obvious that the use of online networks as a communication medium may affect both the size of the group communicat- ing about a particular topic or issue and the rate at which the idea diffuses among the group.14 Both of these effects were mentioned by the special librari- ans surveyed by Ladner and Tillman,15 and are evident from even the most cur- sory examination of an ongoing elec- tronic discussion group. The size of the target group can range from hundreds to thousands and the receipt of a message is almost instantaneous, allowing dis- cussions to evolve quite rapidly. Such computer-mediated commu- nication is particularly critical for the conceptualization and clarification of ideas among members of an invisible college.16 Researchers state that "news, comments, and advice placed on bulle- tin boards [are] valuable in generating new ideas and solving particular prob- lems."17 The trend toward vigorous on- line discussion of new ideas prior to their formal publication has led Lincoln to suggest that individual development of important ideas "may give way to group-developed and refined scholarly ideas."18 Like researchers, librarians also have used lists to solve particular problems. These problems most often take the form of reference queries need- ing a response.19 In addition, librarians find that online discussions contribute to their professional development.20 Thus, there are both immediate and long-term motivations for librarians to participate in online discussions. From the few studies cited above, we can infer that librarians are active users of computer-mediated communi- cation, and that they find it beneficial to their job performance and profes- sional development. An obvious next step in this line of research is to inquire regarding the topics that librarians dis- cuss via online lists and newsgroups; only one prior study of message content has been identified. Campana21 ana- lyzed the content of the messages posted to MLA-L from May 1989 through April 1990 as one part of a study of written communication among music librarians. She found that 33 per- cent of the messages discussed refer- ence, 22 percent cataloging, 16 percent ML A activities, 12 percent sound re- cordings, 8 percent copyright, 7 percent technology, and 2 percent other topics. The subject matter of messages posted to fourteen discussion lists and news- groups related to information and li- brary science was analyzed for the current study. Each message's function - as dis- tinct from its subject matter - is also of Spring 1997
140 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science interest. For example, bilingual pro- grams in public libraries might be the topic of a question, a comment or re- sponse, or a call for conference papers. Clearly, analysis of message function, in addition to message topic, is necessary in order to accurately characterize a dis- cussion list's activity. Three recent studies of message function were iden- tified. Brown22 analyzed the messages on GOVDOC-L and BUSLIB-L; Cromer and Johnson23 analyzed the messages on PACS-L, LIBREF-L, and BI-L; and May,24 in an attempt to automatically classify them by function, analyzed the messages on HUMANIST. Each of these studies resulted in very similar function categories, so the results from all three studies are compared in table 1. Differ- ences in the categories used by the three different researchers account for some of the noticeable differences in the re- sults. However, in some ways, the simi- larities are more striking. All of these lists have a fairly large number of ques- tions (accounting for 12 percent to 33 percent of the messages) and responses (accounting for 9 percent to 52 percent of the messages), and all include an- nouncements (though these are much more predominant on BI-L, at 46 per- cent, than on the other lists, which range from 9 percent to 36 percent). Cromer and Johnson identified many instances of ongoing discussions of is- sues, a category not used by either Brown or May. Categories similar to those listed in table 1 were used in the Table 1 Percentage Results from Three Studies of Discussion List Message Type PACS-L UBREF-L BI-L (Cromer (Cromer and (Cromer and and GOVDOC-L BUSLIB-L Johnson Johnson Johnson HUMANIST Message type (Brown 1994) (Brown 1994) 1994) 1994) 1994) (May 1994) Query or question 31 33 27 23 12 25 Response or summary of responses 26 38 9 22 11 52 Presentation or discussion of issues 37 34 32 Announcements 14 9 36 23 46 19 Offer of resources 1 3 Request for resources 9 Errors <1 13 Administrative 5 Other 7 3 Total number of messages 550 380 unknown unknown unknown 1,372 Volume 38, Number 2
What's Everybody Talking About? 1 4 1 current study to analyze the functions of messages posted to fourteen discus- sion groups. In summary, few previous studies of librarians' use of discussion lists have been conducted. Only one study - focusing on a list for music librarians - analyzed the topics of the messages posted. Several studies have analyzed the functions of the posted messages and have found that questions, re- sponses, and announcements are com- mon. The current study analyzes the topics and functions of messages posted to fourteen discussion groups in library and information science. Research Question Despite the fact that each discussion list or newsgroup has an explicit statement of its focus, most lists are not moderated and topics may be any that are of inter- est to subscribers. Even those lists that are moderated include the discussion of many topics not explicitly included in the list's statement of purpose. The cur- rent research was conducted to discover which topics of discussion are domi- nant and which functions are per- formed by the messages posted to selected lists of interest to professionals in information and library science. Method Students in an introductory course on communication processes were invited to conduct a content analysis of an elec- tronic list or newsgroup as their term projects. In fall 1994, twenty-one stu- dents completed analyses of fourteen different lists. Messages on each list or newsgroup were captured for approxi- mately one month. If more than 150 messages were posted to a particular list during that month, a random sample of 150 messages was selected for analysis. If multiple students analyzed the same list or newsgroup, their data were com- bined. If more than one topic was dis- cussed within one message, or if a message performed more than one func- tion, it was segmented into multiple units. Each message unit was described in terms of its topic and its function. Frequency analyses of these data were performed to provide an overview and comparison of the message topics and functions for each list. These methods are described in more detail below. The Lists Analyzed In September, the twenty-one students participating in this project were pro- vided with the guide to library-oriented lists and electronic serials compiled by Bonario and Thornton.25 The students also were encouraged to explore the In- ternet and the published literature to identify and monitor other lists and newsgroups that might be of interest. During October, each student selected one active list (i.e., any list on which there were 150 or more messages posted per month) to analyze for this study. Each of the lists included in the analysis is briefly described below, along with the name(s) of the student(s) who con- ducted the individual analyses. ■ African American Studies and Librarianship (AFAS-L@listserv. kent.edu): Owned and moderated by several members of the American Library Association, Association for College and Research Libraries, Afro- American Studies Librarians' Section; "a roundtable discussion among librarians and other inter- ested people on topics relating to African American Studies and Li- brarianship," including "peripheral Spring 1997
142 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science issues such as race relations and multicultural diversity"26; analyzed by Sharlene Harris. ■ Archives and Archivists (ARCHIVES @miamiu.muohio.edu): Owned by Donna B. Harían and John B. Harían; "dedicated to dissemination of in- formation and news and ongoing discussion of issues of interest to the archival community"27; analyzed by Theresa Dillon and Andy Hempe. ■ American Society for Information Science (ASIS-L@asis.org): Owned by Merri Beth Lavagnino, Debbie Lords, David Carlson, Jennifer Bates, and Cassandra Brush28; spon- sored by the Society to support its members and others; also available as newsgroup bit.listserv. asis-1; analyzed by Andrew Stinson. ■ Business librarians (BUSLIB-L@idbsu. idbsu.edu): Owned by Barbara But- ler; purpose is discussion of issues related to the collection, storage, and dissemination of business infor- mation within a library setting; also available as newsgroup bit.listserv. buslib-1; previously analyzed by Ladner and Tillman, and Brown29; analyzed by Lisa Crenshaw and Stacey Marien. ■ Circulation and Access Services (CIRCPLUS@idbsu.idbsu.edu): Owned by Dan Lester; "a discussion forum for issues relating to circulation, re- serve room, stack maintenance, se- curity, and similar issues in librar- ies"30; also available as newsgroup bit.listserv.circplus; analyzed by William Jenniches. ■ Rare Books and Special Collections (ExLibris@library.berkeley.edu): Es- tablished by Peter Graham, now owned by Everett C. Wilkie; "an en- vironment for discussing matters re- lated to rare book and manuscript librarianship"31; analyzed by Eliza- beth Broyles, Kerry Connard, Jeff Maxim, and Damon Sauve. ■ Gay /Lesbian/Bisexual Librarians (GAY- LIB N@usc.edu): Owned by Keith Trimmer; "dedicated to the con- cerns and interests of gay, lesbian, and bisexual library workers and friends. Issues discussed may in- clude political action, AIDS educa- tion, outreach programs, social pro- grams, finding out what other groups, individuals, and libraries are doing, and general library is- sues"32; see Fattig33 for more infor- mation on origin and purpose; ana- lyzed by Jill Hollingsworth. ■ Government Documents (GOVDOC-L@ psuvm.psu.edu): Owned by Raeann Dossett, Diane Kovacs, Michael Kovacs, Aimee Piscitelli, and Mark Thomas; "a discussion forum about government information and the Federal Depository Library pro- gram"34; see Kovacs35 for more in- formation on origin and purpose; found to be one of the top twenty- one electronic conferences by Kovacs, Robinson, and Dixon;36 pre- viously analyzed by Brown;37 also available as newsgroup bit.listserv. govdoc-1; analyzed by J. Christine Harmes. ■ Law Librarians (LAW-LIB@ucdavis. edu): Owned by Judy Janes; for dis- cussion of "issues related to law li- brarians and libraries, legal research questions, etc."38; analyzed by Alicia Julian. ■ Library Administration and Man- agement (LIBADMIN@list.ab.umd. edu): Owned by Pamela Bluh; dis- cussion of topics in library admini- stration and management39; ana- lyzed by Bridget Regan. ■ Discussion of Library Reference Issues (LIBREF-L@listserv.kent.edu) : Owned by several reference librari- ans at Kent State University Librar- ies; "discussion of reference librari- anship," including "related issues such as the impact of electronic dis- Volume 38, Number 2
What's Everybody Talking About? 1 43 semination of information on refer- ence activities and services"40; see Robinson and Kovacs41 for more in- formation on origin and purpose; see Cromer and Johnson42 for a study of the subscribers and an analysis of types of messages; found to be one of the top twenty-one elec- tronic conferences by Kovacs, Rob- inson, and Dixon;43 also available as newsgroup bit.listserv.libref-1; ana- lyzed by Jennie Duvernay. ■ School Library Media & Network Communications (LM_NET@listserv. syr.edu): Owned by Peter Milbury and Michael Eisenberg; focuses on "topics of interest to the school li- brary media community, including the latest on school library media services, operations, and activi- ties"44; see Eisenberg and Milbury45 for more information on origin and purpose; analyzed by Judy Austin and Judy Packer. ■ Library Services to Children and Young Adults in Public Libraries (PUBYAC® nysernet.org): Owned by Shannon VanHemert; focuses on the practical aspects of "program- ming ideas, outreach and literacy programs for children and caregivers, censorship and policy issues, collec- tion development, administrative considerations, puppetry, job open- ings, professional development, and other pertinent services and is- sues";46 analyzed by Melissa McAbee and Betty Strickland. ■ The newsgroup soc.libraries.talk discusses all aspects of libraries; analyzed by Susan Crowell. Each student captured the mes- sages from his or her list for approxi- mately one month, in order to minimize the bias associated with a brief (i.e., several-day) flurry of messages about a particular topic. The students did not post any messages to the lists during this period. If substantially more than 150 messages were posted during the period of data collection, 150 messages were randomly selected for analysis. If a message discussed more than one topic or performed more than one func- tion, then it was segmented into multi- ple units prior to analysis, giving each unit an equal proportion of the weight of one message. For example, if there were two topics discussed in one mes- sage, each topic would be weighted as one-half a message. A total of 3 ,197 mes- sages were analyzed. The dates of data collection, the number of messages posted, and the number of messages analyzed for each list are described in table 2. Categorization of Message Topics and Functions Each student researcher categorized the topic and function of each message in his or her sample. Both topic and func- tion categories were derived from the data, and category definitions were de- veloped collaboratively as the study progressed. As the study began, the topic categories were relatively uncon- strained. Student researchers were asked to choose category names from the Thesaurus of ERIC Descriptors47 or the index terms used in Library Litera- ture.48 These suggestions for category names were then submitted to the course instructor, who identified possi- ble overlap among categories, codified the syndetic structure of the category names, and created a "thesaurus" of category names and definitions to be used in this project. The thesaurus was made available to student researchers through the school's file server. In its final form, the project thesaurus con- tained 171 topic categories, and their narrower/broader relationships. Spring 1997
144 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Table 2 Description of Sample Number of Number of messages List Researcher Dates (1994) messages posted analyzed AFAS-L Harris 9/26-10/25 150 150 ARCHIVES Dillon 9/19-10/13 374 151 Hempe 10/4-10/31 unknown 152 ASIS-L Stinson 9/26-11/13 150 150 BUSUB-L Crenshaw 10/31-11/28 328 151 Marien 9/9-10/9 358 148 CIRCPLUS Jenniches 9/12-10/10 150 150 ExLibris Broyles 10/3-10/31 271 150 Connard 10/10-11/4 233 150 Maxim 10/10-11/14 313 150 Sauve 9/22-10/22 365 150 GAY-UBN Hollingsworth 9/1-10/11 912 150 GOVDOC-L Harmes 10/1-10/31 300 150 LAW-LIB Julian 9/10-10/11 531 162 LIBADMIN Regan 9/12-10/19 291 150 LIBREF-L Duvernay 10/8-11/5 430 150 LM_NET Austin 9/21-10/21 1.227 148 Packer 9/9-9/30 1,043 173 PUBYAC McAbee 9/16-10/24 155 155 Strickland 9/21-10/24 155 155 soc.libraries.talk Crowell 10/6-11/14 150 150 Total 3. 197 For the categorization of message functions, the purpose and form of the message were considered. For example, a call for papers (on whatever topic) could be distinguished from a job an- nouncement (of whatever type of job). The goal of this categorization was to determine the proportion of administra- tive messages (announcements, etc.) and to understand the responsiveness of each list (i.e., whether messages were posted in response to requests for infor- mation). As with the topic categories, candidate function categories were sub- mitted to the instructor, evaluated, codified, and made available to the stu- dent researchers through the school's file server. Eighteen categories of message functions were used in these analyses. In order to compare the findings Volume 3a Number 2
What's Everybody Talking About? 1 45 from the twenty-one different content analyses, the authors collaboratively reexamined the categories and com- bined those that were similar. As neces- sary, the original messages were examined to determine the appropriate- ness of the consolidation. The outcome of this process was the consolidation of the 171 original topic categories into forty-nine categories, plus one "miscel- laneous" category, and one category for messages that were left blank by the poster. Though this consolidation proc- ess resulted in a loss of some of the richness of the original data, it allowed the authors to see the patterns in the similarities and differences of the mes- sage topics and functions across lists. Dato Analysis Frequencies of each topic category in each list and each function category in each list were calculated, using SAS. When multiple students analyzed the same list, their data were combined by simply adding the frequencies together. To determine whether there were differ- ences between lists in their message topics and functions, chi square statis- tics were calculated for these two-way tables.49 The percentage of each list's messages that falls into each category was calculated and reported, instead of raw frequencies, in order to take into account the varying number of mes- sages analyzed across the fourteen lists. Results Two specific questions were addressed by this study: (1) What topics are discussed on these lists, and are there differences in the topics discussed across the lists? and (2) What functions do messages perform in the selected lists, and are there differ- ences across the lists? Message Topics No topic stood out as predominant across all the lists. The only categories accounting for 5 percent or more of the combined total were publications (6 percent), Internet resources (6 percent), library services (5 percent), and list in- formation (5 percent). There was a sta- tistically significant relationship between the lists and the topic catego- ries (chi square, with 650 df = 8668.681, p = 0.001). The topic catego- ries are not easily grouped, because of their diversity. Nevertheless, the groupings shown in table 3 represent the authors' attempt to synthesize the results of this analysis, and the discussion of the distribution of topics across the lists is organized by topic group. The first group covers librarians, archives/archivists, and media centers. These categories were common in sev- eral of the lists and accounted for over 10 percent of the messages on four lists. Fourteen percent of the messages in AFAS-L concerned librarians, and this was the most frequently occurring cate- gory for that list. Similarly, 15 percent of the messages in LIBREF-L concerned librarians. Media centers (and schools) were often discussed on LM_NET (one of the two most frequently occurring topics on that list). Archives (including preservation issues, archival collec- tions, and policies in archives) and ar- chivists were often discussed on ExLibris (one of the two most frequently occurring topics on that list). The next grouping includes several library management issues. Four lists covered these topics frequently. Seven- teen percent of the CIRCPLUS messages and 19 percent of the LIBREF-L mes- sages concerned personnel manage- ment (including management of paraprofessionals, selection and evalu- ation of staff, training issues, student Spring 1997
146 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science I "ai 8 O ]5 o & "5 i_i è O O) I % C co O "a £ "o I CD ü I O CO r- CM CMr- c\| _ to CM - CM CM CM oO «O CM - _ _- CM - ^ - eO 2íS o ocoo loco 1 ü í CM 1^0*000 IO - 2 Ul lOr-r-O* "ír- ^-COCNOJI^lO - <N - 1^ OS ■- ^ ca Zi z g-q-lO^-O^-r- CMCM r-lO-cOCM I § CM ^-LOCMr- "~ ¡2 í «O - ^g CM -- ^T- r-OOCN- - «o X " O ^q-r- r- r- CNI - CM CM O* CMCM^cOr- lu n - OL CMIO "" N «O "" CM r- ^ ^ r-r- r-r-'víO oc "" "" ^ o § r-coco- - IO - O- CO - *í S2cO i- r- •- r- ^J ,_ ^_ ,_ r- CO •- - - ^ ^" ^O» - r-r-^fOOO COIO O - «O- - JJ^CMCM- - W N - 42 «R to «o -§ a § til il Sili. 11 eiiel IJSí líilIÜIIIlliSlIgflilIflíSSJilS Volume 38, Number 2
What's Everybody Talking About? 1 47 ,_ O, «O ^ ^ ^ ^ - CM - - CM - ^ " ^- ^^COCMW^-fc CO CMCM - •- .- CO CO OO UO CM 2 CO r-^-r^- CO <NCO .- CM CO CM r- (N - <- § tO _ <m _ CM CM r- lOiOcO r-xg-iOCMCvlg ^•CM ^.-- - ■- COCM ^r-(O---(Ng coiom co^^o ocsig cMior- - -co co-r^g Cvj^j tO,-^ CO -^ ^-^- r-cOOO^rCMg CM r- - COCM - r- -^ IO g OOr_,_ _«q- OCOr-|^ CM r- •- -- CMr-r-CO§^ ^COOCM- - « .. i;2^ N^ O ^ r-COr-'sT COO- ^T - CO IO g qo toco m ior>.r^ ococo-- mg Hill a^^llsflc I „ I I ^ I « gli 11 I ||1 Id I HI !||1 I ill „ ||| flip ^ « I Iflloll, I i Spring 1997
148 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science salaries, and volunteers), the most fre- quently occurring category on each of those lists. The soc. libraries. talk news- group often discussed employment is- sues, with this category accounting for 10 percent of the messages in the group. LIBADMIN focused on library manage- ment in general (including budgeting, fees, planning, library policies, secu- rity, and marketing). This category ac- counted for 14 percent of the LIBADMIN messages (the most fre- quently occurring category). Financial support (including grants) was another frequently discussed topic in LIBAD- MIN, comprising 11 percent of the mes- sages. Various library services and func- tions are found in the next grouping, and were discussed frequently on only a few lists. Library services in general (including bibliographic instruction, interlibrary lending, circulation, re- serves, reference interviews, and the idea of virtual libraries) were frequent topics on CIRCPLUS (13 percent) and PUB YAC (17 percent), and user behav- ior was the most frequently occurring topic on PUBYAC (19 percent). The next two groupings contain seven categories related to the materials collected by libraries and information centers and two categories related to facilities and equipment/ supplies. Sev- eral lists focused their discussion on these topics. Over a third of the mes- sages on LAW-LIB discussed publica- tions, including electronic publications (the most frequently occurring topic in that list), and GOVDOC-L focused on government publications, their distri- bution, and acquisition (25 percent of the messages, combined). Citations/ references (including quotes) and litera- ture (including adolescent and chil- dren's literature) were the two most frequently occurring topics on GAY- LIBN, and together accounted for 20 percent of the messages on that list. Literature was also a common topic on PUBYAC (18 percent), citations/refer- ences on AFAS-L (11 percent), and library collections (including serials) on CIRCPLUS (11 percent). Equipment and supplies was a common topic on the ARCHIVES list (10 percent). The next grouping is concerned with various technologies: computers, online systems, and the Internet. Every list had at least two messages in this group, and several lists focused in this area. Internet resources (including e- mail) was one of the most common top- ics on BUSLIB-L (10 percent), was the most common topic on soc. libraries. talk (13 percent), and accounted for 15 per- cent of the messages on GOVDOC-L. Telecommunications was another com- mon topic on BUSLIB-L (10 percent), and online systems (including library automation and bar coding) were fre- quently mentioned on LAW-LIB (11 per- cent) and CIRCPLUS (10 percent). Internet resources, telecommunica- tions, and online systems were more often discussed, overall, than comput- ers and programs; however, computer programs was the most common topic discussed on the ARCHIVES list (15 percent). The seventh grouping represents governmental, political, and social top- ics. None of the topics in this group dominated any of the lists. Copyright was frequently discussed on CIRCPLUS (12 percent) and soc.libraries.talk (11 percent), and the government (including the courts and legislation) was often dis- cussed on LIBADMIN (11 percent). These types of topics were mentioned on almost every list, but never frequently. The eighth grouping is a set of dis- ciplines and discipline-related topics. Business correspondence was often dis- cussed on BUSLIB-L (10 percent). Other topics in this group did not account for 10 percent of the messages on any of the lists. Volume 38, Number 2
What 's Everybody Talking About? 1 49 The ninth grouping contains topics related to organizations and their activi- ties. It is not surprising that ASIS-L was dominated by messages about meet- ings/conferences (16 percent) and workshops (13 percent), especially as the annual meeting of that organization was held near the end of the data collec- tion period. The next small grouping contained advertising and announcements of em- ployment opportunities. Announcements of employment opportunities did not ac- count for 10 percent of the messages on any list. Advertisements were posted to only five of the lists and advertising did not account for 5 percent of the mes- sages on any list. The eleventh grouping contained personal messages (such as obituaries and messages to friends), courtesy mes- sages (including self-introductions and discussions of "netiquette"), and jokes/humor. Almost all of the lists con- tained at least some messages in this grouping, but this type of message did not account for 10 percent of the mes- sages on any list. The final grouping contains mes- sages asking for, or providing informa- tion about, the list, miscellaneous or other categories of messages, and blank messages. List information (such as queries about the scope of the list or how to subscribe) accounted for 10 per- cent of the messages on ExLibris and 13 percent of the messages on LM_NET (one of the two most frequently occur- ring categories on each of these lists). The diversity of topics discussed on LM_NET and soc. libraries. talk were not represented well by our categorization scheme, as 11 percent and 10 percent, respectively, of these lists' messages were coded as "other." The errors repre- sented by blank messages were infrequent, occurring on only five lists and never exceeding 5 percent of the messages. Dominant Topics on Each List Each list's focus can be represented by the topics that are most frequently men- tioned on that list. The topics that ac- counted for at least 50 percent of each lists' messages were (in order of fre- quency of occurrence): AFAS-L: librarians (14 percent), citations/references (11 percent), em- ployment opportunities (9 percent), Internet resources (8 percent), publica- tions (7 percent), workshops (7 per- cent), and awards (7 percent). ARCHIVES: computer programs (15 percent), equipment and supplies (10 percent), archives/archivists (9 per- cent), collection development (8 per- cent), library collections (6 percent), and meetings/conferences (6 percent). ASIS-L: meetings/conferences (16 percent), workshops (13 percent), em- ployment opportunities (7 percent), In- ternet resources (6 percent), list information (6 percent), library services (4 percent), computer programs (4 per- cent), online systems (4 percent), and telecommunications (4 percent). BUSLIB-L: telecommunications (10 percent), Internet resources (10 per- cent), business correspondence (10 per- cent), publications (9 percent), businesses (8 percent), and statistics (7 percent). CIRCPLUS: personnel management (17 percent), library services (13 per- cent), copyright (12 percent), and li- brary collections (11 percent). ExLibris: archives/archivists (10 per- cent), list information (10 percent), pub- lications (9 percent), humor (9 percent), philosophical/ethical issues (5 percent), Spring 1997
150 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science library management (4 percent), com- puters (4 percent), Internet resources (4 percent), meetings/conferences (4 per- cent), advertising (4 percent), and other/miscellaneous (4 percent). GAY-LIBN: citations/references (10 percent), literature (10 percent), per- sonal (8 percent), censorship (7 per- cent), other/miscellaneous (7 percent), laws (5 percent), and library services (4 percent). GOVDOC-L: distribution and ac- quisition of government publications (19 percent), government publications (16 percent), Internet resources (15 per- cent), awards (9 percent), and Internet access (8 percent). LAW-LIB: publications (34 per- cent), online systems (11 percent), and courtesy (8 percent). LIBADMIN: library management (14 percent), financial support (11 per- cent), government (administrative body) (11 percent), personnel manage- ment (6 percent), librarians (5 percent), equipment and supplies (5 percent), In- ternet resources (5 percent), meetings/ conferences (5 percent), workshops (5 percent), and courtesy (5 percent). LIBREF-L: personnel management (19 percent), librarians (15 percent), publications (7 percent), online systems (7 percent), and Internet resources (7 percent). LM_NET: media centers (13 per- cent), list information (13 percent), other/miscellaneous (11 percent), edu- cation (9 percent), computer programs (7 percent), and Internet resources (7 percent). PUBYAC: user behavior (19 per- cent), literature (18 percent), and li- brary services (17 percent). soc.libraries.talk: Internet re- sources (13 percent), copyright (11 per- cent), employment issues (10 percent), other/miscellaneous (10 percent), li- brary collections (9 percent), and list information (9 percent). Based on this analysis by list, the topics that appeared most frequently across lists were Internet resources (AFAS-L, ASIS-L, BUSLIB-L, ExLibris, GOVDOC-L, LIBADMIN, LIBREF-L, LM_NET, and soc.libraries.talk), publi- cations (AFAS-L, BUSLIB-L, ExLibris, LAW-LIB, and LIBREF-L), library ser- vices (ASIS-L, CIRCPLUS, GAY-LIBN, and PUBYAC), meetings/conferences (ARCHIVES, ASIS-L, ExLibris, and LIBADMIN), and list information (ASIS-L, ExLibris, LM_NET, and soc. libraries.talk). In addition, the other/ miscellaneous category appeared among the most frequent categories for ExLibris, GAY-LIBN, LM_NET, and soc.libraries.talk. Message Functions Combining all the lists, the most fre- quently occurring message functions were general responses (23 percent), comments (19 percent), announcements (15 percent), and general inquiries (15 percent). There was a statistically sig- nificant relationship between the lists and the functions of the messages posted to them (chi square, with 208 df = 2104.161, p = 0.001). The eighteen types of functions were organized into four groups for presentation in table 4, and their distribution across the lists will be discussed in that order. Inquiries of several types are in- cluded in the first group. General in- quiries occurred frequently on most of the lists. They were the most common type of message on LM_NET and soc. libraries.talk, and also accounted for over 25 percent of the messages on CIRCPLUS and LIBADMIN. Reference inquiries occurred frequently on BUSLIB-L, ExLibris, GOVDOC-L, LAW- LIB, LIBREF-L, and LM_NET, and were the most frequent type of message on BUSLIB-L and LAW-LIB. There were a few technical inquiries and requests for Volume 38, Number 2
What '$ Everybody Talking About? 1 5 1 Al it 0) Ü D JO O & l_i .Q CO I i * ! CO o fe D u_ 8» O I CL DiO oo- «O •- to ^ *- - cOiO CM - - O '^'"O v ■g •- oo- cm to »- ^ v ^ ■g ^2 •- CO || ft cor. ^cou,^^ s^,_^ r o §00 CMOOOJCN COCMOOOOJ CO 2 tt - «O '"CO ZcM OtO IO CO CO CM CO - IO r- CNr- ,_,_^ _j -I z §^CN - CN J - - COI^ O -g £0 ¿ CO ,_|^ COCOO - -- lO^CN r^ CN g 3-. ^ CM _l ó I x'S^O"- "Ovo coocsi.- r>» cn 2 ¿^ -5 « ^ TTcOtog U ^r^ cncm •- cm io r*«. r- coo cm»- --o •- o^ _J </) *$ i- CM CO O >- W ^ CO CO >- 00.- CM[«" 5 - . « - to > TOCO 00CO r-CM- ^ g TOCO g CM «O - CM g J ^ li) I^CM CM^ O'-g liIil^l3llìl^l3lSÌI?Ì58Ì85llS Spring 1997
152 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science ideas, but these were not common, ex- cept on PUBYAC, where requests for ideas accounted for 18 percent of the traffic. A few surveys were being con- ducted via these lists, especially on LIBREF-L, where they accounted for 7 percent of the traffic. The next group includes various types of responses. If a list is interactive (i.e., the participants exchange ideas and information with each other rather than using the list as a forum for mono- logues), then the number of responses should be equal to or higher than the number of inquiries. This certainly seems to be the case. Inquiries make up 28 percent of the total number of mes- sages, and responses total 29 percent, including some messages that were compilations of multiple responses. General responses were frequent on many of the lists. They were the most common type of message on ARCHIVES, CIRCPLUS, GOVDOC-L, LIBADMIN, and PUBYAC, and also ac- counted for over 25 percent of the mes- sages on AFAS-L and GAY-LIBN. Reference responses were common on BUSLIB-L (17 percent of the total). Technical responses, compilations of responses, and offers of resources oc- curred on many of the lists, but they accounted for over 10 percent of the traffic only on GOVDOC-L (offer of re- sources). The third group includes several types of administrative messages. An- nouncements (including a few newslet- ters) were quite common on many of the lists, accounting for over 10 percent of the messages on nine of the fourteen lists. In particular, announcements were the most frequently occurring type of message on AFAS-L and ASIS-L. It is interesting to note that these two lists are the only lists in the study that are sponsored by professional organiza- tions. Job announcements were rela- tively common on ASIS-L (13 percent), but accounted for less than 10 percent of the traffic on any of the other lists. Calls for papers and for volunteers oc- curred occasionally. The final group consists of com- ments and error-related behavior. Com- ments (including a few complaints) were the most common type of message on ExLibris, GAY-LIBN, and LIBREF-L, and also accounted for over 25 percent of the messages on soc. libraries. talk. This category represents free-wheeling discussions on a variety of topics. The final categories consist of errors and their corrections/retractions. Errors (e.g., a subscription request being sent to the list subscribers) did occur on many of the lists, but they were infre- quent, accounting for 5 percent or less of the messages on any list. The propor- tion of corrections and retractions was slightly less, but seemed to correspond to the proportion of errors. Discussion of the Results The topics most frequently discussed in each group were reasonably consistent with the group's stated purpose. Most topics were related to various aspects of libraries and library operations. In addi- tion, technology topics were frequently discussed, as well as topics related to the library's clientele (e.g., business cor- respondence was often discussed on BUSLIB-L). One interesting finding is the diversity of specific topics being discussed. This was mentioned as an advantage of electronic groups by read- ers of LIBREF-L.50 The analysis of message functions did not yield any major surprises. Que- ries and responses of various types were quite numerous overall, with approxi- mately the same proportion of each. An- nouncements were quite common on some of the lists (particularly the two formally associated with professional Volume 38, Number 2
What 's Everybody Talking About? 1 53 associations), and appeared on all the lists. Comments made in the context of free-wheeling discussions also were common on some of the lists, but were rare on others. This last finding is some- what surprising when compared with the results from Rosenbaum and Sny- der's study of several non-library-sci- ence discussion groups on BITNET, which indicated that "the exchange of views on given topics"51 was the most frequent type of message function. One possible explanation of this dif- ference is that librarians communi- cate differently than people in other fields; another is that professionals' use of computer-mediated communi- cation differs from that of scholars/ researchers. One of the possible uses of the cur- rent study is to identify discussion groups for potential subscription, based on the reader's professional interests. For in- stance, if a reader is interested in censor- ship, ARCHIVES, GAY-LIBN, LIBADMIN, LM_NET, and soc.libraries.talk might be considered for subscription. Such an in- terpretation of these results should be made with caution, however. Each sam- ple, though reasonably large, was taken from less than two months of activity on each discussion list. Additionally, in most cases, only one researcher partici- pated in the categorization of the mes- sages, thus the reliability of the categorization can be questioned. Never- theless, these results present a starting point for understanding the subject mat- ter of messages posted to discussion groups in information and library sci- ence, and the functions being performed by those messages. Reflections on the Research as an Educational Exercise As stated earlier, this study was the re- sult of a cooperative classroom assign- ment with two objectives: to introduce new students to electronic discussion groups as a channel for professional communication, and to introduce them to content analysis as a research method. For the first purpose, the as- signment was certainly successful. Part of its success was due to student inter- est in the communication medium. Ap- proximately two-thirds of the class chose this assignment from among four term-paper options available. It is likely that their enthusiasm for the project was at least partially due to their inter- est in becoming more proficient in the use of computer-mediated communica- tion. The informal comments of many of the students and the formal comments that appeared in their individual term papers indicated that they were also motivated by the desire to "listen in" on the conversations of their more senior colleagues. This assignment gave them the opportunity to "hear" what the im- portant issues are in various fields and how professionals deal with them. In terms of fulfilling the second goal - introducing students to content analysis as a research method - the as- signment was adequate, but could be improved. Most of the student re- searchers had not conducted inde- pendent research before, and it is unlikely that any of them had been in- volved in collaborative research. Though the assignment was to be com- pleted individually, there were some collaborative aspects to the project. Be- cause it was determined early in the semester that the results from the indi- vidual studies would be consolidated, a small amount of class time each week was devoted to discussion of the re- search methods being used. Sampling methods were discussed in detail; the decision on a method for segmenting multiple-topic messages was made jointly; and the authority lists for topics and functions were derived interac- Spring 1997
1 54 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science tively. In this way, the assignment was successful. One change that would both increase the learning involved with this project and improve the outcome would be to require the students to work in pairs. By collaborating more closely with one other researcher, the students could have learned about the impor- tance of reliability in coding their topic and function categories, and could have produced demonstrably reliable results. In spite of this weakness, we believe that the project was successful as a learning exercise and it will likely be incorporated in future offerings of the class. Conclusion This study has contributed significantly to our understanding of the topics being discussed by librarians in online mes- sages and the functions being per- formed by those messages. However, we are still far from a complete and accu- rate picture of professional communica- tion in this medium. Additional research studies should be conducted, using a method similar to that used here. They should sample from the same discussion groups at future times to see if the topics come and go, or if they are stable within the group. They also should sample from additional dis- cussion groups so that a complete map of the subject matter of discussions in the field of library and information sci- ence can be charted. A clearer under- standing of the content of online discussions should support the forma- tion of stronger and more useful invis- ible colleges, thus leading to the clarification and rapid diffusion of im- portant new ideas in library and infor- mation science. References and Notes 1. George S. Machovec, "Usenet and List- servs: Electronic News and Conferenc- ing," Information Intelligence: Online Libraries and Microcomputers 10(1992):l- 4; Gord Nickerson, "Networked Re- sources," Computers in Libraries 12(1992):13-16, 18. 2. Larry R. Oberg, "COLLIB-L: Listservs in Library Communications," CfrRL News 54(1993):632-34. 3. Avrà Michelson and Jeff Rothenberg, "Scholarly Communication and Informa- tion Technology: Exploring the Impact of Changes in the Research Process on Archives," American Archivist 55 (1992):236-315. 4. Mark J. Schaefermeyer and Edward H. Sewell, Jr., "Communicating by Elec- tronic Mail," American Behavioral Scien- tist 32(1988):112-23. 5. Charles R. McClure, Ann P. Bishop, Philip Doty, and Howard Rosenbaum, The National Research and Education Network (NREN): Research and Policy Perspectives (Norwood, N.J.: Ablex, 1991). 6. Starr Roxanne Hiltz, Online Communi- ties: A Case Study of the Office of the Future (Norwood, N.J.: Ablex, 1984). 7. Yitzhak Berman, "Discussion Groups on the Internet as Sources of Information: The Case of Social Work," Aslib Proceed- ings 48(1996):31-36. 8. Diane K. Kovacs, Kara L. Robinson, and Jeanne Dixon, "Scholarly E-Conferences on the Academic Networks: How Library and Information Science Professionals Use Them," Journal of the American Society for Information Science 46 (19951:244-53. 9. Donna E. Cromer and Mary E. Johnson, "The Impact of the Internet on Communi- cation Among Reference Librarians," The Reference Librarian 41-42(1994): 139- 57. 10. Sharyn J. Ladner and Hope N. Tillman, "How Special Librarians Really Use the Internet," Canadian Library Journal 49(1992):211-15; Sharyn J. Ladner and Volume 38, Number 2
What's Everybody Talking About? 1 55 Hope N. Tillman, "Using the Internet for Reference," Online 17(1993):45-51. 11. Kenley Neufeld, "The Benefits of Elec- tronic Communication Among Library Professionals" (M.L.S. thesis, San Jose State University, 1994). 12. Thomas E. Abbott, "E-Mail Use in Two- Year-College Libraries and LRCs," Com- munity & Junior College Libraries 7(1991):59-68. 13. Diana Crane, Invisible Colleges (Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Pr., 1972); John L. Gresham, Jr., "From Invisible College to Cyberspace College: Computer Confer- encing and the Transformation of Infor- mal Scholarly Communication Networks," Interpersonal Computing and Technology Journal 2(1994):37-52 (available as file GRESHAM IPCTV2N4 from listserv@guvm.georgetown.edu) . 14. Leah A. Lievrouw and Kathleen Carley, "Changing Patterns of Communication Among Scientists in an Era of Telescience,'" Technology in Society 12(1990):457-77. 15. Ladner and Tillman, "Using the In- ternet." 16. Starr Roxanne Hiltz and Murray Turoff, The Network Nation: Human Communi- cation via Computer, Rev. ed. (Cam- bridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1993); Yvonna S. Lincoln, "Virtual Community and In- visible Colleges: Alterations in Faculty Scholarly Networks and Professional Self-image" (paper presented at the an- nual meeting of the Association for the Study of Higher Education, Minneapolis, Minn., October 28-November 1, 1992, ERIC, ED 352 903); Lievrouw and Carley, "Changing Patterns." 17. McClure, Bishop, Doty, and Rosenbaum, The National Research and Education Network, 102. 18. Lincoln, "Virtual Community and Invis- ible Colleges," 20. 19. Deborah Campana, "Information Flow: Written Communication Among Music Librarians," MLA Notes 47(1991):686- 707; W. Carlton Brown, "Message Traffic Analysis of GOVDOC-L and BUSLIB-L: Two Library-Oriented Listservs" (mas- ter's paper, School of Information and Library Science, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 1994); Kovacs, Robinson, and Dixon, "Scholarly E-con- ferences." 20. Cromer and Johnson, "The Impact of the Internet." 21. Campana, "Information Flow." 22. Brown, "Message Traffic Analysis." 23. Cromer and Johnson, "The Impact of the Internet." 24. Andrew D. May, "Automatic Classifica- tion of E-Mail Messages into Communica- tion Type," (master's paper, School of Information and Library Science, Univer- sity of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 19941. 25. Steve Bonario and Ann Thornton, Li- brary-Oriented Lists and Electronic Seri- als, 1994 (http://info.lib.uh.edu/liblists/ home.htm). 26. Usage guidelines for AFAS-L. June 5, 1996. E-mail message received from L- Soft list server at Kent State University. 27. Archives Descript. Not dated. File avail- able from listserv (-miamiu.muohio. edu). 28. Electronic Communications with ASIS. January 13, 1996. (http://www.asis.org/ Ecomm/index.html) . 29. Ladner and Tillman, "Using the In- ternet;" Brown, "Message Traffic Analy- sis." 30. Randy D. Ralph, comp., Library-Related E-Mail Lists, April 3, 1996 (http://www. infi.net/-rdralph/library/listservs/index. html). 31. Everett C. Wilkie, Jr. Not dated. Exlibris. (http://palimpsest.stanford.edu/byform/ mailing-lists/exlibris/) . 32. GAY-LIBN subscription confirmation message. May 29, 1996. Received from CREN ListProcessor at USC. 33. Karl Fattig, "How to Grow a Listserv: The Case of GAY-LIBN and NMRT-L," Ne- braska Library Association Quarterly 24(1993):50-53. 34. Usage guidelines for GOVDOC-L. May 19, 1996. E-mail message received from L- Soft list server at PSUVM. 35. Diane K. Kovacs, "GOVDOC-L: An On- line Intellectual Community of Docu- ments Librarians and Other Individuals Spring 1997
1 56 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Concerned with Access to Government Information," Government Publications Review 17(1990):411-20. 36. Kovacs, Robinson, and Dixon, "Scholarly E-Conferences." 37. Brown, "Message Traffic Analysis." 38. Untitled. Not dated, (http://www.lib. uchicago.edu/~llou/lawsuits/lawlists.txt). 39. Kovacs and The Directory Team, 10th Re- vision Directory. 40. Usage guidelines for LIBREF-L. March 25, 1996. E-mail message received from L-Soft list server at Kent State University. 41. Kara Robinson and Diane Kovacs, "LIBREF-L: Sharing Reference Expertise Over the Academic Networks," Wilson Library Bulletin 67(1993):47-48, 50. 42. Cromer and Johnson, "The Impact of the Internet." 43. Kovacs, Robinson, and Dixon, "Scholarly E-Conferences." 44. Michael B. Eisenberg and Peter Milbury, Welcome to LM_NET. E-mail message re- ceived from L-Soft list server at Syracuse University, June 3, 1996. 45. Michael B. Eisenberg and Peter Milbury, "LM_NET: Helping School Library Media Specialists to Shape the Networking Revolution in the Schools," School Li- brary Media Annual 12(1994):33-53. 46. Shannon VanHemert, PUBYAC subscrip- tion confirmation message, received from listserver at NYSERNet, May 19, 1996. 47. Educational Resources Information Cen- ter, comp., Thesaurus of ERIC Descriptors (Phoenix, Ariz.: Oryx Press, 1995). 48. Library Literature, (New York: H. W. Wil- son, [serial]). 49. The high number of cells with low ex- pected frequencies requires that these significance tests be interpreted with cau- tion, as chi square may not be a valid test in these circumstances. 50. Cromer and Johnson, "The Impact of the Internet." 51. Howard Rosenbaum and Herbert Snyder, "An Investigation of Emerging Norms in Computer Mediated Communication: An Empirical Study of Computer Conferenc- ing," ASIS '91: Proceedings of the 54th ASIS Annual Meeting, Washington, D.C., 27-31 October 28 (1991):15-23. Volume 38, Number 2