PV Toward a New Model of the Information Professions: Embracing Empowerment Mary Niles Maack In redefining the information professions for the twenty-first century, it is important to consider the core values embraced by these fields and to examine the relationship of professionals to their clients and to other professions. Because other models have failed to take account of professional-client interaction, this paper presents a new client-centered typology of the professions. Special emphasis is given to the empow- ering professions (such as psychology, social work, education, and librarianship), which all share the goal of enabling their clients to use knowledge for the purpose of taking control of their own lives. After offering a critique of the unquestioned assumptions and androcentric biases underlying modern theories of professionaliza- tion, this article presents a feminist perspective that validates the ethic of care in professional practice and acknowledges the importance of those professional ac- tivities whose goal is to diffuse knowledge, not to guard or control it. In the past, our understanding of the information professions has been marred by the use of the traditional or "liberal" professions as a model. For example, sociological literature utiliz- ing the trait model of professionaliza- tion operated on the assumption that unless occupations such as librarian- ship, engineering, or social work "matched" characteristics of law or medicine, they could not be classified as "true" professions. Scholars taking this approach often dismissed all fields that emphasized caring or intellectual nurturing as "service" professions, and as recently as 1969, a group of highly regarded sociologists (led by Etzioni) relegated most female-intensive fields to the domain of "semi-professions."1 Nearly a decade later in his well-re- viewed book, The Culture of Profession- alism, historian Bledstein emphasized the masculine character of the profes- sions, stating that the professional's claim of authority "derived from a spe- cial power over worldly experience, a command over the profundities of the discipline. Such masterful command was designed to establish confidence in the mind of the helpless client."2 While more recent publications by scholars such as Reeves, Abbot, and Friedson have introduced a broader, more sophis- ticated analysis of the professions, these writers also employ an androcen- tric perspective focusing on issues such as jurisdictional competition, exclusiv- ity in the creation and control of an esoteric body of knowledge, and legal control over entry into the field.3 Although social theorists have used a variety of approaches to the study of Fall 1997 283
284 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science About the Author MaryNiles Maack is Professor, Graduate School of Education and Infor- mation Studies, University of California, Los Angeles. This paper was presented at the 1997 ALISE conference. professionalization, most have neverthe- less developed models centered on the exclusive control over a body of knowl- edge with little or no attention to how that knowledge is used for, with, or by the cli- ent. My main goals in this paper are: 1. to offer a pluralistic framework chal- lenging the idea that the norm for all professions should be a single andro- centric model of power and control. 2. to shift the focus of analysis from a static enumeration of traits to an ex- amination of the dynamic, reciprocal nature of the relationship between professionals and their clients. 3. to present an alternative view that ac- knowledges both the value and impor- tance of those professional activities and practices whose goal is to diffuse knowledge, not to guard or control it. 4. to offer a new perspective that focuses on the shared values and interconnec- tions among those professionals who regard the empowerment of the client as the essential outcome of their work. The Need for a Client-Centered Model It is my conviction that information pro- fessionals (who have previously meas- ured their worth and their work against the highly authoritarian model of law and medicine) actually have a great deal more to learn from other empowering profes- sions such as teaching or psychology, TABLE 1 Client-Centered Typology of the Professions Volume 38, Number 4 Group 1 : High Authority Professions The professional offers prescriptions, directives, or strategies that the client must follow. Fields: Law, Medicine, Dentistry, Clergy Group 2: Indirect/Product-Oriented Professions The professional focuses on the creation of a physical or intellectual product that may serve the needs of many clients. Fields: Urban Planning, Engineering, Architecture, Chemistry Group 3: Empowering Professions The professional shares expertise with the goal of enabling clients to use knowledge in order to take control of their own lives or their own learning. Fields: Community Psychology, Education, Social Work, Library & Information Science
Embracing Empowerment 285 where the emphasis is on sharing knowledge with the client rather than on cognitive exclusivity. Furthermore, I believe that a meaningful analysis of the professions must examine the relation- ship between professionals and their clients, focusing on the desired out- come of that interaction rather than on the exclusivity of the knowledge base or on the mechanisms maintained for con- trol over who has access to that knowl- edge. Using a client-centered approach, I have developed a multidimensional typology that applies to the full range of professions. This typology presents the world of the professions from the stand- point of practitioners and the clients they serve rather than from the abstract perspective of the sociologist or histo- rian. (See table 1.) In this model, each category con- sists of a constellation of professions that share a particular client orientation and may also share similar goals and values (see table 2). In addition, the model takes into account the fact that those working in certain subfields within a given profession may some- times have a client relationship similar to that of professionals placed in a dif- ferent category. For example, within the information professions, those who are reference librarians, archivists, or chil- dren's librarians deal directly with the public, whereas others who work as sys- tems analysts, catalogers, indexers, or abstractors have a much more indirect relationship with clients - many of whom they may never see. In a sense, catalogers might be thought of as boundary spanners whose values and training are anchored in library and in- formation science while the work they produce in some ways is similar to that done by programmers, scholars, or engi- neers whose focus is on products rather than on personal intervention. How- ever, despite their responsibilities for creating a print or electronic "product," catalogers are also part of an empow- ering profession because they, like their colleagues in public service, embrace core values and overarching goals such as fa- cilitating independent learning and freely providing access to knowledge and re- sources needed by the clients. This new client-oriented frame- work differs radically from the domi- nant approaches to social theory presented in Michael Winter's excellent review of sociological literature on the professions (see table 3). 4 In his analysis of the work of sociologists who repre- sent different schools of thought, Winter demonstrates that although trait theorists focus on the individual practi- tioner, while functionalists stress insti- tutions, and occupational control theorists emphasize the role of the ref- erence group, none of these models de- TABLE 2 Attitudes Toward Professional Knowledge and Outcomes of Its Use Fall 1997 Authoritarian Relationship Empowering Relationship Indirect Relationship cognitive exclusiveness knowledge mediation and cognitive exclusiveness sharing monopoly of judgment partnership in decision-making monopoly of technical expertise goal is to resolve the client's goal is to promote the client's goal is to create a physical or problem growth and competence intellectual product clients remain dependent on clients work/progress toward clients remain dependent on the knowledge and services of greater autonomy the products of professional the professional expertise
286 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science votes significant attention to the central fact of life for many professionals - their daily interaction with the clients for whom they exercise their knowledge and use their skills. In refraining the debate over the na- ture of professionalization, it is essen- tial to (1) analyze attitudes toward knowledge, the nature of its use, and the desired outcome of a professional's ef- fort as well as (2) to examine the differ- ent kinds of relationships professionals may have with their clients. These is- sues, which are laid out in table 2, will be explored further in more detailed examination of selected professions. Definitions and Models, Metaphors and Meaning In presenting a client-centered model of the professions, it is not my goal to cre- ate yet another hierarchy that devalues certain professions and elevates others. Despite the hope of achieving greater inclusiveness, it is nonetheless neces- sary to offer an operational definition as to what kind of occupations will be con- sidered professions in this analysis. Recognizing the lack of consensus in the theoretical literature (see Millerson, Abbot, Friedson),5 I have chosen to take a legal definition drawn from the Taft- Hartley Act, a labor-management rela- tions act passed in 1947 and revised in 1970: The term "professional employee" means any employee engaged in work: (i) predominantly intellectual and var- ied in character as opposed to routine mental, manual, mechanical or physical work; (ii) involving the consistent exer- cise of discretion and judgment in its performance; (iii) of such a character that the output produced or the result accomplished cannot be standardized in relation to a given period of time; (iv) requiring a knowledge of an advanced type in a field of science or learning customarily acquired by a prolonged course of specialized intellectual in- struction and study in an institution of higher learning or a hospital, as distin- guished from a general academic educa- tion or from an apprenticeship. [Section 2 (12) of 29 U.S.C. <fl 152 (12) (1970).]6 Because this definition not only places emphasis on the intellectual na- ture of the work and the importance of exercising judgment, but also specifies TABLE 3 Comparison of Sociological Models of the Professions Adapted from: Michael F. Winter. The Culture and Control of Expertise (Westport, Conn.: Greenwood, 1988). 124. Volume 38, Number 4 Model Primary Aspect Focus Trait Autonomy INDIVIDUAL Knowledge Base Professional Association University Education Functionalist Authority INSTITUTION/SOCIETY Cognitive Skill Knowledge Base University Education Occupational Control Knowledge Base GROUP University Education Professional Association
Embracing Empowerment 287 university-based instruction as a crite- rion for inclusion, it provides a frame- work that is limited to those occupations where learning is key. Definitions are important in estab- lishing our understanding of the world, but models, like metaphors and images, can also have a profound effect on the way we perceive relationships. As the sociologist Jonathan Turner remarks, a model provides a means "to represent visually a phenomenon in a way that exposes its underlying properties and their interconnections." He goes on to note that although the term model is highly ambiguous in the social sci- ences, models have been used in social theory to present "concepts and their relations ... as a visual picture that maps properties of the social universe and their interrelations."7 Building on the mapping metaphor, it is apparent that, like a flat map that represents three-dimensional space, any model can only partially represent reality. However models, like the north-ori- ented maps we carry in our heads, frame the way we think and act, thus becom- ing part of a conceptual system that unconsciously "plays a central role in defining our everyday realities."8 By the same token, collective self- image, practices, and strategies for im- provement in diverse fields have been shaped by a conceptual system based on a highly authoritarian model of profes- sionalism - despite this model's inap- propriateness to their philosophy of service or to the nature of their practice. One striking example occurred in the social work field when Abraham Flexner, an educator who was known for his highly critical evaluation of medical training, was invited to address a national conference of charities and corrections in 1915. At that historic meeting he declared that a profession must be teachable, learnable, self-polic- ing, altruistic, and socially useful; he also emphasized that although profes- sionals derive their raw material from science and learning, this knowledge must be applied in a way that tran- scends rigid and mechanical applica- tion of rules: "what matters most is professional spirit."9 However, despite what appeared to be an open definition, inclusive of new fields that had emerged at the end of the nineteenth century, Flexner asserted that social workers had only arrived at the begin- ning stages of professionalization and concluded that "because social work mediated between other professions it did not have the responsibility and power of a true profession."10 The durable influence that Flexner exerted has been noted by many schol- ars, including Philip Popple, who ob- served seventy years later: "Traditional sociology of the professions, with its emphasis on cognitive exclusivity, has yielded dysfunctional results for social work."11 Developing this point further, Popple continued: Because of the large number of excep- tions to the current models of profes- sions, we must conclude that there is something wrong with each of these models. All of them to date, be they trait, process, or power, basically follow Flexner's 1915 example. They assign pri- mary importance to skill based on exclu- sive intellectual knowledge applied to some problem . . . Because of this skill and knowledge, the profession is seen as "winning" control of a domain and ac- quiring the autonomy to practice within the domain.12 From the early years of this century to the present, most of the supposedly "objective" social science literature was replete with undefined key words related to professional power - both in regard to power over the client and exclusive con- trol over a body of knowledge. The fre- quent use of terms such as "hegemony," Fall 1997
288 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science "dominance," "monopoly of dis- course," and "social control" was criti- cized by sociologist Eliot Friedson, who dismisses such words "as part of a col- orful rhetoric that exercises the imagi- nation by its connotations but that does not allow actual connection with con- crete human events and experiences."13 High Authority Professions as the Model Although few social theorists have been as blunt as Nathan Glazer, who declared that law and medicine alone were "the major professions," those two fields have often been set apart from and above other occupations.14 While Glazer used the term "minor profes- sions" to describe other fields, Amitai Etzioni designated teachers, librarians, and social workers as "semi-profession- als" partly because they were "rarely directly concerned with matters of life and death."15 It may be true that the prestige of lawyers and physicians are linked to their intervention at times of crisis, but theorists have tended to ig- nore the fact that a large majority of those who practice in these fields spend their time performing work of a much more mundane nature. Lawyers obviously devote more billable hours to legal research than to time in court, and relatively few doctors spend their careers performing major surgery or working in an emergency room. In fact, Matthew DuMont, an M.D. from the National Institute of Mental Health, noted that "at least 60 percent of the physician-patient contacts are for functional complaints (where there is no organic pathology.)"16 As in other fields, work in crisis situations varies by specialty; it is therefore reasonable to argue that social workers or psy- chologists employed in suicide prevention centers handle more life-threatening cases than plastic surgeons, ophthal- mologists, or corporate lawyers. Even when lawyers and doctors are not dealing with life-and- death issues, they nonetheless exercise authority over their clients differently than most other professionals. In his history of American medicine Paul Starr differentiates be- tween two distinct but interrelated kinds of professional authority: "social author- ity [that] involves the control of action through the giving of commands" and "cultural authority [that] entails the con- struction of reality through definitions of fact and value."17 In analyzing physicians' use of these two kinds of authority, Starr also discusses the voluntary nature of the doctor-patient relationship: A doctor may tell a patient that if he does not stop smoking ... he will not have long to live. The patient may take this as an authoritative judgment, but decline to follow the advice. Here the physician's cultural authority exceeds his social authority; this is quite commonly the case. Physicians, insofar as they deal with voluntary patients, generally do not have the coercive powers of the state to enforce either their definitions of reality or their instructions. Judges rule; physi- cians usually advise. Starr goes on to note that while such advice is not coercive it is often "advice that one can not safely ignore."18 Even though both lawyers and phy- sicians lack coercive power over most of their clients in a free-market system, because much of the knowledge they use in their practice is highly technical and specialized, they are able to maintain what sociologist Magali Larson refers to as "cognitive exclusiveness."19 This ex- clusivity has not only been maintained as a means to control entry into the field, it has also served as a way of closely guard- ing knowledge that might be both under- standable and useful to the client. Blatant Volume 38, Number 4
Embracing Empowerment 289 historical examples of this are found in Dr. D.W. Cathell's manual The Physician Himself- a popular guide for medical practice that went through numerous edi- tions beginning in 1881. In regard to ther- apy and pharmaceuticals, Dr. Cathell offered the following advice: Especially avoid giving self-sufficient peo- ple therapeutic points that they can resort to ... It is not your duty to cheat yourself or other physicians by supplying this person and that one with a word-of-mouth pharma- copoeia for general use ... If compelled to give a person remedies under a simple form . . . use whatever strategies necessary to pre- vent such a person from taking advantage of your prescriptions.20 The use of Latin names for simple com- pounds like carbolic acid and even "trans- posing the terms" were among the strategies that Cathell recommended to physicians who sought to guard their knowledge from their patients. Such techniques of secrecy and obfuscation were later challenged by the public health movement, and the intro- duction of preventive medicine brought radical changes that would have been anath- ema to Cathell, who wrote during a period when the American medical profession was consolidating its authority. An even more dramatic alteration of the doctor-patient relationship came nearly a century later in the wake of the adoption of the Patients Bill of Rights by the American Hospital Association in 1972. Starr notes that "recognized rights in health care, such as informed consent, obligate doctors and hospitals to share more information with patients. Thus the new health rights move- ment . . . challenged the distribution of power and expertise." He then observes that the best illustration of the decline of medi- cine's "professional sovereignty" is found in the increasing tendency during the 1970s for "the courts to view the doctor-patient rela- tionship as a partnership in decision making rather than a doctor's monopoly."21 Despite the changing attitude toward informing and educating patients, Starr believes that a relationship of depend- ency still remains a key component of professional authority. He writes: The kind of authority claimed by the profes- sions, then, involves not only skill in per- forming a service, but also the capacity to judge the experience and needs of clients. Professional authority can be defined, in part, by a distinctive type of dependency condition - the dependence on the profes- sional's superior competence.22 Dependency is also a central theme in Bledstein's analysis of the consolidation of professional power during the last quarter of the nineteenth century. Bledstein notes that symbols of professional authority "in- cluding the number of technical aids" in the office of a successful practitioner, "rein- forced the public's consciousness of its de- pendence . . . Practitioners succeeded by playing on the weaknesses of the client, his vulnerability, helplessness, and general anxiety."23 From this perspective, because the client's lack of professional knowledge fosters dependency, the mastery of this knowledge becomes an intellectual com- modity - not intellectual property in the sense that one has created the knowledge, but property in that one has mastery and publicly recognized intellectual ownership gained through education, experience and/or credentialing. Indirect Client Relationships in Product/Process-Oriented Professions In the proposed client-centered typo- logy, Group Two includes professionals who are very concerned about intellec- tual property because in many cases they apply knowledge to create prod- ucts that may be copyrighted or pat- ented. The resulting work can be concrete (literally - such as a bridge, a highway, or a building) or it can be an intellectual Fall 1997
290 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science product, such as a book or article, a scientific report, a computer program, or a musical score. Other kinds of pro- fessionals in this category are those who apply knowledge toward the public good through work in management or policy development (e.g., public ad- ministration or city planning). What brings these disparate fields together is their indirect relationship with clients who support their work through taxes or purchases, but whom they may never see. For example, civil engineers deal with representatives of city government, not with the primary users of their high- ways or bridges. Their knowledge is not used for the immediate or direct benefit of an individual client, but in the creation of a product that is often used by a clientele with whom the professional has no per- sonal acquaintance. One of the few theorists to comment on this indirect relationship is Larson, who states: "the physical nature of the engineer's professional product imme- diately involves the possibility that the buyer be a different person from the consumer . . . The relation between the technical devisor and the buyer of his services is typically quite different than that which prevails when buyer and consumer are fused, and so is the set of potential loyalties and responsibili- ties."24 The issue of divided loyalties is of special concern for those profession- als in Group Two who are employed in the for-profit sector (e.g., as architects, engineers, industrial designers). The potential conflict of interest between responsibility for the public good and the demands of profit-oriented employ- ers has been directly addressed by pro- fessional associations in their codes of ethics. The Accreditation Board for En- gineering and Technology has clearly expressed these concerns in the first item in its Canon of Ethics, which states: "Engineers shall hold paramount the safety, health, and welfare of the public in the performance of their pro- fessional duties." Canon four further elaborates: "Engineers shall act in pro- fessional matters for each employer or client as faithful agents or trustees, and shall avoid conflicts of interest."25 The issues of social responsibility and the ethical use of professional knowledge are also discussed in engineering text- books that may include issues such as environmental pollution, whistle blow- ing, and public safety. Boundaries of some of the fields in Group Two are relatively fluid, allowing for entry through a range of criteria, including education, official creden- tials, and experience. Although the great majority of practitioners will have a university degree in their field and may also hold a state license, in rare cases entry can be gained through talent and through apprenticeship. One such field is engineering, where most profes- sionals have at least a bachelor's degree and over a quarter hold licenses as Pro- fessional Engineers. However, in a 1985 report sponsored by the National Re- search Council, an engineer was de- fined as an individual whose only qualification could be: "Current or re- cent employment at a job classification requiring engineering work at a profes- sional level."26 Even though the engineering field (at least in theory) admits those whose knowledge may have been gained out- side the university, historically engi- neers have sought to maintain cognitive exclusivity through the prestige associ- ated with their mastery of theoretical science and because of their proprietary interest in trade secrets and patents. In a study that focuses on electrical engi- neering and communication Carolyn Marvin writes: the restricted literacy of theoretical sci- ence and applied engineering was touted in the late nineteenth century as the Volume 38, Number 4
Embracing Empowerment 291 exclusive property and singular re- sponsibility of professional experts. Mastery of technical secrets was both an indicator of status and a path to it ... Because of the esteem conferred on tech- nological literacy by a society that rever- enced it as a high secret, professionals were anxious to guard it from eager non- specialists who might dilute it or, per- haps more alarming, possess it inde- pendently of the elites whose exclusive domain it was supposed to be.27 The Empowering Professions Although many of the fields that are designated as empowering professions (social work, teaching, librarianship, psychology) also originated or under- went intense professionalization dur- ing the late nineteenth century, their goal was never seen as exclusive control over a body of knowledge from which all others would be excluded. As social workers and librarians created "new" professions, their relationship with cli- ents was far different from that de- scribed by historian Burton Bledstein, who refers to the client as a vulnerable, helpless "victim" at the mercy of the all-knowing professional. Bledstein fur- ther declares: "The culture of profes- sionalism tended to cultivate an atmosphere of constant crisis ... in which practitioners both created work for themselves and reinforced their authority by intimidating clients."28 Although there have often been competing visions of service in fields such as librarianship and social work, broadly speaking, their shared goal is to enable their clients or students to gain knowledge that will allow them to exert more control over their own lives and over their environment. For social workers or therapists, the objective may be to provide clients with knowledge or information that will enable them to obtain resources, solve immediate prob- lems, or deal with long-standing issues, such as unresolved childhood traumas. In the case of those who work in librar- ies, archives, museums, or in any level of education, the knowledge shared with clients often provides them with personal or cultural enrichment rather than helping them gain a needed skill or solve a specific problem. However, in other instances, professionals from Group Three, including librarians, teachers, and psychologists, may com- municate information or knowledge to clients in order to assist them in accom- plishing an immediate task. Relatively little sociological or his- torical research has acknowledged me- diation and communication as an essential function of professionals. In fact, Etzioni's work in the mid-1960s relegated occupations such as teaching and social work to the netherworld of "semi-professions" because their prac- titioners "are more concerned with the communication and to a lesser extent with the application of knowledge."29 In contrast, the proposed client-cen- tered model presents the communica- tion of knowledge as a vital professional activity - especially in the information age. Those who communicate knowl- edge (psychologists, occupational therapists, psychiatrists, public health nurses, and counselors, as well as teach- ers and information professionals) are therefore seen as members of mature professions that base their practice on the assumption that knowledge is power. However, the most significant tenet linking the professionals in Group Three is their belief that power should be conceived as empowerment rather than control. Professionals working in these fields often express their mission as the encouragement of autonomous learning and effective problem solving. Their goal is to provide clients with the infor- Fall 1997
292 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science mation and knowledge that will enable them to exert greater control over their own lives; by transferring knowledge to the client, these professionals empower people to meet their own needs more effectively. William S. Bennet, Jr., and Meri C. Hokenstad describe such fields as "people-working professions" be- cause practitioners "function as cata- lysts, who, through the communication of information and sharing of insights, attempt to help the client help him- self."30 They further note that the main function of these professionals is "the transference of knowledge, not just the use of it."31 From this perspective, the goal of the professional is to promote growth and competence, so that the next time a similar situation arises (an infor- mation need or a family crisis), the clients can handle it on their own without pro- fessional assistance or intervention. Professionals in Group Three are similar to lawyers and doctors in that they usually engage in a face-to-face re- lationship with clients; however, their work may be in groups (classrooms or group therapy) as well as on an indi- vidualized basis. In some cases profes- sionals, such as librarians or physical therapists, may have short-term rela- tionships with many clients who only come to seek help with a specific need whereas others in these fields may have certain clients with whom they work over a period of years (e.g., a librarian dealing with volunteers in a neighbor- hood branch, or a therapist working in a retirement home or with a sports team). In a similar fashion psycholo- gists, teachers, or university faculty have an ongoing relationship with cli- ents or students that lasts over a signifi- cant time. Whether the client-professional relationship is occasional and sporadic or long-term, practitioners in Group Three provide knowledge or information to their clientele and work in partnership with them. The desired outcome of this relationship is not to prolong the depend- ency of clients but to foster their learning, autonomy, competence, and self-esteem. The Code of Ethics of the National Asso- ciation of Social Workers, 1993, expresses this idea in its principles that states: "The social worker's primary responsibility is to clients . . . The social worker should make every effort to foster maximum self- determination on the part of clients."32 Librarians have also expressed their commitment to both individual self-determination and community ac- tion. The Public Library: Democracy's Resource, a statement of principles adopted in 1982 by the Public Library Association, declares that the mission of the public librarian is "to provide free access to, and promote the communica- tion of ideas and information so that individuals on their own behalf, and groups, agencies, organizations, and in- stitutions can take control of their lives and affairs."33 In a similar fashion, the Final Report of the ALA Presidential Committee on Information Literacy opens with the statement that "in an information society, all people should have the right to information that can enhance their lives ... To promote eco- nomic independence and quality of ex- istence, there is a lifelong need for being informed and up-to-date." This docu- ment also declares: "Information liter- acy, therefore, is a means of personal empowerment. It allows people to verify or refute expert opinion, and to become independent seekers of truth."34 While there has been a strong, con- tinuing tradition in librarianship and so- cial work that defines the role of the professional as a mediator, facilitator, or partner, there has also been a countervail- ing view expressed by proponents of "professionalization" who advocate an authoritarian or paternalistic approach to clients. In the social work field, paternal- ism has been described as practice con- ducted on behalf of people for their own Volume 38, Number 4
Embracing Empowerment 293 good, but without their consent,35 whereas in librarianship paternalism has often been linked to class biases in book selection. Thus, rather than providing readers with fiction or recreational works, some librarians insisted on attempting to "uplift" readers by offering them "the best literature" whether or not they wanted it. Although there have been persist- ent efforts to resist paternalistic prac- tices in librarianship and social work, leading journals in both fields have published articles insisting that "true" professional status could only be achieved through increasing the power wielded by the professional. One noted sociologist, William Goode, concluded that librarianship was not a profession because the librarian has little power over his clients . . . The client has the right to check out and use the materials of the library, even if the librarian be- lieves he can not use them to advantage . . . This strain between the wishes and the real needs of a clientele is perhaps to be found in all professions, but in estab- lished professions more often it is re- solved by the professional's decision.36 Writing from a similar perspective, Ernest Greenwood, a professor of social work from Berkeley, stated: "In a profes- sional relationship . . . the professional dictates what is good or evil for the client, who has no choice but to accede to professional judgment . . . The cli- ent's subordination to professional authority invests the professional with a monopoly of judgment."37 However, although Greenwood believed that so- cial work was "seeking to rise within the professional hierarchy so that it too might enjoy maximum prestige," he warned that "the attainment of profes- sional prestige, authority and monop- oly by social workers will undoubtedly carry disturbing implications for the social action and social reform compo- nents of social work philosophy." Many social work practitioners and educators were opposed to adopting Greenwood's authoritarian model and in- stead endorsed the idea of "shared power in partnership with others."38 By the 1970s, following the lead of black social worker Barbara Solomon, radical leaders in the field began to describe social work as an "empowering profession." However, as historian Barbara Levy Simon points out, "[t]hough the coinage of the term em- powerment is relatively recent, the per- spective connoted by that term is not . . . Social work's commitment to helping marginalized and impoverished people is as old as the occupation itself. Since the last decade of the nineteenth century, so- cial work's empowerment tradition in the United States has comprised one vital seg- ment of the larger profession."39 Defining Empowerment Because of its salience to the mission of social work, professionals and educators from that field have led the way in pro- viding definitions, critiques, historical studies, practice-oriented articles, and even textbooks dealing with the concept of empowerment. In addition to social work publications, surveys of literature on the empowerment approach in human services have identified books and arti- cles in community psychology, commu- nity psychiatry, public health, gerontology, education, and even liberation theology.40 Because the meaning of empowerment may differ depending on the field, nation- ality, and cultural and political orienta- tion of the writer, there is no consensus on a single definition. However, authors from a number of fields have frequently quoted the 1987 definition offered by psycholo- gist Julian Rappaport: Empowerment is a pervasive positive value in American culture. The concept suggests both individual self-determination over Fall 1997
294 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science one's own life and democratic participa- tion in the life of one's community, often through mediating structures such as schools, neighborhoods, churches, and other voluntary structures.41 Because a central tenet of librarian- ship has been the belief that access to information is essential to democratic participation, Rappaport's definition of empowerment is consistent with our understanding of the role of the library. Marilyn Geli, who describes libraries as "custodians of social value and . . . agencies of information justice," de- clares: "If our form of government re- quires an informed public, the mission of the library is to provide the source of that information equally to all."42 While the idea of empowerment of the information-poor through equalization of access to resources - both print and electronic - has been a frequent topic in library literature, the theme "libraries change lives" also addresses the second element of Rappaport's definition that states: Empowerment conveys both a psycho- logical sense of personal control or influ- ence and a concern with actual social in- fluence, political power, and legal rights. It is a multilevel construct, applicable to individual citizens as well as to organiza- tions and neighborhood.43 In a similar fashion, DuBois and Miley note that empowerment refers to a state of mind, such as feeling worthy or competent or perceiving power and control as well as "a reallocation of powerihai comes from modifying social structures."44 Since much professional work in human services fields, includ- ing library and information science, is done on a one-to-one basis, practition- ers often view their primary role as fos- tering the individual's competence. The growth of confidence and development of personal skills can then become a first step toward enabling that individ- ual to participate in the social life of the broader community and engage in po- litical action. Because of the focus on the individ- ual in the literature of the human service fields, client-practitioner relationships have been discussed at length in articles and books dealing with empowerment. In the second edition of their textbook, Social Work: An Empowering Profession, DuBois and Miley identify a number of assump- tions underlying this approach: ■ Empowerment is a collaborative process, with clients and practitio- ners working together as partners. ■ Clients must perceive themselves as causal agents, able to effect change. ■ People must participate in their own empowerment: goals, means and outcomes must be self-defined. ■ Empowerment involves access to re- sources and the capacity to use those resources effectively. ■ The empowering process is dynamic, synergistic, ever changing, and evolu- tionary.45 Much of social work literature em- braces the egalitarian, collaborative ap- proach advocated by DuBois and Miley. Nonetheless, appropriate use of expertise and the asymmetrical nature of the client- professional relationship have also been acknowledged as issues that must be con- fronted by professionals who wish to fos- ter the self-determination of clients. Hasenfeld identifies four kinds of power held by the social worker: power over resources, power of expertise, referent power or persuasion (which is linked to interpersonal skills and empathy), and legitimate power, "which is an appeal to dominant cultural values and authorita- tive norms."46 In using this power to promote empowerment, Hasenfeld rec- ommends strategies similar to what is often called the "strengths perspective" that "builds on clients' strengths and on resources in their environment."47 Volume 38, Number 4
Embracing Empowerment 295 Hasenfeld advocates practice based "on the assumption that the capacity of peo- ple to improve their lives is determined by their ability to control their environ- ment." In contrast to powerlessness that comes from loss of control and negative self-valuation, he sees empowerment as "a process though which clients obtain resources - personal, organizational and community - that enable them to gain greater control . . . and attain their aspirations."48 By serving as information provid- ers, librarians can play an important role in enabling clients to obtain knowl- edge about their environment as well as information that will aid them in spe- cific tasks. As Durrance points out, "if citizens are to make informed decisions in a democracy, and further if they are to have accurate information needed to influence the decisions that affect their lives and those of others - to take ad- vantage of their right to know - they need assistance through the maze of sources."49 Although Durrance found, in her 1984 study of library response to citizen information needs, that library practices and policies sometimes im- pede access to information, her study also revealed that "the single factor most closely associated with success- fully using a public library was whether or not the citizen group leader knew the name of a librarian."50 This finding confirms the importance of focusing on client relationships in a new way, re-en- visioning the field as part of a constel- lation of empowering professions whose relationship with the client is predicated on individualized assis- tance. In the library and information science field, this means beginning with what the individual knows, iden- tifying the nature of the information gap, and assisting that person in locat- ing, evaluating, and effectively using any kind of print or electronic material that will meet her information needs. Implications of the Model: Empowering our Clients and Ourselves Social worker Lorraine Gutierrez de- scribes empowerment as occurring "on the individual, interpersonal, and insti- tutional levels, where the person devel- ops a sense of personal power, an ability to affect others, and an ability to work with others to change social institu- tions." She then outlines four processes associated with empowerment: increas- ing self-efficacy; reducing self-blame; developing group consciousness; and assuming responsibility for change.51 Each of these processes can be applied to a profession as a corporate body whose relationship to the broader soci- ety is in many ways analogous to that of an individual to her or his community. Increasing Self-Efficacy By using the "strengths perspective" in re-envisioning librarianship and the other information professions, we must draw on our heritage - the ideals, prac- tices, and accomplishments of these fields. This does not mean ignoring weaknesses, threats, or failings, but it requires that we avoid the negativism of the "deficits" approach, which concen- trates on superficial attributes of profes- sionalism rather than focusing on our central mission and then identifying the internal and external resources avail- able to improve practice. Unfortunately, the deficits ap- proach, which elaborates on those traits that librarianship may lack, has domi- nated much of the literature on pro fes - sionalization in library and information science. Those writing from this per- spective assume, like William Goode, that unless our educational programs, credentials, or knowledge are analo- gous to those of the "true" professions we can never claim professional stand- Fall 1997
296 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science ing. Library and information science scholars who have pointed out the fal- lacy of this approach include Pauline Wilson, who argued that no field could achieve complete fidelity to the profes- sional model,52 and Lester Asheim, who believed that the most positive as- pect of the "anti-professionalism" movement of the 1960s lay in its chal- lenge to the rigid, monolithic model. He writes: In the past if there were any charac- teristic of professionalism to which li- brarianship did not conform, the imme- diate assumption was that librarianship, not the criterion, must be at fault. The 1960s movement, by demonstrating that it is possible to examine the pro- fessional criteria and to reject them if they are found wanting, introduced a new approach to the status of librari- anship. It became possible to evaluate the practices of librarians on their own terms, and to decide whether any criteria borrowed from other occupations are re- ally applicable.53 Advocating "a new, more flexible set of professional standards that would focus not on the symbol, but on the thing itself," Asheim suggests a means for in- creasing the efficacy of librarianship - ef- ficacy grounded in the profound understanding and belief in our values and goals as professionals. Those values that Asheim believed had "withstood critical scrutiny of the 1960s" included: "giving access to the information without prescription;" and the practice of provid- ing instruction to people "in skills with which they can help themselves instead of turning always to us." Among the goals he identified were "client-orientation, special knowledge enlisted in the service of people, [and] public benefit before pri- vate gain."54 These views have been ad- vocated by a number of librarians such as Hanks and Schmidt, who envisioned a "democratic professionalism" that prefigured the contemporary empower- ment model in its insistence that profes- sionals should not "dictate what clients must do, but discover what the clients need and fulfill these needs by using specialized knowledge and skills."55 As library activists were placing greater emphasis on empowering users, scholars showed that this approach ac- tually had had a long history in the field. Birdsall dates "the idea of promot- ing user self-sufficiency" to 1876 when Samuel Swett Green wrote an article on reference service that "urged librarians to teach library users to be inde- pendent."56 In this same article, Green advised librarians to be sympathetic and patient and "show respect for reti- cence" on the part of the user. Yet de- spite the deep roots of this egalitarian tradition, there have also been persist- ent efforts to fault librarians for their reluctance to take an authoritative stance toward collection development and reader services. Reducing Self-Blame Although both activists and feminists have challenged literature that blames librarians' lack of "professional status" on their client orientation and on their alleged passivity, articles and books continue to appear that implicitly ac- cept an authoritarian model of profes- sionalism - even though this model has been severely criticized in many fields - including law and medicine. Ironically, in the 1980s, at a time when Starr believed that the doctor-patient relationship was being transformed into a "partnership in decision making," an editorial in the Journal of Academic Li- brarianship urged librarians to build a "vital, authoritative image."57 Major Owens, a congressman and former li- brarian, was even more adamant in a 1986 article where he advised that li- Volume 38, Number 4
Embracing Empowerment 297 brarians display "constructive arro- gance when establishing their authority over matters relative to library and in- formation services."58 More recently, a book by Harris and Hannah admon- ished librarians to "abandon their pas- sive neutrality and adopt a much more authoritative stance toward their cli- ents."59 Despite the growing number of works critiquing the authoritarian model of professionalism,60 too many writers in library and information sci- ence continue to accept its premises - blaming librarians for their failure to conform to a model that has been largely discredited. For example, in a 1989 book on public library organiza- tion, Webb lists seven traits that "li- brarians, and other groups who aspire to professionalism, naturally feel com- pelled to emulate"; the seventh trait is "involvement in the discovery and ap- plication of knowledge as opposed to its mere communication."61 Webb then quotes from a 1964 work by Etzioni, and even states that since librarianship lacks some of the qualities that he enu- merated above, it therefore "seems to fit into the category Etzioni describes as a 'semi-profession.'" This kind of state- ment reinforces the tendency to inter- nalize the negative self-image that comes from uncritical acceptance of la- bels such as "semi-profession" or "mi- nor profession." Unfortunately, such images continue to haunt our profes- sional literature. According to Nelson, one way to exorcise this "chimera of professional- ism" that devalues our field is to "rec- ognize that the fault may not lie all within ourselves, but may be inherent in the nature of our society. Knowledge and learning, to which we are so closely allied, are not really respected for their own sake in American society."62 A sec- ond factor that Nelson confronts is the fact that, as a woman's profession, li- brarianship is not valued because women are not valued. However, rather than accepting victimhood or blame, she and other feminist librarians be- lieve that the field must become com- mitted to working toward equalization of women's social and economic status as well as increasing their opportunities in librarianship. Canadian library edu- cator Roma Harris also advocates "re- embracing the old librarianship by restoring to it a brand of female profes- sionalism. This includes a (re)commit- ment to service; . . .advocacy vis-à-vis the public's right to equitable access to information; and activism with respect to employment issues including status, salary, and equity in the workplace." She then urges librarians to "embrace a feminist analysis of their profession . . . [and to] give themselves credit for what they know and put a stop to the process of shunning the female-intensive as- pects of their work."63 Developing Group Consciousness If we, as information professionals, em- brace empowerment as our central role, acknowledging the importance of val- ues such as intellectual nurturing and the ethic of care, we will also validate a feminist concept of professionalism that is shared by fields such as social work, community psychology, counsel- ing, public health nursing, occupa- tional therapy, and teaching. I strongly agree with Roma Harris, who urges li- brarians "to ally themselves with those in other female-intensive professions and acknowledge that many of the ex- ternally imposed impediments to their goals are the result of the way in which female endeavor is valued in this cul- ture."64 We should not only view the information professions as part of a con- stellation of occupations that center on empowerment of clients, we should ac- Fall 1997
298 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science tively seek closer ties with these fields through partnerships, teamwork, and an exchange of knowledge. We have much to learn from publications in psychology and social work that offer discussion of empowerment-based practice with clients who are frequently among the populations that most need but least use our services. Library and information science professionals also can learn a great deal from counselors, teachers, and public health nurses engaged in client educa- tion programs. The relationship should be reciprocal, since practitioners in these fields can and should use informa- tion resources that we acquire, organ- ize, and make available. One example of collaborations across professions is a workshop for social workers organized by a state library literacy campaign; the goal was to help these practitioners ree - ognize signs indicating that a client had low literacy skills and should be re- ferred to a library literacy program. In turn, libraries that have community in- formation centers or information and referral services should seek contacts with professionals in other human serv- ices fields to whom they may need to refer library users. Another reason for joining efforts with professionals who share our values is to enlist their support in a campaign to rename these fields as empowering professions. Taking a new name and forging a new collective identity with other client-centered fields is far more than an exercise in semantics. Social work professors Van Der Bergh and Cooper stress that "renaming includes reclaiming knowledge and pride in cul- tural, historical, and current experi- ences ... To rename also means to expand the conceptual boundaries of words by going beyond conventional definitions."65 Applying the idea of re- naming to empowerment-based social work, DuBois and Miley emphasize the importance of language: "Words shape our thinking, prescribe our interpreta- tions, and predispose our conclusions. It stands to reason that if social work is to be an empowering profession, then the words, labels, and metaphors social workers draw on to describe their work must promote strengths and facilitate empowerment."66 How would it change the thinking of library and information science practitioners and students if they were to envision their field as cli- ent-oriented, active, collaborative, and empowering - not as a semi-profession that can never fit the authoritarian model of professionalism? Assuming Responsibility for Change Looking toward the twenty-first cen- tury, we in the library and information science field have affirmed our commit- ment to public access to information, and through the information literacy movement we have sown the seed for a new understanding of professionalism. While the Final Report of the ALA Presidential Committee on Information Literacy expands the responsibility and enhances the self-image of information professionals, it also views information literacy as "a means of personal empow- erment." Thus information profession- als have a catalytic role, enabling individuals to gain knowledge, to in- crease their skills in finding and organ- izing information, and to develop a critical perspective that allows them "to verify or refute expert opinion, and to become independent seekers of truth."67 This thinking is similar to the attitude toward professionals expressed by sociologist Robert Bellah and his col- leagues, who wrote in The Good Soci- ety, "We need experts and expert opinion, and experts can certainly help Volume 38, Number 4
Embracing Empowerment 299 us think about the important issues. But democracy is not the rule of experts. It is basic to the education of citizens that they learn how to evaluate expert opinion . . . Weighing the moral impli- cations of different options is what is essential."68 By endorsing a skeptical, and even subversive, approach toward professional authority, we have moved toward a new concept of professional- ism that emphasizes shared critical thinking and partnership as well as problem solving. The one certainty that the future holds for professionals is the expanding role of teaching and learning in all fields - not only in the empowering pro- fessions that promote autonomy, but also in fields as diverse as medicine and city planning. During the next century the idea of a "learned profession" must give way to the concept of a "learning profession." Because of the enormous expansion of knowledge and informa- tion, it becomes essential to teach future professionals to use a vast array of re- sources (electronic, print, or human) that will be essential to their continuing education. Sophie Freud, a social work professor, states this well: "More impor- tant than teaching students everything they need to know, which is a hopeless task, is teaching them an attitude of being life-long learners. I believe an identity of an educator automatically implies a simultaneous self-concept of learner."69 By taking this approach - learning for, with, and from students and clients - we foster an openness to innovative thinking and a continuing source of empowerment for both our- selves and those with whom we work. These ideas of connection, mutual- ity, and interdependence also reflect patterns and values that feminist psy- chologists have identified with women's ways of thinking and know- ing. As Mary Field Belenky and her col- leagues point out, "Women typically approach adulthood with the under- standing that the care and empower- ment of others is central to their life work. Through listening and respond- ing, they draw out the voices and minds of those they help to raise up. In the process, they often come to hear, value, and strengthen their own voices and minds as well."70 The concept of an empowering profession incorporates these ideas and, like Gilligan's work in moral reasoning, the goal of this new approach is not to devalue other ways of thinking or other uses of expert knowledge, but to recognize the valid- ity of a different voice that adds a coun- terpoint to the discourse on the nature of professional practice.71 While it may generally be appropriate for lawyers, doctors, engineers, and architects to concentrate on solving problems - shar- ing little of their knowledge with cli- ents - this mode of practice must be recognized as antithetical to fields like psychology, teaching, social work, and librarianship. In such fields profession- als do not impart all of their knowledge to the student or client, but rather view mature practice as understanding what knowledge will enable clients to em- power themselves. By proposing a client-centered categorization of the professions, my goal is to challenge the idea that the norm for all professions should be a single androcentric model of power and control, anchored in hierarchical rather than collaborative relation- ships, and replete with military meta- phors. I wholeheartedly endorse the view of British management professor Judi Marshall who calls for a radical approach to organizations: tak- ing nothing for granted, looking criti- cally at basic values and assumptions and identifying where, however subtly, they define male as positive and female as negative. The aim of these processes Fall 1997
300 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science is to develop new social and organiza- tional foundations that value women and men equally . . . not rejecting the heritage we have but looking for the functions and creative potential of fe- male and male patterns of being, espe- cially drawing from archetypal levels of understanding to go beyond the limits of social stereotypes.72 If we take this "radical approach" as an invitation to re-examine our heri- tage, we must also include what Winter describes as the "philosophical under- pinnings of professionalism." He notes: "Two of these root ideas are freedom and service, and in a sense they are the fundamental notions of professional life . . . Without the idea of service, free- dom falls into a form of self-assertion, and without the idea of freedom, the notion of service becomes a form of ser- vility."73 As we move toward thinking of li- brarianship and information science as "empowering professions" rather than "service professions," we must still ac- knowledge the inequalities in the cli- ent-professional relationship and the nature of professional autonomy. Let us discard hierarchical images and em- brace new metaphors that reflect differ- ent definitions of expertise, power, and leadership. After observing that women participating in their study of feminist leadership seldom spoke of "power," but preferred the term "influence," Astin and Leland offered a new defini- tion of power as empowerment. Thus they conceive of power as "an expand- able resource that is produced and shared ... as energy that transforms oneself and others . . . the effective leader as one who empowers others to act in their own interests."74 Only by coming to terms with how we, as infor- mation professionals, view power and exert leadership can we assume respon- sibility for change. References 1. Amitai Etzioni, ed., The Semi-Profes- sions and their Organization (New York: Free Press, 1969). 2. Burton Bledstein, The Culture of Profes- sionalism: The Middle Class and the De- velopment of Higher Education (New York: Norton, 1978), 90. 3. Andrew Abbot, The System of the Profes- sions: An Essay on the Division of Expert Labor (Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Pr., 1988); Eliot Friedson, Professional Pow- ers: A Study of the Institutionalization of Formal Knowledge (Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Pr., 1986); Eliot Friedson, Profes- sionalism Reborn: Theory, Prophesy and Policy (Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Pr., 1994); William J. Reeves, Librarians as Professionals: The Occupations Impact on Library Work Arrangements (Lex- ington, Mass.: Lexington Books, 1980). 4. Michael F. Winter, The Culture and Con- trol of Expertise (Westport, Conn.: Green- wood, 1988), 124. 5. Geoffrey Millerson, The Qualifying Asso- ciations: A Study in Professionalization (London: Routledge & Paul, 1964); Abbot, The System of the Professions; Friedson, Professional Powers. 6. Quoted in Friedson, Professional Pow- ers, 138. 7. Jonathan Turner, "Analytical Theoriz- ing," in Social Theory Today, Anthony Giddens and Jonathan Turner, eds. (Stan- ford, Calif.: Stanford Univ. Pr., 1987), 164. 8. For a fuller discussion of these points, see George Lakoff and Mark Johnson, Meta- phors We Live By (Chicago: Univ. of Chi- cago Pr.,1980), 3-9. 9. Abraham Flexner, "Is Social Work a Pro- fession?" in Proceedings of the National Conference of Charities and Corrections, 1915 (Chicago: The Hildmann Printing Co., 1916), 589-90. 10. Brenda DuBois and Karla Krogsrud Miley, Social Work: An Empowering Pro- fession, 2d ed. (Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1996), 45 (emphasis added). 11. Philip R. Popple, "The Social Work Pro- fession: A Reconceptualization," Social Service Review 59 (1985): 561; see also R. Lubove, The Emergence of Social Work as Volume 38, Number 4
Embracing Empowerment 30 1 a Career, 1880-1930 (New York: Atheneum, 1965) and Barbara Levy Simon, The Em- powerment Tradition in American Social Work: A History (New York: Columbia Univ. Pr., 1994). 12. Popple, "The Social Work Profession," 568. 13. Friedson, Professional Powers, ix-x. 14. Nathan Glazer, "The Schools of the Minor Professions," Minerva 12 no. 3 (1974): 346-64. 15. Amitai Etzioni, Modern Organizations (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 1964), 78. 16. Matthew P. DuMont, "The Changing Face of Professionalism," Social Policy 1 (1970): 28. 17. Paul Starr, The Social Transformation of American Medicine: The Rise of a Sover- eign Profession and the Making of a Vast Industry (New York: Basic Books, 1982), 13. 18. Ibid., 14. 19. Magali Larson, The Rise of Professional- ism: A Sociological Analysis (Berkeley: Univ. of California Pr., 1977), 15. 20. Quoted in Starr, The Social Transforma- tion of American Medicine, 87. 21. Ibid., 389. 22. Ibid., 15. 23. Bledstein, The Culture of Professional- ism, 99. 24. Larson, Rise of Professionalism, 26. 25. Institute of Industrial Engineers Web page http://www.iienet.org/ 26. Engineering Education: Report of the Na- tional Research Council (Washington, D.C.: National Academy Pr., 1986), 36. The National Research Council defined an en- gineer as "a person having at least ONE of the following qualifications: (a) College/university B.S. or an ad- vanced degree in an accredited engineer- ing program. (b)' Membership in a recognized engi- neering society at a professional level. (c) Registered or licensed as an engi- neer by a governmental agency. (d) Current or recent employment at a job classification requiring engineering work at a professional level." 27. Carolyn Marvin, When Old Technologies Were New: Thinking About Electric Com- munication in the Late Nineteenth Cen- tury (New York: Oxford Univ. Pr., 1988), 39 (emphasis added). 28. Bledstein, The Culture of Professional- ism, 100. 29. Etzioni, Modern Organizations, 78. 30. William S. Bennet, Jr., and Meri C. Hokenstad, "Full-Time People Workers and Conceptions of the Professional," in Sociological Review Monograph, vol. 20, ed. Paul Halmos (Keele, U.K.: Univ. of Keele, 1973) 23. 31. Ibid., 35. 32. Reprinted in DuBois and Miley, Social Work: An Empowering Profession, 461 (emphasis added). 33. Public Library Association, The Public Library: Democracy's Resource, A State- ment of Principles (Chicago: ALA, 1982) (emphasis added). 34. American Library Association, Final Re- port: ALA Presidential Committee on In- formation Literacy (Chicago: ALA, 1989), 1-2 (emphasis added). 35. For a discussion of this issue see Barbara Levy Simon, The Empowerment Tradi- tion in American Social Work: A History (New York: Columbia Univ. Pr., 1994), 5-7, and Paul Spicker, Principles of So- cial Welfare: An Introduction to Thinking About the Welfare State (New York: Rout- ledge, 1988), 54. 36. William J. Goode, "The Librarian: From Occupation to Profession?" Library Quar- terly 31 (1961): 306-20. 37. Ernest Greenwood, "Attributes of a Profession," Social Work 2 (July 1957): 54-55. 38. Blanche W. Cook, Eleanor Roosevelt: 1884-1933, vol. 1 (New York: Viking, 1992), 16. 39. Simon, The Empowerment Tradition in American Social Work, xiii-xiv. 40. Barbara Levy Simon, "Rethinking Em- powerment," Journal of Progressive Hu- man Services 1 (1990): 27. 41. Julian Rappaport, "Terms of Empower- ment: Toward a Theory for Community Psychology," American Journal of Com- munity Psychology 15 no. 2 (1987): 121. 42. Marilyn Geli, "The Politics of Informa- tion," Library Journal 104 (1979): 1735- 36. Fall 1997
302 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 43. Rappaport, "Terms of Empowerment," 121. 44. DuBois and Miley, Social Work: An Em- powering Profession, 25. 45. Ibid., 24. 46. Yeheskel Hasenfeld, "Power in Social Work Practice," Social Service Review 61 (1987): 470-83. 47. DuBois and Miley, Social Work: An Em- powering Profession, 9. 48. Hasenfeld, "Power in Social Work Prac- tice," 478-79. 49. Joan Durrance, Armed for Action: Library Response to Citizen Information Needs (New York: Neal-Schuman, 1984), xi. 50. Ibid., xiii-xiv; see also 129-31. 5 1 . Lorraine Gutierrez, "Working with Women of Color: An Empowerment Perspective," Social Work 35 (1990): 150. 52. Pauline Wilson, "ALA, the MLS, and Pro- fessional Employment: An Observer's Field Guide to the Issues," American Li- braries, 15 (1984): 563-66. 53. Lester Asheim, "Librarians as Profession- als," Library Trends 27 (Winter 1979): 225- 57 (emphasis added). 54. Ibid., 253 (emphasis in original, under- score added). 55. Gardner Hanks and C. James Schmidt, "An Alternative Model of a Profession for Li- brarians," College & Research Libraries 36 (1975): 186. 56. William Birdsall, "Librarianship and Pro- fessionalism: Status Measured by Out- moded Models," Canadian Library Journal 37 (June 1980): 145-48. 5 7 . Quoted in Roma Harris, Librarianship : The Erosion of a Woman's Profession (Nor- wood, N.J.: Ablex, 1992), 91. 58. Ibid. 59. Michael Harris and Stan Hannah, Into the Future: The Foundations of Library and In- formation Services in the Post-Industrial Era (Norwood, N.J.: Ablex, 1994), 106. 60. Charles Derber, William A. Schwartz, and Yale Magrass, Power in the Highest De- gree: Professionals and the Rise of the New Mandarin Order (New York: Ox- ford Univ. Pr., 1990); Judi Marshall, "Re- visioning Career Concepts: A Feminist Invitation," in Handbook of Career The- ory, eds. Michael B. Arthur, Donald T. Hall, and Barbara S. Lawrence. (Cam- bridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Pr., 1989), 275-91; Harris, Librarianship: The Erosion of a Woman's Profession; Donald A. Schòn, The Reflective Practitioner: How Professionals Think in Action (New York: Basic Books, 1982). 61. Terry D. Webb, Public Library Organiza- tion and Structure (Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland & Co., 1989), 90. 62. Bonnie Nelson, "The Chimera of Profes- sionalism," Library Journal 105 (1980): 2038. 63. Harris, Librarianship: The Erosion of a Woman's Profession, 164. 64. Ibid. 65. Nan Van Der Bergh and Lynn Cooper, Feminist Visions for Social Work (Silver Spring, Md.: National Association of So- cial Workers, 1986), 8. 66. DuBois and Miley, Social Work: An Em- p o wering Profession ,213. 67. ALA, Final Report: ALA Presidential Committee on Information Literacy, 1, 2 (emphasis added). 68. Robert Bellah and others, The Good Soci- ety [New York: Knopf, 1991). 69. Sophie Freud, "Social Workers as Com- munity Educators: A New Identity for the Profession," Journal of Teaching in Social Work! (1987): 111-26. 70. Mary Field Belenky and others, Women s Ways of Knowing: The Development of Self Voice and Mind (New York: Basic Books, 1986), 48. 71. Carol Gilligan, In a Different Voice: Psy- chological Theory and Women's Develop- ment (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Pr., 1982). 72. Marshall, "Re-visioning Career Con- cepts," 277. 73. Winter, The Culture and Control of Ex- pertise, 116. 74. Helen Astin and Carole Leland, Women of Influence, Women of Vision: A Cross- Generational Study of Leadership and Social Change (San Francisco: Jossey- Bass, 1991), 1. Volume 38, Number 4