THE JOHN M. WING FOUNDATION ON THE HISTORY OF PRINTING AT THE NEWBERRY LIBRARY Joel L. Samuels' Beginning with its benefactor (John M. Wing, 1844-1917), this article traces the historical development of the John M. Wing Foundation on the History of Printing through the successive contributions of its three custodians (Pierce Butler, 1920-31; Ernst F. Detterer, 1931-47; and James M. Wells, 1951-84). The Wing Foundation contains examples of printing from the invention of movable type in the fifteenth century to the present day, calligraphic manu- scripts, archival documents on certain notable type designers and printers, and secondary literature on the history of printing and related interests. The article focuses on the formulation of the collecting policy and the application of the policy in the development of the collection. Introduction The Newberry Library, founded in 1887, is recognized as a leading research library in history and the humanities of western Europe, Great Britain, and the Americas. William F. Poole, the founding librarian (1887-94) acquired 120,000 books and 44,000 pamphlets during his tenure. Among these acquisitions were notable rare books and an exten- sive collection of bibliography. These interests, converging with the interests of several trustees and librarians during the first quarter century, were to result in the establish- ment at the John M. Wing Foundation on the History of Printing, which would become an internationally recognized collection. It collects exam- ples of printing from the invention of movable type in the fifteenth century to the present day in western Europe, particularly Germany, France, and Italy; in Great Britain; and in America. It also collects examples of calligraphy within these boundaries. The focus of the Wing Foundation is the development of the printed book in western Europe 1. The Newberry Library, 60 West Walton Street, Chicago, Illinois 60610. [Library Quarterly, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 164-1891 X 1988 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-25 19/88/5802-0004$0 1.00 164
JOHN M. WING FOUNDATION 165 and the Americas, but it also contains a few printed pieces from the Orient. It collects manuscripts and printed books on the subjects encom- passed by this brief definition and contains several artifacts such as composer's sticks and type molds as well. In examining the purpose and scope of the Wing Foundation, it is illuminating to begin with the life of John M. Wing, whose vocation was printing and publishing and whose interest in books forms the back- ground to his testament: the establishment of a "library within a library" [1, p. 4] devoted to the printing arts. Life and Legacy of John M. Wing (1844-1917)2 John Mansir Wing was born in Ferndale (Oswego County), New York, on April 7, 1844.3 He was the son of a blacksmith and farmer, a descendant of the Reverend John Wing whose widow and four sons had come from England in 1632 to settle in New England.4 He attended school in Pulaski, New York, left home at the age of twelve (1856), and became a printer's devil in Pulaski. Several months later, he was employed as a typesetter and utility man for the Roman Citizen in Rome, New York. Here he was eventually permitted to write editorials and earned something of a reputation by composing his editorials directly into type. Then, employed by the Utica Herald in Utica, New York, for two years during the Civil War, he worked first as a proofreader and, later, as an editorial writer and compiler of news concerning New York state. Wing failed in an attempt to establish his own newspaper in Wauke- gan, Illinois, and an advertising agency in St. Louis, Missouri, during the closing years of the Civil War. He arrived in Chicago in August 1865 (at the age of twenty-one) and immediately became a reporter for the Chicago Times. He continued in this position until 1868. During this period he also ventured into book publishing. He wrote and published such books of local interest as The Great Union Stock Yards of Chiago [4]; 2. The biographical information in this section is drawn largely from "John Mansir Wing" [21, an article written shortly after Wing's death. 3. The genealogical material refers to 1844 as the date of birth. An introductory note to "A Great Wing Library" [1, p. 2] refers to 1845 as the date of birth, as does all secondary material published after this date. 4. The genealogy of Wing can be traced in The Owl 15 (1914): 1306-14; 16 (1914): 1889- 98; 17 (1915): 1499 and 1500; 17 (1916): 1555-57; 18 (1917): 1638 and 1639; 19 (1918): 1797-98; and 22 (1920): 2031 and 2132. Further information is in A Historical and Genealogical Register of John Wing, of Sandwich, Mass. and His Descendants, and His Descendants, 1682-1888 [3].
166 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY The Great Chicago Lake Tunnel [51; and History of the Great Chicago Lake Tunnel [6]. In 1868, Wing became a traveling correspondent in Europe for the Boston Herald and expected to become managing editor of this newspa- per after his return but, when the owner died in 1869, he was disap- pointed in his hope of being given the position. When Wing returned to Chicago in 1869, he established J. M. Wing and Company, Publishers, which published the Land Owner (1869-77), a monthly devoted to real estate, land grants, buildings, and city improvement. When the Great Fire of 1871 destroyed his office and equipment, he took the next train to New York and returned with new type. In the years following the fire, the Land Owner contained information on the rebuilding of Chicago and satisfied its readers' curiosity with pictures and information about im- portant new buildings. The Land Owner was heavily illustrated and full of advertisements. At ten cents per copy, it was the sort of enterprise- in a booming Chicago-which would make Wing a wealthy man. Other publications related to the city of Chicago, the architecture of Chicago, or the Chicago fire and rebuilding were published by J. M. Wing and Company. Most of these apparendy were written by Wing himself, for example, Wing's Illustrated Travelers' and Visitors' Hand-Book to the City of Chicago [71 and The Tunnels and Water System of Chicago [8]. Even though it was a great success, Wing began to lose interest in the Land Owner and turned his attention to another publication that he expected would appeal to a wide readership in Chicago: the Western Brewer; and Journal of the Barley, Malt, and Hop Trades (1876-87). It was issued monthly, reporting on crops and brewery production. Like the Land Owner, it was filled with advertisements and was highly profitable. In connection with the Western Brewer, there was also an annual publica- tion, Wing's Brewers'Hand-Book of the United States and Canada (1877-84). Wing retired in 1888 at the age of forty-three. He traveled extensively and, wherever he went, visited bookstores. He began to accumulate a large library. During his retirement years (1888-1917), most of his resources were devoted to book-related pursuits. By 1900, Wing had gathered a collection of about 5,000 volumes [1, p. 2], consisting largely of history, biography, travel, and literature. He called his collection "The Old Corner Library." The name derived from his house in Chicago in which he lived with his sister and elderly parents. "The Old Corner Library" occupied three rooms of this house. Years later, in describing his collection, Wing commented, "Having been bred a printer I naturally turned to collecting early examples of the 'art preservative of arts' " [1, p. 2]. He mentioned that he had collected specimens of the work of Aldus Manutius, the Elzeviers, Plantin, and "the celebrated press at Basel, Switzerland, where the works of Erasmus were printed" [1, p. 2].
JOHN M. WING FOUNDATION 167 He was also an energetic and enthusiastic extra-illustrator of books. This practice had been popularized by James Granger who, beginning in 1769, added engraved portraits and other illustrative material to the original contents of a book. Although bibliophiles today condemn this practice, an examination of the products of Wing's extra-illustrating efforts demonstrates the skill with which the work was done. Wing busied himself with this activity to the extent that octavo and quarto volumes were often made into folios or one original volume might be made into several volumes. He selected the illustrative material, re- moved it from books and magazines, and interleaved the illustrations with the text of his selected book, adding an explanatory title page. Others bound these newly created books. By the time of his death, Wing had extra-illustrated several hundred volumes. In addition to collecting and extra-illustrating books, he also collected prints and book plates.5 He was especially enamored of early engravings. Finally, Wing was interested in his family history. To this end, he wrote Family Trees and Genealogy [of the] Wing Family of America [10] and was instrumental in organizing "Wing Family of America," which published The Owl, a genealogy magazine of the Wing family. These book-related pursuits of John M. Wing form the background for understanding his contribution to the Newberry Library. He wrote in 1900, "I have given [my] books by will to the great Newberry Library of Chicago for the benefit of the people of this city, of which it is to form a distinct section, to be known as the 'John M. Wing Foundation of the Newberry Library'" [1, p. 4]. How long before this article or the formal will did Wing think along these lines? When did the will first exist as a formal document? Did anyone, either the librarian or one of the trust- ees, assist Wing in formulating the ideas expressed in the will? There is minimal documentary evidence by which these questions concerning his relationship to the Newberry Library between 1887 and 1900 can be answered. However, we do know his thinking in 1900, and it will be useful to summarize his ideas as outlined in "A Great Wing Library" (1900). (1) The collection of books, including the extra- illustrated books, were to be given to the Newberry Library. (2) This collection would be known as the "John M. Wing Foundation of the Newberry Library." (3) There would be an endowment, whose income would be used to augment the collection. (4) The collection would be maintained separate from other books as "a library within a library." (5) The paintings of his parents and of himself would be hung on the walls. At a time not recorded in the available documents, the library pro- 5. These interests are reflected in the Old Corner Library Scrap Book about Books, Bibliogra- phy, Book-Plates, Libraries, and Other Things, Picked Up Here and There by a Philosopher [9].
168 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY vided space where Wing pursued his interest in books. Beyond the indications of his intentions in 1900, nothing is known about this period except that John M. Wing was favorably disposed toward the Newberry Library. In a letter of May 7, 1912, from Bryan Lathrop (secretary of the library) to Wing,6 Lathrop acknowledges receipt of Wing's letter of February 1912 concerning the disposition of his books. Lathrop com- ments briefly, "The matter was referred to the Committee on Invest- ments and Finance." In a further letter of January 6, 1913, Lathrop informs Wing that "the questions connected with the establishment of the John M. Wing Foundation" were referred to Horace H. Martin, representing the Book Committee, and himself, representing the Fi- nance Committee. As a result of this letter and further conversation, Wing met with Martin onJanuary 25, 1913. A letter of January 28, 1913, from Wing to. Lathrop is most important because he withdraws his request for setting aside the fourth floor of the building for the Wing Foundation but states clearly, "I decline to [change] my will and insert therein a clause for request, allowing the books to be scattered throughout the entire library, thus annulling the very basic idea of the Foundation." A few months later, in a letter of April 10, 1913, from Harry Pratt Judson of the University of Chicago to Wing, Judson outlines a plan whereby: (1) there would be a Memorial Room at the University of Chicago for the collection of books and prints accumulated by Wing and (2) income from the endowment would be used to develop the John M. Wing Collection of European History. Wing responds immediately to Judson on April 12, 1913, that he has decided to put off the matter until later. He writes, "Later on, when my domestic affairs and my disturbed condition of mind has reached a more settled basis, I shall take the liberty of requesting another interview with you." Wing's mention of domestic affairs apparently refers to making some provision for his niece, Susan Gilbert. In a letter of April 14, 1913, Judson acknowledged receipt of Wing's letter of April 12, 1913. No draft of a will dated earlier than 1913 is available, and, inasmuch as this draft contains no additional date, it is not certain whether the draft was prepared before or after the above-mentioned exchange of letters. This earliest extant draft of the "Last Will and Testament of John M. Wing" (1913) contains as its ninth provision: "Should the Newberry Library decline to accept this bequest and carry out its provision, and 6. The letters and memoranda cited in this and subsequent paragraphs are in the files of the business office of the Newberry Library, along with copies of various legal and financial documents pertinent to the Wing Foundation.
JOHN M. WING FOUNDATION 169 should so notify my executor in writing, I then in that event, and then only, give, devise, and bequeath my entire residuary estate as mentioned in Paragraph Five, to 'University of Chicago,' substituting the name of the University of Chicago in place of 'The Newberry Library,' wherever the latter appears written in this my will" [1 1]. This provision is elimi- nated from the final draft in 1915 [12]. From the letters and meetings described above, it is clear that Wing maintained these ideas he set forth in 1900, particularly the one that the John M. Wing Foundation would be "a library within a library." In the letter of January 28, 1913, from Wing to Lathrop (cited above), Wing rejected the idea of scattering his books throughout the library, an idea conveyed orally to him by Horace H. Martin. It appears that, by September 1913, the trustees agreed with Wing since action was taken to deposit Wing's collection of books and prints "in the room designated for them some years ago" [13, p. 16]. Wing moved his collection to the third floor of the library and worked among his books. During 1913-17, his library was available for use by readers although Wing himself owned and maintained control of the collection. Before the "Last Will and Testament of John M. Wing" (1913) was revised in 1915, another document had been prepared in 1914 [14]. It appears never to have been signed. There is no substantive difference between this document and the "Last Will and Testament of John M. Wing" (1915). The final draft of the will, dated March 8, 1915, contains as its most important provisions, sections 6, 7, and 8. The sixth provision [12] is concerned mostly with the physical arrangements and administrative aspects of "The John M. Wing Foundation." It can be summarized as follows. (1) The collection of books and prints known as "The Old Corner Library" will be the nucleus of the Wing Foundation. (2) The collection is to be augmented with income from the capital of his estate. (3) The room in which the library was already placed [following the trustees' decision in September 1913] is to be known as the "Memorial Room of the John M. Wing Foundation." (4) Various oil portraits are to be hung in the Memorial Room. (5) The collection of extra-illustrated books is to be kept in glass-front, dust-proof cases. (6) The library shall employ, at the expense of the estate, a custodian who shall be responsible for the care and cataloging of the books. (7) The books purchased with income from the estate shall be placed in an area adjacent to the Memo- rial Room. This last provision was not in the 1913 draft but was in the 1914 agreement [14]. In comparing these terms with the ideas set forth in "A Great Wing Library," one concludes that the two documents are consistent and that the final draft of the will of 1915 is more specific. The seventh and eighth provisions deal with matters not set forth in
170 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 1900 or mentioned in the letters exchanged between Wing and Lathrop in 1912 and 1913. These two provisions were probably developed by, or at least with the stimulus of, Horace H. Martin, a trustee of the New- berry Library from 1901 to 1925 and vice president of the trustees from 1911 to 1925. He was also a member of the Book Committee from 1901 to 1925 and its chairman from 1914 to 1925 [15]. The exact circum- stances leading to the preparation of Wing's will are not known through primary documents, but it is reasonable to conjecture that Martin as- sisted Wing in the preparation of the will. In 1921, Pierce Butler wrote, "It so happened that Horace H. Martin. . . had long cherished the idea of a purely typographical collection" [16, p. 76]. Butler also observed that Martin developed a scheme for a typographical library "and the Wing Foundation thus owes its establishment and organization very largely to his interest" [16, p. 77]. Since W. N. C. Carleton, the Newber- ry's librarian from 1909 to 1919, was interested in the history of printing and bibliography, it is possible that he also influenced Wing's decisions about the terms of the will. The seventh provision of the final draft outlines the categories of materials to be purchased with the income from the estate. Books are to be purchased "which treat of, relate to, illustrate, exemplify, or depict, either wholly or in part, either directly or indirectly, the following subjects, viz.,: (1) The History and Development of the Arts of Printing, Engraving, and Book-Illustration from the date of the introduction into Europe of the art of printing with movable metal type. (2) Bibliogra- phy,-by which term I mean the science, history, record, and descrip- tion of printed books" [12]. In explanation of these stipulations, the will declares that the collection should contain "representative and typical specimens of the work of all the typographically or historically important printers and presses of Europe and North America, so that the typog- rapher, historian, and bibliographer may be enabled to trace at first hand, from original materials, every significant development of the arts of printing and book-production. The contents and subject matter of these books should always, as far as possible, have a literary, biographi- cal, historical, or artistic interest or importance as well as typographical" [12J. The eighth provision deals with further administrative aspects of the Wing Foundation and can be summarized as follows. (1) Except for the cost of binding books and the salary of the custodian, the income of the Wing estate shall be used for the purchase of books (as described in the seventh provision). The administrative overhead is to be paid by the library. (2) A book plate reading "The John M. Wing Foundation of the Newberry Library" shall be placed in each book in the collection, but the book plate of "The Old Corner Library" shall not be removed. (3) The income of the estate shall be spent annually unless the book market
JOHN M. WING FOUNDATION 171 would be unreasonably high in a given year. However, if unexpended revenue should amount to $10,000.00, it shall be added to the capital. (4) The library shall have full authority to invest and reinvest the principal of the estate as it seems advisable. (5) The library shall maintain a separate account for the Wing Foundation. The terms of the will are clear. The collection of books accumulated by Wing would be the nucleus of the John M. Wing Foundation; the income from his endowment would be used to purchase and bind books that exemplify the development of printing and related arts, along with the subject of bibliography; there would be a custodian responsible for the collection whose salary would also be paid from the income, but all other expenses would be paid by the library; and the terms pertaining to physical arrangements would maintain the Wing Foundation as "a li- brary within a library." Wing disposed of the house in which he lived with his parents and sister and, during the later years of his life, he lived in hotels. During these transient years, he visited and worked in the midst of his collection as often as he could. He died of pneumonia on March 14, 1917. Early Decisions of the Trustees (1918 and 1919) The library was formally notified of Wing's testament will in 1918 [17, p. 10], and the first custodian was appointed in January 1920 [16, p. 77]. It appears that the initial response to the formal notification of the terms of the will was made by the librarian, W. N. C. Carleton, who recom- mended, in a memorandum to the trustees [18], that: (1) The custodian of the Wing Foundation should be responsible for the care, guard- ianship, classification, and cataloging of the collection as well as provide assistance to readers who use the collection. (2) The highest priority for purchasing books should be given to those books that will be "represen- tative and typical specimens of the work of all the typographically or historically important printers and presses of Europe and North America" [12]. In purchasing these books, special emphasis should be given to the period 1450-1550. (3) Materials pertinent to the interests of Wing Foundation already owned by the Newberry Library should be transferred to the Wing Foundation.7 At the annual meeting in January 1919, the trustees passed a resolu- 7. W. F. Poole, the founding librarian, had collected materials in fine printing and bibliography from the inception of the library. In 1911, Carleton reported that extensive lists were prepared for purchasing books, among them lists for bibliography and the history of printing [19, p. 7]. By 1919, the collection in these areas was of sufficient strength that a checklist was published (Book Arts, Pt. 1, Bibliography, Printing, Bookbinding, Publishing & Bookselling, National & Trade Bibliography [20]).
172 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY tion concerning the establishment of the Wing Foundation. The most pertinent part is as follows: "Resolved, that the President [Edward L. Ryerson], Librarian [W. N. C. Carleton] and Professor McLaughlin be appointed a Committee, with authority to prepare and report to this Board, as soon as practicable, a scheme or plan for the expenditure of the income of the Wing Fund in the purchase of books under the terms and conditions of the Wing Will" [21]. This committee presented its report in April 1919 ("Report on Policy, 1919"). It consisted of three sections: physical location, administration, and book policy. In this discussion, I will focus on the section on book policy [22, pp. 3-11], which provides a definition of the emerging collecting policy. Wing's will provided that funds be used to purchase materials in two subjects, namely, the history of printing and bibliography. The "Report on Policy, 1919" recommended that intensive purchasing in bibliogra- phy be postponed until the collection on the history of printing was well advanced on the grounds that it was impractical to develop collections on both subjects simultaneously. Further, bibliography was well repre- sented in Chicago libraries, but there was no collection on the history of printing in Chicago. This decision was not intended to preclude the purchase of important works on bibliography. What should be the criteria for selecting books on the history of printing? In a "Memorandum on the will of John M. Wing, Deceased" from John M. Wilson, a trustee, addressed to the Board of Trustees, Wilson recommended that two classes of books should be purchased. "(a) Books which in whole or in part treat the history and development of the arts of printing, etc.; (b) those which, in the opinion of the Library authorities, have a value as examples illustrating or exemplifying the history or development of the art of printing or engraving, or book illustration" [23]. This recommendation was adopted in the "Report on Policy, 1919," which also recommended that special attention be given to the following classes of books: books representative of the period 1450- 1550; books printed after 1550 that are notable examples of fine print- ing or illustrate a significant development of the art of printing; speci- men books, type sheets, and type catalogs of type founders and printers; and biographies of printers and type founders. The "Report on Policy, 1919" suggests that, in purchasing these mate- rials, the aim should be selectivity rather than comprehensiveness. The books selected should have literary, biographical, historical, or artistic interest as well as typographical value. Through such a collection, it should be possible "for the typographer, historian, and bibliographer ... to trace ... from original materials, every significant development of the arts of printing and book-production" [12].
JOHN M. WING FOUNDATION 173 This report also recommends that "the preparation of lists of books on the History of Printing be begun immediately in accordance with the principles of choice and selection recommended above" [22, p. 11]. The "Report on Policy, 1919" was adopted by the trustees in April 1919 [24]. An immediate result of the adoption of this report was a survey of the existing collections to determine which typographical material was avail- able. This survey was begun in 1919 under the supervision of Pierce Butler, head of the Order Department. W. N. C. Carleton, the librarian, was promoting the Wing Foundation during the period when the trustees formulated and approved the plans for establishing the Wing Foundation. His activity is illustrated by an interesting exchange of letters with D. B. Updike in which the latter was seeking to sell a rare copy of Moxon's Mechanick Exercises to the New- berry. In a letter of April 2, 1919, from Carleton to Updike, Carleton writes, "I regret to report that our Trustees have not yet authorized the purchase of books from the Wing income, but plans are working out more happily at present than they were some months ago, and I am hopeful that in another two months active purchasing may be begun." Two months later, in a letter of June 2, Carleton again writes to Updike: "At last the purchase of books for the Wing Foundation is under way." A few books were purchased in the next six months. Active purchasing, though, did not begin until the first custodian was appointed in January 1920. The trustees sought advice from various experts regarding the ap- pointment of a custodian but failed to find an appropriate candidate. In a letter of April 9, 1919, to Frederick Ives Carpenter, a trustee, Carleton writes: "I think our best plan at first will be to appoint a certain man on the Library staff to the position. The one I have in mind is an excellent bibliographer, is experienced in the administration of special collections, has excellent command of foreign languages, and would be fully compe- tent to aid me in the early stages of organization, arrangement, and selection of the material to be acquired." Formative Beginnings under the Custodianship of Pierce Butler (1920-1931) Pierce Butler was born December 19, 1886, in Clarendon Hills, Illinois.8 After receiving his undergraduate education at Dickinson College and 8. Biographical information concerning Butler is drawn largely from Stanley Pargellis, "Pierce Butler-a Biographical Sketch" [25]. See also, Bernard I. Bell, "Pierce Butler, Professor and Priest" [26].
174 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY teaching in a preparatory school for one year, he decided to prepare for teaching medieval history. He studied at Union Theological Seminary (1907-9) and received a B.D. degree from Hartford Seminary in 1910. He also received an M.A. degree in German literature from Dickinson College in 1910 and a Ph.D. in church history from Hartford Seminary in 1912. Unable to find a teaching position, he entered the parish ministry but left a year later owing to problems his deafness presented in the conduct of parish work. After being employed as a clerk for the Burlington Railroad in Chicago, he obtained a position in the Order Department of the Newberry Library in 1916. The "Report on Policy, 1919" recommended that there be a survey to determine which typographical material was in the library collection. One of Pierce Butler's early contributions at the library was to compare bibliographies with the library catalog to determine the Newberry's holdings. He began this survey in mid-1919 and completed it in 1922. A list of the most important guides and bibliographies used in this survey was included in the 1919 Report of the Trustees of the Newberry Library [24, pp. 13-14]. In addition, it is likely that Butler used Verzeichniss der Sammlungen des Borsenvereins der deutschen Buchhrndler [27], the catalog of the Bibliothek des Borsenvereins der deutschen Buchhandler at Leipzig, and Gallia Typographica [28]. Since the trustees had decided to give special attention to selecting examples of printing during the period 1450-1550, Butler surveyed the incunabula holdings first, and his results were recorded as Check List of Incunabula in the Newberty Library [29]. This list contains 280 titles ac- quired by the library from 1887 to 1919, mostly en bloc acquisitions. A revised checklist was issued in 1924, and the final edition of the checklist published in 1933 contains additional information on the library's in- cunabula holdings before the establishment of the Wing Foundation [30, pp. xiv-xv]. By January 1920, important decisions had been made for the Wing Foundation that would affect its future. First, the trustees had estab- lished a financial basis and administrative framework. Second, based on the provisions of Wing's will, the trustees had developed a collecting policy. Third, Butler was making a survey of existing typographical holdings. Fourth, on the recommendation of Carleton, the trustees appointed Butler as the first custodian of the Wing Foundation. Based on the "Report on Policy, 1919," Butler wrote "A Typograph- ical Library: The John M. Wing Foundation of the Newberry Library" [16]. As a whole, the article describes the character and scope of the Wing Foundation. Of interest to us is that a significant portion of the article is devoted to the principles of book selection that would guide the development of the new collection.
JOHN M. WING FOUNDATION 175 Butler began by observing that the Wing Foundation, reflecting the Newberry's interests in the humanities, would be concerned "with the humanities of typography" in contrast with other collections on typog- raphy, namely, Bibliothek of Borsenrerein at Leipzig, the St. Bride's Foundation in London, and the Typographical Library of American Type Founders' Company in Jersey City [16, pp. 73-74]. The special interest of the Wing Foundation would be to "instruct, correct, and inspire the makers and users of books in the higher aspects of typog- raphic art" [16, p. 78]. In order to accomplish this goal, the collection would be developed along the following lines: (1) It would collect exam- ples of printing through which the invention, spread, and development of printing could be traced in its early years as well as related materials "for every printer or press down to the present day whose work is of real significance for the subsequent course of the art" [16, p. 79]. Further, it would collect the literature concerning the history of printing as defined above. (2) It would also select those examples of printing that present solutions to problems of letter construction, page arrangement, and illustration as well as secondary literature pertinent to those concerns. (3) The collection of examples of printing were supposed to include "fine examples of the best work that has been accomplished in every important species of printing" [16, p. 791 to serve as a source of inspira- tion to typographical workers. Thus, the Wing Foundation intended to collect primary and secondary materials for inquiring into the history of printing whether the purposes of the inquiry be instruction in the typographic arts or for documenting their historical development. The principles used to select examples of printing were to be applied, with appropriate changes, to the selection of incunabula. An in- cunabulum could be selected as an original document of the history of printing, that is, a book that contains references to the invention and early development of printing;9 as an example of the manner in which the early craftsman solved problems of typography and book design, particularly the complicated problems of letter forms; or for its aesthetic value. Butler observed that "in the history of fine printing it is a notewor- thy fact that nearly every master has been a careful student of the work of early printers" [16, p. 83]. He concluded his discussion of the selection of incunabula by directing attention to the textual importance of these works. Whenever consistent with the guiding principles, an in- 9. When Butler surveyed existing collections and compiled the Check List of Incunabula in the Newbmy Library in 1919, he was interested in determining the library's holdings of incunabula that refer to printing. For this purpose, he used Aksel G. S. Josephson, "The Literature of the Invention of Printing: A Bibliographical Study" [311. Of the twenty-seven incunabula listed in this article, Butler discovered that the library already owned most of the titles.
176 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY cunabulum should be selected for its literary or historical value. Butler wrote: "If this interest is given its proper value the incunabula collection will become an approximate equivalent of what a good institutional library must have been in the early years of the sixteenth century" [16, p. 84]. In approving the "Report on Policy, 1919," the trustees agreed that initial purchases should concentrate on examples of printing from the period 1450-1550. Later, they approved Butler's program for purchas- ing incunabula [30, pp. ix-x]. Butler traveled to Europe in 1922, 1923, 1924, 1926, and 1930 to purchase incunabula.10 Of the 1,333 incunabula he selected during 1920-31, three-fourths were purchased during these trips. By number and year, the purchases were 246 in 1922, 249 in 1923, 127 in 1924, 194 in 1926, and 317 in 1930, for a total of 1,018. These extensive purchases were made possible by the unique market conditions of the decade following World War 1 [32]. Before leaving on the first trip, he obtained lists of incunabula hold- ings of the University of Chicago Library and the John Crerar Library to avoid unnecessary duplication in the Chicago area. By the end of 1924, the Newberry Library had accumulated a collection of 1,058 incunabula representing nine countries, seventy-eight cities, and 391 presses. But- ler's aggressive program of incunabula purchases increased the library's holdings to 1,613 by 1933. Of this total, only ninety-three titles acquired by 1933 were duplicated in the University of Chicago Library or the John Crerar Library. Among these duplicates, about sixty had been acquired by the Newberry Library before the Wing Foundation was established. Through the purchases of incunabula, Butler continually reaffirmed the collecting policy stated earlier. In 1933, Butler explained his selec- tions of incunabula for the Wing Foundation as follows: "My incunabula mission was to secure typical material illustrating all possible phases of the development of printing from its invention to the close of the fifteenth century. My second task was to select, whenever a choice was possible, books which contained those texts that were most significant of the intellectual interests and methods of scholarship current in that period" [30, p. xvi]. At the same time Butler selected incunabula repre- sentative of countries, towns, printers (or presses), and type specimens. His selections were determined, in part, by his desire to develop a collection arranged by Robert Proctor's classification and type identification system. Proctor's system classified works by place of origin 10. Buder's account of these trips is recorded in "Incunabula Markets of Europe" [321 and in [30, pp. xv-xix].
JOHN M. WING FOUNDATION 177 (that is, countries and towns) and by printers, and it illustrated the spread of printing through the development of new typefaces. In spite of the excellent collection of incunabula developed through Butler's use of the Proctor scheme, the practice did lead to "a few fundamental weaknesses in the collection," according to James M. Wells, a later custodian of the Wing Foundation [33, p. 2]. In attempting to document typography according to the Proctor scheme, Butler on occasion chose a "less important" book if it illustrated a typeface he wanted, and some- times he would buy an incomplete copy to obtain a certain typeface. Nonetheless, Butler's systematic selections by this method made possible investigations into the history of printing that purchases of merely aesthetically pleasing or rarer works might not have permitted. Though he emphasized the development of the incunabula collection, Butler also acquired notable examples of printing from the sixteenth to the early twentieth centuries. Early in 1920, the library acquired the complete set of books printed by William Morris at the Kelmscott Press (1891-96), presumably fifty-two works in sixty-six volumes. Butler's justification for purchasing all the works printed by Morris, rather than representative works, as was the stated policy for modern presses, was that Morris constantly experimented and, thus, the serious student must have knowledge of the entire group in order to appreciate particular examples [ 16, pp. 83-84]. The collection of the Wing Foundation was augmented by donations from printers and printing firms in Chicago. These gifts were attracted by the establishment of a typographical library at the Newberry. Having achieved many of his goals of developing the incunabula collection, Butler was eventually able to direct more attention to the purchase of sixteenth-century imprints. In 1930, he reported that the library had accumulated 1,680 titles of sixteenth-century imprints. Acquiring examples of printing did not preclude the purchase of other materials relating to printing, particularly as defined by the collect- ing policy. The personal library of Theodore De Vinne was sold at public auction in January 1920 [34, p. 17]. Of the 300 titles of typog- raphical interest desired for the Wing Foundation, Butler acquired 243 titles [35, p. 16]. The trustees' reports from 1920 to 1931 indicate a special interest in obtaining type-specimen books, of which 179 were purchased in 1925 and another fifty-six in 1928. Materials were acquired on the following topics: type design, the invention of printing, early developments in printing, biographies of notable printers, histories of famous presses, and-especially-bibliographies of printing and allied subjects. These purchases led to an increased public awareness of the Wing Foundation. It was used by type designers and printers to study exam-
178 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY ples of printing and by scholars in considering the typographical evi- dence bearing on problems of literary history. Awareness by an even wider public came through exhibits prepared by Butler, drawing on materials in the Wing Foundation." There were several educational activities related to the Wing Founda- tion. For example, it hosted traveling exhibits of the American Institute of Graphic Arts; provided space for evening lectures on fine printing; and furnished materials for an educational film produced by the United Typothetae of America. In 1927 and 1928, classes on the problems of printing were offered in cooperation with the Society of Typographic Arts, which had been founded in 1927 in Chicago. When the Graduate Library School of the University of Chicago was opened for students in 1928, Butler was engaged-on a part-time basis-to teach courses in the history of printing and related subjects. His experience at the Wing Foundation preeminently qualified him to teach in this field. Butler resigned as custodian of the Wing Foundation in September 1931 to assume full-time responsibilities at the Graduate Library School but continued his association with the Newberry Library, both as a reader and, on occasion, as an advisor to his successors. In 1953, after his retirement from the Graduate Library School and just before his death, he returned to the Newberry Library as a Visiting Fellow. Further Developments under the Custodianship of Ernst F. Detterer (1931-47) Ernst F. Detterer was born in Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, in 1888. He received his A.B. from Moravian College in 1908 and was a student at the School of Industrial Art at the Pennsylvania Museum from 1910 to 1912. For several weeks in 1913, he studied calligraphy privately with Edward Johnston. After that, he was an instructor in art at the Chicago Normal College and from 1918 to 1920 was head of its art department. Then, at the school of the Art Institute in Chicago, he headed the department of printing arts and taught courses in printing arts and calligraphy until 1931. Detterer was appointed custodian of the Wing Foundation in 1931, a position he held until his death in 1947. He had a life-long interest in the history of books, book production, and especially in type design. The collecting policy set forth in "Report on Policy, 1919" and subse- 11. Perhaps the most significant was represented in the exhibit catalog The First Fifty Years of the Pnrnted Book, 1450-1500: Notes Descriptive of an Exhibition [361.
JOHN M. WING FOUNDATION 179 quently clarified by Butler was continued during the custodianship of Detterer. Although the collecting policy remained unchanged, different patterns of collecting did emerge. The nearest resemblance to a signifi- cant change in the collecting policy was the expansion into calligraphy. Perhaps the most important shift in the pattern of collecting was that from fifteenth-century books to sixteenth-century books. Butler himself had noted the decreasing supply and increasing cost of incunabula, which would result in fewer purchases of such books. It appears that Detterer never acquired more than five incunabula in any given year and probably acquired no more than forty titles during his seventeen years as custodian. He did develop, with considerable vigor, the collection of sixteenth- century imprints, giving special attention to "the beautiful illustrated books of that period" [37, p. 10], particularly French imprints. His concern for sixteenth-century imprints was reflected not only in his acquisitions but also in the directives issued for cataloging them. In a memorandum issued to the Technical Division on March 25, 1935, he notes that sixteenth-century imprints should be represented in the catalog by the following added entries: printer, town, chronology, bin- der, illustrator, and book plate. This was an extension of the policy that already applied to the cataloging of incunabula. He also acquired more imprints of private presses in England and America than did his predecessor. He was especially interested in col- lecting examples of modern fine printing and placed an emphasis on acquiring printers' manuals and books of type specimens. The beginning of the modern revival of calligraphy as well as the emergence of the private press can be traced to William Morris (1835- 97) in England. The most important figure during the rebirth of interest in calligraphy was the Englishman, Edward Johnston (1872-1949) [38]. Detterer had studied with Johnston in London and was strongly in- fluenced by him. Johnston's influence can be further detected in stu- dents of Detterer such as R. Hunter Middleton and James Hayes. Teach- ing from Writing & Illuminating, & Lettering [39] in his classes at the Art Institute, Detterer was one of the first to bring Johnston's ideas and techniques to the United States [33, p. 3]. Shortly after Detterer was appointed custodian of the Wing Founda- tion, he attempted to acquire the private calligraphic collection of C. Lindsay Ricketts. In 1934, the trustees decided that the price asked for the collection was too high. Detterer attempted again to persuade the trustees in 1941 and this time had the support of Alfred E. Hamill, a collector of calligraphy and president of the trustees. In a "Memorandum to the Book Committee" (April 1941), Detterer made his appeal to purchase the Ricketts Collection. His purpose was "to
180 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY recommend a policy regarding the purchase of collateral material in a field related to the Wing collection of type specimen books-that is, in the field of specimen books of calligraphy" [40]. The justification for including calligraphy within the scope of the collection he stated as follows: "From the European invention of printing in the fifteenth century, when the chief book and document hands furnished the pat- terns for the earliest typefaces, the main external influence on the design of typefaces has been the styles of script practiced by the contemporary writing master" [40]. After citing instances of the relationship between calligraphy and type design from the sixteenth through the twentieth centuries, Detterer observed that this relationship had not been thor- oughly investigated, "probably due to the lack of available collections of calligraphic and typographic material of sufficient extent to form the basis of such a study" [40]. The trustees approved the purchase of a collection of fifty-three manuscripts and 675 printed books. This purchase, in 1941, im- mediately made the Newberry a principal center for calligraphic study. The collection in calligraphy was augmented regularly, most significantly by Alfred Hamill's bequest of more than 300 books and manuscripts in 1953.12 A few months after acquisition of the Ricketts collection, there had been "some agitation" in the Society of Typographic Arts for a calli- graphic study group drawn from its members who would meet under the aegis of the Newberry Library [42, p. 63]. On June 21, 1941, Detterer wrote a letter inviting fourteen members of the Society of Typographic Arts to meet at the library on June 24, to form the New- berry Library Calligraphy Study Group. According to James Hayes, "The formation of the group was a direct result of the purchase by the Library of the [Ricketts collection]" [42, p. 63]. Charter members of this group included such well-known figures in calligraphy and type design as R. Hunter Middleton, Raymond Da Boll, and James Hayes [38, pp. 31-32; 43, pp. 28-30]. As their first project, the members of this group voted to examine all of the examples of calligraphy then in the Wing Foundation. Meetings were held once a week in the rare book room of the library. The com- pletion of this project required nearly two years, and, during the course of this time, conversations in meetings often wandered from the im- mediate calligraphic work under consideration and touched on any topic connected with calligraphy and type design. In this way, the Newberry Library Calligraphy Study Group "developed into something like a 12. A brief description of Hamill's collection, selected to supplement the Ricketts Collec- tion, is found in [411.
JOHN M. WING FOUNDATION 181 school of writing, lettering and graphic design. Probably unique in its kind, it exercised a remarkable influence throughout the American Midwest" [44, p. 511. This emphasis on calligraphy increased the public knowledge of the Wing Foundation and encouraged the active use of the collection. Other notable en bloc acquisitions during the custodianship of Det- terer included: a small collection of Stone and Kimball imprints (1935 and 1936) [45, p. 21; 46, p. 22];13 a gift of materials relating to F. W. Goudy, an American type designer, containing type specimens, docu- mentation for type design, and books printed at the Village Press (1939) [37, p. 91; books from the personal library of William A. Kittredge, a Chicago designer, which included 300 books Kittredge considered nota- ble examples of book design as well as a large quantity of printed materials such as announcements, stationery, catalogs, and Christmas cards (1946) [48, pp. 9-10]; and a collection of original close up draw- ings and designs of Oswald B. Cooper (1946) [49]. Visiting Fellows during 1947-51 Ernst Detterer died suddenly on November 9, 1947, and a successor was not appointed until August 1951. The librarian of the Newberry, Stan- ley Pargellis (1942-62), was responsible for the care of the Wing Foun- dation [44, p. 53]. During these years, visiting fellows played a significant role in the Wing Foundation. A visiting fellowship was a research grant for scholars who wished to work in the library's collections. In return for the grant, the visiting fellow divided time between his research and advising the library in his special field. Stanley Morison was one of these visiting fellows. Morison was a leader in the movement to raise typographical standards in the machine-press age. He was a coeditor of the first four volumes and editor of the last three volumes of The Fleuron (1923-30) and typographical consultant to many companies and presses, including the Monotype Corporation, The Times, and Cambridge University Press. He was first introduced to the Wing Foundation through correspondence with D. B. Updike in 1923. Morison used the calligraphy collection of C. Lindsay Ricketts in Wil- mette, Illinois, in 1924 for the preparation of an article on calligraphy for the Encyclopaedia Britannica. He had additional contact with the Wing Foundation through Pierce Butler, whom he met in Europe when the latter was searching for incunabula. In 1946, Morison became acquainted with Stanley Pargellis. There 13. See [471.
182 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY were two major results: Morison was appointed as a visiting fellow of the Wing Foundation in the spring of 1948, and he advised Pargellis con- cerning the appointment of a successor to Ernst Detterer [50, pp. 417- 19]. Soon after Detterer's death, Pargellis wrote to Morison asking for advice. He responded by proposing candidates for the custodianship and by volunteering to spend some time in Chicago with whomever was selected as the next custodian. Morison was to visit the library as a visiting fellow nearly every year from 1948 to 1968. In the autumn of 1959, the library honored him by presenting an exhibition of his work. Konrad Bauer was appointed as a visiting fellow of the Wing Founda- tion in 1948. He was the art director at the Bauer Type Foundry and was associated with the University of Mainz. One of Bauer's suggestions for the Wing Foundation was that changes in printing and illustration styles be traced by using the works of one author as a constant. This could be done by concentrating on an author "who had been heavily published in the early days of printing and who had had a relatively continuous publishing history up to the present" [51, p. 62]. Bauer specifically suggested a comprehensive collection of Terence or Plautus. The library followed Bauer's plan with the works of Terence since that author was already strongly represented in the library's holdings. Incidentally, there was an exchange of letters between Pargellis and Bauer in which the latter declines the opportunity to become custodian of the Wing Foun- dation. In 1950, there were a number of important en bloc acquisitions just before a new custodian assumed responsibility for the collection. These acquisitions included letters written to Bruce Rogers, examples of seven- teenth-century Italian calligraphy, and the gift of a large collection of the papers of Platt Rogers Spencer (3,000 items), which augmented the calligraphy collection [52, pp. 137-39]. Also, a complete leaf of the 36- Line Bible was purchased. Both Morison and Bauer had a significant influence on the development of the Wing Foundation in these years between custodians. Recent Developments during the Custodianship of James M. Wells (1951-84) James M. Wells was born in West Virginia and, following undergraduate studies at Northwestern University, obtained an M.A. degree in English literature from Columbia University. After further studies and teaching, he was awarded a traveling fellowship from the American Council of Learned Societies (ACLS) to do research in London from 1949 to 1951 on William Morris and the arts and crafts movement.
JOHN M. WING FOUNDATION 183 Stanley Pargellis was among those who had reviewed Wells's applica- tion for the ACLS Fellowship and, through Stanley Morison, arranged for Wells to visit the library in 1950. Wells was appointed custodian the same year but remained in London until 1951 to conclude his research. He began work as custodian on September 1, 1951. Wells continued to carry forward the collecting policy proposed in the "Report on Policy, 1919," clarified by Butler in "A Typographical Li- brary" (1921), and expanded under Detterer in 1941. He purchased all the same categories of material acquired by his predecessors. Because of the maturity of the collection by this time and the decreasing availability of some types of materials, Wells began to alter the pattern of collecting. He defined his task as "build[ing] a collection, rather than a group of ill- matched high spots" [33, p. 4] and sought to do this by filling gaps where he found them. The purchase of incunabula, for instance, was normally limited to a half-dozen titles in a year, but there were substantial purchases of in- cunabula in the following years: twenty-three in 1956, twenty in 1962, and forty in 1964. In 1964, the library purchased the Silver Collection, which consisted primarily, but not exclusively, of first and early editions of literary texts from Europe and England during the period of the Renaissance. Books printed by William Caxton were included in this notable acquisition [53, p. 4; 54]. The holdings of sixteenth-century imprints from Italy and, especially, France were also strengthened. Although Pierce Butler concentrated on developing an incunabula col- lection representative of countries, towns, printers, and typefaces, the tendency since 1960 has been to emphasize the significance of the text, particularly in relation to the library's interests in promoting Renais- sance studies. The calligraphy collection was augmented regularly, particularly by Italian, French, and American writing books. There was increased em- phasis given to the acquisition of ephemeral printing. One of the most notable of these acquisitions, in 1956, was the collection of Bodoni Giambatista, an influential printer of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. It consists of a group of 137 broadsides, proof- sheets, letterheads, passports, and similar material produced by the Royal Printing Office at Parma [55, pp. 158-59]. In 1962, a collection of 150 broadsides from the seventeenth century was acquired [56, p. 59]. While Butler had concentrated on the fifteenth century and Detterer on the sixteenth century, neither had acquired much material exem- plifying printing processes during the machine-press period except as occasional examples of fine printing. Wells was interested in acquiring notable examples of photomechanical printing. Further, he acquired the necessary materials with which the development of color printing could
184 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY be documented [57, p. 154; 58, pp. 24-25]. In deference to the Art Institute, prints were not collected. Neither were twentieth-century illus- trated books collected heavily, though there are some twentieth-century illustrated books, notably French, in the Wing Foundation. There was a conscious attempt not to duplicate purchases made by the Art Institute [58, p. 30]. The acquisition of the Stone and Kimball collection in 1971 empha- sized the continuity of the collecting policy under the custodianships of Detterer and Wells. In 1935 and 1936, Detterer had acquired a small collection of Stone and Kimball imprints as examples of notable book design in America, more specifically in Chicago. The collection acquired in 1971 had been accumulated by Herbert S. Stone, Jr., the son of one of the partners of Stone and Kimball. The collection consists of approxi- mately 2,000 items including Stone and Kimball imprints, manuscripts, posters, drawings, and correspondence dealing with the firm.'4 The major shift in emphasis was toward the acquisition of correspon- dence and other materials documenting the history of printing. The most notable acquisitions of this type of material included a gift of papers, letters, and notebooks of Will Ransom (1955), thereby strengthening the collection on American typography [61, pp. 1, 9; 62]; manuscripts and printed books related to the work of Philippe-Denis Pierres, a friend of Benjamin Franklin (1958) 15 [64, pp. 70-71]; manu- scripts on French printing history, particularly of Jean Chardon (died 1682) and Denis Thierry II (died 1713), representing records ac- cumulated by the family of the latter over two centuries (1959) [57, p. 149]; letters and printed pieces of Nathan C. Geer, an Illinois printer of the mid-nineteenth century (1960) [65, p. 265]; a collection of 600 items (decrees, prospectuses, advertisements, priced catalogs, and similar ma- terial) on French printing, publishing, and bookselling during the eigh- teenth and early nineteenth centuries (1961) [66, pp. 333-34]; a major part of the archives of Count Harry Kessler and the Cranach Press (1965); a collection of eighteenth-century French publishers' catalogs and announcements (1967) [67, pp. 6-7]; manuscripts of Hoffman Brothers, pioneers in stereotyping in late eighteenth-century France, 14. See A Histoy of Stone & Kimball and Herbert S. Stone & Co. with a Bibliography of Their Publications, 1893-1905 [47] for a list of Stone & Kimball imprints. The research resulting in the publication of this book was based on the collection of Herbert S. Stone, Jr., which was augmented by letters, documents, and books between the time Kramer did the research and the time the library acquired the collection. The "Stone & Kimball Collection" was later augmented by a gift of 279 books published by this firm [59, p. 5]. See [60] for two articles on Stone & Kimball. 15. The use of this material enabled George B. Watts to write Philippe-Denis Pierres: First Printer Ordinary of Louis XIV [63].
JOHN M. WING FOUNDATION 185 whose customers included Thomas Jefferson (1971) [58, p. 24]; and the archive, consisting of letters and work records, of George Salter, a calligrapher, illustrator, and book designer who worked for leading publishers in America in the twentieth century [68, p. 19]. During the closing years of the work of James M. Wells, there were four diverse and important acquisitions: (1) "A collection of 1,250 pam- phlets dealing with the regulation of printing, bookselling, and censor- ship in France from 1521 to 1829, together with a number of manu- scripts on the subject and an extensive chronological table, in manuscript, covering 1275-1777" [69, p. 4]. (2) A gift, from R. R. Donnelley and Sons, of private press books, examples of fine printing, and reference books, numbering almost 400 items [70]. Incidentally, after the Newberry selected these items, the Regenstein Library, at the University of Chicago, selected the items it needed and those books not required by either library were sold, with the proceeds being divided between the two libraries. (3) A gift, from Robert H. Brannan (a retired member of the staff), of private press books and fine printing, primarily by Thomas Bewick [71, p. 6]. (4) A gift of papers of the Chiswick Book Shop in New York City, dated 1952-58, which included letters between Herbert Cohen (the owner) and persons such as Will Ransom, Stanley Pargellis, and James Wells [72]. This last gift was presented in recogni- tion of the career of James M. Wells on the occasion of his retirement (February 1, 1984).16 One of the most notable events during the custodianship of Wells was the publication of book catalogs of the Wing Foundation by G. K. Hall and Company, thereby making the collection accessible to scholars everywhere. The first catalog was published in 1961, with supplements being published in 1970 and 1981 [73-75]. More than the usual amount of detail has been included in the entries, enhancing the catalogs' usefulness. Where known, provenance for each title is listed. Entries are heavily annotated and often contained bibliographical information not readily available elsewhere. A great deal of the credit for the painstaking cataloging belongs to Bernard E. Wilson, who cataloged almost all of the additions to the collection between 1959 and 1986. Besides the standard author, title, and subject entries, the catalogs provided separate chronological and place-name sections. Incunabula are cataloged according to the Proctor scheme, with works entered under place of origin (that is, countries and towns) and by printers. Other books acquired as examples of printing were cataloged by an 16. Paul F. Gehl (Ph.D., University of Chicago) was appointed curator of the John M. Wing Foundation on June 15, 1987.
186 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY adaptation of the Proctor scheme: century, place, and printer were noted for these post-1500 titles. The Newberry Calligraphy Study Group, founded by Detterer in 1941, continued, after 1947, under the leadership of James Hayes. It discontinued its activities in 1960, but the calligraphy collection is still used frequently and intensively, and there are courses in calligraphy available in the Newberry Library Lyceum. The library supported the activities of the Society of Typographic Arts by accommodating a print- ing workshop in the library from 1953 through 1980. The Wing Foundation continued to be used by a wide variety of readers. Although no statistical information is available, the impression is that there were substantially more publications completed with the use of the Wing Foundation during 1951-83 than during 1920-50, reflect- ing the increased size and maturity of the collection as well as convenient access to it through published catalogs. Wells himself has written more than thirty articles on calligraphy, the history of printing, and typography for reference works and scholarly journals plus numerous short pieces for the Newberry Libraiy Bulletin and the Anhual Reports. The growth of the library's fellowship program and increased interest in the history of the book as a field of study has resulted in extensive use of the Wing Foundation. Perhaps the most significant change in the use of the Wing Foundation is that scholars find texts, selected as examples of printing, required for research in a wide range of subjects. Conclusion The John M. Wing Foundation on the History of Printing collects materials from western Europe, Great Britain, and America in the following categories: literary or historical texts selected as a representa- tive specimen of a printer, an aspect of the printing process, or as a physical feature of the book (for example, design or illustration); print- ers' manuals, type-specimen books, or other material that can provide information concerning the development of printing processes from contemporary sources; writing books (and calligraphic manuscripts) of notable scribes from the fifteenth century to the present day (because of the connection between calligraphy and type design); manuscript and archival material that provides original documentation for printing pro- cesses and notable printers; and reference materials, consisting of bib- liographies, history, biographies, and monographs that are essential to use the primary sources enumerated above. The subject scope of this reference collection consists primarily of
JOHN M. WING FOUNDATION 187 printing history and related subjects: book illustration, paper making, and bookbinding. Books on publishing and bookselling are collected to the extent that the historical relationship between printing and the book trade requires the use of such material. Materials on book collecting are also a part of the collection. One of the remarkable features of the Wing Foundation is the degree of continuity in its policy over a period of almost seventy years. This is a credit to the foresight of those who formulated the original collecting policy, transforming John M. Wing's will into enduring and flexible guidelines. It is also a credit to the three custodians between 1920 and 1984. Indeed, the length of their tenure provided enough latitude so that each one could make a distinctive contribution. Working within the constraints of a clear and open collecting policy, each custodian was free to develop the collection according to changing needs and even his personal interests. Since the Wing Foundation was developed in the context of the comprehensive collections of the Newberry, the custodian could be highly selective in the acquisitions. The benefit of this "library within a library" is that the funds from the Wing endowment could be used only for the Wing collection rather than for the supporting materi- als. This made possible a clarity of purpose and specificity of scope for the Wing Foundation that ought to characterize a "research collection." REFERENCES 1. Wing, John Mansir. "A Great Wing Library." The Owl 1 (June 1900): 2-4. 2. "John Mansir Wing." The Owl 18 (March 1917): 1651-55. 3. Wing, Conway P. A Historical and Genealogical Register of John Wing, of Sandwich, Mass. and His Descendants, and His Descendants, 1682-1888. 2d ed. New York: De Vinne Press, 1888. 4. Wing, John M. The Great Union Stock Yards of Chicago. Chicago: Religio-Philosophical Publishing Assn., 1866. 5. Wing, John M. The Great Chicago Lake Tunnel. Chicago: Jack Wing, 1867. 6. Wing, John M. History of the Great Chicago Tunnel. Chicago: Jack Wing, 1868. 7. Wing, John M. [attributed]. Wing's Illustrated Travelers'and Visitors'Hand-Book to the City of Chicago. Chicago: J. M. Wing & Co., 1874. 8. Wing, John M. [attributed]. The Tunnels and Water System of Chicago. Chicago: J. M. Wing & Co., 1874. 9. Wing, John M. Old Coner Library Scrap Book about Books, Bibliography, Book-Plates, Libraries, and Other Things, Picked Up Here and There by a Philosopher. Chicago: Pasted at the Old Corner Library, 1899. 10. Wing, John M. Family Trees and Genealogy: Wing Family of America. Chicago: Old Corner Library, 1903. 11. "Last Will and Testament of John M. Wing." 1913 draft. 12. "Last Will and Testament of John M. Wing." 1915 (final) version. 13. Report of the Trustees of the Newbery Library. 1913.
188 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 14. "Last Will and Testament of John M. Wing." 1914 draft. 15. "Minute on the Death of Mr. Horace H. Martin." In Report of the Tru.stees of the Newberry Library. 1925, pp. 14-18. 16. Butler, Pierce. "A Typographical Library: The John M. Wing Foundation of the Newberry Library." Papers of the Bibliographical Society of America 15, pt. 2 (1921): 73-87. 17. Report of the Trustees of the Newberry Library. 1918. 18. Memorandum to trustees from W. N. C. Carleton, June 18, 1918. 19. Report of the Trustees of the Newbery Library. 1911. 20. Book Arts. Pt. 1, Bibliography, Printing, Bookbinding, Publishing & Bookselling, National & Trade Bibliography. Chicago: Newberry Library, 1919. 21. Resolution passed at the Annual Meeting of Trustees, January 1919. 22. "Report on Policy, 1919." 23. Memorandum on the will of John M. Wing, deceased. J. M. Wilson to trustees, undated, but before April 1919, possibly before January 1919. 24. Report of the Trustees of the Newbe Library. 1919. 25. Pargellis, Stanley. "Pierce Butler-a Biographical Sketch." Library Quarterly 22 (July 1952): 170-73. 26. Bell, Bernard I. "Pierce Butler, Professor and Priest." Library Quarterly 22 (July 1952): 174-76. 27. Verzeichniss der Sammlungen des Borsenvereins der deutschen Buchhandler. 3 vols. Leipzig: B6rsenverein, 1885-1902. 28. Lepreux, Ceorges. Gallia Typographica. 8 vols. Paris: H. Champion, 1909-14. 29. Butler, Pierce. Check List of Incunabula in the Newberiy Library. Chicago: Newberry Library, 1919. 30. Butler, Pierce. A Check List of Fifteenth Century Books in the Newberiy Library and in Other Libraries of Chicago. Chicago: Newberry Library, 1933. 31. Josephson, Aksel G. S. "The Literature of the Invention of Printing: A Bibliographical Study." Papers of the Bibliographical Society of America 11 (January 1917): 1-14. 32. Butler, Pierce. "Incunabula Markets of Europe." Publishers Weekly 5 (March 1927): 1-5. 33. Wells, James M. Report to the Bibliographical Committee. December 1970; 34. Koenig, Michael. "De Vinne and the De Vinne Press." Library Quarterly 41 Uanuary 1971): 1-24. 35. Report of the Trustees of the Newbery Library. 1920. 36. Buder, Pierce, comp. The First Fifty Years of the Printed Book, 1450-1500: Notes Descrip- tive of an Exhibitio. Chicago: Newberry Library, 1925. 37. The Newbery Library: Report of the Trustees for the Year 1939. 38. Anderson, Donald. "Calligraphy." In Encyclopedia of Library and Information Science. New York: Marcel Dekker, 1965. Vol. 4, pp. 1-33. 39. Johnston, Edward. Writing & IUuminating, & Lettering. London: John Hogg, 1906. 40. Memorandum to the book committee. Detterer, Ernst F., to the Newberry Library Book Committee, April 1941. 41. "The Hamill Calligraphic Collection." Newberty Library Bulktin 3 (April 1954): 148-51. 42. With Respect to RFD: An Appreciation of Raymond Franklin Da Boll and His Contribution to the Letter Arts. Freeport, Maine: TBW Books, 1978. 43. Wells, James M. "Calligraphy in Chicago." Printing and Graphic Arts 2 (May 1954): 28-30. 44. Bauer, Konrad F. "The John M. Wing Foundation on the History of Printing." De Gulden Passer 28 (1950): 44-56. 45. The Newberry Library: Report of the Trustees for the Year 1935.
JOHN M. WING FOUNDATION 189 46. The Newberiy Library: Report of the Trswtees for the Year 1936. 47. Kramer, Sidney. A History of Stone & Kimball and Herbert S. Stone & Co., with a Bibliography of Their Publications, 1893-1905. Chicago: Norman W. Forgue, 1940. 48. "William A. Kittredge." Newberry Library Bulletin 1 (September 1946): 9-14. 49. "Library Notes." Newberry Library Bulletin 1 September 1946: 29-32. 50. Barker, Nicolas. Stanley Morison. London: Macmillan, 1972. 51. Sanders, Walter. "Terence at the Newberry, 1470-1700: A Rough Checklist." Research Opportunities in Renaissance Drama 9 (1966): 62-76. 52. "Library Notes." Newberry Library Bulktin 2 (July 1950): 136-42. 53. Annual Report of the Director and Librarian. 1963-64. 54. Towner, Lawrence W. Every Silver Lining Has a Cloud: The Recent Shaping of the Newberry Library's Colkction. Chicago: Newberry Library, 1970. 55. "Notable Accessions of the Library, 1956." Newberry Library Bulletin 4 (March 1957): 42-64. 56. "Notable Accessions of the Library, 1962." Newby Library Bulktin 6 (April 1963): 33-63. 57. "Notable Accessions of the Library, 1959." Newberiy Library Bulktin 5 (April 1960): 130-56. 58. Annual Report of the Director and Librarian. 1970-71. 59. The Newberry Library; Annual Report. 1981-82. 60. Newberry Library Bulktin 6 (August 1978): 305-21. 61. "Will Ransom: A Biographical Portrait." Newberry Library Bulletin 4 (November 1955): 1-9. 62. Wells, James M. "Will Ransom and the Ransom Records in the Newberry Library." Book Club of California Quarterly News Letter 23 (Winter 1957): 3-7. 63. Watts, George B. Philippe-Denis Pierres: First Printer Ordinary of Louis XIV. Charlotte, N.C.: Heritage Printers, 1966. 64. "Notable Accessions of the Library, 1958." Newberty Library Bulktin 5 (May 1959): 55-74. 65. "Notable Accessions of the Library, 1960." Newberry Library Bulletin 5 (April 1961): 240-65. 66. "Notable Accessions of the Library, 1961." Newberly Library Bulletin 5 (June 1962): 323-49. 67. Annual Report of the Director and Librarian. 1966-67. 68. Annual Report of the Director and Librarian. 1972-73. 69. Wells, James M. "Acquisitions at the Newberry Library: The John M. Wing Founda- tion on the History of Printing." The Newberiy Libraty; Annual Report. 1977-78. 70. Newberry-ana. August 17, 1979. 71. The Newberry Library; Annual Report. 1982-83. 72. Newberry-ana. January 30, 1984. 73. Dictionary Catalogue of the History of Printing from the John M. Wing Foundation in the Newberry Library. 6 vols. Boston: G. K. Hall & Co., 1961. 74. Dictionary Catalog of the History of Pnnting from the John M. Wing Foundation in the Newberyy Library. Ist suppl. 3 vols. Boston: G. K. Hall & Co., 1970. 75. Dictionary Catalog of the History of Printing from the John M. Wing Foundation in the Newber7y Library. 2d suppl. 4 vols. Boston: G. K. Hall & Co., 1981.