THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Volume VII JANUARY 1937 Number I THE VATICAN LIBRARY DURING RECENT YEARlS IGINO GIORDANI THE CAETANI ARCHIVES O N OCTOBER 23, 1934, the Duke Gelasio Caetani, former Italian ambassador to the United States, died prematurely. With his death the precious archives of the Caetani family came to the Vatican Library as a permanent deposit. This was according to the wishes of the deceased Duke, with the consent of his brother Roffredo and his nephew. The Caetani family, which takes its origin and its name from Gaeta, has given to the Church two popes, Gelasio II and Boni- face VIII (Popes Gregory IX and Paul III were sons of two women of the same lineage), thirteen cardinals, and numerous bishops, and has made itself illustrious throughout ten cen- turies with men of arms and of letters. With such a genealogy as this, the value of its archives is easily understood. They are, in fact, one of the richest among the private collections of the Roman patriciate. In them are collected 3,475 parchments, 198,3I7 documents, and I,I96 manuscript volumes. During the past century certain studies have permitted a survey of its con- tents, and Gregorovius has said that "when the Caetani archives are published, it will be necessary to re-write part of the history of Latium and of the Kingdom of Naples." The rearrangement
2 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY of the archives has been commenced, and certain documents have been singled out which illustrate the history of the family. In I870 the archivist G. B. Carinci published the Lettere di Onorato Caetani, the leader of the pontifical infantry at the battle of Lepanto. Duke Gelasio gave new impulse to the rearrangement of the papers and in I9I9 began the publication of the Documenti dell'Archivio Caetani, with the aim of assembling material for the history of the family. These publications include: (i) a large historical work on the family entitled Domus Caietana, two volumes of which have been issued in three parts covering the events up to the sixteenth century (the Duke has illustrated the documents with his own engravings); (2) the collection of six large volumes, Regesta chartarum, in which are reproduced the most important manuscripts of 954-IS22; (3) the corre- spondence of Onorato Caetani with Giovanni d'Angio during the invasion of the Kingdom of Naples under the title Epistola- rium Honorati Caietani; and (4) the genealogical and chrono- logical table of the Caetani family under the title Caietanorum genealogia. In addition he published an edition of the celebrated Dante codex (Codice Caetani della Divina commedia), and at the time of his death he was preparing to publish a collection of the most interesting medieval documents under the title Varia (which has been published this year), and the third volume of the Domus Caietana,' covering the seventeenth to the nineteenth centuries. The publication of the documents will be continued by the Vatican Library, since with the archives has come their careful archivist, Dr. Cesare Ramadori. With this transfer many docu- ments already in the Vatican relative to the history of the Caetani house and to the events in which members of the family have participated find completion. In fact, Duke Gelasio had this in mind in desiring the union of his papers with those of the Vatican. It should be noted that the Caetani archives are not the first ' The outline of this edition was given by Dr. Cesare Ramadori, archivist of the Caetani family, in the Osseratore Romano, February 14, 15, 1935.
THE VATICAN LIBRARY 3 collection of this sort, concerning the Roman patriciate families, to come to the Vatican. The value of these archives becomes apparent when one considers that in them are collected a large portion of the papers having to do with the activities of the cardinals, bishops, nuncios, and other ecclesiastical dignitaries; papers dealing with the history of the Church which emanated from ecclesiastical authorities in the exercise of their functions, some of which came naturally to complete the documents al- ready in the Vatican Archives and Library; and heavy bundles from the office of the Santa Sede. In I899 Leo XIII bought the archives and the library of the Borghese, committing the former to the Vatican Archives and the latter to the Vatican Library. Another part of these ar- chives came three years later from the family. In I902 the Bar- berini library (1597-I679), with all its bookcases, was trans- ferred to the Vatican Library. This library contains 31,671 printed books and I0,652 manuscripts in addition to a collection of archives recently enriched by the gift of the Sciarra papers. In i92i the precious Rossi library came into the Vatican. In 1923 the Italian government gave the Chigi library to the Pope: 300 incunabula, 30,000 printed books, and 3,000 manuscripts, including a collection of archives (the private archives have re- mained with the family). In 1926 the widow Marchesa Ferrajoli gave the library of her family: i,2oo manuscripts and 4o,ooo printed volumes, among which are many works of French, Spanish, and English lit- erature. In 1930 the archives of the Prince Ruspoli were deposited in the Vatican Archives. In March, I931, the Pontificate received a generous gift from an American Catholic, Mr. Louis Mendels- sohn, who acquired for the Pope the famous portrait of Clement IX by Maratta, sacred relics of that Pope, and the archives of the Rospigliosi house (partially destroyed by fire), with a great part of the library. To complete the list of important recent accessions we will record that in March, 193I, the Croci family gave to the Holy Father, and thus to the Vatican Library, the voluminous collec-
4 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY tion of documents which Gaetano Moroni used in compiling his Dizionario di erudizione ecclesiastica, printed in I03 volumes (I84o-6i), to which he later added an index in six volumes (I 878-79). On December I, I933, in the presence of the Pope, there was placed in the Galleria of the Library a glass case containing the masterpieces of the historian of the popes, Ludwig von Pastor, given by his wife. Among the pieces in the collection are a hun- dred volumes and bundles of manuscripts with the complete correspondence of the famous historian. This collection is simi- lar in form to one placed in the middle room which contains the masterpieces of Giovanni Battista de' Rossi and which was given to Leo XIII by the family of the great Roman archaeolo- gist. THE REORGANIZATION OF THE CATALOGS Before he made the gift of his papers and his books, Duke Gelasio Caetani had done a great service to the Vatican Library by putting it in touch with various important institutions in the United States. During the post-war period the Duke had been in the United States as ambassador. But before this, while he was a mining engineer, he had made many friends and had gathered hundreds of books which he read and annotated, with certain significant notes. Learning of Dr. Nicholas Murray Butler's intention to devel- op the program of international peace supported by the Carne- gie Endowment for International Peace in the field of libraries and knowing the value of the book as an instrument of civiliza- tion, Caetani spoke to Dr. Butler of the Vatican Library and of its need for renovation. Dr. Butler was greatly interested, and in May, I926, Dr. Henry S. Pritchett, trustee of the Carnegie Endowment, was sent to Rome to study methods of developing and reorganizing the cataloging and classification systems for the collections of the Vatican Library-"the most famous and valuable collec- tions of manuscripts and books in existence"2 '2in order to fa- 2 Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, Yearbook (I928), p. 8i.
THE VATICAN LIBRARY 5 cilitate their consultation by students of all countries. Dr. Pritchett had a long audience with the Holy Father and dis- cussed the problem with Mgr Giovanni Mercati and Mgr Tis- serant. As a result of this preliminary survey Dr. W. W. Bishop was asked, because of his particular competence, to come and study the technical aspect of the matter in conjunction with Mr. Robert Wilberforce. The two men arrived in Rome on March 9, 1927. Dr. Bishop made a careful study of the problem and then returned to the United States. Mgr Tisserant, who had been invited by the Carnegie Endowment to make a tour of the principal libraries of the United States, accompanied him on his return. Mgr Tisserant returned to Rome on July 30, I927. In the summer of 1927 the president of the Carnegie En- dowment had an audience with the Holy Father in which the plan for the reorganization of the Library was definitely estab- lished and approved. This plan included the compilation of (i) a summary index, by author, of the manuscripts; (2) a catalog of a section of the printed books to serve as a model; and (3) an index of the in- cunabula, for inclusion in the Gesamtkatalog. With the assistance of the Carnegie Endowment, four of the librarians of the Vatican were sent to America-Mgr Enrico Benedetti and Mgr Carmelo Scalia, who were to spend six months in practice at the Library of Congress, and Drs. Gerardo Bruni and Igino Giordani, who were sent to Ann Arbor, Michi- gan, and to New York to attend the courses in library science given at the University of Michigan and at Columbia Univer- sity. They arrived in New York on August 3I, I927. A few months later, on February 22, I928, some of the most illustrious and expert librarians of America-Dr. Bishop, Mr. Charles Martel, Mr. J. C. M. Hanson, and Mr. W. M. Randall -arrived in Rome to begin the work of reorganization. From the American Academy of Rome, Mr. M. L. Lord lent his assist- ance, and from Norway there came the librarian of Trondhjem, Mr. John Ansteinsson, who had studied in America. The Library of Congress contributed to the great undertaking not only by permitting the distinguished head of its catalog
6 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY department, Mr. Martel, to come to Rome but also by giving a complete collection of its printed cards and by continuing to furnish them, thus providing a depository catalog. It also fur- nished the Vatican catalog with cards for those of our books of which they possessed copies and which they had cataloged. The use of Library of Congress cards was quickly adopted by the Vatican Library, so that Dr. Bishop was able to write, "I regard this agreement on cataloging principles as an interna- tional undertaking of great importance which will advance the practice of international cataloging at least fifty years."3 It was a just prediction. For the use, and, indeed, only the presence of the American cards in the Vatican Library has incited many librarians to reform their own systems, to bring them up to date, and, especially, to examine themselves in an unprejudiced manner. With the reorganization thus begun, a center for the diffusion of systems and ideas has been created at Rome, and an intellec- tual convergence has been brought about, capable of promoting and advancing that spiritual intent by which Carnegie was moved. From I928 to 1932 three more assistants at the Vatican Li- brary came to the United States to study library science at the University of Michigan. They were Dr. Riccardo Matta, Dr. Giuseppe Graglia, and Dr. Nello Vian. THE RECATALOGING Manuscripts.-In the actual methods of cataloging the manu- scripts-a collection numbering about 6o,ooo-little or nothing has been changed. For more than thirty years a printed cata- log, manageable in form and accurate in content, has been in the process of compilation. The work has progressed rapidly during the past few years under the encouragement given by a pontiff who, having been a librarian himself, understands the needs of a library like that of the Vatican; the aid given by the Carnegie Endowment is also partly responsible for the progress. Twenty volumes have been published in which are described 3 Ibid. (i 929), p. I" 7.
THE VATICAN LIBRARY 7 the following groups of manuscripts: Palatini greci; Palatini latini, i-92i; Reginensi greci e di Pio II; Papiri latini e egizi; Ottoboniani greci; Urbinati greci e latini; Capponiani; Vaticani latini, I-I,I34, 1,461-2,059, 9,852-I 1,700; Vaticani greci, I-329; Chigiani e Borgiani greci; Armeni, Etiopici, Copti, etc. This work has been done in great part by the scrittori of the Vatican. In late years some extra collaborators have been added to this group, making it possible to accelerate the rhythm of the scientific cataloging of the manuscripts. Most of these collab- orators are well-known men in the world of scholarship, such as Adolphe Hebbelynck, former rector of the Catholic University of Louvain, who is concerned with the Coptic manuscripts to- gether with Rev. A. Lantschoot; Professor Umberto Cassuto, of the Royal University of Rome, who is describing the Arabic manuscripts; Professor Giorgio Levi della Vida, who is working on the Muhammadan Arabic manuscripts in conjunction with Rev. Professor Giorgio Graf, who is working on the Christian Arabic material. Among those concerned with the latin manu- scripts are Dom Andr6 Wilmart, who has discovered and illus- trated so many texts, Professor Bertalot, and Professor A. Campana. The new tool for the consultation of the manuscripts is the index, the plan for which was studied by Dr. Bishop, Mgr Mercati, and Mgr Tisserant. It is being made in international form on typewritten cards. No fewer than fifteen persons have given their time to its compilation-priests, for the patristic and canon law parts; jurists; and professors of literature- both men and women, all of whom held diplomas in paleography. The index to the manuscripts of the Vatican Library proposes to furnish the student with the best possible copy of the items useful in his research-items which catalogs and inventories, by their very nature, cannot offer with equal ease. To serve these ends the index is being compiled from material derived from the systematic examination of all of the manuscripts in the various collections of the Library. In this card index there will be as- sembled, little by little, and placed at the disposal of the stu- dents, cards not only indicating authors, titles, and editions,
8 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY but also subjects and data which inform the searcher of the per- sons and the particular and general arguments to which the writings thus cataloged refer. Author cards are made whenever an author is known or can be identified; title cards, whenever the writer is anonymous and the title is given in the manuscript or an edition of it, or can be supplied by scientific research; subject and material cards (which have the entry words in capital letters so that they may be quickly distinguished from the others) are usually made for every unedited work and for edited works only when it seems strictly necessary. For works which are both anonymous and unedited still another card is made giving the "Incipit" in order to aid in the eventual identification of the work and in the re- searches of the catalogers themselves. Cross-reference cards tie the entire collection together at the proper points. The basic elements contained in the cards have been deter- mined by an analytic examination of the writings, scientifically conducted, and subject and material cards are prepared accord- ing to criteria which aim at combining the necessary precision with whatever practicability in description and classification will best answer the needs of the students. This results in a ful- ness of entries which are distributed and grouped so as to throw into relief, on cursory examination, organic series of data which would otherwise be difficult to discover. The language in which the manuscripts are described in the catalogs is Latin, which is the tongue best understood by schol- ars of all countries. In the index, however, it has seemed ad- visable to give the subjects in Italian to harmonize with the practice in the catalog of printed books. Incunabula.-For the incunabula (about seven thousand), there exists a general alphabetic catalog, typewritten on cards, in which are given all the data for their identification. Three duplicate cards have been made for each entry, one of which goes to the public catalog, one to the official catalog, and the third to a special catalog of incunabula. An accurate, technical description of each incunabulum has been made by a competent cataloger, Rev. Tommaso Accurti,
THE VATICAN LIBRARY 9 and is to serve as copy for a printed catalog. A description of the incunabula, arranged chronologically by place of printing like the Index of Proctor, has also been completed. Besides this, there is a general alphabetic index of printers. Descriptions of Vatican copies have been added to the proof sheets of the Gesamtkatalog der Wiegendrucke when these were lacking; and corrections and additions have been made -an ex- acting task of careful collaboration in the editing of this im- portant catalog. Printed books.-The most radical reorganization has taken place in the cataloging of the printed books. In order to unite the various collections of the Library in a single catalog, the general alphabetic (dictionary) type of card catalog, modeled after those existing in the great American libraries, has been adopted. To guide in this cataloging a voluminous manual of cataloging rules, Norme per il catalogo degli stampati (Citta del Vaticano: Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana, I 93 I), has been compiled, based on the Anglo-American Cataloging rules and on the Regole per la compilazione del catalogo alfabetico, which derives from them and which is in use in the Italian government libraries. From these basic rules the Vatican Library has made any modifications and taken any initiative which would best enable it to catalog its own books, taking care always to give its own catalog a form which should conform to the international character of its own readers, who come from all countries, and to the universal char- acter of the Church itself. With this in mind it has "inter- nationalized" the Anglo-American Rules for the sake of readers (e.g., in the entries names of cities are given in their respective languages). In this way the Library has entered wholeheartedly into the field of international co-operation in cataloging. Approximately five hundred rules have been fixed, treating in detail all the possible problems of cataloging; and the pro- posed object of having the cataloging of a uniformity helpful to students of all countries has been realized by this publication. The volume has gone into many public and private libraries and has begun to circulate also in foreign countries. The compilers of R?gles catalographiques 2 l'usage des bilioth?ques de Belgique
10 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY (Brussels: R. Henriquez, I933) have, in several points, followed the rules of the Vatican. The dictionary catalog is on cards following the pattern and form of those of the Library of Congress, so that every American who consults it soon remarks that it "looks very familiar." The cards are printed. When it is discovered from the depository catalog that the book has been cataloged at Washington, the Vatican requests the cards from the Library of Congress; other- wise it prints them itself. The subject headings of the secondary cards, as well as the bibliographic descriptions, are in the Italian language. The sub- ject headings, however, are almost all taken from the Subject headings published by the Library of Congress and translated into Italian. I have written an article concerning the criteria used in this translation, "Subject headings in the Vatican Libra- ry," for Special libraries (Vol. XXV, No. 3 [March, '9341). Americans using the catalog find no difficulty in retranslating these headings into English. Along with the dictionary catalog there is being compiled a classified catalog arranged according to the Library of Congress Classification. All the cards have one and sometimes two classi- fications constituting a language which needs no translation. The reading public has made good use of the dictionary catalog. It is only beginning, with some hesitation, to approach the classified catalog-a more unusual tool. It is needless to say that the adoption of these systems of cataloging has aroused, along with enthusiasm and approval, some criticism and disapproval. The importance of the collab- oration of libraries and the exchange of their products in the form of uniform catalogs is not yet evident to all. There are still some readers who do not realize the added ease which our cards bring to research and who are affected by a nostalgia for the difficulties imposed by the old catalogs considered as a testing ground for courage. As though difficulties in research were lacking! The author catalog of printed books has been completed. As soon as the handwritten cards have been replaced by printed
THE VATICAN LIBRARY Ii cards, the author catalog will be transformed into a dictionary catalog. It should be noted that the handwritten cards are in two forms and that they are in two sets of card cases: the most recent ones, in the same form as the printed cards, arranged in metal cases which are to become the catalog cases for the dic- tionary catalog; and the older cards, collected in wooden boxes which have also been subjected to rearrangement by some sis- ters of the Franciscan Missionaries of Mary, who have col- laborated gratuitously in the revision. They have been work- ing in their mother-house, checking the entries according to the criteria lately adopted, recopying the small cards of the Bar- berini collection, collecting on a single card the entries for the various copies of a work, etc. The books in the Sala di Consultazione (Reference Library) are all entered in the new card cases; a good portion of them have been recataloged according to the new rules, and almost all the cards which have been printed are for these books. The work is slow because the personnel is limited; the five catalogers, trained in America, who are editing the cards for the press are assisted to a certain extent by four others who are con- stantly interrupted in this task by other duties in the Library. There are in all eleven persons engaged in making both the definitive and the provisional cards-certainly few enough for a large library and for work of high accuracy. Painstaking work is required, for example, in the establishment of the biographical dates of all persons whose names are used as entries either main or secondary. In this work all available sources are utilized and, in addition, letters are written to persons and institutions in every country-a task which is partly compensated for by the volumes which authors offer to send immediately upon receiving our request, in order that they may have all their works pres- ent in the Vatican. Cards have been printed since I930 and are sold at the price of L. 0.20 each to associated libraries. Table I presents a list of the numbers of cards printed in past years, with the cost for each year and the total cost. The cards are sent in packages of about
12 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 325 each; the postage for foreign countries amounts to about L. 6.oo a package. Particular accuracy has been sought in the cataloging of the collection of monographs (Festschriften, Melanges, Miscella- nies, etc.). A very careful description has been made of these, facilitating the compilation of analytic cards. A first list con- taining I25 items of the collection thus cataloged has been pub- lished; other lists will follow. TABLE I NUMBER AND COST OF PRINTED CARDS AT VATICAN LIBRARY DURING RECENT YEARS Year Number of Number of Cot(ie Entries Cards Cost (Lire) 1930 ........ ..... 921 I1,079 L. 2I 5. 80 1931 ......... .... I1 ,?? I 693 338.60 1932 ........... 3 3,720 744 00 1933 ... . 2, 275 2,574 5 14. 80 I934 ........... 3,450 3,942 788.40 1935 ........... 2,Y950 3,320 664.00 Total ......... 1 4,596 I6,328 L. 3,,265. 60 "Last but not least," there should be some mention of the in- ventory in book form which has been carefully compiled for the printed books of the Palatina collection by Rev. Giovanni Maz- zini as a companion tool to the inventory compiled by Steven- son, Jr., which included only about half of this rich collection. THE NEW STACKS The technical and physical renovation has proceeded along with the revision of the cataloging. Between I927 and 193I there was constructed what has come to be called the Nuova Biblioteca, but which might more properly be known as the Biblioteca Pio XI, since it was designed and built by the reign- ing pontiff. This building contains all the printed books of the Vatican-about half a million; it occupies almost the entire ground floor and first floor of the ancient building constructed by Bramante in 15I2 at the order of Julius II, connecting the
THE VATICAN LIBRARY 13 palace of Nicholas V and Alexander VI with the pavilion or bel- vedere of Innocent VIII. On December 20, I928-the beginning of his sacred jubilee the Holy Father opened the first section of this new library. This was the lower part built in the old stables. This enormous space has been divided into three stories by marble floors and filled with new metal stacks constructed in the United States by an organization specializing in library equipment (Snead & Co., of New Jersey), and put in place by Italian workmen under the direction of an engineer from the manufacturing company. The stacks are 2 meters high, permitting access to the books without the need of ladders or steps; the adjustable shelves allow the graduation of the spaces according to the heights of the books. The installation of electric light, in metal tubes to prevent short-circuits, makes the space bright as day, and there is addi- tional light from large windows. Electric interrupters are pro- vided with time attachments which automatically cut off the current after five minutes, much to the assistance of the person- nel who may suffer from absent-mindedness-a defect, it is re- ported, not uncommon among students! A powerful ventilator transmits the air through the whole space, automatically tempering the air in order to protect the leather bindings, which would suffer as much from an excess of dryness as from an excess of humidity. Three stairways and an Otis elevator connect the three floors of the stacks. At the same time as this new stack was opened, the new entrance to the library with its artistic stone staircase was inaugurated in the Cortile del Belvedere. Two stone murals at the foot of the stair- case celebrate the bibliographic enlargement of the Library dur- ing the first seven years of the pontificate of Pius XI, represent- ed, for example, by the accession of the Chigiana, of the Ferra- joli library, of the Caprotti oriental manuscripts, of the library of Mgr Petit, etc. The new stairway and, above all, the modern stack installation give a most modern appearance to the oldest library in Europe. To this first section the Holy Father added a second still larg- er one occupying the floor above where the mosaic factory was
I4 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY located, but greater in length (to the end of the Cortile di S. Damaso). The mosaic factory was established by Sixtus V to provide mosaics needed in the Basilica di S. Pietro then in con- struction; and after various peregrinations, took that place in i825 under Leo XII. The mosaic factory was transferred to another location be- hind the old Seminario Minore Vaticano; the large windows on the Cortile del Belvedere were reopened, as far as was practicable, in the thickness of the Bramantesque walls toward the east. In this way the architectural compactness which resembles a bas- tion of a fortress was restored, uninterrupted except for the great entrance arch, which was re-embellished, and the over- hanging balcony, the entrance to which has been enlarged. On the parapet of this balcony a large stone will commemorate this further work of Pius XI. Throughout the space which extends over the first stacks, the entrance arch, and another thirty meters, metal uprights of stacks have been installed. They are divided into three stories with floors of Carrara marble, and are connected not only by means of the common elevator but also by five stairways of iron and marble. A stairway in the center and the entrance elevator provide communication with the part beneath. In the large room which extends along the wing of the building as far as the adjacent Cortile di S. Damaso, stacks have been placed along the inside wall, divided into three stories with two iron galleries, and set aside for the cabinet of engravings and for the Cicognara library. This arrangement has been adopted to avoid invading the floor adorned with beautiful old mosaics. Another adjoining room is reserved for the care of the geograph- ical maps. Next to the windows which open onto the balcony over the entrance arch of the Cortile del Belvedere and on the first floor of the new part (which is the fourth floor of the Biblioteca Nuova) is the doorway to the numismatic cabinet or medal col- lection belonging to the Vatican Library. By way of this room and the cabinet of engravings there is access to a room over- looking the Cortile del Triangolo, which houses the Caetani archives.
THE VATICAN LIBRARY i5 As to the new section of the stacks: The principal part of these occupies a space 136 meters long, 6 meters wide, and 7 meters high, and contains io,ooO meters of shelves arranged in 471 ranges, 2.i0 meters high, and of a collective weight of 250 tons of steel. Twenty-five rows of the stacks on the fourth floor have been provided with grills and closed off with a special door for the most valuable books of the "Riserva" and for the in- cunabula. The electric installation in this section is even more modern' than that in the one beneath. It is in the form of reflecting lamps so that illumination is secured by three hundred electric lights regulated by interrupters, with wires conducted in tubes which guarantee perfect insulation against fire. The ventilator located on the second floor takes the air already dried and humidified from the stacks underneath and distributes it through the three floors. The new stacks have a capacity of 800,ooo volumes. THE NEW SALA DI CONSULTAZIONE At the close of 193 1, in the middle of this work of transforma- tion, there was a most unfortunate accident. December 22, at four-thirty o'clock, an hour in which, fortunately, there were few persons remaining, there was a collapse of the above-men- tioned old wing; the Library of Sixtus V, two pillars of the Salone Sistino with the corresponding portion of the Sala di Consultazione beneath, were destroyed, crushing four workmen who were working on the ground floor and knocking down a young collaborator, Dr. Marco Vattasso, who had been hired only a few days before. In the crash some treasures were over- turned, among which were eight manuscripts from the Salone Sistino and about fifteen thousand volumes from the Sala di Consultazione. The rescue work was undertaken immediately. The victims and the books were freed. The Holy Father, greatly affected, especially by the loss of human life, gave immediate orders to begin the reconstruction of the building. Out of fifteen thousand volumes only about fifty were so badly damaged as to be beyond
i6 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY repair; the rest remained intact or were capable of repair. The manuscripts were all restored. In order that the students should not be hindered in their work, the books in the Sala di Consulta- zione were quickly put in order and assembled on the shelves of the Biblioteca Nuova (which had just been put in the place of the mosaic factory). On the morning of December 29, all was in order, and on January 2, when the library was formally opened to the public, the students found the printed books and manu- scripts at their disposal and in order. The ruined frescoes on the ceilings of the Salone Sistino were reproduced with scrupulous exactness according to the originals, so that in April, 1933, the large court was reopened to the public in all its splendor of color and light. Nothing was missing except one precious cup of malachite given by the czar and the baptis- mal font of the son of Napoleon III, which had been irreparably shattered. And so on October 2, I933, after a private visit from the Holy Father, the Sala di Consultazione, completely restored after the disaster, was reopened to the public. The entrance to the library was again placed on the Cortile del Belvedere. The restoration of the Sala di Consultazione is now complete. In vivid richness reproduced with fidelity and in luminousness the room stands as beautiful and imposing as before. The greater illumination comes from the opening of a large window in the arch facing on the Cortile del Belvedere, in ac- cordance with Bramante's plan for the complete restoration of the original architectural design of the court. The high and wide cornices of the three buildings to the east, west, and north had been partly walled in, in successive epochs, and reduced to port- holes for telescopes (on the ground floor where some are still re- maining) or to normal rectangular windows. Pius X had already opened almost all those on the first floor on the east in order to provide light for the Pinacoteca. Pius XI, retaking the initiative, resolved in I928 to open likewise those on the other two sides and, the same year, began to open those in the old stables now transformed into the storage room for printed books; and, in I930, he made an effort to do the same for those in the Sala di
THE VATICAN LIBRARY 17 Consultazione; it was this which required the change in the shelving which has now been effected. As a matter of fact, to speak of the Sala di Consultazione is to use a somewhat misleading expression because, in effect, the Sala di Consultazione consists of not one but three rooms, the two larger of which are parallel and intercommunicating, re- ceiving light from the Cortile del Belvedere and the Cortile della Biblioteca (now called the Stamperia), respectively. A por- tion of the third and smallest overlooks the Cortile del Belve- dere; the rest connects with the Archives. In saying that the Sala di Consultazione is well lighted, one means to speak par- ticularly of the first assembly hall, flooded with light from seven enormous windows now opened. The improved lighting is also due to the fact that in two of the parallel halls the oblique shelving which had divided them into three sections has disappeared so that now they present themselves in their entire length, standing out in relief from the graceful galleries of the new shelves, and, in the first room, from the rows of twenty-three beautiful student-desks, each one with four sections, placed in orderly fashion along the entire length of the room. The students are given as much convenience and space as they formerly enjoyed. The new stacks are the most noteworthy part of the furnish- ings which were all completely renovated according to the most modern technique. The installation was the work of Snead & Company. These iron stacks, covered over with a pure green bronze, with movable shelves which can be adjusted within half-inch limits, are placed next to the outside walls between the windows. Along the two inside walls the stacks, instead of being twice as high, are divided into half their height by a graceful and decorative gallery, also of bronzed iron, provided with a balus- trade with small columns joining to make squares for colored glass. These are provided with reading desks fastened to the gallery to permit the immediate and rapid consultation of books. With this division these higher stacks result in normal height, so that any person of average stature is able to reach the volume
I 8 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY he needs without the aid of stools and cumbersome and creaking ladders. In the two larger rooms, which are separated by a wall, there are displayed two parallel galleries which communicate with each other across the six spacious openings of the passages be- tween the two rooms. These double stacks cover the entire height of the walls. In the next room the gallery next to the entrance is detached along the inside wall and passes across as far as the outside wall, where there is displayed in the space the first group of sculpturing which covers likewise the second row of the stacks. Moreover, in order to conserve space, the shelving along the length of the inside wall is not placed directly back to the wall, as in the corresponding wall inclosing the other room, but is arranged in the form of a comb with projections which ex- tend about two meters out into the room (i.e., for each two sec- tions of the shelving) in the main floor, and about one meter (i.e., for each separate section) in the gallery. This arrange- ment has permitted this part of the gallery to be made much longer. There is access to the gallery by way of two staircases placed at either end of the second hall or by means of the large Otis ele- vator which connects the inclosure underneath, where in No- vember the catalogers, the secretary, and the accession depart- ment with their necessary reference equipment were trans- ferred. The elevators serves also to convey the book trucks which facilitate the distribution of the books. The center space in the second room is not filled with study desks, but with sections of the old and new catalog placed in ten handsome metal files furnished by Forges of Strassburg. The upper part of these files is provided with trays for cards, six rows per case, and fourteen trays in a row. These files will later be used for the general catalog which, as we have said, is in process of revision. The old card catalog in wooden trays is placed in the lower part of the same cases on movable stands and corresponds al- phabetically with the new catalog, so that the searcher who is looking for the work of a particular author can find it, without having to move, either in the new general catalog, in the old
THE VATICAN LIBRARY I9 catalog, or in the catalogs of the British Museum, of the Bibijo- theque Nationale, or in the Gesamtkatalog of the Prussian libra- ries, since these catalogs are also placed, with the same alpha- betical arrangement, on the shelves under the wooden trays. At the present time the new cases are only partly occupied by the cards; the two upper rows of cases have been left empty in all the sections. These will be filled gradually as the recatalog- ing proceeds and the old cards of the wooden trays are replaced with the new, so that in time these latter will disappear com- pletely. In the meantime some metal cases of the same length, but of lesser depth and height, provided with movable metal shelves, have been placed between one section and another to maintain the alphabetical continuity between the card catalogs and the printed catalogs of the foreign libraries and to provide space for the oversize volumes. A good number of the wooden trays of the old catalog have been placed in the upper part of these, while the lower part is used to hold volumes of the printed cata- logs or oversize volumes (those higher than 47 cm.) belonging to adjacent sections in the regular shelving. These cases, alternat- ing with the card-catalog cases, serve also as tables upon which the trays of the catalog and the printed catalogs can be placed for consultation. In the third room the arrangement of the bookshelves is re- peated in the same design as in the other rooms; that is to say, they are single for a certain space and double, with a gallery, for a longer space. An innovation in the reconstruction of the Biblioteca di Con- sultazione is the electrical installation, made in accordance with the most modern theories of fire protection, with a rich arrange- ment of lamps in order to assure proper illumination even in the northern part where the natural lighting is not always sufficient. All the bookshelves are provided with lamps, which, in the second hall, are automatically extinguished (with a clocklike de- vice similar to that functioning for the stacks in the new store- room for the printed books) after five minutes of illumination; and in the first room an electrical outlet has been placed on the floor at the foot of each study table, eventually to provide il-
20 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY lumination at night. Two fire extinguishers have also been placed at either end of the second hall. A hot-water heating system completes the fixtures of the rooms. The radiators are alternated with the files in the second room, while in the first they are placed in the empty spaces be- neath the first, third, fifth, and seventh large windows. In the spaces beneath the other three windows, which are much deeper because of the architectural design of the building (constructed as it is with projections and recesses), are reading- desk compartments in which are placed the periodicals. It has been possible to utilize a greater space than was available in the past, giving place to 231 periodicals (of the SS6 that arrive normally)-that is to say, one hundred more than before. The magazines have been divided into three groups: (i) biblio- graphical, oriental, theological, and philosophical journals; (2) art, philological, literary, and scientific journals; and (3) histor- ical journals. Regarding the classification of the book collection, deference was given, in a general way, to the old classification, except that the section including bibliographies and that including encyclo- pedias and dictionaries have been expanded. The collection of periodicals, previously grouped in one class only, has been di- vided into subclasses according to the subject matter. The over- size volumes, which at one time were inclosed in inconvenient wooden cases, now have been placed, for the most part, hori- zontally on the bookshelves of their respective sections and also on the stands at the base of the trays of the card catalog in the cases of the second room. Concerning the topographical arrangement of the sections, the principle of arranging the volumes according to the frequen- cy of their use has been followed (beginning with the entrance of the first room on the first floor and ending in the third room on the second floor). This arrangement begins with biographies, bibliographies, encyclopedias, and dictionaries. Other aids to consultation are the labels placed at the top of each single bookshelf, in the cornice, with the name of the sub- ject and the number of the class and the subclass, and the
THE VATICAN LIBRARY 21 indicative labels inclosed in oblong metal frames placed upon each stand. Labels are also placed on the sides of every catalog. THE SCHOOL OF LIBRARY SCIENCE The youngest creature of this renovation of the Vatican Li- brary is the Scuola di Biblioteconomia. It has assumed the task of diffusing the new methods of library organization. There is little hope that the use of printed catalog cards and of the modern catalogs will be adopted by other libraries (and, in fact, none of the European libraries has subscribed to our printed cards as yet, and only that of Leningrad has requested an ex- change) until the librarians go to a professional school where they are instructed in the new methods. In Italy there are such professional classes in the royal universities and they render good service. In the Vatican such a class was created, emphasizing the practical rather than the theoretical side of library work and basing its instruction on its own experience. It aimed chiefly at the training of youths intending to become librarians of ecclesi- astical libraries-of the Azione Cattolica (universities, colleges, seminaries, etc.) and parochial libraries-libraries for which the Vatican could serve as a prototype for obvious reasons. The school is opened in November, and it closes with the final examinations in June. It is so organized as to present the most important factors in the fulfilment of all the services re- quired of a librarian. It is comprised, therefore, of two courses annually-one entitled "Cataloging" (to teach the rules of cat- aloging, definition of subject heads, classification, arrangement, etc.); the other, "Organization and services of the library" (to teach bibliography, book selection, accession, collation, loaning, etc.). There is no registration fee. A diploma is given to stu- dents who have regularly attended the lectures and have com- pleted the assignments and passed the final examinations. The two courses are intrusted respectively to the writer and to Professor Nello Vian, assistant at the Vatican Library, who was also trained in America. The cataloging lessons are based on our volume, Norme per il catalogo degli stampati, with the aid of the best-accepted manuals.
22 THE LIBRARY QUeRTERLY In addition to lectures (two hours weekly, on Thursday-a vacation day for the students of the ecclesiastical schools), practical exercises are assigned to be carried out in the cataloging room, where all the necessary and useful books are placed at the disposal of the students, and counsel and help are given by the catalogers. For these exercises the students are permitted to use the Library every day-morning and afternoon. The first two years it was necessary to limit the number of students to thirty because of restricted space. Now a larger classroom has permitted the number of students to be increased. The students, for the most part ecclesiastical or theological students, have reflected the universality of the Church proper; there are Italians, Spaniards, Germans, Hungarians, Poles, Frenchmen, Americans, Mexicans, Canadians, etc., drawn from the regular and secular clergy, who, for the most part, attend the various institutes of higher ecclesiastical learning in Rome. Returning to their own countries, they will spread those methods of library science in which are fused American initia- tive and Latin tradition. As Mgr Tisserant said in his address before the Holy Father, May 7, I935, the first time the school was received in audience, the aphorism, Bonum diffusivum sui, is applied to the work of the school; if the catalogs and rules are diffused from Berlin to Los Angeles, the students of the school, belonging to many na- tions and to several religious orders or congregations, and com- ing from many dioceses, will bring to their native countries "a rich new mass of knowledge." The Pope, who had willingly ap- proved the inauguration of the school, was pleased with its suc- cess and told the students that it is much better to govern books (the task of the librarian) than it is to govern men. To summarize the impressions of the first two academic years, it seems to me that the students have shown a lively in- terest in the new methods which revealed to them lines of organ- ization heretofore more or less ignored and unsuspected. And this is a positive result: to have created a first nucleus of com- petence and enthusiasm where formerly existed a rudimentary empiricism and a diffused apathy. In America it may be of in- terest to know that the students were extraordinarily interested
THE VATICAN LIBRARY 23 in the Decimal System, which they would eagerly apply to vari- ous libraries if they were not perplexed by the deficiency of the religious classification. Their interest in American classification systems induced them to translate the three principal tables (ooo-999) of the Dewey Classification and the main headings of the Library of Congress Classification, as well as to arrange, on the basis of Cutter's tables, a list of notations by authors. This classification scheme was published in one small volume which may be of service to the new librarians in the arrangement or rearrangement of their libraries.4 PUBLICATIONS Another well-known activity of the Library is of an editorial nature and consists in the publication of research on the mate- rials in the Library itself, the reproduction of manuscripts, etc.5 The first class of publications consists of catalogs of Vatican manuscripts; the two latest volumes describe Ethiopian codexes and are the work of Mgr Tisserant. The second class-the "Studi e testi" -a collection of historical monographs, critical texts, philological dissertations, etc., comprises seventy volumes and has acquired great renown in the world of scholarship. Referring to the catalog for a complete list of the other publi- cations, it is useful to note the photographic reproduction of the Pianti maggiori di Roma, from the sixteenth to the eight- eenth century, the Studi e documenti per la storia del Palazzo Apostolico Vaticano by Ehrle and Egger, and, above all, the two series (maior and minor) of "Codices e Vaticanis selecti," the publication of which was begun under Leo XIII and continued more rapidly under Pius XI. In the maior series, in 1930, a new edition was published of Fragmenta et picturae Vergiliana codicis Vaticani 322 5; Codici istoriati di Dante, edited by V. Zabughin; Tereniii comoediae picturis illustratae Cod. Vat. 3868, with an Introduction by G. Jachman (Leipzig: 0. Harrassowitz); Dantis A/agherii Monarchiae liber et epistolae, from Cod. Vat. 4 Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana, Scuola di Biblioteconomia, Sistemi di classificazione degli stampati (CittA del Vaticano, I935). Pp. 35. 5 See Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana, Elenco dellc pubblicazioni (CittA del Vaticano, 1932). A new enlarged edition, with explanatory notes on each publication, will be issued next month.
24 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY lat. I729, with a Preface by F. Schneider; in I93I, Codex Ver- gilianus qui Palatinus appellatur, with a Preface by R. Sabba- dini (Pad's, "Editions historiques"; Sabbadini had published the Augusteus in I926); and in I932, Claudii Pbolomaei Codex Urbinas graecus 82 (Leiden: Brill; Leipzig: Harrassowitz), the result of thirty years' patient work by P. J. Fischer, S.J. And finally, in the same series, may be mentioned the reproduc- tion of a famous palimpsest from Bobbio, containing De re publica of Cicero, edited by G. Mercati, who has prefaced an authoritative Introduction; and the reproduction of La cronaca figurata di Giovanni Villani, edited by L. Magnani. Some volumes were published also in two other series of manuscript reproductions: "Codices ex ecclesiasticis Italiae bibliothecis de- lecti" and "Codices liturgici e Vaticanis praesertim delecti." In May, I932, the Vatican Library participated in the Fourth International Book Exhibit at Florence, exhibiting a collection of its own catalogs of manuscripts, its own "Studi e testi," with others of its most valuable editions, and a photographic repre- sentation of the restoration of the manuscripts. PERSONNEL In October, I933, Pro-Prefect Mgr Tisserant went to Chica- go to participate in the International Congress of Librarians, where he read a paper dealing with the importance of the preser- vation of historical documents throughout the various civiliza- tions. If on the first visit to the United States (I927) "Mgr Tis- serant won friends wherever he went,"6 on the second visit he augmented the number of his friends and those of the Vatican Library, securing for this institution vast and precious sympa- thy and admiration. He was subsequently invited to hold con- ferences (six in all) in various institutions. In October of the following year Mgr Tisserant participated, as a representative of the Vatican, in the Third National Con- gress of Italian Librarians at Bari, where he told of the results of the reorganization of the cataloging practices in the Library. The president, Hon. Solmi, in thanking him, proposed, and the Congress approved by acclamation, that a telegram of congratu- 6 Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, Yearbook (1928), p. 84.
THE VATICAN LIBRARY 25 lation be sent to the Pope, expressing their appreciation of the successful restoration of the Vatican Library. In May, 1935, Mgr Tisserant represented the Holy See at the Second International Congress of Libraries and Bibliography at Madrid-Salamanca-Barcelona, where he renewed his acquaint- ance with his many European and American friends and col- leagues. In May, I936, he went to Warsaw to take part in the ninth session of the International Committee of Libraries. It was sad that in March, 1934, death took the old and illus- trious librarian of the Vatican, Cardinal Francesco Ehrle, the German Jesuit who had been appointed by Leo XIII to manage and develop the ancient institution, which task he had per- formed with great intelligence, meriting the praise of scholars throughout the entire world. Born in 1845, he was, from I895 to I914, the prefect of the Vatican Library, and, as such, he planned and organized the Sala di Consultazione. He was suc- ceeded by Mgr Achille Ratti, who was afterward elected pope and given the purple cloth and the title "Librarian of the Church." Cardinal Ehrle frequented the library until his last days, venerated no less for his virtues than for his knowledge which with unforgettable simplicity and cordiality he placed at the disposal of all the students (and there were legions of them) who came to the Vatican Library. Ninety-eight years ago, two famous scholars and librarians, Mai and Mezzofanti, were appointed cardinals. This year, in June, Mercati and Tisserant have likewise been appointed car- dinals. And it has been the highest appreciation of their achievements as librarians by a librarian pope. Mercati, as "Librarian and Archivist of the Church," succeeds Cardinal Ehrle; Tisserant goes to the Congregation for the Eastern Church to which he brings his wide knowledge of Oriental questions, and, at the same time, he will continue his work on the catalog of Ethiopian manuscripts of the Vatican Library. The new head of the Library, chosen personally by the Pope, is the learned Benedictine, Dom Anselmo M. Albareda, of Montserrat, Spain-a man well known as a scholar and bibliog- rapher, and one who is familiar with all the great libraries of Europe.