FROM QUEER TO GAY AND BACK AGAIN: YOUNG ADULT NOVELS WITH GAY/LESBIAN/QUEER CONTENT, 1969-1997' Christine Jenkins2 Approximately one hundred young adult novels with gay/lesbian/queer content have been published since the first one appeared in 1969. Building on earlier content analysis research, this article provides three theoretical approaches to understand the evolution of this subgenre, drawing on the work of Gerda Lerner, Rudine Sims Bishop, and George Chauncey. It con- cludes by highlighting themes and patterns that suggest the progress that has been made and has yet to be made in the realistic portrayal of gay/ lesbian/queer lives in young adult fiction. Introduction While coming-of-age stories have been a staple of Western literature for centuries, books designated as "young adult literature" began to be written, reviewed, and marketed as such during the 1940s and 1950s, a time when teenagers were becoming an increasingly distinct con- sumer group within U.S. society. Since the 1960s, the label of young adult (YA) literature has been most commonly applied to fiction with a young adult protagonist that is centered on the developmental and life phase issues associated with adolescence and is created for and marketed to a teenage readership. And while it is acknowledged that young adults choose to read a variety of genres (mysteries, science fic- tion, historical novels, romance, and so on) written for readers of vari- ous ages and reading levels, there is a specific narrative form that is 1. I would like to thank Janice Del Negro, Deborah Stevenson, Ginny Moore Kruse, K. T. Horning, and other members of the staffs of the Children's Cooperative Book Center in Madison, Wisconsin, and the Center for the Study of Children's Books in Champaign, Illinois, for their invaluable help in identifying and collecting data for this research. 2. Assistant professor, Graduate School of Library and Information Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 501 East Daniel, Champaign, Illinois 61820; telephone 217- 244-7452; fax 217-244-3302; E-mail jenkins@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu. [Library Quarterly, vol. 68, no. 3, pp. 298-334] () 1998 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-2519/98/6803-0004$02.00 298
YA NOVELS-GAY/LESBIAN/QUEER CONTENT 299 strongly identified with YA fiction as a whole: stories involving contem- porary social issues told in the first person or limited third person from the viewpoint of a teen protagonist. These books are members of a subset of YA literature referred to variously as "contemporary realism" or "problem novels," a form that had its beginnings in the "new real- ism" of books for children and young adults published in the 1960s. Critics trace the origin of "new realism" in teen fiction to the period from 1967 through 1969, during which S. E. Hinton's The Outsiders [1], Ann Head's Mr. and Mrs. Bo Jo Jones [2], Paul Zindel's The Pigman [3], and other pivotal titles were published. New realism in YA novels was characterized by candor, unidealized characters and settings, collo- quial language, and plots that portrayed realistic problems that did not necessarily find resolution in a happy ending [4, pp. 104-5]. Among the themes that emerged at this time were homosexuality and the social prejudice against gays and lesbians. John Donovan's I'll Get There: It Better Be Worth the Trip [5], published in 1969, was the first YA novel to specifically address homosexuality in the lives of young adults. In the book, thirteen-year-old Davy describes his growing friendship with a classmate, Altschuler. One afternoon in Davy's living room, the two play a chasing game with Davy's dog, Fred, and the boys end up kissing. As Davy says, I guess I kiss Altschuler and he kisses me. It isn't like that dumb kiss I gave Mary Lou Gerrity in Massachusetts before I left. It just happens. And when it stops we sit up and turn away from each other. Fred has trotted off, maybe tired of both of us by now. "Boy," I say. "What was that about?" "I don't know," Altschuler answers. We get up, and we avoid looking at each other. When our eyes meet, we laugh, but not like before. [5, p. 143] This one kiss (described here in its entirety) and Davy's resulting distress leads to an estrangement that is eventually resolved: the boys talk things over, Davy resolves never to do "it" again, and their friend- ship continues. In 1969, a year marked by New York City's Stonewall Rebellion, an event identified by many as the beginning of the contem- porary gay/lesbian rights movement, the book's portrayal of same-sex attraction and antigay prejudice was greeted with enthusiasm by some reviewers and readers; others deemed it inappropriate, even danger- ous, to young readers' developing sensibilities with the possibility that it "might arouse in the unconcerned unnecessary interest or alarm or both" [6]. Gay/lesbian content of any sort has been, and continues to be, a highly contested area, particularly when included in a text directed specifically toward young people. Not surprisingly, such books have be-
300 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY come one center of an ongoing social discourse regarding young peo- ple and their sexuality. Thus far, much of the scholarship in this area has focused on the compilation and evaluation of titles for use with young people in library and/or classroom settings. There have also been several studies utilizing content analysis to identify patterns of representation over time or within specific groups of titles, such as books containing gay/lesbian characters in particular roles (parents, siblings, teachers), or books deemed especially suitable for a specific age group or readership [7-20]. My examination of this literature from 1969 to 1997 has evoked many questions about the relationship between fiction and the social context in which it is written, published, and read. According to these books, who are gay/lesbian people, and how are they portrayed? Are there identifiable patterns in characterization, plot, descriptive language, narrative voice? According to these books, what role(s) do gay/lesbian people play in the lives of young people? What might these books indi- cate about the sort of content considered appropriate (or inappropri- ate) for young adult readers? What similarities or differences are there between this literature's portrayal of gay/lesbian people and literature portraying other minority-status groups? Do these books threaten the "traditional family" and, if so, how? Whose stories are told? Whose stories are omitted? According to this literature, what is the difference between gay and queer, and does it matter? This study is a start toward answering some of these questions. Early Research: Characters and Content Analysis In the early years of this literature-the 1970s and early 1980s-fic- tional portrayals were among the only media images of gay/lesbian people that were more or less readily available to young adults. In an earlier study, I identified YA titles with gay/lesbian content published from 1969 to 1992 and used simple content analysis to examine how gay and lesbian characters were portrayed, gathering demographic data on each gay or lesbian character: age, sex, race, class, appearance, single/partnered status, occupation/interests, and the character's re- lation to the protagonist [21]. Much of what I found was fairly predict- able; the majority of the titles reinforced social stereotypes of the ge- neric gay person as an urban middle-class white male who is educated, involved in the arts, and likely to encounter hardships directly related to antigay prejudice. Less predictable was the emergence of gender as a key variable. Gay/ lesbian characters were strictly segregated according to gender: YA nov-
YA NOVELS-GAY/LESBIAN/QUEER CONTENT 301 els included either gay men or lesbians, but never both. Gay male characters consistently outnumbered lesbian characters by a ratio of roughly three to one. Portrayals of same-sex relationships also fell into gendered patterns, with gay males more or less equally likely to be ei- ther single or partnered, but nearly all lesbians (six out of eight adults and nineteen out of twenty teens) in coupled relationships (and the two single adult lesbians [in Judith St. George's Call Me Margo], a for- mer couple [22]). Finally, the protagonist's gender was a predictive variable within the books with gay/lesbian secondary characters. In books with female protagonists, the gay/lesbian secondary characters were equally likely to be male or female. In books with male protago- nists, the gay/lesbian secondary characters were always male. Other patterns emerged as well. In seeking to examine trends over time in the sixty novels published during those years, I used publication date to divide the group into two roughly equal groups (thirty-one titles published from 1969 to 1984, and twenty-nine titles published from 1985 to 1992) and compared the two groups according to the above variables. The most notable trend was a shift in the books' narrative distance-a move away from protagonists dealing with their own same- sex attractions/orientation and toward heterosexual protagonists deal- ing with gay/lesbian secondary characters, most commonly sibling, friend, uncle, or teacher. This article extends my earlier research to include books published from 1993 to 1997. The rate of publication has steadily increased: thirty-one titles in sixteen years from 1969 to 1984 (1.9 titles per year), followed by thirty titles in eight years from 1985 to 1992 (3.75 titles per year), followed by thirty-eight titles in the five years from 1993 to 1997 (7.6 titles per year). Also included in the more recent titles (from 1991 to 1997) are a small but growing number of YA short story collections with gay/lesbian content, a trend that has provided further variety in narrative patterns [23-27].3 Throughout this century, the great majority of U.S. fiction titles for children and young adults have featured white characters, especially white protagonists. In recent years, however, there has been a small increase in the numbers of titles for children and young adults that includes characters who are people of color. YA novels with gay/lesbian content reflect this trend. The sixty earlier (1969-92) novels included only three-Rosa Guy's Ruby (1976) [28], David Rees' The Milkman's on His Way (1979) [29], andJacqueline Woodson's TheDear One (1991) [30]-with people of color as gay or lesbian characters, and the one 3. Short story collections are not within the purview of this research except in recording yearly publishing totals of YA books with gay/lesbian content.
302 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY in Rees' novel was very much in the background. In all three books, these characters were African American. The thirty-four novels pub- lished from 1993 to 1997 included eight with people of color as gay/ lesbian characters: R.J. Hamilton's Who Framed Lorenzo Garcia?and Case of the Missing Mother (both 1995) [31, 32], Gloria Velasquez's Tommy Stands Alone (1995) [33], Woodson's From the Notebooks of Melanin Sun (1995) [34], Melrose Cooper's Life Magic (1996) [35], Liza Ketchum's Blue Coyote (1997) [36], Jess Mowry's Babylon Boyz (1997) [37], and Woodson's The House You Pass on the Way (1997) [38]. Hamilton's two books feature the Pride Pack, a multicultural group of gay, lesbian, bisexual, and straight teens who hang out at a gay/lesbian community center. In addition to this (somewhat undifferentiated) group of sec- ondary characters, the protagonist of Mo Framed Lorenzo Garcia? is gay and Latino; gay Latino characters are also included in the titles by Vel- asquez and Ketchum. The four books by Woodson, Cooper, and Mowry feature gay/lesbian African-American characters. Thus, in the past five years, the proportion of YA titles that portray gay/lesbian characters as people of color has increased from three out of sixty (5 percent) to eight out of thirty-four (24 percent). It is interesting to note that one African-American writer, Jacqueline Woodson, has been responsible for three of the eleven titles overall. However, despite the current shift in racial demographics of charac- ters and the increase in overall numbers of titles, this comparative con- tent analysis indicates far more continuity than change over time. For example, the great majority of gay/lesbian characters were, and con- tinue to be, middle class. Gay males continue to outnumber lesbians; the "gender gap" continues with three books featuring gay males for every one featuring lesbian characters (fig. 1). The trend away from gay/lesbian protagonists continues; gay/lesbian characters play sec- ondary roles in two out of every three titles (fig. 2). The gendered pattern of narrative distance noted earlier (that is, lesbian secondary characters appearing only in books with female protagonists) also con- tinues to hold, with the exception of two "breakthrough" books: M. E. Kerr's Deliver Us From Evie (1994) [39], in which a male narrator tells about the year his older sister comes out as a lesbian; and Jacqueline Woodson's From the Notebooks of Melanin Sun (1995) [34], a story told by a teenage boy as he comes to terms with his previously single mother's relationship with another woman. Likewise, the gender segregation of the earlier novels continues with a handful of exceptions: R. J. Hamil- ton's Who Framed Lorenzo Garcia? and The Case of the Missing Mother (noted above [31, 32]); and Nancy Garden's Good Moon Rising, a love story in which the young lesbian protagonist is briefly mentored (via letter) by a gay male friend [40].
- - - - , \o 00 0"0 - - - 0l 00 00 -0 7~~~~~~e to t 00 00 00 00 00 _ r~~~~r V cow ON _ - - _ ~ ~ ~~~~~- O t , N _ O O~~~~~~~~~- _^O~~~~~~~~N
VEN Z,///, C) C14 r/Ml e1111, C) 01 00 00 00 00 Cd 00 t-. M Cd = = 00 -z3 s.., 00 0 to C-f) ed Cd 00 00 00 00 -al oll 00 0 C;3 03 t-- biD C! Cd Cd > C14 Cd 0 biD u u ct u 41 > INC k4) m C14 C bID 0 = Z 'L. 0
YA NOVELS-GAY/LESBIAN/QUEER CONTENT 305 Content analysis focusing on demographics of gay/lesbian charac- ters has revealed some interesting patterns, but it leaves many questions unanswered. Extracting and examining the gay/lesbian characters in more than ninety books by more than eighty authors published over a twenty-nine-year time span necessitates a decontextualized analysis that reveals little about the role(s) each character plays within his or her particular narrative. In addition, when I look at the data gathered from books published over nearly three decades, I am struck by the consistency of my findings, given the changing social contexts in which they were published. From 1969 to 1997 there have been dramatic shifts in the status and visibility of gay men and lesbians in U.S. society. From 1969 to 1996, however, with the exception of the introduction of the AIDS epidemic as a plot element, there have been few changes in any aspect of gay or lesbian characters in YA novels. In a society with such volatile political and cultural attitudes toward gay men and lesbians, why is this literature so tenaciously conservative? To answer this question, it is necessary to turn to qualitative approaches to this data. With few exceptions, these are novels written for and marketed to young adults by major commercial publishers who necessarily have a strong interest in the sales of their product. Each text is a reflection of deliberate choices made by author and editor regarding the gay/ lesbian content (including character, plot, dialogue, and theme) deemed to be appropriate in a work of fiction designed for young adult readers. Therefore, this body of literature stands as a chronological series of texts that may be read as both history and literature. Thus, it is useful to look to theories drawn from these disciplines. Theoretical Models As noted above, the earliest YA novel with gay/ lesbian content was pub- lished in 1969, a landmark year in the gay liberation movement. As texts situated in the years between Stonewall and the present, these books reflect a still-unfolding evolution of gay awareness in the United States as reflected in its history, literature, and popular culture. If these books offer us sources for a history of representations of gay/lesbian people, which I believe they do, a historiographical model is a highly appropriate lens through which to view this literature over its nearly three decades of publication. Given that gender plays a major role in the shape of this literature, I looked to the work of historian Gerda Lerner, whose theoretical framework for women's histonrogra- phy provides valuable insights into these textual representations of gay/lesbian people [41].
306 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY This body of works may also be approached as a chronology of liter- ary representations of minority-status characters in books written spe- cifically for young readers. Perhaps the most developed theories de- scribing such works have been advanced by Rudine Sims Bishop, an education researcher who has studied representations of African- Arnerican characters in children's and young adult fiction over time. Young people's literature with African-American characters (as com- pared to other minority-status groups) has a history that stretches back many decades, as does its critical study. While gay people and African Americans are not equivalent groups, I believe Sims Bishop's scholar- ship provides a model that can be adapted usefully to the study of YA literature with gay/lesbian characters and content [42]. Finally, these books may be viewed as reflections of mainstream so- cial attitudes and beliefs about gay/lesbian people within the larger U.S. society. From this angle, the emerging perspective of queer studies offers interesting insights. The work of historian George Chauncey traces gay male life and culture in pre-World War II New York City and effectively contradicts the myths about gay people perpetuated in the mainstream media and popular culture. His identification of pat- terns specific to popular portrayals of gay/lesbian people and their lives-focusing on both what is present and what is absent-provides a useful comparison for the portrayal of gay/lesbian people within mainstream young adult literature [43]. I believe that the scholarship of Lerner, Sims Bishop, and Chauncey can provide valuable perspectives to the understanding of young adult literature with gay/lesbian content. This application of theoretical frameworks provides answers that lead to further questions. It is my hope that this work may suggest approaches to this data from other disciplines that might provide additional insight into this multifaceted subject. Gerda Lerner's Model of Women's Historiography Since gender is a key variable in the tides under consideration, I looked to the work of Gerda Lerner, a pioneering women's historian who theo- rized a much-cited conceptual framework of research perspectives that describes the various stages of women's inclusion in historiography [41, pp. 145-59]. Among the scholars who have used Lerner's framework as a foundation for their own work is library historian Suzanne Hilden- brand, who built upon Lerner's perspectives to create a theoretical model specific to scholarship on women in library history: (0) invisibil- ity; (1) compensatory or contributions history; (2) discrimination or
YA NOVELS-GAY/LESBIAN/QUEER CONTENT 307 oppression history; (3) women's cultural history; (4) women in history [44]. The study of history, as traditionally understood in Western culture, was originally the study of history without women. While the existence of women was certainly not denied, their work and lives were assumed to be entirely in the shadow of men. Thus, a history of men was thought to encompass a history of women as well. Women were, in a word, invis- ible. The first scholarly perspective that includes women is defined as compensatory or contributions history. It is based on the assumption that the experiences of men and women have been basically similar, and that the addition of some influential, but hitherto overlooked, great women is sufficient to effect the inclusion of women in history. The second perspective, referred to as discrimination or oppression history, assumes that male and female experiences have been funda- mentally different and seeks to document past discrimination against women as a historically oppressed group. The third perspective, wom- en's cultural history, also assumes that male and female experiences have been fundamentally different, but focuses instead on the histori- cally undervalued activities in which women have been engaged. The fourth and final perspective, the "women in history" model, is based on the assumption that men and women are neither completely similar nor dissimilar but are, instead, influenced by a wide range of variables, including-but not limited to-gender. This awareness of the contex- tual gender system enables researchers to view more clearly how the power relationships exist in a given context and how the various actors-male and female-fit into that frame [41, 44]. This progression is more or less reflected in the chronological his- tory of young adult novels with gay/lesbian content. In the earliest YA novels from the 1940s and 1950s, gay/lesbian content was limited to antigay epithets and the occasional shadowy character included to rep- resent the oddities-or the dangers-of the larger adult world into which young people were moving. In Maureen Daly's Seventeenth Sum- mer (1941), for example, Angie and Jack, two teenagers in Fond du Lac, Wisconsin, go to a local bar to hear a Chicago blues musician. The musician is one of the first black people Angie has ever encoun- tered, and she is fascinated not only by his bluesy piano playing but also by the fact that he is wearing red nail polish, which she interprets as further evidence of his exotic Otherness [45, p. 171]. In Madeleine L'Engle's A Small Rain (1945), the teenage protagonist, Katherine, goes out with friends in New York City, and they mischievously take her to a gay bar where Katherine encounters "a woman, or what had perhaps once been a woman. Now it wore a man's suit, shirt, and tie; its hair
308 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY was cut short, out of a dead-white face glared a pair of despairing eyes." Katherine recoils in pity and horror [46, pp. 311-12]. In both cases, gay/lesbian characters are simply devices used to reveal the female pro- tagonists' unworldly naivete. In J. D. Salinger's The Catcher in the Rye (1951), Holden is continually concerned about this or that friend's "flitty" or "perverty" nature, and the possibility that one of his favorite teachers might be gay, but his concerns are a reflection of his own distrustful adolescent vulnerability [47]. These fleeting representations of sexual deviance appear as elements of the setting or plot; gay men and lesbians remain invisible as charac- ters. Among the first of the YA "problem novels" with significant gay/ lesbian content, there was a brief spate of books-Donovan's I'll Get There: ItBetterBe Worth the Trip (1969) [5], Guy's Ruby (1976) [28], Mary Sullivan's What's This abnsut Pete? (1976) [48], Deborah Hautzig's Hey, Dollface (1978) [49], Stephanie Tolan's The Last of Eden (1980) [50], and St. George's Call Me Margo (1981) [22] -in which teen protago- nists (two boys, four girls) worried about a possible same-sex attraction but finally concluded (often with the help of an adult mentor) that their feelings were simply a stage they were passing through on their way to heterosexual adulthood. Just as women's experience was sub- sumed under men's, so homosexuality was portrayed as a brief passage in the story of heterosexual development. Some of the more recent novels include a variation of this worry: books in which protagonists wonder if they themselves are gay/les- bian-not in response to their own attractions but, rather, to learning that an adult relative or mentor is gay or lesbian. The protagonist is reassured that he or she is probably not gay/lesbian and the scene closes. Interestingly, in all three of the more recent titles (as well as in four out of six older titles), it is a young female who is responding to an adult gay male: in Deborah Davis' My Brother Has AIDS (1994) and Nancy Springer's LookingforJamie Bridger (1995), girls wonder about themselves when they learn of their older brothers' gayness [51, pp. 42-43; 52, pp. 155], while in Ellen McClain's No Big Deal (1994), a girl wonders about herself when she learns her favorite teacher is gay [53, pp. 184-85]. The next stage in women's history is the inclusion of a few excep- tional women in an otherwise male-centered history. Exceptional indi- vidual gay people also appear in young adult novels with gay/lesbian content, and it is interesting to note that all of them are male. When these exceptional figures are young men, they appear as wise but wistful loners longing for love: a generous advisor in M. E. Kerr's I'll Love You When You're More Like Me [54]; a football buddy in Ann Snyder and Louis Pelletier's The Truth about Alex [55]; a faithful friend in B. A.
YA NOVELS-GAY/LESBIAN/QUEER CONTENT 309 Ecker's Independence Day [56]; a handsome former boyfriend in Hila Colman's Happily Ever After [57] and in Ann Rinaldi's The Good Side of My Heart [58]; a talented teammate in Liza Murrow's Twelve Days in August [59]. As adults, these singular gay men play mentor roles: a mys- terious recluse in Isabelle Holland's The Man without a Face [60]; a sensi- tive writer in Lynn Hall's Sticks and Stones [61]; a wise old sculptor in Emily Hanlon's The Wing and the Flame [62]; a children's book author in Rees' Out of the Winter Gardens [63]; a compassionate Big Brother in Carolyn Meyer's Elliott and Win [64]; a witty uncle in Ron Koertge's The Arizona Kid [65]; a genius auto mechanic in Gary Paulsen's The Car [66]. Uncles, brothers, and teachers who have AIDS (nine in books published from 1985-96) also number among the exceptional and sin- gular gay men who mentor troubled teen protagonists, usually while living-and often dying-in brave isolation [35, 51, 67-73]. The next perspective to be explored in women's history is oppression history-stories of the struggles and hardships particular to women as a sex. Oppression based on sexual identity has been a part of gay/ lesbian history as well; many contemporary gay men and lesbians have experienced social ostracism, as well as hate crimes, name calling, and other forms of harassment. Not surprisingly, in the course of nearly thirty years of young adult "problem novels," fictional gay and lesbian characters have been beaten, shot, gay-bashed, drowned, sexually mo- lested, kidnapped, framed on drug charges, or killed in car accidents. Others have been fired, received hate mail, or had their lockers, cars, or homes vandalized. Teens living with their families have been disin- herited, cut out of family photos, sent to deprogrammers, or thrown out of the house; others leave voluntarily, for the sake of the family's good name. Some of these books are older, others were published quite recently, and it would appear that portrayals of gay and lesbian charac- ters as targets, scapegoats, and victims will continue to be an element in future YA novels. Lerner's next research perspective is that of women's cultural his- tory-more generally the study of women's active engagement in their own lives and in their communities. This is where the parallels between Lerner's model of the portrayal of women in historiography and the portrayal of gays and lesbians in young adult novels begin to break down. While many of these books are the stories of gay and lesbian characters in the context of a partnered relationship, there are very few depictions of their lives within a wider gay/lesbian/queer commu- nity. The reader encounters either a single gay man or a solitary gay or lesbian couple. The single men are just that-single-and each cou- ple is depicted living in isolation from any larger world of gay/lesbian! queer social networks. However, while feelings of (and actual) isolation
310 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY are not uncommon for teen gays and lesbians in both fiction and fact, these novels usually portray gay/lesbian adults as choosing to live their (single or coupled) lives entirely separate from any gay or lesbian com- munity. In Madeleine L'Engle's A House Like a Lotus, a lesbian couple lives in a country house and sees no one except the members of one neighboring family [74]. In Gary Bargar's What Happened to Mr. Forster? a gay man gets fired from his teaching job [75]; he and his partner pack up their house by themselves. In Nancy Garden's Annie on My Mind, both members of a lesbian couple are fired from their teaching jobs, and again, no one comes to help them move from their home of twenty years [76]. The same thing happens to a favorite gym teacher in Marilyn Kaye's Real Heroes [69]. In Norma Klein's Breaking Up and Now That I Know, in A. M. Homes' Jack, and in Bette Greene's The Drowning of Stephen Jones, adult gay and lesbian couples, whether they live in rural Alabama or in New York City, are never pictured in a setting with other gay/lesbian people [77-80]. Even the West Hollywood gay male couple in Theresa Nelson's Earthshine are apparently the only gay people in their AIDS support group [70]. The fictional gay/lesbian couple's world contains no gay or gay-friendly bars or restaurants, no gay/lesbian newspapers or bookstores, no gay or lesbian sports teams, no music festivals, no gay/lesbian neighborhoods. They have no gay/ lesbian friends over for dinner, go to no one's house for brunch, partic- ipate in no demonstrations, join no gay/lesbian social or political groups, staff no gay switchboards, are members of no reconciling con- gregation, and never go dancing in public. With few exceptions, there is no evidence of any gay/lesbian/queer community in the pages of these novels. Furthermore, the exceptions are brief glimpses rather than fully realized characters or settings: in Koertge's The Arizona Kid, the protagonist attends a party hosted by his gay Uncle Wes and meets several of Wes' friends [65]; in Klein's Now That I Know, a teenaged girl meets some of her father's friends at his birthday party [78]; in Woodson's From the Notebooks of Melanin Sun, a teen, his mother, and his mother's female partner go to a gay beach, where he meets some of their friends [34]; in Cristina Salat's Living in Secret, a girl, her mother, and her mother's female partner go to a party and a picnic with several gay and lesbian friends and their children [81]; in Barbara Wersba's Crazy Vanilla, a teen talks to his gay older brother on the phone and can hear noise from a party his brother and brother's part- ner are cohosting in the background [82]. Thus, even when a commu- nity is acknowledged, it is pictured as distant from the protagonist- and the reader. In YA novels, the gay community is always somewhere else. The final perspective is that of "women in history," which is more
YA NOVELS-GAY/LESBIAN/QUEER CONTENT 311 of an ideal than a workable research perspective at this point in time. If there were women in history, women and men would interact among themselves and each other, neither entirely similar or dissimilar, in a power structure in which gender is understood to be one among many variables that affect-but do not rule-women's and men's lives. Given the gender-role restrictions, the prevalence of heterosexism and homo- phobia, and the perceived necessity of the closet, a YA novel in which, say, same-sex couples could freely walk hand in hand in public would hardly be considered a work of contemporary realism. Thus far, Block's Weetzie Bat, a story that employs magical realism to picture a closetless world with characters of various sexual orientations, is the only YA novel portraying "gay/lesbian people in (print) history" [83]. Rudine Sims Bishop's Model for African-American Inclusion in Children's Books Like all literature, children's literature reflects the social, political, and cultural milieu in which it was written. Early depictions of African- American characters in books for young people were created by white authors and illustrators and were frequently stereotypic portrayals of faithful but dull-witted servants, contented plantation dwellers, or clowning buffoons in roles that were either comic or criminal. Dur- ing the 1930s, 1940s, and 1950s, more realistic portrayals of African- American characters began to appear, but it was not until the rise of the Civil Rights movement that mainstream publishers began to actively acquire and promote children's and young adult books by and about African Americans. In the early 1980s, Rudine Sims Bishop looked at literary representations of African Americans over time in books writ- ten for young people. I believe her model can be usefully adapted to the study of young adult literature with gay/lesbian content. Sims Bishop proposes a three-part model to describe the treatment of African-American characters in children's books published in the years immediately following the Civil Rights movement of the 1960s. First, "social conscience" books appeared, books in which race was the problem and desegregation the solution. Next came "melting pot" books, in which racial diversity was present but unacknowledged and integration was a given. Finally, "culturally conscious" books began to be published, books in which African Americans are portrayed in a culturally accurate manner [42, pp. 14-15]. In the first group, "social conscience" books, Sims Bishop identifies two types of narratives: the white-viewing-black plot of "guess who's coming to dinner" and the black-viewing-white plot of "learning how
312 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY to get along with whites" [42, pp. 19-22]. In the former, a white pro- tagonist befriends a black person who has moved into a white commu- nity and encountered hostility and prejudice. In the "getting along with whites" books, the same desegregation story is seen through the eyes of the black newcomer. He or she encounters problems, but comes to realize that everyone, black and white, has problems, and whites' behavior that looks like racism may actually be a manifestation of some other personal unhappiness [42, pp. 19, 21-22]. Social conscience books rarely speak of racism but, instead, show discrimination as pre- judgment based on faulty information. Thus, prejudice can be reme- died by education and contact with members of the prejudged group [42, pp. 26-29]. Many YA novels with gay/lesbian content fit into this category. Given that the protagonist is most likely not gay or lesbian, most also fit into the whites-viewing-blacks "guess who's coming to dinner" narrative. The story is complicated, however, by the closet. Homophobic hostility and prejudice are expressed, not only by other characters, but quite frequently by the protagonist himself or herself. In these cases (and they are frequent), the protagonist's internal conflict is experienced as two individuals-a better self and a worse self-who are engaged in an argument. One self is the individual with a positive personal rela- tionship with someone who is gay/lesbian but closeted. The other self is an individual in relation to the larger society, who has been condi- tioned by homophobic social forces. When the gay/lesbian character comes out, the protagonist experiences immediate internal conflict: his or her "good side" observes and deplores the antigay prejudice of others, while the "bad side" actually agrees with the prejudice, though usually to a lesser degree. His or her "good side" eventually finds allies and educates the "bad side," replacing stereotypes and mistaken as- sumptions with accurate information about gay people. And it is only at this point, when that internal conflict is resolved, that the protago- nist can provide the parent or sibling or uncle or friend with any reas- surance that his or her love is still returned. Among the African-Amnerican titles examined by Sims Bishop, the "social conscience" books recall a historically outdated phase of chil- dren's literature: a time when black characters patiently submitted to racist abuse as the price to be paid for some easement of segregation and some form of friendship with white protagonists. Among the gay/ lesbian titles, however, "social conscience" books continue to be pub- lished. From the early 1970s to the late 1990s, gay and lesbian charac- ters have come out to loved ones and then waited stoically for the ho- mophobic abuse to cease and the relationship to be restored. In Sticks and Stones, Tom avoids his best friend Ward until a near-fatal car acci-
YA NOVELS-GAY/LESBIAN/QUEER CONTENT 313 dent in the book's final pages forces him to see how his homophobia has damaged their friendship [61]; in Sandra Scoppetone's Trying Hard to Hear You, Camilla abandons her best friendJeff until a fatal car acci- dent in the book's final pages forces her to see how her homophobia has damaged their friendship [84]. Other characters learn without the assistance of car accidents: in J. P. Reading's Bouquets for Brimbal, Macy denies her best friend Annie's relationship with a woman until a shared loss helps revive their friendship [85]; in both Happily Ever After and The Good Side of My Heart, girls recoil when they learn their former boyfriends are gay but are finally able to overcome their initial aversion to reestablish contact [57, 58]; in Now That I Know, Jack, and From the Notebooks of Melanin Sun, teenagers react with anger and rejection when they learn their (single) parents have become involved with a same- sex partner but are finally willing to visit them (Now That I Know), eat dinner with them (Jack), or go to the beach with them (From the Note- books of Melanin Sun) [78, 79, 34]. In several novels, reconciliation comes only with the imminent or actual death of the gay/lesbian char- acter: in The Eagle Kite, the protagonist's visit to his father comes in the final stages of his father's death from AIDS [71]; in A House Like a Lotus, the protagonist's transatlantic phone call to her mentor comes in the final stages of her mentor's death from a rare tropical disease [74]. And Chuck, the protagonist in The Man without a Face, is (after much soul searching) finally capable of reconciling with his tutorJustin only to learn that Justin has died a month earlier [60]. Honest or over- wrought, passionate or melodramatic, "social conscience" portrayals of gay/straight relationships continue to be standard fare in YA litera- ture. Sims Bishop's second category, "melting pot" books, recognizes the universality of the human experience to such an extent that they "ig- nore all differences except physical ones: skin color and other racially related physical features" [42, p. 33]. They do not concern themselves with the problems of racism but, instead, focus on common human experiences that are shared by all children. This difference/no difference tension is by no means resolved in YA fiction with gay/lesbian content. In "melting pot" fiction, differences may be noted in passing, but then are ignored as the characters assume a homogeneity that is seen as the key to cooperation, which means that the closet is mandatory for peaceful coexistence. The argument has been made that gay/lesbian people's lives are no different from hetero- sexuals' lives, except for what they do in bed. If gay men and lesbians are conscientious about keeping their private lives discreetly tucked away, they should be treated fairly and equitably by the rest of "us." In The Car, for example, fourteen-year-old Terry falls in with Waylon,
314 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY an iconoclastic drifter with a genius for auto mechanics and a heart of gold; there is no mention of Waylon's gay identity until halfway through the book, when Waylon's best friend Wayne casually mentions this fact to Terry. Terry's initial response is alarm that Waylon might make a move on him. "'Hell, boy, [Wayne replies,] he's gay, he's not a pervert. You're just a kid, why would he make a move on you?' Well ... And the truth was Terry couldn't think of an answer, nor did it seem important. He shrugged and went back to work on the engine with Wayne" [66, pp. 85]. This is the sole reference to Waylon's iden- tity, which is dismissed as irrelevant to the relationship between a forty-five-year-old man and an adolescent. This interaction counters the stereotype of gay/lesbian people as sexual predators but glosses over the fact that one's sexual identity would be important information for a friendship built on honesty and trust. Here, someone's gayness is presented as something utterly beside the point to anyone not actively interested in pursuing a romantic relationship with that someone. However benevolently, gay/lesbian "melting pot" books celebrate the closet. Or, as Polly, the protagonist in A House Like a Lotus, is told by her father: "Lesbianism exists, and has since the beginning of history, and we have not always been compassionate. I thought it was now agreed that consenting adults were not to be persecuted, particularly if they keep their private lives private" [61, p. 111; emphasis added]. According to these novels, remaining closeted is the price gay men and lesbians pay for a place in the mainstream and "a place at the table." On the other hand, while many or most gay men and lesbian women do indeed lead their private lives privately, it has been argued that the closet should not be a necessary precondition to the granting of equal rights. A counterargument to the "no difference" model was made by early gay liberation activists, who made the claim that gay/lesbian people's lives are entirely different from heterosexuals' lives, except for what they do in bed. Sex is just sex, after all-it is how one is treated the rest of the time that matters, and if a gay/lesbian identity places one outside the mainstream, then one's life will be considerably differ- ent from lives lived inside those exclusive gates. This model, predicated on difference (regardless of whether the cause is nature or nurture), takes a civil rights approach to gay/lesbian (or, as many would say, queer) lives in contemporary American society. Such a presentation of difference suggests Sims' third category: books that are "culturally conscious." "They are books that seek to reflect, with varying degrees of success, the social and cultural tradi- tions associated with growing up Black in the United States. In contrast to the social conscience books, they are not primarily addressed to non-
YA NOVELS-GAY/LESBIAN/QUEER CONTENT 315 Blacks, nor are they focused on desegregating neighborhoods or schools. They differ from the melting pot books in that they recognize, sometimes even celebrate, the distinctiveness of the experience of growing up simultaneously Black and American" [42, p. 49]. Sims Bishop calls for culturally conscious fiction representing the lives and experiences of African Americans as told from within the cul- ture. Culturally conscious fiction assumes that this culture and these people may well be different from the mainstream culture and from people who live within the norm of white America. However, the over- whelming tendency in young adult literature with gay/lesbian con- tent-and in young adult literature in general-is for writers to tell the story as viewed from a mainstream heterosexual perspective. Sims Bishop has stated, "Fiction about Afro-Americans seems to have had one of three major socializing purposes: to promote racial harmony, to promote American cultural homogeneity, or to provide self-affirma- tion for Afro-American children" [42, p. 103]. Likewise, fiction about gay and lesbian people seems to have one of three major socializing purposes: to promote gay/straight harmony, to promote American cul- tural homogeneity, or to provide self-affirmation for gay and lesbian young adults. The first two are best served by the closet and the no difference model of gay/lesbian identity. The final purpose of self- affirmation for gay/lesbian readers requires a culturally conscious per- spective that places the gay/lesbian people, community, and reality at the center of the story. This requires considerations of authenticity- the accurate, culturally conscious rendering of the marginalized char- acter, setting, or other narrative element. We know from numerous surveys of attitudes toward gay/lesbian people that those people who say they know a gay/lesbian person express more tolerant attitudes than those who say they do not. Could these books perhaps play a didac- tic role in acquainting young readers with realistically portrayed gay/ lesbian people? And could those readers' imaginations be pushed a bit further to see them from an empathetic, rather than simply a sympa- thetic, perspective? Could a young reader not simply feel for gay/les- bian people but feel with them? With rare exceptions, it appears that this literature has yet to be written. George Chauncey's Myths of Isolation, Invisibility, and Internalization George Chauncey's historical study of New York City describes a pre- Stonewall gay community that existed consciously and publicly, com- prised of men who saw themselves in relation to other members of
316 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY that community. This world has been obscured, even forgotten, and Chauncey identifies the three myths of isolation, invisibility, and inter- nalization that inform this deliberate erasure of the past. First, the myth of isolation describes earlier gay men as living lives essentially cut off from each other; "anti-gay hostility prevented the development of an extensive gay subculture and forced gay men to lead solitary lives in the decades before the gay liberation movement" [43, p. 2]. Second, the myth of invisibility represents the early gay community as hidden, even invisible, to all eyes, even those of other gay people: "even if a gay world existed, it was kept invisible and thus remained difficult for isolated gay men to find" [43, p. 3]. And finally, the myth of internaliza- tion assures us that all gay men viewed themselves as defective, mentally ill, pitiful, and pitiable; "Gay men uncritically internalized the domi- nant culture's view of them as sick, perverted, and immoral, and that their self-hatred led them to accept the policing of their lives rather than resist it" [43, p. 4]. These myths have been-and continue to be-prevalent in YA nov- els. The same-sex encounter of Donovan's young men in 1969 is pre- sented as a temporary aberration, even a predictable stage in their de- velopment as heterosexual adults [5]. The first character who is identified as "a homosexual"-as opposed to someone who has a ho- mosexual experience-appears in 1972 in Holland's The Man without a Face, a brooding recluse with a haunted past. Justin McLeod, the title character, tells Charles, the teenage protagonist and narrator, "I've known what I was for a long time" [60, p. 149; emphasis added], a flawed (and curiously degendered) identity that appears to be con- nected to a car accident responsible for the death of one young man and the facial scars that make McLeod's psychological stigma visible. He has deliberately isolated himself not only from other gay people (apparently, since there appear to be no other gay characters in the book) but from all other people.Justin McLeod embodies all the myths identified by Chauncey. So, too, does Ward in Hall's Sticks and Stones; he is another reclusive author who isolates himself and sees himself as a polluting influence whom everyone, particularly the protagonist Tom, should shun [61]. In contrast, there are a few titles that portray gay/lesbian characters actively resisting these myths. For example, British author David Rees' In the Tent (1979) depicts four boys whose weekend camping trip be- comes a near-disaster when they are stranded by bad weather in a wil- derness area. Two of them, Tim and Ray, unexpectedly come out to each other. When it becomes clear that their rescue is imminent, the boys talk about future plans and Ray tells Tim about a gay pub:
YA NOVELS-GAY/LESBIAN/QUEER CONTENT 317 "There's places at home where people like us meet," Ray said. "Are there?" Tim was surprised. He'd never heard of such a thing. "A pub. And some group that meets in somebody's house.... Anyway, I want to go to this pub at home. I don't think I'd dare go in by myself, though. Will you ... come with me?" "I don't know. I'll think about it." "Nobody's going to rape you, Tim!" "Why do you want to go there?" "To meet others like us, of course! You can't live in a vacuum!" "They might be, well, very strange. The men who go to this pub." "Look, we can't be the only two nice decent homosexuals in the world!" "I suppose not." He had a cheering vision of hundreds of happy uncompli- cated people enjoying themselves together, sharing each others' lives. "I sup- pose not." [86, pp. 105-6] This positive portrayal of gay teens reaching out toward a gay com- munity is notable for its active rejection of the myths of isolation, invisi- bility, and internalization, particularly remarkable in that it was written at a time when American novels were years away from acknowledging that gay/lesbian characters might want to have other gay/lesbian friends or seek out a larger gay community. Rees' other novels-The Milkman's on His Way (1982) [29], Out of the Winter Gardens (1984) [63], and The Colour of His Hair (1986) [87] -also include a gay community. However, Rees was an out gay man who was a well-known children's author (winner of the 1979 Carnegie Medal, England's equivalent of the Newbery Medal, for The Exeter Blitz [88]). As a writer publishing young people's books with small gay-identified presses (London's Gay Men's Press and Boston's Alyson Press), David Rees-who died of AIDS in 1993-was hardly typical. Perhaps not surprisingly, Alyson Press also publishes R.J. Hamilton's Pride Pack YA series, described above, which features a group of gay, lesbian, and straight teens who hang out at their city's Gay and Lesbian Community Center [31, 32]. Although Chauncey identifies these as myths that were prevalent in the past, they appear to be alive and well in the present world of YA fiction. These myths would not be so tenacious if there were not an element of truth in each of them; indeed, these myths are present in the day-to-day social reality of many marginalized groups. Feelings of isolation, invisibility, and internalized homophobia, however, are not static conditions but are rather problems that gay/lesbian people (like other marginalized groups) seek to remedy through self acceptance and by identification or creation of a community of family and friends with whom openness about same-sex attractions and relationships is possible. However, when so many books picture gay/lesbian characters solely in isolation or as members of a single isolated couple, this consis- tent limitation appears to confirm and reinforce all three myths.
318 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY In the larger world of YA fiction, gay/lesbian characters are even more isolated, appearing in only a small fraction of each year's publish- ing output. This relative absence from the larger world reinforces the myth of isolation, but even more so the myth of invisibility. The isola- tion of gay/lesbian individuals or couples in YA fiction precludes any portrayal of a larger gay/lesbian community. And, ironically, it is often the very invisibility of gay/lesbian people (individually and collectively) that weighs so heavily on the minds of teenage characters of all orienta- tions. Indeed, it was their absence more than their presence that was noted, at least indirectly, in the endless ruminations of protagonists and their friends who worried if they were sufficiently masculine or feminine to make the shift from asexual child to the gender conformity of the dance floor, the high school, the malt shop, or any other en- trance point to adolescent, and, by extension, adult society. Young adult novels are rife with teenage boys who wonder if they can, for example, play a musical instrument and still be considered masculine, and teenage girls who wonder if they can excel in science and still be considered feminine. The answer is invariably positive-yes, it is OK to win the music competition/get a science scholarship without giving up one's identity as a truly masculine man or feminine woman. But if the question is asked at all, it must mean that the answer is not assured, which in turn raises the question: What if the answer is not yes? What or whom do teens fear when they worry about their nonconformity to gender roles? The unspoken, undescribed, and invisible image is that of the man who is not a man, the woman who is not a woman-that is, the gay man or the lesbian. And if there are no self-identified gay men or lesbians present to provide a reality check for these myths, then the internalization of a rigid gender conformity seems almost inevi- table. While YA books continue to perpetuate these myths, there appears to be a weakening of hegemony of negative internalization. Earlier books portrayed gay and lesbian characters as the flawed results of dysfunc- tional families and childhood trauma, specifically overly protective mothers, distant fathers, and early sexual assault. This assumption be- gan to be challenged in YA fiction in 1980, when Klein's Breaking Up featured a lesbian mother and her partner as secondary but apparently self-accepting characters who successfully challenge a threatened cus- tody suit [77]. Since that time, fictional gay/lesbian characters are in- creasingly likely to describe internalized homophobia in the past tense as a notion they rejected early in their coming-out process. More re- cently, this assumption is often located within the perspective of (ap- parently straight) characters and is cited as the reason for negative behavior: name calling, harassment, and gay-bashing. Gay/lesbian
YA NOVELS-GAY/LESBIAN/QUEER CONTENT 319 orientation is usually described benignly, and gay/lesbian characters are, if anything, more intelligent, mature, and well adjusted than their straight friends and relatives, who frequently approach them for advice on romantic and family relationship problems. Yet this may also be a reflection of another stereotype applied to minority groups, an either- or portrayal that depicts them as entirely depraved or wholly saindlike: the "wild Indian" or the "noble savage." Despite the more positive spin of the "good gay sage" as a character type, it is still a stereotype rather than a fully developed character. This stereotype, coupled with the persistence of isolation and invisibility in the world of YA fiction, continues to inform a genre that may or may not be accurately de- scribed as "contemporary realism." Common Threads and Recurring Issues Several common threads weave throughout these considerations of an- alytical frameworks suggested by Lerner, Sims Bishop, and Chauncey. These recurring tensions include questions of authenticity and realism, the relationship between gay/lesbian people and children in tradi- tional families, and the difference/no difference dichotomy in con- flicting understandings of sexual identity and gay/lesbian people. The first overarching issue that arises is the intertwined concern of realism and authenticity: Do the lives of gay/lesbian people in these novels of "contemporary realism" appear to reflect the real lives of contemporary gay/lesbian people? Is there a correlation between por- trayals of gay/lesbian people in YA fiction and nonfiction? Questions of authenticity engage the librarians, teachers, and parents who are looking for literature that is truly multicultural. In searching for au- thentic portrayals of the experiences of racial, ethnic, and cultural mi- norities, some believe that only a member of a given minority group can write accurately about that group, while others believe that stories are only limited by the writer's imagination. Not surprisingly, the same questions arise in evaluating fiction with gay/lesbian content. Certainly authors can write sympathetically, even empathetically, about charac- ters who do not resemble themselves. But it can be difficult to capture the subtleties of culture, the nuances that convey the flavor of life from within a marginalized group. More difficult than details of food, lan- guage, and setting is seeing the story through the Other's eyes and sustaining that vision in the telling. As bell hooks asked in From Margin to Center [89], a critique of literature from a black feminist perspective, can we decenter the text? Is it possible to place the marginal view at the center?
320 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY At this point in time, fictional gay/lesbian people are more or less comfortably visible to the (usually heterosexual) YA protagonist, but they are still seen as Other. With a few exceptions, it appears that it is not yet possible for a mainstream young adult novel with gay/lesbian content to take any vantage point except that of the mainstream, and gay/lesbian characters continue to be portrayed as outsiders who live (often somewhat precariously) within the heterosexual mainstream but who will never really be "one of us." Other minority status groups have begun to be represented in YA fiction that places them and their world at the center and tells the story from their perspective. This is not yet the case for gay men and lesbians. Stories of gay/lesbian culture and community, told from a perspec- tive located within that culture, continue to be rare in YA fiction. This dogged adherence to narratives from a majority perspective in YA fic- tion with gay/lesbian content is particularly intriguing when con- trasted with recent YA nonfiction. Books such as Roger Sutton's Hearing Us Out: Voicesfrom the Gay and Lesbian Community (1994) [90], Ann Her- on's Two Teenagers in Twenty (1994) [91], and Larry Dane Brimner's Being Different: Lambda Youths Speak Out (1995) [92] contain multiple narrative voices of gay men and lesbians telling the stories of their lives as they move through the mainstream and the margins. The narratives contain common elements (coming-out stories, for example) as well as disparate elements provided by varying persons, settings, and situa- tions. These real-life protagonists are situated outside the mainstream, their intended audience in various locations from margin to center. Why the disparity between fiction and nonfiction? Why this resistance to realistic gay and lesbian voices as fictional narrators and protago- nists? And why the avoidance of any portrayal of the communities and friendship networks that are part of so many gay and lesbian lives? The Children, the Family, and the Community Children represent the continuation of families and are strongly identi- fied with them. Indeed, many people feel that children are not only members of a family, but that it is their presence that makes a family, that bestows the social legitimation associated with families as they are traditionally understood. Individual family members may be gay or les- bian, but the traditional family is a heterosexual institution, which makes a family's gay/lesbian members a curious anomaly: they share the same gene pool and perhaps the same last name, but many feel that their sexual orientation places them outside even their own families of origin, particularly in relation to that family's children. This stricture
YA NOVELS-GAY/LESBIAN/QUEER CONTENT 321 extends even more strongly to any connection between children and gay/lesbian people who are not blood relatives. Among the patterns that emerge from these novels is a consistent oppositional relationship between traditional families of parents and children and the gay/lesbian community. This is most clearly illus- trated in Kaye's Real Heroes [69]. Kevin's physical education teacher, Mr. Logan, is HIV-positive. This fact is revealed when his name appears on the membership list of an HIV support group that is coordinated by Jason, the openly gay older brother of Kevin's best friend Andy. When Mr. Logan's HIV status becomes common knowledge, a group of parents mobilize to have him fired. After some weeks of school meet- ings and hostile picket lines, he finally quits, sacrificing his job for his students' education. He explains this to Kevin as he packs up his be- longings to move to Atlanta. In all this, Mr. Logan is alone. As the editor of a national gay magazine, Jason clearly has a community. As a teacher facing job discrimination, Mr. Logan's community is appar- ently entirely outside of-and absent from-the school's community. The conflict is set up as Mr. Logan's struggle between loyalty to the gay community and concern for the children, and he chooses the chil- dren. The underlying assumption is that the gay community has no connections with children and that choices made on behalf of children would not be the same as choices made on behalf of gay people. In Real Heroes, the interests of children and of gay people are, by their very nature, in conflict. I wanted to stay, Kevin. And I could have stayed. Many of my friends thought I should become a symbol, to show a community that a person with HIV can continue to work effectively, that we do not put others at risk. Your friend Andy's brother, Jason, said I had an obligation to others with HIV to take a stand. But I had another obligation. To my students. If I stayed and the disrup- tions continued, it would be at your expense. That wouldn't be fair to you kids..... So you see, Kevin, I wasn't giving up, I was making a choice. It was a hard choice but most important choices are. If I stayed, you kids would suffer. So I chose to leave. [69, p. 132] This narrative places the gay community and nuclear families at op- posing-and seemingly irreconcilable-sides of a conflict. And the teacher, with self-sacrificing nobility, makes what he sees as the moral choice; he leaves, and in doing so, has done the right thing by placing the needs of the children above the needs of his community. As in other novels about gay people (with or without HIV or AIDS), Real Heroes provides few details about the gay community except to place it somewhere else, a location entirely separate from the family home. M. E. Kerr's Nightkites [67], Penny Durant's Wien Heroes Die [68], Davis' My Brother Has AIDS [51], Cooper's Life Magic [35], and Gregory
322 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Maguire's Oasis [72] are all accounts of older brothers and uncles who live their adult lives with partners and friends in cities with a sizable gay/lesbian community but then contract AIDS and return to their families of origin to die. Even in families that fully accept and embrace their gay son or uncle, their lives as openly gay men are in the past and offstage. Various degrees of alienation from families of origin occur in the lives of many gay men and lesbians in fiction and in fact. This is rarely a static condition, however, but rather one element among many in the myriad connections and disjunctures that occur between family members over time. YA fiction often pictures the estrangement that culminates in the revelation of a family member's gay/lesbian orienta- tion. YA fiction less frequently pictures what happens when the initial drama is past and the intertwined lives of family members continue. In Murrow's Twelve Days in August, Todd's beloved Uncle Gordo comes out to him in the course of a telephone conversation about Alex, a soccer teammate of Todd's who is being gay-baited by another team member. Todd says, "He talks as if anyone who even plays to Alex is a fag-" "Todd." Uncle Gordo's voice was harsh; I caught my breath. "Don't use that word around me." . . . He paused. "Sometimes I wonder if you know who I am." I held the phone away from my ear, stared at it a minute, then tucked it back against my head. "Well, of course I do. You're my uncle." "That's not what I mean." . . . Uncle Gordo paused for a long time, then said in a slow, deep voice, "I'm gay, Todd. I'm a gay man. Gary isn't just my business partner; he's also my lover." "I didn't know." My voice broke, and I wiped my face with the back of my hand. "No one ever told me." He groaned. "I'm not surprised-although I always hoped my brother wouldn't pass his prejudices on to you." [59, pp. 158-59] Todd is shocked and distressed, not by the news itself so much as by his parents' long silence regarding this aspect of his uncle's life. Several days later Gordo attends Todd's next soccer game, and his team's win- ning goal is followed by cheers and hugs between uncle and nephew. The drama of the moment of revelation is painfully intense, but what follows is not familial disruption and alienation but rather the continu- ation and enhancement of their existing connection. The book ends, and the story continues. At a time when traditional nuclear families are one configuration among many, the continuing segregation of young people from gay/lesbian adults in YA novels appears increasingly at odds with the variety and flexibility of actual families. As Slim, the pro- tagonist of Nelson's Earthshine puts it when thinking about Larry, her father's partner: "I still wouldn't know what to call him if I had to fill
YA NOVELS-GAY/LESBIAN/QUEER CONTENT 323 out another one of those forms for school. Friend is true, but it's not enough. He's my family, that's all I know" [70, p. 177]. Straight Gays, Queer Gays, and Difference When considering depictions of lives and cultures situated outside the mainstream, one inevitably faces the question of depictions of uncom- fortable differences. As noted earlier, the gay/lesbian characters in the earliest YA novels were usually viewed as "queer," with the negative connotation that usage indicated until recently. They were different from their straight peers and their difference was inborn and tragic. Gay/lesbian characters who are basically indistinguishable from het- erosexual people-whose gay/lesbian identity surprises family mem- bers-may be acceptable, but what about those who do not conform to traditional gender roles? What about differences that really look dif- ferent? The "straight gays' versus ''queer gays" controversy first appeared in YA literature in Morton Hunt's nonfiction title, Gay: Mat You Should Know about Homosexuality (1977), an odd compendium of prejudices and assumptions about gay/lesbian people addressed to young adult readers [93]. In the book, Hunt declared that there were basically two types of gay people. Straight gays, according to Hunt, are basically indis- tinguishable from heterosexuals: they "fall in love, care about each other, and make a home together in much the same way most straight people do" [93, p. 138]. Parents could invite a straight gay couple over for dinner with absolute confidence that the children would never sus- pect their guests were, well, more than friends. Straight gays elicit no embarrassing questions. They conscientiously avoid talking about their living arrangements, their holiday activities, or their plans for the week- end. Except for the sex of their partners, the lives of straight gays are exactly the same as the lives of their heterosexual counterparts. Straight gays are nice normal people; they deserve a wave over the back fence, a friendly greeting in the workplace, and perhaps even a place on a Christmas card list. Queer gays, on the other hand, are "gays whose appearance and behavior, either after working hours or all the time, make them seem to straights as strange as creatures from another planet.... the lisping nellie, the super-swishy 'screaming queen,' and the 'drag queen,' . . . the bull dyke ... [whose] mannish hair style, clothes, voice, and man- nerisms call attention to themselves, and bother many straights" [93, pp. 138-39]. Queer gays ignore conventional gendered expectations and flaunt their sexual orientation by their voices, their clothing, their
324 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY hairstyles, and their manner. Parents would never have them over for dinner for fear of the effect on the children. Even if they could behave themselves (which they could not), one simply would not want them in one's home-what would the neighbors think? This problematic differentiation and its presentation to teen readers embodies an underlying tension in many YA novels. The books appear to be rooted in the assumption that young adults are, by their nature, homophobic, that their automatic impulse is to fear any disruption to gender conformity, and that gay bashing is "natural" adolescent behav- ior. With that assumption firmly in place from the beginning, it is hardly surprising that young adult fiction is conservative. The inclusion of "straight" gay/lesbian characters is as far as it will stretch. Depicting straight teens not running away in horror from gay/lesbian peers, or gay or lesbian adults not treated as potential child molesters, or gay/ lesbian adults and gay/lesbian teens in any proximity-these are radi- cal developments in the world of young adult novels. Positive depictions of queer gays challenge the naturalness of gender itself and disrupt the notion of sexual orientation as a dichotomous variable. The shift that adolescents experience in viewing themselves, and being publicly viewed by others, as sexual beings is already dis- turbing to adults who are hoping that their teenage children really will Just Say No. Further disruption is virtually intolerable. M. E. Kerr's Deliver Us from Evie has one of the few portrayals of queer gay characters in Evie, an attractive butch teenager described admir- ingly by her younger brother: "You could see the blue of her eyes all the way across the room. I thought she looked a little like Elvis Presley" [39, p. 7]. Evie is a young farmer who begins to celebrate her difference when she falls in love with the banker's daughter. Her mother actually finds her unfeminine demeanor more distressing than her lesbianism, but Evie replies: "Patty likes me the way I am. She likes me in pants, with my hair slicked back, in my bomber jacket. . . and she likes me taking long steps, sinking my hands in my pockets, and all the other stuff you say I shouldn't do.... Some of us look it, Moml I know you so-called normal people would like it better if we looked as much like all of you as possible, but some of us don't, can't, and never will! And some others of us go for the ones who don't, can't, and never will." Mom didn't answer. Then Evie said, "There's nothing to cry about!" "I'm not crying for myself. I'm crying for you, honey." "I'm trying to tell you save your tears, Mom. For the first time in my life someone likes me just the way I am." [39, pp. 85-86] It is not simply the inclusion of a positively queer character like Evie that makes this story subversive, but the story's conclusion. After the
YA NOVELS-GAY/LESBIAN/QUEER CONTENT 325 predictably negative response to Evie and Patsy's relationship from both family and community, the two are (again, predictably) forced to leave their rural community for the anonymity of the city. When the prodigal daughters return to Missouri for a visit, however, it is they who are prospering in New York City while their families struggle to recover from the flood of 1993. Although family members reunite with genuine affection, Evie and Patsy again leave, this time as independent adults returning to their new home and community in New York. The narra- tor, Evie's younger brother, concludes the story: "She [Evie] sent us a little two-fingered salute and began backing out. 'Tell Patsy hi!' I shouted. Mom started to walk away. Then she turned around, cupped her hands to her mouth, and called out, 'Don't you two be strangers!'" [39, p. 203]. Here the straight/queer tension is resolved as this traditional parent and her queer daughter renew their connection. Despite Evie's strangeness in the eyes of the rural Missouri community in which she grew up, her estrangement ends as her mother calls out conventional words of parting. The words draw Evie and Patsy back in a verbal ges- ture that is both an embrace and the promise of acceptance, of a future in which differences may be both accepted and reconciled. It appears that Evie and Patsy will be able to be both queer and family. Queer Young Adult Literature? There is a general unwillingness in this literature to represent sexual orientation as anything other than permanent and unalterable. This flies in the face of the current focus on queer identity as an "in your face" statement of difference from the mainstream, but a difference that could include both same-sex and heterosexual relations, if not relationships. The "straight" world of the mainstream represented not only those who considered nonheterosexual attractions to be deviant and perverse, but also those who considered sexual identity to be con- sistent across an individual's life. What to make of the self-identified lesbian who occasionally sleeps with men? Or a bisexual whose current sexual relationship does not necessarily predict the sex of future sexual attractions or partners? Where to put a queer sensibility that embraces the identity of Other in multiple ways in which categories are deliber- ately resisted, fragmented, conflated, or blurred? In some respects, these questions mirror the ongoing discussion and debate around racial identity. Which box on the census form is checked by, say, the child of a Chinese Hawaiian and a Latino Puerto Rican? What is the validity of a choice made between categories deter-
326 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY mined by those who see "race" as essential and definable? And what if an "other" box is added to the form? Will it be checked by so many that the category will be meaningless? If so, then what? Young adult "new realism" began in the 1960s with the rejection of literary conventions of language, role model behavior, and happy endings thought appropriate for young adults. Evolving from its origi- nal position of opposition to mainstream YA fiction, the body of YA literature with gay/lesbian content has developed its own conventions based on a new set of perceived truths about identity. The lesbian English teacher in Annie on My Mind leads a discussion on the meaning of "the truth shall make you free" [76]. Liza takes this advice to heart and tells her family and friends that she is a lesbian, revealing the truth about her relationship with Annie that had been obscured by the social presumption of heterosexuality. But what to do with the young adult who says in essence, "I don't know what I am; I only know what I am not"? The VA "problem novel" began as a genre that defined itself by what it was not: it was not the traditional story considered appropriate for teen readers. Thirty years have passed and this resistant genre has itself taken on a definition that finds a new resistance to categorization. Or, asJohn Fiske put it in his essay, "The Jeaning of America," no matter how alert clothing manufacturers are to contemporary trends, they can never "catch up" to current street fashion; no matter how canny the mass customization, young people will deliberately change the garments that have been created for them to reflect their own oppositional meanings and social resistance; young people "keep devising new ways of tearing their jeans" [94, p. 19]. 'Zines and other individually produced alternative publications, made ever more possible through accessible computer technology, will de- scribe the latest, most current images and ideas of actual young people. Mass market YA novels will never catch up, nor would they want to, as they necessarily contain the messages adults want young people to hear, the messages embodied in traditional stories that create order out of chaos, take the hero on a quest only to bring him home again, allow opposites to attract, permanently vanquish monsters, and pair "once upon a time" with "they lived happily ever after." The didactic tradition of mass market books for young readers leaves scant room for postmodern multiple identities or inconclusive endings. In Colman's Happily Ever After, for example, the protagonist Melanie learns that her childhood sweetheart Paul is gay, and their love story becomes a tragedy: "Happily ever after. . . maybe, but only as friends. They were going to have very different lives, and all the dreams she'd had of Paul and herself together would have to be wiped out. No house, no marriage, and her trust that a childhood love was the one love of
YA NOVELS-GAY/LESBIAN/QUEER CONTENT 327 her life was to be denied" [57, p. 150]. Yet there are also occasional hints of a shift in even this most traditional of narratives. Indeed, some young adult fiction with gay/lesbian content appears to be changing the story, appropriating folklore motifs and traditional narrative con- ventions to create new narratives that directly challenge even the con- ventional heterosexual stories embodied in fairy tales. In the final scene of Block's Weetzie Bat, the tide character and her family of choice-her partner, her best friend and his lover, and their two children-are seated around a quintessentially familial dinner table: "And she looked around the table at Dirk and Duck and My Secret Agent Lover Man and Cherokee and Witch Baby-all of them lit up and golden like a wreath of lights. I don't know about happily ever after [Weetzie thought] ... but I do know about happily" [83, p. 88]. Appendix Young Adult Books with Gay/Lesbian Content, 1969-1997: Chronological Bibliography Early Years Group: Titles Published 1969-1984 (31 titles in 16 years = 1. 9 titles per year) 1969 Donovan, John. I'll Get There: It Better Be Worth the Trip. New York: Harper & Row, 1969. 1972 Holland, Isabelle. The Man zwithout a Face. New York: Lippincott, 1972. 1974 Scoppettone, Sandra. Trying Hard to Hear You. New York: Harper & Row, 1974. 1976 Guy, Rosa. Ruby. New York: Viking, 1976. Sullivan, Mary W. What's This about Pete? Nashville: Thomas Nelson, 1976. 1977 Hall, Lynn. Sticks and Stones. Chicago: Follett, 1977. Kerr, M. E. I'll Love You When You're More Like Me. New York: Harper & Row, 1977.
328 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 1978 Hautzig, Deborah. Hey, Dollface. New York: Greenwillow Books, 1978. Scoppettone, Sandra. Happy Endings Are All Alike. Boston: Alyson, 1978. 1979 Rees, David. In the Tent. London: Dobson Books, 1979. 1980 Klein, Norma. Breaking Up. New York: Random House, 1980. Reading, J. P. Bouquets for Brimbal. New York: Harper & Row, 1980. Tolan, Stephanie. The Last of Eden. New York: Bantam, 1980. 1981 Bargar, Gary. What Happened to Mr. Forster? New York: Clarion/ Houghton Mifflin, 1981. Futcher, Jane. Crush. Boston: Alyson, 1981. Hanlon, Emily. The Wing and the Flame. New York: Bradbury, 1981. Levy, Elizabeth. Come Out Smiling. New York: Delacorte, 1981. Snyder, Ann, and Pelletier, Louis. The Truth about Alex (original title: Counterplay). New York: New American Library, 1981. St. George, Judith. Call Me Margo. New York: Putnam, 1981. 1982 Bunn, Scott. Just Hold On. New York: Delacorte, 1982. Chambers, Aidan. Dance on My Grave. New York: Harper & Row, 1982. Garden, Nancy. Annie on My Mind. New York: Farrar Straus Giroux, 1982. Hulse, Larry. Just the Right Amount of Wrong. New York: Harper & Row, 1982. Rees, David. The Milkman's on His Way. London: Gay Men's Press, 1982. 1983 Ecker, B. A. Independence Day. New York: Avon, 1983. Kesselman, Janice. Flick. New York: Harper & Row, 1983. Mosca, Frank. All-American Boys. Boston: Alyson, 1983. Singer, Marilyn. The Course of True Love NeverDid Run Smooth. New York: Harper & Row, 1983. 1984 L'Engle, Madeleine. A House Like a Lotus. New York: Farrar Straus Giroux, 1984.
YA NOVELS-GAY/LESBIAN/QUEER CONTENT 329 Rees, David. Out of the Winter Gardens. London: Olive Press, 1984. Ure, Jean. You Win Some. You Lose Some. New York: Dell, 1984. Mid-Years Group: Titles Published 1985-1992 (30 titles in 8 years = 3. 75 titles per year) 1985 Bess, Clayton. Big Man and the Burn-Out. New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1985. 1986 Colman, Hila. Happily Ever After. New York: Scholastic, 1986. Kerr, M. E. Nightkites. New York: Harper & Row, 1986. Meyer, Carolyn. Elliott and Win. New York: McElderry, 1986. Sakers, Don. Act Well Your Part. Boston: Alyson, 1986. Ure, Jean. The Other Side of the Fence. New York: Delacorte, 1986. Wersba, Barbara. Crazy Vanilla. New York: Harper & Row, 1986. 1987 Klein, Norma. My Life as a Body. New York: Knopf, 1987. Rinaldi, Ann. The Good Side of My Heart. New York: Holiday House, 1987. 1988 Klein, Norma. Now That I Know. New York: Bantam, 1988. Koertge, Ron. The Arizona Kid. New York: Joy Street/Little, Brown, 1988. Wersba, Barbara. Just Be Gorgeous. New York: Harper, 1988. 1989 Block, Francesca Lia. Weetzie Bat. New York: Harper, 1989. Brett, Catherine. S. P. Likes A. D. Toronto: Women's Press, 1989. Childress, Alice. Those Other People. New York: Putnam, 1989. Homes, A. M. Jack. New York: Macmillan, 1989. Rees, David. The Colour of His Hair. Exeter, England: Third House, 1989. Shannon, George. Unlived Affections. New York: Harper & Row, 1989. 1990 Levy, Marilyn. Rumors and Whispers. New York: Fawcett, 1990. Sweeney, Joyce. Face the Dragon. New York: Delacorte, 1990. Walker, Paul Robert. The Method. New York: Gulliver/HBJ, 1990.
330 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 1991 Block, Francesca Lia. Witch Baby. New York: Harper, 1991. Crutcher, Chris. Athletic Shorts. New York: Dell/Laurel-Leaf, 1991. (Short stories) Garden, Nancy. Lark in the Morning. New York: FSG, 1991. Gleitzman, Morris. Two Weeks with the Queen. New York: Putnam & Grosset, 1991. Greene, Bette. The Drowning of Stephen Jones. New York: Bantam, 1991. Maguire, Jesse. Getting It Right. New York: Ivy/Ballantine, 1991. Woodson, Jacqueline. The Dear One. New York: Delacorte, 1991. 1992 Durant, Penny Raife. When Heroes Die. New York: Atheneum, 1992. Wieler, Diana. Bad Boy. New York: Delacorte, 1992. Recent Years Group: Titles Published 1993-1997 (38 titles in 5 years = 7.6 titles per year) 1993 Block, Francesca Lia. Missing AngelJuan. New York: Harper, 1993. Kaye, Marilyn. Real Heroes. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1993. Murrow, Liza Ketchum. Twelve Days in August. New York: Holiday House, 1993. Salat, Cristina. Liting in Secret. New York: Bantam, 1993. Walker, Kate. Peter. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1993. 1994 Bauer, Marion Dane, ed. Am I Blue? Coming Out from the Silence. New York: HarperCollins, 1994. (Short stories) Davis, Deborah. My Brother Has AIDS. New York: Atheneum, 1994. Donovan, Stacey. Dive. New York: Dutton, 1994. Kerr, M. E. Deliver Us from Evie. New York: HarperCollins, 1994. McClain, Ellen Jaffe. No Big Deal. New York: Lodestar, 1994. Nelson, Theresa. Earthshine. New York: Orchard Books, 1994. Paulsen, Gary. The Car. San Diego, Calif.: Harcourt Brace, 1994. 1995 Bantle, Lee F. Divingfor the Moon. New York: Macmillan, 1995. Block, Francesca Lia. Baby Bebop. New York: HarperCollins, 1995. Fox, Paula. The Eagle Kite. New York: Orchard Books, 1995. Hamilton, R.J. Who Framed Lorenzo Garcia?Boston: Alyson, 1995. (Pride Pack #1) Hamilton, R. J. The Case of the Missing Mother. Boston: Alyson, 1995. (Pride Pack #2)
YA NOVELS-GAY/LESBIAN/QUEER CONTENT 331 Springer, Nancy. Looking for Jamie Bridger. New York: Dial, 1995. Van Dijk, Lutz. Damned Strong Love: The True Story of Willi G. and Stephan K Translated by Elizabeth D. Crawford. New York: Henry Holt, 1995. Velasquez, Gloria. Tommy Stands Alone. Houston: Arte Publico/Piniata Books, 1995. Woodson,Jacqueline. From the Notebooks of Melanin Sun. New York: Scho- lastic, 1995. 1996 Block, Francesca Lia. Girl Goddess #9. New York: HarperCollins, 1996. (Short stories) Cart, Michael. My Father's Scar. New York: HarperCollins, 1996. Cooper, Melrose. Life Magic. New York: Dial, 1996. Garden, Nancy. Good Moon Rising. New York: Farrar Straus Giroux, 1996. Lynch, Chris. Dog Eat Dog Blue-Eyed Son series, book 3. New York: HarperCollins, 1996. Maguire, Gregory. Oasis. New York: Clarion, 1996. Zalben, Jane Breskin. Unfinished Dream. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1996. 1997 Dines, Carol. Talk to Me: Stories and a Novella. New York: Delacorte, 1997. (Short stories) Donoghue, Emma. Kissing the Witch: Old Tales in New Skins. New York: HarperCollins, 1997. (Short stories) Gantos, Jack. Desire Lines. New York: Farrar Straus Giroux, 1997. Jenkins, A. M. Breaking Boxes. New York: Delacorte, 1997. Kerr, M. E. "Hello, " I Lied. New York: HarperCollins, 1997. Ketchum, Liza. Blue Coyote. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1997. Larson, Rodger. What I Know Now. New York: Henry Holt, 1997. Mowry, Jess. Babylon Boyz. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1997. Wersba, Barbara. Whistle Me Home. New York: Henry Holt, 1997. Woodson, Jacqueline. The House You Pass on the Way. New York: Scholastic, 1997. Total Titles Published 1969-1997 (99 titles in 29 years = 3.4 titles per year) REFERENCES 1. Hinton, S. E. The Outsiders. New York: Viking, 1967. 2. Head, Ann. Mr. and Mrs. BoJoJones. New York: Putnam, 1967. 3. Zindel, Paul. The Pigman. New York: Harper, 1969.
332 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 4. Nilsen, Aileen Pace, and Donelson, Kenneth L. Literaturefor Today's Young Adults. 4th ed. New York: HarperCollins College, 1993. 5. Donovan, John. I'll Get There: It Better Be Worth the Trip. New York: Harper & Row, 1969. 6. Bacon, Martha. "Review." Atlantic Monthly 224 (December 1969): 150. 7. Hanckel, Frances, and Cunningham, John. "Can Young Gays Find Happiness in YA Books?" Wilson Library Bulletin 50 (March 1976): 528-34. 8. Mitchell, Judith. "Changes in Adolescent Literature with Homosexual Motifs, Themes, and Characters." Ph.D. diss., University of Connecticut, 1982. 9. Goodman, Jan. "Out of the Closet, but Paying the Price: Lesbian and Gay Characters in Children's Literature." Interracial Books for Children Bulletin 14, nos. 3-4 (1983): 13-15. 10. Wilson, David. "The Open Library: YA Books for Gay Teens." EnglishJournal 73 (Novem- ber 1984): 60-64. 11. Jenkins, Christine. "Hearthrobs and Heartbreaks: A Guide to Young Adult Books with Gay Themes." Out/Look 1 (Fall 1988): 82-92. 12. Wolf, Virginia. "The Gay Family in Literature for Young People." Children's Literature in Education 20 (March 1989): 51-58. 13. Jenkins, Christine. "Being Gay: Gay/Lesbian Characters and Concerns in Young Adult Books." Booklist 87 (September 1, 1990): 39-41. 14. Sumara, Dennis. "Gay and Lesbian Voices in Literature: Making Room on the Shelf." Engiish Quarterly 25 (1991): 30-34. 15. Cuseo, Allan A. Homosexual Characters in YA Novels: A Literary Analysis, 1969-1982. Met- uchen, N.J.: Scarecrow, 1992. 16. Clyde, Laurel A., and Lobban, Maijorie. Out of the Closet and into the Classroom: Homosexual- ity in Books for Young People. Port Melbourne, Australia: ALIA Thorpe, 1992. 17. Williams, Robert F. "Gay and Lesbian Teenagers: A Reading Ladder for Students, Media Specialists and Parents." ALAN Review 20 (Spring 1993): 12-17. 18. Bernstein, Robin. "A Literature of One's Own." Harvard Gay and Lesbian Review I (Spring 1994): 23-26. 19. St. Clair, Nancy. "Outside Looking In: Representations of Gay and Lesbian Experiences in the Young Adult Novel." ALAN Review 23 (Fall 1995): 38-43. 20. Webunder, Dave, and Woodard, Sarah. "Homosexuality in Young Adult Fiction and Non- fiction: An Annotated Bibliography." ALAN Review 23 (Winter 1996): 40-43. 21. Jenkins, Christine A. "Young Adult Novels with Gay/Lesbian Characters and Themes, 1969-92: A Historical Reading of Content, Gender, and Narrative Distance." Journal of Youth Services in Libraries 7 (Fall 1993): 43-55. Titles were gathered from available bibliog- raphies, lists contained in earlier studies, and reviews in Boolist, School LibraryJournal, and VOYA. I limited my study to books available in the United States and publislhed and marketed as young adult novels. Most of the books included are from mainstream presses, although a few small press books, including several from Canada and Great Britain, were included if they met the above requirements. 22. St. George, Judith. CaU Me Margo. New York: Putnam, 1981. 23. Crutcher, Chris. Athletic Shorts. New York: Dell/Laurel-Leaf, 1991. 24. Bauer, Marion Dane, ed. Am I Blue? Coming Out from the Silence. New York: HarperCollins, 1994. 25. Block, Francesca Lia. Girl Goddess #9. New York: HarperCollins, 1996. 26. Dines, Carol. Talk to Me. New York: Delacorte, 1997. 27. Donoghue, Emma. Kissing the Witch. New York: HarperCollins, 1997. 28. Guy, Rosa. Ruby. New York: Viking, 1976. 29. Rees, David. The Milkman's on His Way. Boston: Gay Men's Press, 1982. 30. Woodson, Jacqueline. The Dear One. New York: Delacorte, 1991. 31. Hamilton, R. J. Who Framed Lorenzo Garcia? Boston: Alyson, 1995.
YA NOVELS-GAY/LESBIAN/QUEER CONTENT 333 32. Hamilton, R. J. The Case of the Missing Mother. Boston: Alyson, 1995. 33. Velasquez, Gloria. Tommy Stands Alone. Houston: Arte Publico/Piniata Books, 1995. 34. Woodson, Jacqueline. From the Notebooks of Melanin Sun. New York: Scholastic, 1995. 35. Cooper, Melrose. Life Magic. New York: Dial, 1996. 36. Ketchum, Liza. Blue Coyote. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1997. 37. Mowry, Jess. Babylon Boyz. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1997. 38. Woodson, Jacqueline. The House You Pass on the Way. New York: Scholastic, 1997. 39. Kerr, M. E. Deliver Us from Evie. New York: HarperCollins, 1994. 40. Garden, Nancy. Good Moon Rising. New York: Farrar Straus Giroux, 1996. 41. Lerner, Gerda. The Majoity Finds Its Past: Placing Women in History. New York: Oxford University Press, 1979. 42. Sims, Rudine. Shadow and Substance: Afro-American Experience in Contemnporary Children's Fic- tion. Urbana, Ill.: NCTE, 1982. 43. Chauncey, George. Gay New York: Gender, Urban Culture, and the Making of the Gay Male World, 1890-1940. New York: Basic Books/HarperCollins, 1994. 44. Hildenbrand, Suzanne. "Some Theoretical Considerations on Women in Library His- tory." Journal of Library History 18 (1983): 382-90. 45. Daly, Maureen. Seventeenth Summer. New York: Dodd, Mead, 1942. 46. L'Engle, Madeleine. Small Rain. New York: Farrar Straus Giroux, [1945] 1984. 47. Salinger, J. D. The Catcher in the Rye. Boston: Little, Brown, 1951. 48. Sullivan, Mary W. What's This about Pete? Nashville: Thomas Nelson, 1976. 49. Hautzig, Deborah. Hey, Dollface. New York: Greenwillow Books, 1978. 50. Tolan, Stephanie. The Last of Eden. New York: Bantam, 1980. 51. Davis, Deborah. My Brother Has AIDS. New York: Atheneum, 1994. 52. Springer, Nancy. Lookingforjamie Bridger. New York: Dial, 1995. 53. McClain, Ellen Jaffe. No Big Deal. New York: Lodestar, 1994. 54. Kerr, M. E. I'll Love You When You're More Like Me. New York: Harper & Row, 1977. 55. Snyder, Ann, and Pelletier, Louis. The Truth about Alex. New York: New American Library, 1981. 56. Ecker, B. A. Independence Day. New York: Avon, 1983. 57. Colman, Hila. Happily Ever After. New York: Scholastic, 1986. 58. Rinaldi, Ann. The Good Side of My Heart. New York: Holiday House, 1987. 59. Murrow, Liza. Twelve Days in August. New York: Holiday House, 1993. 60. Holland, Isabelle. The Man without a Face. New York: Lippincott, 1972. 61. Hall, Lynn. Sticks and Stones. Chicago: Follett, 1977. 62. Hanlon, Emily. The Wing and the Flane. New York: Bradbury, 1981. 63. Rees, David. Out of the Winter Gardens. London: Olive Press, 1984. 64. Meyer, Carolyn. Elliott and Win. New York: McElderry, 1986. 65. Koertge, Ron. The Arizona Kid. Boston: Joy Street/Little, Brown, 1988. 66. Paulsen, Gary. The Car. San Diego, Calif.: Harcourt Brace, 1994. 67. Kerr, M. E. Nightkites. New York: Harper & Row, 1986. 68. Durant, Penny Raife. When Heroes Die. New York: Atheneum, 1992. 69. Kaye, Marilyn. Real Heroes. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1993. 70. Nelson, Theresa. Earthshine. New York: Orchard Books, 1994. 71. Fox, Paula. The Eagle Kite. New York: Orchard Books, 1995. 72. Maguire, Gregory. Oasis. New York: Clarion, 1996. 73. Zalben, Jane Breskin. Unfinished Dream. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1996. 74. L'Engle, Madeleine. A House Like a Lotus. New York: Farrar Straus Giroux, 1984. 75. Bargar, Gary. What Happened to Mr. Forster? New York: Clarion/Houghton Mifflin, 1981. 76. Garden, Nancy. Annie on My Mind. New York: Farrar Straus Giroux, 1982. 77. Klein, Norma. Breaking Up. New York: Random House, 1980.
334 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 78. Klein, Norma. Now That I Know. New York: Bantam, 1988. 79. Homes, A. M. Jack. New York: Macmillan, 1989. 80. Greene, Bette. The Drowming of Stephen Jones. New York: Bantam, 1991. 81. Salat, Cristina. Living in Scret. New York: Bantam, 1993. 82. Wersba, Barbara. Crazy VaniUa. New York: Harper & Row, 1986. 83. Block, Francesca Lia. Wetczie Bat. New York: Harper, 1989. 84. Scoppettone, Sandra. Trying Hard to Hear You. New York: Harper & Row, 1974. 85. Reading, J. P. Bouquets for Bnmbal. New York: Harper & Row, 1980. 86. Rees, David. In the Tent. London: Dobson Books, 1979. 87. Rees, David. The Colour of His Hair. Exeter, England: Third House, 1989. 88. Rees, David. The Exeter Blitz. London: Hamish Hamilton, 1978. 89. hooks, bell. From Margin to Center. Boston: South End, 1992. 90. Sutton, Roger. Hearing Us Out: Voices from the Gay and Lesbian Community. Boston: Litde, Brown, 1994. 91. Heron, Ann. Two Teenagers in Twenty. Boston: Alyson, 1994. 92. Brimner, Larry Dane. Being Diferent: Lambda Youths Speak Out. New York: Franklin Watts, 1995. 93. Hunt, Morton. Gay: What You Should Know about Homosexuality. New York: Farrar Straus Giroux, 1977. 94. Fiske, John. Understanding Popular Culture. New York: Roudedge, 1991.