Teaching Bibliography and Reference- Four Divergent Views Bibliography and the Seminar RAYMUND F. WOOD THE "bibliography courses" in a typical library school might vary widely from course to course, and would certainly vary in content and in technique from school to school; in fact, until we have (perish the thought!) complete uniformity of curriculum in all the library schools in the country, we shall probably never be able to decide just what a "bibliography course" should consist of, or just how it should be taught. Charles D. Patterson, in his excellent study of 27 library schools across the country, analyzed the usages of the seminar method and found that it has been applied to such widely divergent types of courses as "system analysis," "methods of research," "library education and supervision," and "case-taught courses." But evidently none of his 27 respondents specifically mentioned "bibliography courses," unless we include them under the blanket term "any advanced research."1 The concept of the bibliography course can be narrowed down by the elimination process of determining what it is not. First of all it is not an advanced reference course. It is not an in-depth, or in-breadth, expansion of any of the two-letter groupings in the new, 8th edition, Winchell.2 There are, for example, approximately one thousand titles of reference books in the BD section of Winchell, "Literature." A course in the bibliography of English or World Literature should not be a mere attempt to add another hundred or so titles to Winchell's thousand. Secondly, it is not an in-depth study of certain more important titles on the Winchell list. A select class of eager students could, no Wood is an Associate Professor in the School of Library Service, University of California, Los Angeles. 18
Teaching Bibliography and Reference doubt with profit to themselves, spend a semester or a quarter in a more intensive study of the Harvard Classics (BD 14), or Bompiani (BD 21), or Magill (BD 37-39), or American Notes and Queries (BD 58), or any other title that may be passed over too hastily in the general reference course. But although such a study may be profitable, it should still be classed as an advanced reference course, a professional rather than a research-oriented course. The question may then be put, what is a bibliography course, and to what extent may the seminar method be applied to it? Patterson, citing Harold Goldstein and others, defines a seminar, at least in so far as it pertains to library education, as a group of advanced students "in which the members do original research, and reporting and sharing of discoveries is done in the presence of all the members and the seminar leader."8 This is a good working definition; all that is missing is a clear statement of what constitutes "original research." In library education this requirement may be somewhat broadly interpreted. If the proper intellectual product of a librarian is a bibliography, as has been wisely said, then the best training that future librarians can have in library school is training in the making of bibliographies. The historian in training should produce a short paper on some novel aspect of history; the budding scientist in the laboratory should be expected to produce some novel interrelationship of chemicals, or some new breed or strain of animal or plant; the musician, some original composition, or some new interpretation of a classical piece; so the librarian in training should produce a new bibliography. This is his original re- search; this is his field of endeavor. It is new only in the sense that no one else has done it before (or not recently) ; it is old in the same sense that the scientist is merely seeking new combinations from the same basic set of 100-odd elements that all other scientists use; and in the same sense that there are only 26 letters to the English alphabet for the humanist, and only 12 semitones in the chromatic scale for the musician. Each in his own way is making something new out of some- thing already existing; and the librarian constructs his "original re- search," his bibliography, out of existing materials, no less than the scientist, or the humanist, or the sociologist. Stephen Minot, in his penetrating article "What a Seminar is Not," realized the value of this concept when he said that research or discovery "implies finding new relationships rather than old facts."4 It is the new relationship of the existing titles, constructed to form a new bibliography, that is the essence of bibliographical research, the proper field of librarianship, 19
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP and perhaps the most important contribution of librarianship to the world of scholarship. The seminar method, therefore, seems most eminently suited to the bibliography courses, or the "literature" courses, as taught in library schools, whether these be courses in the bibliography (or literature) of the social sciences, the humanities, the fine arts, the physical sciences, the biological sciences, or any other academic discipline having its own considerable body of literature. This conclusion may be strength- ened by a consideration of one additional aspect of the seminar, one so mudi taken for granted that it is seldom mentioned - namely, that all the students in the seminar are concentrating on one topic, or one point of focus, even though each may be considering a different aspect, or angle, or point of view of the same topic or focal point. Thus, in a history seminar, one student may study heuristics, another epigraphy, another diplomatics, and so on; but all these are related to one another in that they are all auxiliary sciences to history, and all are essential to complete historical research. So in library science; if a topic be selected for a seminar in, say, the Bibliography of the Social Sciences, a topic or point of focus which is broad enough to encompass all or most of the social sciences, but not too broad for a quarter or a semester's work, all the students in the seminar can feel that they are encompassing a broad field, but each one knows that his contribution is but a part of a whole, and there exists that unity in the seminar which is its most essential characteristic. Can such topics be found, and can the classical seminar method be profitably applied to the bibliography courses in library school? It is the opinion of this instructor that such topics can be found, and that the method can be applied, and with surprising success. Assuming a seminar of normal size, say nine to twelve students, and assuming that the general field is to be either that of the social sciences or of the humanities and fine arts, it is the responsibility of the instructor to select a topic broad enough to be applicable to all or most of the dozen or so social science topics (history, geography, anthropology, economics, etc.) as listed in either Hoselitz,8 Lewis,6 or White,7 or the eight broad topics listed by Winchell under the humanities,8 while at the same time not so broad that its literature, even when broken down into these dozen or so parts, could not be covered by one student (or by a pair or a group of students, in the event of larger seminars) in the course of a single quarter or semester. A topic that might be considered as a bit too large for a semester's 20
Teaching Bibliography and Reference seminar in the social sciences would be "Communism." Its literature is too vast, and covers too many languages, for a single seminar. On the other hand the topic 'Tobacco" might be a bit too narrow. While applicable to most of the divisions of the social sciences - economics, history, etc. - it is unlikely that as many as ten students could produce ten meaningful bibliographies on this subject. Successful topics, how- ever, have been, in the social sciences, 'The Rise of the Third Reich," and 'The Westward Movement [in the U.S.]"; and in the humanities, "Freudian Influences in 20th Century Literature and Arts." Incidentally, the Westward Movement would also be a fine topic for a seminar in the bibliography of the humanities and fine arts, with its possibilities of bibliographical study of fiction, poetry, drama, folksongs, folklore, heroes ("Paul Bunyan"), stereotypes (the cowboy, the "bad man," and so on) , all rising from the Westward Movement. In actual practice, in applying the seminar method to the bibliog- raphy course, the topic is pre-selected by the instructor. Ideally he should be well acquainted with the total bibliography of the subject, in order to give meaningful direction to the seminar from the be- ginning. The topic once proposed to the group, it should be narrowed or broadened until it is of suitable size. It should then be discussed as a whole, and the general literature of the broad topic analyzed. This should include monumental collections, if any; publications of societies in the field; encyclopedias, general works, serials, and so on. A guided tour of the university library's holdings in the pertinent fields should introduce the students to the entire area to be covered in the seminar. All of this, together with a division of the field into its com- ponent parts, and allocation of these among the seminar participants, should occupy the first three or four meetings. The seminar need not meet again until the first student, chosen by lot or by the logic of the component parts, is ready to present his bibliography (the equivalent of his "paper" in seminars in other disciplines) to the group. Each in turn then presents his bibliography, explaining the value of each work selected, and perhaps some data about its author; and at the end of the semester the instructor makes his summary and analysis of the work of the seminar. The 3x5 cards which make up each one's bibliography may be turned in to the instructor for a grade, and then retained or returned at will. If retained they comprise a valuable, up-to-date bibli- ography, and if the topic was carefully chosen, may be a valuable addition to the university's reference resources. The advantages to such a method of conducting a seminar in a 21
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP course of which the main objective is bibliographical study are mani- fold. First of all there is a feeling of homogeneity which is lacking when each student compiles a bibliography on a subject of his own choice. Next, there is the sense of recognition, since many titles will inevitably be chosen by more than one student - in history and in geography, for example. Third, there is a valuable sharing of findings, since students are encouraged to help one another by sharing titles discovered in some unsuspected journal, for example, which seem to fit, say, economics, rather than history. This sharing of findings helps materially to strengthen the feeling of professionalism, of librarians working with one another, which is one of the finest characteristics of our profession. Fourth, there is a sense of thoroughness. By the time the same topic, say the Westward Movement, has been treated six or seven times, each time from a different point of view, it becomes a kind of familiar friend, and its impression on the mind of each par- ticipant is thorough and lasting, to say the least. Fifth, there is the satisfaction of knowing that at least one small topic, one minor aspect of the whole field of knowledge, has been thoroughly and adequately covered bibliographically. Students often complain that their library course is, inevitably, a mere skimming of the surface. "There is so much to know, so many books to look at!" is a universal plaint. But in this type of seminar the students can at least say"We covered that subject pretty well, didn't we?" Finally, there is the valuable experience gained by each student in the preparation of a scholarly bibliography. He is taught, both by consultation with the instructor throughout the compi- lation of the bibliography, and by the criticism of the instructor and of his fellow students during the presentation of his "paper," how to prepare a bibliography along scholarly lines - both as to content and form. He is advised what to include and what to leave out; he gets practice in cooperative bibliography, since he knows that his is merely one part of a whole; and finally he gets valuable practice in the presen- tation of a scholarly, annotated bibliography which he himself has made. There are, to be sure, some disadvantages to the seminar method over the traditional "syllabus" method. Each student will be exposed to less books, and those students who conceived of the course as an extension of a reference course will be disappointed. Furthermore, some students may have no interest in the topic chosen for the seminar, and may resent their participation in it. But these disadvantages do not seem very significant upon close examination. A well constructed 22
Teaching Bibliography and Reference syllabus in, say, the social sciences would certainly expose the students to several hundred titles; but such a list of titles, with annotations by the instructor or by the students themselves (drawn largely from White or Lewis or Winchell, since no one could be expected to be familiar with every title), serves little more purpose than could be achieved by a systematic perusal of all 423 pages of White's book, which a stu- dent could accomplish more easily in the quiet and privacy of his home. Where then is the value of the seminar? Secondly, as far as interest in the seminar topic is concerned, it is true that many students, if left to their own devices as to a topic for a bibliography, would select such diverse subjects as "salary scales for registered nurses," or "labor relations and the New York Central Railroad," which may be of interest and of profit, but do not tend to make a strongly unified seminar. In practice, on the other hand, students who at first profess no interest in the seminar topic chosen for them come to find that, when properly motivated, the investigation of such topics as geopoli- tics, or the Nazi myth of race supremacy, or the geographical problems involved in the unification of Germany, to cite from a recent experience, can become quite fascinating, even to students whose only previous exposure to graduate learning has been in the fields of science or the humanities. The seminar method, as examined in the above-cited article by Pat- terson, is eminently applicable to the teaching of the bibliography, or literature, courses as traditionally taught in library schools to candi- dates for the master's degree, or even for post-M.L.S. students and doctoral candidates. The method has many unique advantages, such as the advantage of fostering a sense of professionalism, as well as the traditional advantages customarily associated with the seminar method - unity of purpose, a sharing of ideas and findings, opportunity for independent research, critical comment from an informed and competent instructor, and practical experience in the presentation of a scholarly piece of work. References 1. Patterson, G D.: The Seminar Method in Library Education. Journal of Education for Librarian s hip, 8:99-105, Fall 1967. 2. Winchell, Constance M.: Guide to Reference Books. 8th ed. Chicago, American Library Association, 1967. 3. Patterson, op. ctt.t p. 99. 4. Minot, Stephen: What a Seminar is Not. American Association pf University Professors Bulletin, 44:733-735, Dec. 1958. 23
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP 5. Hoselitz, B. F., ed.: A Reader's Guide to the Social Sciences. Giencoe, 111., Free Press, CI959. 6. Lewis, P. R.: The Literature of the Social Sciences; an Introductory Guide and Survey. London, Library Association, I960. 7. White, C. M. and Associates: Sources of Information in the Social Sciences; a Guide to the Literature. Totowa, N.J., The Bedminster Press, cl964. 8. Winchell, op. cit., pp. 235-304.