Materials and Sources For Teaching the History of Books and Printing PAUL A. WINCKLER PART I THE PURPOSE of this article is to compile a list of materials and sources which can be used in teaching the history of books and printing. The printed literature on books and printing is vast and in addition there is an ever-increasing amount of films, filmstrips, and slides. In order to make this a workable project certain limitations have been placed on the items to be included. This is not an attempt to produce a complete or comprehensive listing of materials. The em- phasis is on those items which could be considered significant and of value in teaching a survey course in the history of books and printing. The majority of items are printed books or pamphlets. A list of se- lected journals is included but only a few specific journal articles. Al- though a few foreign language works are listed the majority are fairly current materials in the English language. This does not mean that there are not many important foreign language items but it is beyond the scope of this article to include them. Some of the older "standards" have been included since they are still useful, and a number have recently been reprinted. Most of the items are of a general rather than a highly specialized nature since this is in keeping with the survey Winckler is a Professor of Library Science at Palmer Graduate Library School, Long Island University. The second part of this article will appear in the Fall, 1972 issue of JEL. 43
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP character of most graduate library science courses in this subject. Monographs of individuals have not been included. It is hoped that this bibliographical essay will be of interest, value, and practical use to the new instructor, the more experienced practitioner, and the stu- dent of the book. General Reference Sources: Unfortunately there is no major multi-volume English language en- cyclopedia dealing specifically with the history of books. Some of the general encyclopedias are useful and especially the foreign language ones. The Encyclopedia of Library and Information Science (New York: Dekker, 1968- ) now complete to Volume 7, has a few re- lated entries: Aldus Manutius, Venice; Binding; Block Printing; Cal- ligraphy; Caxton; Cobden-Sanderson; Design of Books; Doves Press; etc., but this can hardly be considered a major encyclopedic source in this area. There are a few one-volume works which are useful and provide some limited encyclopedic coverage. Geoffrey Glaister's An Encyclo- pedia of the Book (Cleveland: World, I960) is one of the most use- ful reference sources for terminology and of particular value for his- torical notes. It was originally published by Allen and Unwin in Great Britain. It is a useful guide to "terms used in paper-making, printing, bookbinding, and publishing with notes on illuminated manuscripts, bibliophiles, private presses and printing societies." The book is ar- ranged alphabetically with numerous illustrations. Although most of the entries are brief there are a few which are rather extensive and pro- vide a useful survey of the topic. Glaister is an essential work which can be used with Mary C. Turner's The Bookman 's Glossary (4th ed., New York: Bowker, cl96l) which is a handy source for American terminology. This work is limited to terms and proper names of use in the United States, Great Britain, and Western Europe. Turner's work is of the short-entry type serving as a * 'practical guide for those interested in the terminology used in the production and distribution of books, new and old." Unlike the numerous illustrations in Glaister's this work has no illustrations at all. There are a few other dictionaries and terminology sources which might be helpful. For historical use there is Charles T. Jacobi's The Printer's Vocabulary . . . (London: Chiswick, 1888; Reprint - Gale, 1969) and American Dictionary of Printing and Bookmaking . . . 44
Teaching the History of Books and Printing (Part I) (New York: Lockwood and Co., 1894; Reprint- Gale, 1967) which contains some biographical sketches. For contemporary terminology the works of Edward M. Allen Harper's Dictionary of the Graphic Arts (New York: Harper and Row, cl963) contains "over 6,500 basic terms currently used by those in the graphic arts industries" and brief definitions useful for the terminology of the printing trades; Rudolf Hostettler's Technical Terms of the Printing Industry (St. Gall: The Author, 1963) is a small com- pact dictionary giving the German, English, French, Italian, and Dutch for each term, and Elsevier's Dictionary of the Printing and Allied Industries, compiled and arranged by F. J. M. Wijnekus, (Amsterdam: Elsevier Pub. Co., 1967) is most valuable as a brief international dic- tionary of printing and trade terms in English, French, German, and Dutch. Two recent works have appeared treating the "chronology" of books and printing in W. Turner Berry and H. Edmund Poole's Annals of Printing (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1966) and Colin Clair's A Chronology of Printing (New York: Praeger, 1969). Both begin in 105 A.D. with the invention of paper, in China, by Ts'ai Lun, to the present. The year by year chronological approach has its limita- tions but both works have a detailed index which is essential for any extensive use of this type of book. Berry and Poole also include an eight-page bibliography. Information in both books is usually brief. There have been other "chronologies" in past years including E. E. Bartlett's The Typographic Treasures of Europe (New York: Putnam, 1925) which has a section on the chronology of printing; David Green- wood and Helen Gentry's Chronology of Books and Printing (New York: Macmillan, 1936), and Merritt W. Haynes' A Student's History of Printing giving the Principal Dates, Personages, and Events in the Development of the Typographic Art from the Earliest Times to the Present in Chronological Order (New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1930). Bibliographies: There are a number of bibliographies which can be of value in the search for materials and also as background sources in the history of printing. Theodore Besterman's A World Bibliography of Bibliogra- phies (4th ed., Lausanne: Societas Bibliographica, 1965-1966 in 5 volumes) is an extremely important source for bibliographical informa- 45
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP tion on various aspects of books and printing, as well as for data on individuals. It is impossible to list all the related subject headings since this monumental work contains over 100,000 entries. The heading "Printing" has over 100 pages of double-column space, in what seems like an endless number of bibliographies of bibliographies. Bibliographies more specifically related to books and printing are A Catalogue of the Library Illustrative of the History and Art of Typog- raphy . . . of Richard M. Hoe (London: Chiswick, 1877), which is of historical value as a guide to the literature of printing of the late 19th century; E. C. Bigmore and C. W. H. Wyman's A Bibliography of Printing (London: 1880-1886, 3 vols.; Reprint - Duschnes, 1945, in 2 vols.) which although dated is still useful and especially with its an- notated comments; St. Bride's Foundation. Catalogue of the Technical Reference Library of Works on Printing and the Allied Arts (London: The Foundation, 1919) ; Horace Hart's Bibliotheca Typographica . . . A List of Books About Books (Rochester: The Printing House of Leo Hart, 1933) which is an annotated list used originally as a reading guide for a course in the History of the Printed Book at Harvard Col- lege, which has been expanded for a wider audience; Douglas C. Mc- Murtrie's The Invention of Printing: A Bibliography (Chicago: Club of Printing House Craftsmen, 1942; Reprint - Burt Franklin) which was done under the sponsorship of various groups including the W.P.A. Still a basic bibliography and most useful in its indication of the loca- tion of various items. According to McMurtrie this was the "first mod- ern reasonably comprehensive list on the present subject" and its aim was to offer a bibliography to scholars everywhere "interested in the history of the greatest force in civilization: printing"; National Book League Books About Books (London: Cambridge University Press, 1955) which is a catalog of the League, and the College of William and Mary, A List of Books on Printing: Selected From Those in the College of William and Mary Library (Williamsburg: The College, 1962) which is a short-title mimeographed list of books on printing, typography, binding and other aspects of the graphic arts. The bibliographical activities of G. K. Hall of Boston, Massachu- setts, has been most impressive in bringing out a large number of book catalogs of special collections which are most helpful as biblio- graphical tools. Some which are of particular value in books and print- ing are: New York Public Library. The Research Libraries of the New York Public Library. Dictionary Catalog of the Manuscript Divi- sion (1967), in 2 vols., and the Dictionary Catalog of the Rare 46
Teaching the History of Books and Printing (Part I) Book Division, (n.d.), 21 volumes. Two other collections of the New York Public Library are pertinent including: Dictionary Catalog of the Albert A. and Henry W. Berg Collection of English and American Literature, (1969), 5 vols. and of particular interest to the student of the illustrated book is the Dictionary Catalog and Shelf -List of the Spencer Collection of Illustrated Books and Manuscripts and Fine Bindings, (1970), 2 vols. For Shakespeare and Renaissance interest there are the Catalog of Printed Books of the Volger Shakespeare Li- brary, (1971), 28 vols., and the Catalog of the Manuscripts of the Volger Shakespeare Library, (1971), 3 vols. For any in-depth study of the medieval period the Dictionary Catalogue of the Library of the Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies (1972) , 5 volumes, is of great value. Two items which are particularly significant for books and printing are The Palaeography Collection in the University of London Library. An Author and Subject Catalogue ; (1968), 2 vols. and the Dictionary Catalogue of the History of Printing from the John M. Wing Foundation, The Newberry Library (Chicago), (1962), 6 vols., which contains over 23,000 volumes on the history of printing. Other book catalogs in the G. K. Hall series are also useful both as biblio- graphical sources and for holdings in particular collections. The extensive literature of catalogs, indexes, and bibliographies of bibliographies of original source material cannot be included in this essay but they would be useful for any in-depth study of books and printing and certainly essential in the area of rare book librarianship. Besterman in his A World Bibliography of Bibliographies lists a large number of these. These would include the standard works by Bohatta and Funke, Brunet, Hain, Copinger, Reichling, de Ricci, Duff, Peddie, Wing, Petzholdt, Pollard and Redgrave, Proctor, and many others. Bibliographical Manuals: There are a few useful bibliographical manuals such as Norman A. Binn's An Introduction to Historical Bibliography (2nd ed., London: Association of Assistant Librarians, 1962) which has been prepared specifically for the Final Exam but is a useful, if traditional summary of the history of the book. Staveley in his review {Library Review, Spring, 1963, pp. 46-47) criticizes this work in that it "repeats the old facts in the old order and little connection between the headed para- graphs/' Another work is Arundell Esdaile's Esdaile's Manual of Bibliography (revised edition by Roy Stokes, New York: Barnes and Noble, 1967) , which is also concerned with the parts of a book, ma- 47
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP terials used, typography, illustration, binding, collation, and a separate unit on bibliographical tools. E. W. Padwick's Bibliographical Method: An Introductory Survey (Cambridge: Clark, Ltd., 1969) is an "at- tempt to survey the methods used in analytical and descriptive bibliog- raphy" and is intended primarily for students of librarianship. Derek Williamson's Historical Bibliography (Hamden: Archon Books, 1967) is a review of the "rich literature available" with some brief comments. General Surveys of Books and Printing: It seems unfortunate to begin this unit with a work which must be strongly criticised. The reason it is listed here at all is because it is still quite popular, frequently in bibliographies, and usually without any mention of its weaknesses. I am referring to Svend Dahl's History of the Book (2nd ed., Metuchen: The Scarecrow Press, 1968). This is a chronological survey of the book from antiquity to modern times. Al- though it is a compact overview, it is filled with errors. Robert Harían in his review {Library journal, October 15, 1968, p. 3763) refers to Dahl as a "minefield of errors" and "so encumbered with mistakes that it cannot be seriously considered for use in the classroom or at the reference desk." Harían regretted that the publisher has been indiffer- ent to its editorial responsibility in undertaking a major revision. He feels this is unfortunate since "The author's observations are perceptive; his style is lucid and entertaining; his attempt to interrelate the various aspects in the development and production of the book and to place these in a general historical context is impressively successful." If Dahl is used at all it must be used with caution. Other general surveys include an overview of the book from its origin to modern times in the "Que Sais-Je Series" Albert Labarre's Histoire du Livre (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1970). A popular work explaining how "the book is written, published, printed, sold, and read" is Helmut Lehmann-Haupt's The Life of the Book (New York: Abelard-Schuman, cl957) which is an introductory work useful for the general reader. An attractive work is Norma Levarie's The Art and History of Books (New York: Heinemann, 1968) which presents the "panorama of fine books from their earliest history to the present day." This work attempts to "trace the history of book design and format against a background of the changing patrons and producers of books, the move- ments of social and political history, the state of the arts, the growth and conflicts of religion, the fresh contacts of trade, and the develop- 48
Teaching the History of Books and Printing (Part I) ments of technology/' An enjoyable and readable text and the use of 176 facsimile pages cover the "panorama," in a chronological order. The only unfortunate feature is the lack of color plates especially for the medieval manuscripts, but still this is a wonderful addition to the ever-growing library of books on books. Any study of graphic communication in our present world would be incomplete without mention of Marshall McLuhan's The Gutenberg Galaxy: The Making of Typographic Man (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1964) . Long a standard text in library schools is Douglas C. McMurtrie's The Book: The Story of Printing and Bookmaking (New York: Ox- ford University, cl943) which is still a useful and readable introduc- tion to the history of books, covering from primitive human records to modern times. This is the result of an attempt by McMurtrie to revise The Golden Book which he felt had a number of defects, did not reveal new knowledge in the field, and in which he repeated accepted stories regarding certain events which a wider reading of the scientific liter- ature had shown to be false. McMurtrie was a prolific author on the book including a large number of pamphlets. The last work to be included in this listing of the general surveys is a popularly written work which is part of the "Pleasures and Treas- ures" series by Alan G. Thomas Fine Books (New York: Putnam's Sons, 1967). This work covers four broad topics: "Manuscripts," "Early Printing," "English Books with Coloured Plates, 1790-1837," and "Private Presses." It is a worthwhile work although it is more like four separate monographs rather than a survey. Illustrated with color and black and white plates, which in some cases are poor. Thomas is a past president of the British Antiquarian Booksellers' Association and an antiquarian bookseller in London. General Surveys of the History of the Printed Book: Some of the older general surveys of books and printing are still useful and of historical interest including: James Watson's History of the Art of Printing (1713; Reprint- Gregg, 1965) ; Philip Luckombe's The History and Art of Printing (1771; Reprint- Gregg, 1965); C. H. Timperley's A Dictionary of Printers and Printing, with the Progress of Literatures Ancient and Modern (London, 1838 with a revised edi- tion appearing in 1842) ; R. A. Peddie's Printing: A Short History of the Art (London: Grafton, 1912) ; A. W. Pollard's Fine Books (Lon- don: Methuen, 1912); Stanley Morison and Holbrook Jackson's A 49
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP Brief Survey of Printing History and Practices (London: Fleuron, 1923) ; John Clyde Oswald's A History of Printing: Its Development through Five Hundred Years (New York: Library Press, 1928). A most prolific author of books about books was William Dana Orcutt and his works are still of interest: The Art of the Book (1914), In Quest of the Perfect Book (1926, reprinted in 1970 by Books for Libraries Press), The Kingdom of Books (1927), The Book in Italy (1928) ; Master Makers of the Book (1928), and The Magic of the Book (1930). Laurence Wroth's "A History of the Printed Book" which appeared as the third issue of The Dolphin magazine in 1938 is still one of the best general surveys; Harry G. Aldis' compact survey of the printed book from its origins to modern books is The Printed Book (2nd ed.) and brought up-to-date by John Carter and E. Z. Crutchley, (Cambridge: The University Press, 1941) with some of Aldis' "vigorous and characteristic expressions of his own taste" left in this new edition; and the last item in Frederick Harrison's A Book About Books (London: Murray, 1943). Some of the more recent surveys of the printed book includes: Stan- ley Morison's Four Centuries of Fine Printing (4th ed., New York: Barnes and Noble, I960) which is actually a volume "of reproductions of pages and title-pages from books composed in the 'roman' form of letter, immediately related to that used by printers today." Probably one of the most useful and popular paperbacks is S. H. Steinberg's Five Hundred Years of Printing (2nd ed., Baltimore: Pen- guin Books, 1961) which expresses the author's concept that the his- tory of printing is an "integral part of the general history of civiliza- tion." His useful synthesis is expressed in his belief that printing has been 'the principal vehicle for the conveyance of ideas during the past five hundred years . . . and often penetrates almost every sphere of human activity." Berry and Poole feel that Steinberg's work is "re- freshingly free of dead antiquarianism." One of the most recent works is Warren Chappell's A Short History of the Printed Word (New York: A. A. Knopf, 1971) intended for laymen. To Chappell "printing is a medium" and he views the "history of printing as a combination of the story of man and materials and the story of the development of the art itself." His work examines "the most significant developments and influences which have shaped the course of the printed word during the past five centuries." Filled with excellent and useful illustration in a delightful and readable book. An excellent introduction to the history of books and printing. 50
Teaching the History of Books and Printing (Part I) General Works on Book Production and Bookmaking: Technical manuals and printer's guides can be of historical value in teaching books and printing since these works deal with various aspects of printing from the practical point of view. Some of these have re- cently been reprinted and include: Joseph Moxon's Mechanick Exercises on the Whole Art of Printing (1683-1684) (Published by Oxford Uni- versity Press in 1958 with a 2nd edition in 1962 edited by Davis and Carter); Joseph Smith's The Printer's Grammar (London, 1775); Caleb Stower's The Printer's Grammar: or Introduction to the Art of Printing (London: Crosby, 1808); John Johnson's Typographia, or the Printer's Instructor (London: Longman's, 1824 in 2 vols.) ; T. C. Hansard's Typographica (London: Baldwin, Cradock and Joy, 1825) ; William Savage's A Dictionary of the Art of Printing (London: Long- man's, 1841) and J. Luther Ringwalt's American Encyclopedia of Printing (Philadelphia: Menamin and Ringwalt, 1871). A different approach is the work by Holbrook Jackson The Printing of Books (2nd ed., London: Cassell, 1947) which studies the art of printing from the point of view of the readers and authors rather than that of the printers. The literature on book production is also most extensive and the fol- lowing are a few which might be useful for a general introduction for students in what can become a highly technical and specialized field. Edmund C. Arnold's Ink on Paper: A Handbook of the Graphic Arts (New York: Harper and Row, cl963) is a general guide to book production. He presents a brief historical introduction on written lan- guage and the Latin alphabet, followed by chapters on printing types, printer's terms, layout, letterpress, intaglio, the fine arts, paper, ink, the bindery, and planning printing. The glossary is most useful. One of the best and most easily understood books in this category is Marshall Lee's Bookmaking: The Illustrated Guide to Design and Production (New York: Bowker, 1965). This book is an "outline of practical information and procedure for those engaged in planning and producing books" but its presentation is so clear and well-presented that it is also of value to those who wish to have an idea and under- standing of book design and production. It presents information on bookmaking as a profession, basic knowledge about methods, materials and equipment, the procedures of bookmaking, and reference material including a bibliography and other useful information. Other books in this category include: Hugh Williamson's Methods of Book Design: The Practice of an Industrial Craft (2nd ed., Oxford: 51
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP Oxford University Press, 1966) ; Adrian Wilson's The Design of Books (New York: Reinhold, cl967) which deals with contemporary book design and production: Sean Jennett's The Making of Books (4th ed., New York: Praeger, 1967) which together with Marshall Lee's work is extremely helpful in this rather technical area. Jennett combines the historical aspects with present-day techniques and procedures. His work is aimed at enabling the "reader to enjoy books with a more under- standing eye and wider and deeper appreciation" as a result of know- ing how books are made and how they are designed; Dorothy A. Har- rop's Modern Book Production (Hamden: Archon Books, 1968) is a "simple outline of all the major modern processes involved in the mak- ing of books"; Arthur T. Turnbull and Russell N. Baird present an up-to-date work reflecting the technological revolution in their The Graphics of Communication: Typography-Layout-Design (2nd ed., New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1968) which discusses "electrostatic printing, computerized typesetting, facsimile transmission via telephone, and the pronounced shift to offset lithography as a printing method." The authors discuss the "theoretical and practical methods of communication and reflects the increased awareness of the significance of communication on all facts of life." A unique approach to book design is seen in John Lewis' Anatomy of Printing: The In- fluences of Art and History on Design (New York: Watson-Guptill, 1970) which studies printing "as a reflection of the art, architecture, and fashion of its time, showing the fluctuations of style", and Ruari McLean's Modern Book Design from William Morris to the Present Day (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1959). An attempt to present some of the background and current problems reflecting the tremendous changes presently going on in printing is studied in Roy Brewer's An Approach to Print: A Basic Guide to the Printing Processes (London: Blandford Press, 1971). He discusses the problems of technical change which has brought "as well as challenge, uncertainty." The author presents information from which intelligent deductions can be made regarding "the changing scene of printing." Paper and Papermaking: A useful general source is E. J. Labarre's Dictionary and Encyclo- pedia of Paper and Paper-Making (2nd ed., Amsterdam: Swets and Zeitlinger, 1952). There are a great many books on handmade paper and papermaking 52
Teaching the History of Books and Printing (Part I) which would be helpful in presenting to the student some of the his- torical developments of papermaking as well as the techniques of making paper. These include: Andre Blum's On the Origin of Paper (New York: Bowker, 1934) which although out-of-date is still a use- ful brief study (79 pages) regarding paper and its invention, influ- ence and use in Europe, with brief comments on its invention in China. Any listing of papermaking would be incomplete without mention of Dard Hunter. His works are numerous in a lifetime devoted to the study of paper. Several of his works are now extremely expensive collector's items, but his two standard and more popular studies in- clude: Papermaking: The History and Technique of an Ancient Craft (1942 and 1947) and My Life With Paper: An Autobiography (1958) both published by A. A. Knopf of New York. A work useful for people who are unfamiliar with the paper industry and want a brief general picture of papermaking operations should read Edwin Suter- meister's The Story of Papermaking (Boston: Warren Co., 1954) and for an understanding of hand papermaking and its relationship to art there is John Mason's Paper Making as an Artistic Craft (London: Faber and Faber, 1959). More technical aspects of papermaking can be examined in: H. Hardman and E. J. Cole's Paper-Making Practice (Manchester: Man- chester University Press, I960) a practical guide for people in the trade; Robert A. Higham's A Handbook of Papermaking (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1963) is a rather technical study of the sci- ence and technology of papermaking; F. H. Norris' Paper and Paper Making (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1952) for the papermaking trade, and of particular interest for a detailed and well-illustrated ac- count of machines used in papermaking is R. H. Clapperton's The Paper-Making Machine: Its Invention, Evaluation, and Development. (Oxford: Pergamon Press, c 1967). The standard work on water-marks is C. M. Briquet's Les Filigranes (New York: Hacker Art Books, reprint, 1966) which is a monumental four-volume dictionary and identification source. If the library can afford it the publications of the Paper Publications Society of Helversum, Holland, are most helpful and authoritative sources for any in-depth study of papermaking and water-marks. A most useful catalog was published by the Library of Congress in conjunction with an exhibition held there in 1968 Papermaking: Art and Craft (Washington, D.C.: Library of Congress, 1968) which traces the spread of papermaking through text, maps, and excellent 53
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP illustrations. A brief, readable, and most useful introduction to the history and techniques of papermaking. Anyone interested in papermaking might want to write for their descriptive booklet as well as a possible visit to The Institute of Paper Chemistry of Appleton, Wisconsin, which houses the "Dard Hunter Paper Museum." The Museum was established in 1939 as a combina- tion museum and library "on the ancient craft of papermaking and promoting an understanding of present-day paper and its relation to the Graphic Arts/' The Museum contains all kinds of exhibit material on all aspects of papermaking throughout the world. Bookbinding: A helpful bibliography on bookbinding can be found in A. R. A. Hobson's The Literature of Bookbinding (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1954) which was prepared for the National Book League. Historical studies on bookbinding include: Edith Diehl's Bookbind- ing: Its Background and Technique (1946, reprinted by the Kennikat Press in 1965). This is the most extensive study of bookbinding in all phases of its history and techniques. One of the series of the Victoria and Albert Museum "Illustrated Booklets" is a brief introduction to the "development of bookbinding design" by John P. Harthan Book- bindings (2nd ed., London: Her Majesty's Stationery Office, 1961) containing 79 illustrations of various bookbindings. Inexpensive and most worthwhile for an introductory survey. Although exhibition catalogs can be useful they are often so highly specialized as to limit their use. This is not the case with The History of Bookbinding, 525- 1950 A.D. An Exhibition Held at the Baltimore Museum of Art, No- vember 12, 1957 to ]anuary 12, 1958 (Baltimore: Walters Art Gal- lery, 1957) which presents the "story of the artistic covering of the codex." Contains useful descriptive comments and numerous illustra- tions. The history of bookbinding in America has been collected in a work which came out in 1941 and has recently been reprinted, in 1967, with supplementary material. Bookbinding in America: Three Essays (New York: Bowker, 1967) contains "Early American Bookbinding by Hand" by Hannah French, "The Rise of American Edition Book- binding" by Joseph E. Rogers and "On the Rebinding of Old Books" by Helmut Lehmann-Haupt. Bowker felt that this 1941 work contained "a good deal of information and ideas not repeated, expanded or superseded by any of the later publications" and based on this decided 54
Teaching the History of Books and Printing (Part I) to reprint rather than prepare a new edition. As previously mentioned the editors and authors were asked "to add a brief supplement report- ing new developments and listing new publications in their respective fields/' Technical manuals for do-it-yourselfers, handbooks for professional bookbinders, and guides on how a book is bound, are all helpful in explaining and teaching the techniques of either hand or machine bookbinding. This literature ranges from very simple beginner's guides to more complicated and technical works. Some of the useful works in this area are: John Corderoy's Bookbinding for Beginners (New York: Watson-Guptill, 1967) which is an attractive booklet presenting the steps, tools, equipment, materials, and stages in the binding of books. Douglas Cockerell's Bookbinding, and the Care of Books: A Textbook for Bookbinders and Librarians (5th ed., London: Pitman, 1953) is helpful as a guide to the care and preservation of books. Lionel S. Darley's Introduction to Bookbinding (London: Faber and Faber, 1965) is an amateur's guide to hand bookbinding. J. S. Hewitt-Bates has frequently revised his Bookbinding (8th ed., Leicester: The Dryad Press, 1967) which is intended as a practical work written primarily to present in an "orderly sequence what it is necessary to know of the processes of the craft of Bookbinding." Numerous illustrations and photographs of step-by-step procedures are clearly presented. Pauline Johnson discusses the basic principles of bookbinding but is also con- cerned with its artistic merits in Creative Bookbinding (Seattle: Uni- versity of Washington Press, cl963). A work with a more technical and vocational approach is Kenneth Perry and Clarence T. Babb's The Binding of Books (Bloomington: McKnight and McKnight, 1967). The last in this group is a work which is primarily a text used for the teaching of bookbinding, Laurence Town's Bookbinding by Hand for Students and Craftsmen (2nd ed., London: Faber and Faber, 1963). It is too bad that the explanatory text used in the line drawings is not clearer and easier to read, because otherwise this is a most practical work. Book Illustration: General histories on book illustration include David Bland's A History of Book Illustration: The Illuminated Manuscript and the Printed Book (2nd revised ed., Berkeley: University of California Press, 1969) which is a profusely illustrated work in black and white and color, of the beginning of illustration in roll and codex, medieval 55
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP illumination in the west, oriental illumination and illustration, and illustration from the introduction of printing to the present. The first edition appeared in 1958 and this new edition has brought the ma- terial up-to-date. Contains extensive bibliographies. Much less detailed is David Bland's The Illustration of Books (3rd ed., London: Faber and Faber, 1962) which is a useful beginning work. The book is il- lustrated with 110 black and white plates. The arrangement of this book is also chronological and examines illustration before the birth of printing, and from the 15th through 20th centuries, with a separate chapter devoted to "Children's Books." The second part of this work deals with the processes and their application. Bland's brief introduc- tion "What is Illustration?" is most worthwhile reading for class dis- cussion. Andre Lejard's The Art of the French Book from Early Manuscripts to the Present Time (London: Paul Elek, 1947) although it traces the evolution of the illustrated book in just one country, France, is still fas- cinating reading. The author feels that the art of the book in France "is the inevitable triumph of illustration. Here a finely produced book and an illustrated book are synonomous." Frank Weitenkampf s The Illustrated Book (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1938) is still a basic work in the history of book il- lustration. The emphasis is on the medium - woodcuts, engravings on copper and steel, etching and aquatint, lithography, and wood engrav- ing - rather than a strict chronological survey. Black and white illus- trations are used throughout. Written in a scholarly yet readable style and although the period of the past 30 years would have to be supple- mented with other books, this is still a useful chronicle of book illus- tration. A useful general survey of graphic arts is James Cleaver's A History of Graphic Art (New York: Philosophical Library, 1963) which, with Bland, is a most practical overview of the historical development of graphic art tracing its growth from ancient Egyptian tomb paintings to the contemporary scene. Cleaver relates the history of illustration as a narrative form examining the roots of book illustration, the medieval world and its illustrated and illuminated books, and the development of graphic art from the invention of printing with movable type, through the woodcuts, copper plate engravings, etchings, popular prints, the English sporting print, Victorian book illustration, lith- ography, the etching revival, the poster, private presses, and contem- porary graphic art. The author includes 107 illustrations, in black and 56
Teaching the History of Books and Printing (Part I) white, most of them rather small and not the best reproduction. Useful appendix with a description of the methods of printmaking and a glos- sary of terms. Educational Productions, Ltd. in Great Britain has a series of filmstrips based on this book with ' 'notes" by Cleaver. Books dealing with the history and techniques of specific medium are found in Arthur M. Hind's An Introduction to a History of Wood- cut (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1935; Reprint, New York: Dover, 1963, 2 vols.) and his A History of Engraving and Etching (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1923; Reprint, New York: Dover, 1963) . Hind was Late Keeper of Prints and Drawings in the British Museum. In the history of woodcut he discusses processes and materials in an histori- cal survey of woodcuts from the 15th through the 20th century. A good part of the work is devoted to the woodcut artists of the 15 th century. Each unit has an extensive bibliography with five appendices on "Designers and Engravers of Woodcuts," "Printers and Publishers of Books," "Books Illustrated with Woodcuts," "Prints Mentioned or Reproduced," and "Subjects Discussed in the Text." The work on en- graving and etching deals with the history of engraving in intaglio and is limited to that method. Hind discusses the various processes in an excellent history of engraving and etching from the origin in the 15th century down to 1914. It gives biographical information of various engravers and etchers which although brief fits into his "descriptive survey of the history of engraving in metal throughout the various centuries and schools." This work also contains a "Classified List of Engravers," "General Bibliography," and an "Index of Engravers and Individual Bibliography." Both of these works by Hind are amazing in the wealth of material which has been included. D. P. Bliss' A History of Wood Engraving (1928; Reprint, Spring Books, 1964) shows the wide variety of work which was being done particularly in the 15th and 16th centuries. More contemporary are the studies of book illustration by R. Mar- garet Slythe's The Art of Illustration, 1750-1900 (London: The Li- brary Association, 1970) in her brief study of the processes which were used and the artists involved in book illustration during these 150 years. She studies woodcut, wood engraving, etching, engraving, and lith- ography with illustrations in black and white and one color frontispiece of Blake's engraving for the Book of Job. Diana Klemin's The Illustrated Book: Its Art and Craft (New York: Clarkson N. Potter, cl970) is a series of brief comments combined with illustrations on 48 contemporary illustrators including: Ardiz- 57
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP zone, Baskin, Chappell, Dali, Dwiggins, Kredel, Kent, Pitz, Ward, Wyeth, Wilson, etc. The comments deal with style, techniques, and the work of these illustrators. A useful survey of contemporary book il- lustration. Two works on prints and printmakers include Norman R. Eppink's 101 Prints: The History and Techniques of Printmaking (Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1971) which is a beautifully produced book giving 101 processes which are described in detail with an accom- panying illustration to show each process. This provides an excellent insight into the creative work and the tremendous variety of print- making processes. Herman J. Wechsler's Great Prints and Printmakers (Bentveld: Harry N. Abrams, 1967) is an oversize tome which explains how fine prints are made and studies the outstanding printmakers describing "the different mediums through which they have made their creative statements." Introductory chapter is a simple, clear, and informative overview of graphic art processes. Contains 100 full page illustrations most in full color. The role of the graphic artist and book illustrator in society is examined in: Frank and Dorothy Getlein's The Bite of the Print: Satire and Irony in Woodcuts, Engravings, Etchings, Lithographs and Seri- graphs (New York: Clarkson N. Potter, 1963) which is a fascinating work examining the social commentary of graphic artists from the 15th through 20th centuries. The introductory chapter on "The Bite and the Bitten" is most enjoyable. The authors examine the beginning of satire and irony in graphic arts as it reflects the artists' conception of love and death. The great graphic artists are examined: Diirer, Rembrandt, Callot, Piranesi, Hogarth, Goya, Daumier, Rouault, Koll- witz, Nolde, Munch, Grosz, Picasso, March, Sloan, and Benton. M. Dorothy George's Hogarth to Cruikshank: Social Change in Graphic Satire (New York: Walker, 1967) is a commentary on "graphic social satire before the days of Punch and illustrated journalism, when prints were engraved and sold separately." Looks at England in the 18th century and the foibles and follies of men are depicted in the caricatures and satire of the world of art, letters, the church, the aca- demic world, law, and medicine. The political world received much of the visual satire of that time. Ralph E. Shikes' The Indignant Eye: The Artist as Social Critic in Prints and Drawings from the Fifteenth Cen- tury to Picasso (Boston: Beacon Press, cl969) is another book which 58
Teaching the History of Books and Printing (Part I) shows the relevance of graphic arts as a powerful tool for social and political satire. A technical work dealing with "the theoretical, contractural and technical aspects of illustration" is examined by Lynton Lamb in Draw- ing for Illustration (London: Oxford University Press, 1962). This is a "statement of the illustrator's main problems and of how he can tackle them in his essential dealings with authors, publishers, block- makers, and printers/' This is really a guide for the illustrator which examines the illustrative idea, pictorial imagination, methods of in- vention, the author, publisher, and illustrator. Includes a discussion of illustration for magazines, cartoons, and advertising. Also examines the various methods of reproduction, has a glossary of terms, and a bibliography. Useful for the practitioner and for those who would like to know more about what is involved in illustration. Two practical guides to graphic reproduction processes are Felix Brunner's A Handbook of Graphic Reproduction Processes (New York: Hastings, 1962) and Harold Curwen's Processes of Graphic Re- production in Printing (4th ed., London: Faber and Faber, 1966). Curwen's work is of value because he explains the processes within their historical context. An essential work for understanding the basic methods used by book illustrators and graphic artists. Type and Typography: Many works have been written on the basic principles of typography including John R. Biggs' An Approach to Type (2nd ed., London: Blandford Press, 1961) and his Basic Typography (New York: Wat- son-Guptill, 1968) which is a study of the principles, mechanics, and practice of typography. Oliver Simon's Introduction to Typography (2nd ed., Baltimore: Penguin Books, 1963) was edited by David Bland who attempts to give alternatives and additions to provide this book with more contemporary use. A brief but useful history of type from case to computer is presented by James Moran in The Composition of Reading Matter (London: Wace and Co., Ltd., cl965.) The effect of modern day technology of typography and printing is seen in the highly technical proceedings of the International Computer Typesetting Conference held at the University of London and printed in Advances of Computer Typesetting (London: The Institute of Printing, cl967). The study of type styles is available through numerous works in- cluding: Kenneth Day who edited Book Typography, 1815-1965, In 59
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP Europe and the United States of America (Chicago: University of Chi- cago Press, 1965) which is a series of essays by different authors of various aspects and developments of typography in Belgium, France, Germany, England, Italy, the Netherlands, Switzerland, and the United States. Harry Carter in A View of Early Typography Up to About 1600 (Oxford: The Clarendon Press, 1969) examines the technicalities of type, diversity of letter-forms in print, the establishment of common idioms, Latin and vernacular, and the history of typefounding and punchcutting. Frank Denham has added his contribution in The Shap- ing of Our Alphabet: A Study of Changing Type Styles (New York: Knopf, 1955) . A study of "the history of type faces, and of the histori- cal, personal, economic, industrial and other factors which determined the development of types in certain ways at certain times" can be found in Geoffrey Dowding's An Introduction to the History of Print- ing Types (London: Wace, 1961). Another examination of this same aspect of typography is R. S, Hutchins' The Western Heritage of Type Design (London: Cory, Adams and Mackay, cl963) which is a "treas- ury of currently available typefaces demonstrating the historical de- velopment and diversification of form of printed letters selected and arranged with an introduction, commentaries and reference appen- dices." A. F. Johnson's Type Designs: Their History and Development (3rd ed., London: Graf ton, 1967) and Daniel Berkeley Updike's Printing Types: The History, Form and Use (2nd ed., Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1937, 2 vols.) are both useful. Updike's work is most detailed and still the standard work on the history of type. Stanley Morison and Kenneth Day's The Typographic Book, 1450-1935 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1963) is a visual presentation of typography through five centuries, with excellent il- lustrations. Of particular value in teaching is the oversize book by James Sutton and Alan Bartram An Atlas of Type forms (New York: Hastings House, 1968). This is a visual presentation of "the main changes in type forms over 500 years of printing." This work de- liberately uses illustrations rather than by explaining in words since it is the authors' belief that this is the best and only way to present this kind of material. A fascinating work which is a must for a study of typography. Manuals, encyclopedias and handbooks of type faces are endless but of use in a books and printing course would be W. P. Jaspert, W. Turner Berry, and A. F. Johnson's Encyclopedia of Type Faces (4th ed., New York: Barnes and Noble, 1970) which presents the historical development of writing and typography, as well as practical 60
Teaching the History of Books and Printing (Part I) considerations about type. This is of value since it reveals the evolu- tion of "typography as an extension of writing/' The Alphabet and Writing: The literature on the alphabet and writing covers a wide variety of areas such as palaeography, calligraphy, decipherment, archaeology, the book hands, signs, symbols, script, lettering, inscriptions, etc. The following have been selected, somewhat arbitrarily, to give some idea as to the variety of materials which are available. Since there is much overlapping it was decided to present this unit alphabetically by au- thor's surname and let the reader select those which relate to specialized areas of interest or need. D. M. Anderson wrote The Art of Written Forms: The Theory and Practice of Calligraphy (New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, cl969) which is a comprehensive work in- tended for student or professional who is interested in examining "the history and theory of writing, as well as to work creatively with pen and brush and with types." This is an historical treatment with many illustrations which the author feels are vital "since writing is exper- ienced visually," and there is no way to learn about its "historical role in communication except to see examples in reproductions." An in- triguing booklet was prepared as a catalog for a UNESCO exhibition entitled The Art of Writing: An Exhibition of Fifty Panels (Paris: UNESCO, 1965). Edward Clodd has written the useful The Story of the Alphabet (revised edition, New York: Appleton, 1938; Reprint - Detroit: Gale, 1970). For a fascinating examination of the work of scholars "who searched for and discovered lost manuscripts and who interpreted and deciphered them" read Leo Deul's Testaments of Time: The Search for Lost Manuscripts and Records (New York: Knopf, 1965). This work concentrates on activities in this area since the Renaissance, reflecting an increased interest in the search for manu- scripts which he believes reflects our greater concern about the past. He states that this work "parallels other antiquarian pursuits in our race to recover the fruits of human ingenuity and skill." He recalls the talent, patience, and detection ability of the people who have been involved in what might be called the "archaeology of books." The noted authority in the area of the alphabet and writing is David Dir- inger who has written a great deal including The Alphabet: A Key to the History of Mankind (3rd ed., London: Hutchinson, 1968, 2 vols.) which is "an introduction to the fascinating subject of the history of the alphabet." Volume 1 contains the text which is divided into non- alphabetic and alphabetic scripts, with Volume 2 being devoted en- 61
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP tirely to the illustrations. One of the most detailed standard sources. The other earlier work by Diringer is Writing (New York: Praeger, 1962) in which he presents a survey of the historical development of writing, with text and illustrations, in a work rather similar to the other but written in less technical style. Similar to Deuel is Ernst Doblhofer's Voices in Stone: The Decipherment of Ancient Scripts and Writings, translated by Mervyn Savill, (New York: Viking, 1961). This is an informative work covering "the procedure followed in the decipherment of several important scripts and the interpretation of languages, presented in an intelligible manner, following the course of the investigators, step by step." Also examines the people who de- ciphered these ancient languages and provides the reader with an in- sight into the working methods of these scholars and shows their suc- cesses and failures. Two works of Alfred Fairbank are useful. In I960 a revised edition of the 1949 edition of his A Book of Scripts (Balti- more: Penguin Books, I960) was published. This contains a 30 page historical sketch which studies pens, legibility, economy and speed, and calligraphy. Contains a bibliography and 64 illustrations. The other work by Fairbank is his The Story of Handwriting: Origins and De- velopment (New York: Watson-Guptill, cl970) a fairly recent addi- tion to the literature presenting a brief overview. I. J. Gelb's A Study of Writing (revised ed., Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1963) was first published in 1952. Gelb is a noted scholar of the Hittite civilization. This is probably one of the best studies of the historical development of writing available in English, together with Diringer. A paperback edition is also available. Cyrus H. Gordon has written a popular book Forgotten Scripts: The Story of Decipherment (London: Thames and Hudson, cl968) which tells of the mystery of these in- scriptions and of the people who worked to unlock their secrets. Con- tains information on codes and cyphers, the decipherment of Egyptian, Old Persian, Sumero-Akkadian, Cuneiform, Hieroglyphic, Hittite, Ugaritic, and Aegean. The story of the work and research of these scholars makes exciting reading. Another popularly written book is Keith Gordon Irwin's The Romance of Writing: From Egyptian Hiero- glyphics to Modern Letters ; Numbers, and Signs (New York: Viking, cl956). In 1935 Die Schrift in Verhangenheit und Gegenwart was published with a second edition in 1958. This work by Hans Jensen was translated by George Unwin appearing in a new edition in 1969 under the title Sign, Symbol, and Script: An Account of Man's Efforts to Write (New York: Putnam's Sons, 1969) . A useful brief illustrated history of handwriting and its medieval tradition is studied in E. A. 62
Teaching the History of Books and Printing (Part I) Lowe's Handwriting: Our Medieval Legacy (Rome: Edizioni di Storia e Letteratura, 1969) . Of particular value is the translation given for each illustration which can be most useful in demonstrating the prob- lems of reading ancient texts. Henri-Jean Martin's Le Livre et la Civilisation Ecrite (Paris: École Nationale Supérieure de Bibliothé- caires, 1968) is a well-organized and perceptive survey of the book and the written word. A. C. Moorhouse's The Triumph of the Alpha- bet: A History of Writing (New York: Schuman, cl953) is aimed at showing that "the apparently simple act of writing, and especialy of writing in an alphabetic manner, is one of the world's most original and important intellectual discoveries." This is a useful introduction to a complicated topic and one which it is rather difficult to simplify for general understanding. Alexander Nesbitt's The History and Tech- nique of Lettering (New York: Dover, 1957) is a summary of de- velopments from capital to half-uncial and discusses how the form of the letter was, in part, determined by the position of the pen. Oscar Ogg's The 26 Letters (New York: Crowell, 1961) is a popular in- troduction to the history of letters from pre-history to the present. Profusely illustrated with drawings and examples of various forms of letters. An excellent beginning work on the topic. Jan Tschichold's An Illustrated History of Writing and Lettering (New York: Columbia University Press, 1948) is a book of illustrations giving examples of historical developments of writing in a brief but useful work. Has a chart on the "Pedigree of the European Styles of Writing" that is ex- cellent for a visual presentation. The contributions of the Chinese to the history of books is related in Tsuen-Hsuin Tsien's Written on Bam- boo and Silk: The Beginnings of Chinese Books and Inscriptions (Chi- cago: University of Chicago Press, 1962). A "masterly summary of the development of Latin palaeography" can be found in B. L. Ulman's Ancient Writing and Its Influence (Cambridge: M.I.T. Press, 1969) while Ullman examines the humanistic writing in his The Origin and Development of Humanistic Scripts (Rome: Edizioni di Storia e Let- teratura, I960) . Another look at this theme is James Wardrop's The Script of Humanism (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1963). The Book in the Ancient World: Closely related to the previous unit is this listing of the hand-pro- duced book of the ancient world. The most useful is David Diringer's The Hand-Produced Book (New York: Philosophical Library, 1953). Although now 19 years old still one of the most detailed examinations on the early forms of the book, with emphasis on the ancient world. 63
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP Diringer examines "The Book in Embryo," "Earliest Systems of Writ- ing," "Clay Tablets," "Papyrus Rolls," "Parchment" with a look at the inks, pens, and writing tools used in the production of these works. Numerous black and white illustrations elucidate the text. This work is so detailed that it might discourage the beginner but it is certainly a must for anyone who wishes to study the variety and extent of the production of the hand-produced book of both the ancient and medi- eval world. A few items deal with the world of books in antiquity including Frederic G. Kenyon's Books and Readers in Ancient Greece and Rome (2nd ed., Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1951) ; H. L. Pinner's brief World of Books in Classical Antiquity (2nd ed., Leiden: Sijthoff, 1958) ; George H. Putnam's Authors and their Public in Ancient Times (3rd ed., New York: Cooper Square Publishers, reprint of the 1896 edi- tion) ; E. G. Turner's Greek Papyri: An Introduction (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1968) and one of the few works which studies the early period from the viewpoint of illustration is Kurt Weitzmann's Illustrations in Roll and Codex: A Study of the Origin and Method of Text Illustration (Princeton: Princeton University Press, originally published in 1947 with a second printing, with addenda, in 1970) . Edward M. Thompson has produced two standard works on the history and progress of Greek and Latin palaeography in its literary aspect in his A Handbook of Greek and Latin Palaeography (1902; Reprint, Chicago: Argonaut Inc., 1966) and Introduction to Greek and Latin Palaeography (1912; Reprint, New York: Burt Franklin, n.d.). Up to the time of their original publication these were the only two books of their kind in the English language. Rather technical and definitely a scholarly study. Another rich source of material are the numerous translations, stud- ies, and scholarly investigations into specific texts of the ancient world with translations of these works. These are definitely for advanced students and are helpful in any in-depth study of this period. Two books which can be used for general background information of the Sumero-Akkadian culture in E. Cheira's They Wrote on Clay: The Babylonian Tablets Speak Today (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1938), and Leonard Cottrell's The Quest for Sumer (New York: Putnam's Sons, cl965). The Book in the Medieval World: Within recent years there has been a renewed interest and a new look at the medieval manuscript giving rise to research and new stud- 64
Teaching the History of Books and Printing (Part I) ies in this area and especially a new interpretation of the book of the medieval world. Earlier writing generally placed the medieval manu- script among the "minor arts" but this has changed and the painting of the middle ages as revealed in the pages of the manuscript codex is emerging as a major phase of the history of graphic communication and art. With this development there has been an accompanying body of literature which again has necessitated the selection of only a few of the ever-growing items on this subject. Two books are useful for presentation of the relationship of the scribes and makers of the illuminated manuscripts to the transmission of knowledge. The classic work is George H. Putnam's Books and Their Makers in the Middle Ages (1896-1897; Reprint, Hillary House, 1962) in which he studies "the condition of the production and dis- tribution of literature from the Fall of the Roman Empire to the close of the 17th century." L. D. Reynolds and N. G. Wilson's Scribes and Scholars: A Guide to the Transmission of Greek and Latin Literature (London: Oxford University Press, 1968) in a 185 page paperback provides a "simple introduction for beginners to the processes by which Greek and Latin literature has been preserved." Although intended primarily for students of Greek and Latin this is also of interest to students of biblical scholarship, cultural history, and library science. A must for an understanding of ancient and medieval manuscripts and their importance. There are a number of general overviews on the history of the medieval manuscripts: John W. Bradley 's Illuminated Manuscripts (2nd ed., London: Methuen, 1920) is still useful for its discussion of the art of illumination, vellum and other materials which were used, writing, and also examines Greek and Roman illumination, the Byzan- tine contributions, Celtic Illumination, and other schools down to il- lumination since the invention of printing with movable type. This is one of the "Little Series on Art" edited by Cyril Davenport. Of par- ticular value is an Appendix of "Manuscripts That May be Consulted as Examples" which gives the name of each manuscript, where pro- duced, where kept, and the date, as well as remarks. A. Dain's Les Manuscrits (Paris: Société d'Éditions-Les Belles-Let- tres, 1964) is a detailed study of manuscripts and the problems of copying, palaeography, history and textual matters. Primarily an anthology of illustrations P. D'Ancona and E. Aeschli- mann's The Art of Illumination: An Anthology of Manuscripts from the Sixth to the Sixteenth Century (New York: Phaidon, cl969) is useful to art students and to the persona di cultura who might find in 65
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP this work "what appeals to his taste/' The preface states that the manuscript with its miniature paintings has opened up a new world in a "knowledge of past and little known periods of artistic history." There is a brief survey of manuscript illumination, numerous color and black and white plates, as well as "Notes on the Plates" with a short bibliography and a list of collections. David Diringer's The Illuminated Book (Revised ed., New York: Praeger, cl967) is a revision of his edition of 1955. The purpose is to present a survey of the chief points in the "fascinating world of the medieval book." The work is most extensive ranging from ancient methods of book illustration in Egypt to the golden age of illumination in the last three centuries of the Middle Ages, with emphasis on its development in Italy, France, and Flanders. Numerous illustrations, a bibliography for each chapter, and a general bibliography, as well as an in-depth description of various manuscripts concentrating mainly on "the meaning of the pictures." Diringer's previously mentioned The Hand-Produced Book also discusses the Middle Ages. A worthwhile study of the medieval illuminated manuscript can be found in the popular paperback by Sabrina Mitchell Medieval Manu- script Painting (New York: Viking, 1964) . This work together with P. Francastel's Medieval Painting (New York: Dell, 1968) can be most helpful in relating the development of manuscript painting to the art of the time. J. A. Herbert's Illuminated Manuscripts (London: 1911; Reprint, New York: Burt Franklin, 1958) examines the "history of the illumina- tion of vellum manuscripts, from classical times down to the decay and virtual disuse of the art which resulted, inevitably, though not im- mediately, from the introduction of printing." Herbert examines the characteristics of each of the periods and schools in what becomes a detailed study of various manuscripts. The quality of illustration in the reprint is poor. For a worthwhile "short examination to their (manuscript) study and use" the work by Falconer Madan Books in Manuscript (Revised ed., Reprint: Haskell House, 1968) examines writing, forms of the book, history of writing, the scribes, illumination, errors of the scribes and their correction. An excellent source for any study of the work of the scribes of the medieval manuscript. An examination of the procedures used in the illumination and illustration of the medieval manuscript can be found in the new Got- tingen Model Book, edited with commentary by Helmut Lehmann- 66
Teaching the History of Books and Printing (Part I) Haupt (Columbia: University of Missouri Press, 1972). This is a 15th century illuminators manual giving directions and detailed instruction for the compounding of inks and paints, and directions for their ap- plication. The last in this group is Edith Rothe's Medieval Book Illumination in Europe: The Collections of the German Democratic Republic (New York: Norton, cl968) which is a survey of Western illuminated manu- scripts in 33 libraries and collections of archives in the German Demo- cratic Republic. The author selected 160 manuscripts which were not reproduced before and represent the "most valuable and the least known to the public." The survey revealed that there was a wide chronological range from 400 to 1600 A.D., representing "most coun- tries of Europe and a large number of schools/' The commentary on the manuscripts becomes a "short history of western manuscript il- lumination." Histories dealing with particular periods or schools might be of special interest. T. S. R. Boase's English Art, 1100-1216 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1953) is useful for a detailed examination of this period: André Grabar and Carl Nordenfalk's Early Medieval Painting from the Fourth to the Eleventh Century (Skira, 1957) is devoted to mosaics, mural painting, and book illumination from late Roman to Ottonian illumination and is profusely illustrated with ex- cellent full-color plates. The Rev. Canon F. Harrison, Chancellor and Librarian of York Minister, describes English Manuscripts of the Fourteenth Century (cl250 to 1400) (New York: The Studio Pub- lications, Inc., 1937) which is one in the "Treasures of Illumination" series with 24 full-color plates. The Gothic period is covered in D. H. Turner's Early Gothic Illuminated Manuscripts in England (Lon- don: The Trustees of the British Museum, 1965) in a brief and in- expensive pamphlet; J. Duport and C. Gnudi's Gothic Painting (Skira, 1954), and Emma Pirani's Gothic Illuminated Manuscripts (London: Hamlyn, 1970). A series of Mentor-UNESCO paperbacks are most helpful and in- expensive. Some of the books in the series includes: Czechoslovakian Miniatures from Romanesque to Gothic Manuscripts (1964); Irish Illuminated Manuscripts of the Early Christian Period (1965); and Persian Miniatures from Ancient Manuscripts (1962). These are numerous studies of individual manuscripts but these would be too extensive to mention here. Many of these works are detailed investigations of particular works, such as, The Book of 67
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP Kelts, The Utrecht Psalter, Book of Hours of the Due de Berry, The Tickhill Psalter, etc. There have been a number of facsimiles of some of the medieval books. The results have varied from excellent reproduction to very poor. In general the cost of these works has been quite high and the problem of reproducing the quality of the burnished gold "illumina- tion" has met with varying success. Sometimes the facsimiles are re- produced and sold by the owner as in the case of the delicate Hours of Jeanne d'Evreux, Queen of France (New York: Metropolitan Museum of Art, 1957) a facsimile of the work in The Cloisters. Facsimiles of medieval manuscripts has been actively pursued, in recent years, by George Braziller who has issued a series which in- cludes: The Hours of Etienne Chevalier by Jean Fouquet; The Grandes Heures of ]ean, Duke of Berry (1971); The Hours of Catherine of Cleves (1966); The Master of Mary of Burgundy's A Book of Hours, an exquisite work reproduced with close attention to color and the brilliance of the gold; Old Testament Miniatures: A Medieval Picture Book with 283 Paintings from the Creation to the Story of David and The Très Riches Heures of Jean, Duke of Berry (1969). These items are reasonably priced compared to the cost of a number of other facsimiles. Their value is enhanced by useful his- torical background, and a detailed study of each work. Origin of Printing With Movable Type and Incunabula: The following are two bibliographical studies of early printed books or incunabula: Theodore Besterman's Early Printed Books to the End of the Sixteenth Century: A Bibliography (2nd ed., revised and much enlarged, New York: Rowman and Littlefield, 1969), and Walter L. Heilbronner's Printing and the Book in Fifteenth Century England: A Bibliographical Survey (Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia, 1967) . Other studies on the incunabula period include Curt F. Buhler's The Fifteenth Century Book: The Scribes, the Printers, the Decorators (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, I960) which stresses the problems of the early printers; Pierce Butler's brief The Origin of Printing in Europe (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1940, with a second impression, 1966) ; Theodore De Vinne's The Invention of Printing . . . (New York: Hart, 1877; Reprint, Detroit: Gale, 1969) examines the controversial origin of printing from movable type; Lucien Febre and Henri-Jean Martin's L Apparition du Livre (Paris: Albin Michel, 1958) which according to Berry and Poole is 68
Teaching the History of Books and Printing (Part I) a "comfortable, orientating, and supplementing companion-piece." E. P. Goldschmidt has written two works Medieval Texts and their First Appearance in Print (New York: Bibliographic Society, 1943; Reprint, 1969) and The Printed Book of the Renaissance (2nd ed., Amsterdam: Gerard Th. van Hendren, 1966) ; Konrad Haebler's Study of Incunabula (New York: Grolier Club, 1933; Reprint, New York: Kraus Reprints, 1967) ; Robert A. Peddie's guide to the identi- fication of incunabula Fifteenth Century Books (1913; Reprint, New York: Burt Franklin, 1969) includes a list of Latin names of towns and an extensive bibliography; Helmut Lehmann-Haupt's Gutenberg and the Master of the Playing Cards (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1966), and George Parker Winship's two books: Gutenberg to Plantin: An Outline of the Early History of Printing (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1926) and his Printing in the 13th Century (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, I960). An insight into the early printed Greek books revealing the work of individuals who did much to foster the advancement of the study of ancient Greek language and literature can be found in Robert Proctor's The Printing of Greek in the 15th Century (London: Biblio- graphical Society, 1900) and Ambroise Firmin-Didot's Aide Manuce et VHellénisme a Venis e (Paris: Typographic d' Ambroise Firmin- Didot, 1875) a rather old work but a most detailed account of the work and hectic activity of the Aldine Press in the printing of ancient Greek texts. Books and Printing in Modern Europe and the World: A useful booklet which includes 28 items which were "chosen not alone because they represent textual content of prime importance, but also because their printers gave them monumental form in keep- ing with their significance as intellectual contributions" is Roland Baughman and Robert Schad's Great Books in Great Editions (Re- vised ed., San Marino: The Huntington Library, 1966). Two books dealing with the history of printing in England are Colin Clair's History of Printing in Britain (Oxford: Oxford Univer- sity Press, 1966) and Michael Twyman's unique Printing, 1770-1970: An Illustrated History of its Development and Uses in England (Lon- don: Eyre and Spottiswoode, 1970) intended for "the layman inter- ested in printing and social history, and for the student of typography and graphic design who might want to have an introduction to the history of the field in which he intends to practice." Colin Clair has edited a recent series entitled "The Spread of 69
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP Printing." The purpose of this new series is to give a "concise history of early printing in all parts of the world outside Continental Europe and Great Britain." The separate monographs are written by experts and will probably be completed in 20 volumes, equally divided be- tween countries of the Western and Eastern Hemispheres. Since this material is presently being published it is impossible to prepare a complete list but so far the following have appeared: Early Printing in Malta by Colin Clair; Early Printing in Iceland by Benedikt S. Benedikz; Early Printing in Mauritius, Reunion, Madagascar and the Seychelles by Auguste Toussaint; Early Printing in South Africa by Anna H. Smith; Early Printing in India, Pakistan, Ceylon, Burma and Thailand by Dennis E. Rhodes; Early Printing in Indonesia by H. J. DeGraff ; Early Printing in Greenland by Knud Oldendow, and Early Printing in the Caribbean by Bradford F. Swan. Other titles in this series will include: New Zealand, United States of America, Canada, Portuguese Overseas Provinces, French Overseas Provinces, Spanish Colonial Printing and Missionary Printing in the Far East. This much- needed series is certainly a major contribution to printing history. The series is published by Hertzberger and Company of Amsterdam and is distributed in North America by Abner Schram, I860 Broadway, New York City, N.Y. 10023. Much has been written about the private press movement and the following can be helpful: Colin Franklin's The Private Presses (Chester Springs: Dufour, 1969) is a brief study of the private presses with a select bibliography. This work is useful to up-date the standard study of the private presses in Will Ransom's Private Presses and their Books (1929; Reprint, Duschnes, 1963). The private presses of today are examined by Thomas Rae and Geoffrey Handley-Taylor in The Book of the Private Press: A Checklist (Greenock: Signet Press, 1958) which is a listing of all the existing private presses in the English-speaking world, and Private Press Books, Edited by R. Cave, D. Chambers, P. Hoy, and A. Baker (Pinner: Private Library Association, 1959- ) which is an annual review of the work of contemporary private presses. Books and Printing in America: In more or less a chronological development of printing in America are the following items: Laurence S. Thompson's Printing in Colonial Spanish America (Hamden: Shoe String Press, 1962); Laurence C. Wroth's ever-popular The Colonial Printer (Charlottesville; Univer- 70
Teaching the History of Books and Printing (Part I) sity Press of Virginia, 1964), which is a detailed account of the printer's activities and the general conditions under which he func- tioned, and R. G. Silver's American Printer, 1787-1823 (Charlottes- ville: University Press of Virginia, 1967) a study of the "condition of the American printer during the years 1787 to 1825" describing "his methods of work, the equipment he used and the policies by which he conducted his business/' There are a few general studies of the book in America including: Helmut Lehmann-Haupt's Book in America: A History of the Making and Selling of Books in the United States (2nd ed., New York: Bowker, 1951); Douglas C. McMurtrie's History of Printing in the United States (New York: Bowker, 1936 - Reprint, New York: Burt Franklin, 1969), which is Volume 2 on the "Middle and South At- lantic States." Other volumes were never published. John C. Oswald's Printing in the Americas (New York: Appleton, 1928 - Reprint, Hacker Art Books, 1968) which traces the development of printing through 500 years, and the "classic" work of Isaiah Thomas History of Printing in America (2nd ed., 1874 - Reprint, New York: Burt Franklin, n.d.) who recorded this history as seen during his lifetime (1749-1831) of work and activity as a printer. Anthologies: For the book lover the anthology of readings compiled by Paul A. Bennett Books and Printing: A Treasury for Typophiles (Cleve- land: World, 1951, revised edition, 1963) is "some four hundred pages of sheer delight." This series of essays by prominent men and women in the field of books and printing includes: Wroth, Warde, Dwiggins, Orcutt, Ransom, Pollard, Meynell, Grabhorn, Jackson, Gill, Goudy, De Vinne, Rogers, Updike, Cleland, Ogg, and many more in over 40 articles, excerpts, poems, and essays by some of the "foremost practitioners of the art of bookmaking." Editor's Note: The second part of this article will cover audio-visual ma- terials, sources for original materials, periodicals and special collections and events. 71