Volume 36 OCTOBER 1966 Number4 PAPER DEACIDIFICATION: A PRELIMINARY REPORT' RICHARD DANIEL SMITH INTRODUCTION QO NE of the critical problems fac- ing librarians in their efforts to preserve recorded knowl- edge is the deterioration of paper, the basic material of communication. A major cause of paper deterioration over prolonged periods is identified as the acid-catalyzed hydrolysis of the cellu- lose in paper fibers.2 It is estimated that 90 per cent of the books published from 1900 to 1949 will be unusable for general library purposes within thirty-five years if protective measures to reduce the rate of hydrolysis are not taken.3 The deacidification of paper is known to reduce the rate of this deteri- oration, and it is believed that a de- acidification treatment would extend the useful life of such library materials by several times.4 Although deacidifica- tion processes are applied to preserve rare and valuable paper records, there appears to be no practical process for li- brarians to use in the deacidification of ordinary books. The purpose of this paper is to de- velop an approach to a practical treat- ment for the wet deacidification of pa- per in books stored in libraries. The 2Paper deterioration originating from lack of durability may be contrasted to the deterioration which derives from lack of permanence. A fragile Bible paper may be highly permanent but not durable. Sandpaper is durable but is not required to be highly permanent. Durability is the degree to which a paper retains its original qualities under continual usage. Permanence is that property ascribed to a material which, under specified condi- tions, resists changes with the passage of time. The permanence of paper refers to the retention of significant use properties, particularly folding endurance and color, over prolonged periods. It is affected by temperature, humidity, light, and the presence of chemical agents (see American Pulp and Paper Association, 1965, pp. 182, 335-36; and the discussion of Clapp, 1963). For an exhaustive discussion of the mechanisms of cellulose degrada- tion, see Ott, Spurlin, and Grafflin (1954), pp. 99- 191. For specific references to questions, see Jarrell, Hankins, and Veitch (1936); Shearon (1957); and Barrow and Sproull (1959). 'Paper presented at the annual meeting of the International Institute for Conservation of Historic and Artistic Works-American Group-at the Art Institute of Chicago, June 6, 1966. It is a pre- liminary report of work being done on the author's Ph.D. dissertation at the Graduate Library School, University of Chicago. 'See R. W. Church (1959), pp. 14-16. If the books (then 50 to 100 years old) would fall into a less frequently used category, however, they might withstand infrequent though not general library use (see Fussler and Simon, 1961, particu- larly Appendix H, "Distribution of Books by the Frequency of Their Use," pp. H1-H3). ' Barrow (1965a), pp. 6-7. 273
274 THIE LIBRARY QUARTERLY methodology for this search will consist of: 1. Summarizing the current wet processes for deacidifying paper; 2. Considering certain improvements in prac- tice which appear desirable; and 3. Postulating, based on preliminary findings, how these improvements might be attained. LIMITATIONS This discussion will focus upon the degradation of the cellulose in paper fibers which is caused by acid-catalyzed hydrolysis. It will not consider other causes of paper deterioration unless a very direct relationship with acid hy- drolysis is involved, nor will it concern itself with the sources of the acidity. This investigation assumes that the pri- mary cause of the lack of permanence exhibited by book papers in libraries is the acid-catalyzed hydrolysis of cel- lulose when the pH of an aqueous paper extract is below 5.5 or perhaps 6.5 Generally a paper with a nearly neu- tral or mildly alkaline pH (as measured by an aqueous extract) is found to deteriorate more slowly during ex- tended storage than a similar paper with a significantly lower pH.6 The rate of paper deterioration usually in- creases as the pH decreases.7 Therefore, this report considers that the perma- nence of an acidic paper is improved if a significant shift in the hydrogen ion content (pH) results from a deacidifi- cation treatment. The reader should remember that other causes of paper deterioration can be and frequently are more significant than acid-catalyzed hydrolysis of cellu- lose. Several familiar examples come immediately to mind: 1. The wear and tear caused by patron use; 2. The effect on paper of light, of heat, and of humidity variation; and 3. The results of bacteria, fungi, and insect and rodent attack. In general, this presentation will con- sider that the cellulose in paper fibers, or the paper fibers themselves, are in an idealized condition. This means that all of the paper fibers in the paper sub- strate are construed to contain a uni- form quality of cellulose. Or more broadly stated, this report will neglect the differences in the rate of paper de- terioration caused by variation in fiber source, manufacturing procedure, sec- ondary (accessory) paper-making ma- terials, and environmental conditions of use and storage (except insofar as these involve acids). ACID DEGRADATION OF PAPER FIBERS "Cellulose, the primary constituent of paper fibers, is a linear polysaccha- ride, /-1, 4-glucan of high molecular weight. It is the main solid constituent of woody plants and occurs widely elsewhere in the vegetable kingdom. Cellulose, from the point of view of the pulp and paper industry, approaches the above ideal [paper fibers are not pure cellulose] but never quite reaches ' Two methods are used for preparing paper samples for pH measurement, hot or cold water extraction. The results may be approximately the same on some papers. On others, the hot extraction may give up to 1 or more pH units lower results than the cold extraction. The 5- or perhaps 6 pH value specified refers to results obtained by the hot extraction procedure. The proposed investiga- tion plans to report the pH value of both hot and cold methods because a difference of opinion exists about which method gives the best pH value for estimating the permanence of paper. The procedure for these tests is given by the Technical Associa- tion of the Pulp and Paper Industry (T435-52; 1952). 6 See Byrne and Weiner (1964); and Kantrowitz, Spencer, and Simmons (1940). I W. J. Barrow Research Laboratory (1963), Fig. 2.
PAPER DEACIDIFICATION 275 it."8 Wood cellulose, for example, is that material remaining after most, or essentially all, of the lignin and certain of the carbohydrates, other than cellu- lose, have been removed by the pulping and bleaching operations. A cellulose molecule (chain) consists of an unspecified number of anhydrous glucose units (degrees of polymeriza- tion or D.P.) connected through an oxygen bridge, that is, a hemi-acetal linkage. In natural cellulose, the maxi- mum D.P. is approximately 10,000. The structure and chemical structure of cellulose can be represented as in Figure 1.9 C stands for carbon, H for hydrogen, and 0 for oxygen. The looped arrow at each end indicates that the molecule continues indefinitely but within the constraints expressed above. Hydrolytic attack causes degrada- tion of cellulose by random scission of the hemi-acetal links leading to hydrolyzed cellulose (hydrocellulose). The reaction for the acid-catalyzed hy- drolysis of cellulose is expressed by Figure 2.10 (A simplified structural for- mula for cellulose is used for ease in following the reaction.) The hydrogen ion catalyzes (speeds up) the rate of hydrolysis; the result of hydrolysis is a chain scission or cleavage. The product of hydrolysis is hydrolyzed cellulose, a material analogous to cellulose, but with shorter chain length. The result of an extreme degree of hydrolysis on a very minute (submicro- scopic) portion of a paper fiber is shown in Figure 3." Four cellulose chains are represented in a by the long horizontal lines. Hydrogen bonds and van der Waals forces (weak intermo- CH20H H OH CH20H H ,ISC O\ O SOI I I OH C-OI C- u CC -C H CC H { oo/ \H H H E UIL B I U \M {>OHH +0 H{H C - COI FIGC CH Hc COH HofC Hc o \I I A I\ I-0 H H OH C~ ~ CH20H H OHH FIG. 1.-Cellulose molecule. Four anhydrous glucose units of (C6Hao05)n 0 ~~~~FA ST o O-,-w- + H +EQ- LRu 0~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~0 . 0 o-- + ~~~~H2 0 FSLOW H20 (SCISSION) 0 OH + HO 0 ?H+ 0 FIG. 2.-Acid-catalyzed hydrolysis of cellulose 'American Pulp and Paper Association (1965), p. 109. 'James P. Casey (1960), 1, 6. An informative, colored cellulose molecular model is given as the frontispiece in Ott et al. (1954). 'o Ibid., p. 104. " Adapted from Mauersberger (1954), p. 84.
276 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY lecular bonds) are represented by the short vertical lines. As shown in b, both the glucosidic (hemi-acetal) links along the chain and the hydrogen bonds and van der Waals forces between the cel- lulose chains rupture at points where hydrolysis occurs. The physical properties of a paper change relatively little during the great- er part of the cellulose degradation proc- ess." Figyure 4 indicates that a paper's strength properties remain essentially constant until the average D.P. of the cellulose in a typical paper fiber falls to a critical range of about 400-500 D.P. Below this range, the paper rap- idly loses strength and becomes em- brittled if the degradation continues. The cellulose of a paper fiber may be divided into two classes, accessible and non-accessible cellulose. The ac- cessible cellulose is experimentally de- fined by its availability to enter into chemical reactions. Non-accessible cel- lulose is the remainder, and it is very much less available to enter into chem- ical reactions. Occasionally, the terms "amnorphous" and "crystalline" are used instead of "accessible" and "non- "B. L. Browning suggested in an interview on April 22, 1966, that the critical range for a paper's strength properties might be represented as in Fig. 4. a BONDS IN AND BETWEEN FOUR CELLULOSE CHAINS I+H + I I 1- + + + ?+-I+?+++I +-HHI I-1 _ ~ ~ 111 II_._t I I I I] I I I i i iI I I I lI I Fa - b. BROKEN BONDS AFTER HYDROLYSIS -1- -?1?4- 1-11 1 -4+1- -I-f1-1-4-1+1-1|I1-+++ -++++11141?1-1-1 1+111+1++?---1-1+1+1---1 1 -44-- 1 I - I I -f--I---I- -I--I--t-- 1--1-1 1 -1 1 1 - 1 -1 --1- FIG. 3.-Effect of chain length on physical properties of cellulose Hci J < MAXIMUM AVERAGE CRITICAL < 0Q D. P A PPROX. PAPER ON RANGE 10,000 MANUFACTURE 400 - 5 0 L- 11 400 0\ AVERAGE DEGREE OF POLYMERIZATION NUMBER OF ANHYDROUS GLUCOSE UNITS IN AVERAGE CELLULOSE MOLECULE FIG. 4.-Physical strength of paper versus average chain length of cellulose
PAPER DEACIDIFICATION 277 accessible." This terminology compli- cates the problem because the percent- age of crystalline cellulose does not al- ways correspond to the percentage of non-accessible cellulose when both are measured by appropriate methods. The fact that some cellulose in a paper fiber is non-accessible for acid degra- dation is demonstrated by studies which show that the average D.P. rarely falls below 200.13 This remains true in cases of severe acid hydrolysis. Hence, one reason that some papers are more re- sistant to acid-catalyzed hydrolysis than other papers is because the amount of non-accessible cellulose varies from one type of fiber furnish to another. LITERATURE SURVEY The major purpose of this paper is to propose an approach to a practical treatment for paper deacidification in libraries. Various commentators indi- cate that a workable solution has not been fully developed.14 The most use- ful list of studies is the annotated bibli- ography by Byrne and Weiner (1964). Although this largely duplicates and extends the 1940 Kantrowitz annotated bibliography, the latter yields addition- al information because different ab- stractors prepared many of the annota- tions. Bibliographies on other aspects of paper technology are published by the Institute of Paper Chemistry and the Technical Association of the Pulp and Paper Industry (TAPPI).15 Other guides to the literature are APCA Abstracts; Abstract Bulletin; Abstracts . . . on Archaeology and the Fine Arts; Environmental Effects on Materials and Equipment, Section A; Preservation from Deterioration A b- stracts; and, of course, Biological Ab- stracts and Chemical Abstracts."6 Bar- row (1955, 1965a, 1965b) Belen'kaya (1964); J. A. Church (1961); Grove (1964); Hansen (1939); Kathpalia (1960, 1961a, 1961b, 1962); Pravilova (1964); Spinner (1962); and Ya- brova (1964) are contributors of inter- esting review and summary articles. The books by Britt (1964); Ca- sey (1960); Greathouse and Wessel (1954); Libby (1962); Ott, Spurlin, and Grafflin (1954); and Plenderleith (1962) are suggested for background on cellulose, conservation and deteriora- tion, and paper technology. The APPA Dictionary of Paper (1965) is recom- mended for clarification of paper ter- minology. Richardson recently contrib- uted an annotated bibliography on air and water pollution. Most of the contributions on paper durability and permanence in the liter- ature of library science are non-tech- nical. These works deal with such ques- tions as defining the problem, speculat- ing as to the culprit, and formulating plans to find a solution or reporting on the efforts made. The technical and fundamental literature is largely con- tributed by practicing scientists. Their articles are usually found in the in- dustrial and professional journals of the paper and textile fields. Although much about paper deterioration is imperfect- ly understood, the impression received from these information sources is that existing knowledge is not fully applied to improve the permanence of paper in books stored in libraries. 13 Ibid. 14 See "Break for Bibliophiles" (1966); Clapp (1966); and Williams (1966). 1" Institute of Paper Chemistry (1936 to pres- ent); and Technical Association of the Pulp and Paper Industry (1929 to present). "6 For bibliographical citations to works and au- thors mentioned in this paragraph, see the ap- pended bibliography.
278 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY SPECIFICATIONS OF AN IDEAL WET DEACIDIFICATION PROCESS It will be useful to define an ideal wet deacidification process for use (1) as a yardstick in analyzing the present wet deacidification processes and (2) as a guide to desirable improvements in practice. The following five specifica- tions provide one route toward these goals. 1. The treatment should reduce the active acid- ity (pH) to a level where other causes of paper deterioration define the limit of useful life. 2. The treatment should deposit a protective residue in the paper substrate to act as a buffering and stabilizing agent. 3. The treatment should not be harmful to pa- per and other book components or to book users. 4. The treatment procedure should be simple and within the capabilities of non-profes- sional people working with restricted facili- ties. 5. The treatment procedure should be fast, cheap, and lend itself to hand or mecha- nized application. Specification 1 is aimed at insuring that unit costs are minimized. For ex- ample, it seems wasteful to promote maximum resistance to hydrolysis in a book whose useful life is determined by something else. Specification 2 derives from the ac- cepted practice of precipitating a be- nign buffering agent, for example, cal- cium carbonate, in the deacidified pa- per. Other benefits might result by an extension of this procedure. Czepiel (1960, pp. 289-90) found evidence that the brightness reversion of paper is accelerated by the presence of cupric, ferrous, and ferric ions.'7 Studies by Hudson, Grant, and Hockey (1964) on the sulfur dioxide pickup (from air) by paper indicate that enough sulfur dioxide may be adsorbed into the mar- gins of the leaves to cause deteriora- tion.18 Their work supports Langwell's (1953, p. 214) contention that the ac- tivity of metal ions in catalyzing sulfur dioxide to sulfur trioxide should be in- hibited. Perhaps the activity of these ions would be reduced as a natural con- sequence of deacidification. The avail- able copper and iron, when in ionic form, might precipitate under alkaline condi- tions as the respective hydroxides.'9 Therefore, Specification 2 is interpreted as implying also the desirability of in- hibiting the activity of the cupric, fer- rous, and ferric ions. Specification 3 treats the problems of reversibility, harmful or dangerous in- gredients and reaction products, and physical or chemical damage to the 17"Brightness. As commonly used in the paper industry, the reflectivity of a sheet of pulp, paper, or paperboard for specified light measured under standardized conditions on a particular instrument designed and calibrated for the purpose. Strictly speaking, brightness is not a colorimetric quality. "Brightness Reversion. A term applied to pulps, especially bleached market pulps, and also to 'white' papers and paperboards to indicate loss of bright- ness" (American Pulp and Paper Association [1965], pp. 85-86). 18 The terms "absorption," "adsorption," and "sorption," are used to describe certain phenomena by which materials may enter, remain in, and leave paper. These terms are defined by Van Nostrand's Scientific Encyclopedia (1958), pp. 5, 23, 1534. " Interview with Dr. Leon Stock (1966). Sup- port for the theory that a small quantity of calcium carbonate, which is buffering the development of acidity, will also inhibit the brightness reversion of paper at the margin of a book's leaves may have been provided by Hansen. The margins of leaves, from the 1576 imprint studied, darken progres- sively at the edges (in contact with the atmos- phere) as the quantity of calcium carbonate in these leaves decreases. See Hansen (1937, Figs. 1-6, pp. 14-16A). Hansen also implied that this small quantity of calcium carbonate (minimum in good leaves was 2 per cent CaCO3 by weight) might be the factor which gave the good leaves exceptional resistance to accelerated light aging (Hansen, 1937, p. 10).
PAPER DEACIDIFICATION 279 book or its components.20 These prob- lems indicate that deacidification treat- ments should deposit benign residues whose ingredients are known to pro- mote permanence over extended time periods. The paper should retain as much of its strength as possible during treatment so as to minimize the possi- bility of damage from handling. Specification 4 aims toward the de- velopment of simple rules to determine the suitability of a given paper or book for treatment. The latitude for error in following the treatment specifications should tolerate considerable abuse and still provide satisfactory results. Specification 5 is included because any acceptable deacidification treat- ment must be both economical and practical. Unit costs and production schedules which librarians would find acceptable are not available at this time. ANALYSIS OF CURRENT WET DEACIDIFICATION PRACTICES The concept of introducing an alka- line earth stabilizing agent into paper to increase its resistance to the deteriora- tion caused by acid-catalyzed hydroly- sis appears to have developed initially at the Ontario Research Foundation in the early 1930's.21 Schierholtz (1936), who assigned his patent rights to the Foundation, claimed a process "where- by it [paper] is rendered non-tarnish- ing to metals, such as silver, bronze, etc., with which it is brought into con- tact and inert with respect to inks and colors, etc., applied to the paper, and more durable with age." He states: "As a result of the treatment the paper is left substantially unchanged excepting with respect to its durability with age and tarnishing properties."22 Aqueous solutions of barium, or calcium, or strontium, etc., as their respective bi- carbonates or together with their car- bonates (in suspension) were impreg- nated into paper by immersion or spraying. The timing of this treatment followed the other steps of paper manu- facture. Schierholtz (1936) also claimed that paper could be impregnated with an alkaline earth hydroxide and then treated with carbon dioxide, either in gaseous form or in solution, so as to form the alkaline earth stabilizing com- pound, that is, carbonate. Kathpalia (1962) reviewed five wet and two dry methods of paper deacidi- fication in 1962.23 He reports that cal- cium hydroxide and calcium bicarbon- ate or magnesium bicarbonate in an aqueous solution normally form the ac- tive ingredients of wet deacidification processes. Kathpalia also provides use- ful details for the conservator as he ap- parently explains how the Barrow im- mersion process is practiced at the Na- tional Archives of India.24 All of the wet deacidification processes presented ap- pear to be, chemically speaking, closely related. Hence, this paper proposes to limit its discussion to the best-known wet deacidification processes. Only one method of paper deacidifi- cation has proved itself through general acceptance and remained in use over ' Reversibility, in conservation terminology, is defined as the ability of the conservator to remove any residue introduced into the paper by a preser- vation treatment. A conservator wants, in case of need, the power to return a treated document to its condition just prior to treatment. 21 See Grant (1937), p. 194. 22 Schierholtz (1936), p. 1; and Ontario Research Foundation (1936), p. 1. 3 Kathpalia (1962), pp. 245-49. 24Ibid., pp. 245-47.
280 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY twenty-five years. Summarizing this wet deacidification process, Barrow states: As developed in my laboratory, this process consists of placing the document to be treated between sections of special bronze wire cloth to prevent injury, and passing it through two [water] solutions, allowing it to remain for about twenty minutes in each. The first is a [water] solution of 0.15 per cent calcium hy- droxide which effectively neutralizes the acid and the second is a [water] solution of ap- proximately 0.20 per cent calcium bicarbonate which carbonates the excess hydroxide and precipitates calcium carbonate into the fibers of the paper. After treatment, the [bronze wire] cloth and document are air dried in a rack constructed for the purpose. The precipi- tated calcium carbonate not only has a stabi- lizing effect upon the cellulose fiber, but also acts as a buffer against the absorption of any acid at a later time.25 Barrow explains that his procedure will shift the pH of a document from the 4.0-5.0 range to the 8.4-8.8 pH range and that this treatment will theoreti- cally extend the life expectancy of a document by a factor of from 8 to 10 times.26 Such treated documents are not believed to retain any dangerous or harmful chemicals. The calcium car- bonate deposited in the paper is well known to have existed side by side with cellulose fibers for hundreds of years. In short, if the need for a deacidifica- tion treatment is imperative, the Bar- row procedure is the process to use. Despite its success in reducing acid- ity, the Barrow process has significant shortcomings which prohibit its gener- al application to the paper in books. Most papers retain about 10 per cent of their dry strength when wet by water.27 A wet and weak document requires very careful handling. Only single sheets, not bound volumes, can be treated. The expansion and con- traction of paper on wetting and dry- ing might break the book's spine and/or cause cockling of the leaves and warp- ing of the boards. The leaves might be bonded together on drying by the soluble components of the paper. The problems of drying large numbers of books, wet by water, are not resolved. The alternative of dismantling the book, deacidifying the leaves, and rebinding costs more than libraries can afford to invest in the conservation of ordinary books. Barrow developed spray deacidifica- tion as a possible solution to these prob- lems. The active ingredient, magnesium bicarbonate, is prepared by bubbling carbon dioxide through an aqueous sus- pension of magnesium carbonate for two hours. An addition of 10 per cent ethyl alcohol is made to the magnesium bicarbonate solution to facilitate han- dling and to reduce the tendency of the wetted paper to cockle on drying.28 Li- brarians apparently believe that this cheaper process (as contrasted to dis- mantling the book, treating the leaves, and then rebinding) is also beyond their means. The literature indicates that no other organization has taken up Bar- row's recommendation for a pilot plant study.29 A picture of the present state of pa- per deacidification processes may be ob- tained by analyzing the two Barrow treatments against the five ideal specifi- 'Barrow (1965b), pp. 5-6. 2'Barrow (1965a), pp. 6-7. ' Libby (1962), 2, 123. 28Barrow Research Laboratory (1963), pp. 22- 26; and Barrow Research Laboratory (1964). 29 Barrow Research Laboratory (1963), p. 26. Williams (1966) does imply that spray deacidifica- tion is practical, but this writer was unable to verify through the literature that the process has been used outside of the Barrow Research Lab- oratory.
PAPER DEACIDIFICATION 281 cations. The Barrow treatments pass or exceed Specification 1 and definitely de- posit some quantity of a benign residue to buffer the development of further acidity. No information was found as to whether this residue inhibits the activ- ity of the cupric, ferrous, and ferric ions. The possibility that a magnesium or calcium carbonate residue might inhibit the brightness reversion does not seem to have been evaluated.30 Consequently, some reservation must be retained as to whether the Barrow treatments pass Specification 2. The Barrow process, that is, single-sheet immersion, would fail Specification 3 unless the book were dismantled and rebound. Otherwise, both schemes could be interpreted as passing Specifications 3 and 4. Both Barrow treatments fail Specification 5 because the processes are slow and costly. POTENTIALLY USEFUL MATERIALS IN PAPER DEACIDIFICATION Barrow uses precisely the chemicals known to be associated with the long- term permanence of paper.3' The steps in aqueous deacidification processes which most increase cost are related to the effect of water on paper. Various investigators theorize that a deacidifica- tion solution containing organic sol- vents might provide a remedy for these water-caused difficulties.32 Their line of thinking suggests that a remedy for the deacidification dilemma might be found by seeking the answers to three questions.3 1. Are other chemicals known which have been used to promote the permanence of cellu- losic fibers? 2. Are there chemicals which might be intro- duced into paper and therein allowed to re- act and form chemicals which are known to promote the permanence of paper? 3. If such chemicals exist, are there solvents available which do not have the undesirable properties of water? Conservators commonly use acetone, benzene, ethyl alcohol, white gasoline, hexane, methyl alcohol, naphtha, pyri- dine, toluene, and trichlorethelene as cleaning solvents.34 The problems which concern conservators who use organic solvents are related to inks or second- ary paper-making materials and not to the paper fiber itself.35 "See n. 19. Spinner (1962) discusses brightness reversion, for example, yellowing of paper on aging. 31Jarrell et al. (1936), p. 12; Hansen (1939); and Barrow (1965a), p. 7. "2Langwell (1957), pp. 37-41; Kathpalia (1962), p. 248; and Barrow Research Laboratory (1964), pp. 16-17. ' Additional questions which might suggest other approaches to paper deacidification or stabilization are: 1. Are there chemicals and processes known which could be combined to deacidify and stabi- lize paper effectively without the necessity of wetting the paper being treated? This question asks if permanence might be improved when the de- acidifying agent was introduced as a gas. Perhaps cyclohexylamine carbonate, suggested in Langwell's (1966) vapor-phase deacidification process, would be useful. 2. Are there deacidification or stabilization treat- ments known or possible which might be shown experimentally to promote the long-term perma- nence of paper? This query is related to Question 1 (text) but differs in that the requirement for long-term exposure of paper (Specification 3) to the deacidifying and/or stabilizing agent is dropped. Some possibilities or springboards for further development are use of (a) soaps or alka- line earth tanates as implied by Holden and Maguire (1910); (b) aromatic and aliphatic amines as per Speel (1952), p. 55; (c) alkali metal borates and phosphates as reported by Istrubtsina and Pravilova (1965); (d) polymers of cyanamides or their methyol compounds, as suggested by Sergeeva (1962); (e) dicyanamides and dicyanoguanadines, as invented by Studney, Pollard, and Landes (1949, 1951); (f) acid-binding salts as invented by Lang- well (1965); and (g) alkali salts of organic poly- acids as, e.g., sodium carboxymethylcellulose, by Raff, Herrick, and Adams (1966). sInterview with Paul N. Banks (1966). asIbid.
282 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Certain properties of the first three aliphatic alcohols are compared with those of water in Table 1. Note that water has the greatest weakening effect on paper. The retained wet strength in- creases with an increase in molecular weight, for example, from methyl to ethyl to n-propyl alcohol. The dimen- sional stability of paper follows an analogous pattern when wet by these liquids. Paper wet by water exhibits the least stability, while paper wet with n-propyl alcohol has the greatest di- mensional stability.36 On drying, paper wet with water will cockle or warp to a greater degree than will paper wet with alcohols. The lower boiling points of methyl and ethyl alcohol signify a pos- sibility of faster and/or lower tempera- ture drying. The conclusion, then, is that solvents with at least some proper- ties superior to those of water are com- mercially available. Question 1 asked if other chemicals exist which are known to be associated with the permanence of cellulosic fi- bers.37 The nineteenth-century dyers knew that certain dyes (e.g., aniline black and sulfide colors) are capable of inducing tendering in cotton and linen cloth on storage.38 This particular ten- dering is identified as caused by the acid-catalyzed hydrolysis of cellulose, the acid being introduced in the dyeing process or as a decomposition product from the dye itself.39 Indeed, Holden and Maguire referred to a number of successful treatments on which they im- proved in their 1909 British Patent No. 3087. Some of these earlier treatments impregnate the cloth with an alkali met- al formate or acetate to reduce the acid- ity and to deposit a buffering residue.40 Such a salt, say sodium acetate, might be dissolved to form a 1 per cent by TABLE 1 ALIPHATIC ALCOHOLS COMPARED WITH WATER %7 Retained Name Chemical Molecular Wet Boiling Formula Weight Wet Point (o C.) Water ............ HOH 18 10 100.0 Methyl alcohol.. CH30H 32 35 64.5 Ethyl alcohol.... CH3CH20H 46 48 78.0 n-Propyl alcohol... CH3CH2CH20H 60 61 98.0 * Source: Libby (1962), p. 123. 36 Interview, April 22, 1966, with Dr. B. L. Browning, Chairman, Organic Chemistry Section, Institute of Paper Chemistry. 7 Although results reported in part subsequently have justified a patent application, this paper has been prepared as a progress report and the men- tion of chemicals and procedures herein is not to be construed as a recommendation for the treat- ment of deteriorating cellulosic materials. It is hoped that a more comprehensive report, planned to extend this preliminary report and to incorporate the findings of the proposed laboratory investiga- tion, will (1) be available in mid-1967 and (2) in- clude recommendations as to chemicals and proce- dures. 38Sansone (1895), pp. 32-33. 39Trotman (1964), pp. 54, 438. 40 Holden and Maguire (1910). The alkali metal formates and acetates may prove so strongly basic that they will have limited applicability as paper- stabilizing agents over prolonged periods. The alka- line earth formates and acetates, which are less basic, appear to offer more promise in paper deacidification.
PAPER DEACIDIFICATION 283 weight aqueous solution.4" The dyed and unstable cotton or linen cloth is passed through the solution and dried without rinsing. The excessive acidity is reduced ac- cording to Reaction 1 below. The sodium acetate reduces the danger of future acid attack either as introduced (sodi- um acetate) or possibly, in time, as sodium carbonate or hydroxide because of an intermediate reaction with carbon dioxide (from air) or water. The other alkali metal, or alkaline earth, formates and acetates react similarly. Neverthe- less, sodium acetate is apparently the only one recommended in current tex- tile practice.42 Barrow reports that magnesium ace- tate will deacidify paper, and confirms that magnesium acetate will i'mprove the permanence of paper.43 Magnesium acetate is recommended as an acid in- hibitor in cellulose acetate laminating films.44 In his 1965 British Patent Spec- ification No. 1,007,981, Langwell cites magnesium acetate as one of the chemi- cals which has utility in the preserva- tion of documents.45 Magnesium ace- tate is soluble in methyl and ethyl alcohol. Question 2 asked what chemicals might be reacted in paper to form chem- icals which are known to promote the permanence of paper.46 A compound called an alkoxide is formed if the hy- drogen of the hydroxyl (OH) group in an aliphatic alcohol is replaced by a metal. The alkali and alkaline earth metals form basic alkoxides which are usually soluble in their parent alcohol and sometimes in other organic sol- vents. For example, magnesium methyl- ate, or more correctly, magnesium methoxide is formed according to Re- action 2 and is commercially available as a 5 per cent by weight solution in methyl alcohol.47 Magnesium methoxide, upon intro- duction into paper, would neutralize acidity according to Reaction 3; or, in REACTION 1 H+ + CH3COONa Na+ + CH3COOH I Hydrogen + Sodium Sodium + Acetic acid, at least ion acetate ion some vola tilizes. REACTION 2 Mg + 2 CH30H (CH3O)2Mg + H2 T Magnesium + Methyl Magnesium + Hydrogen gas metal alcohol methoxide escapes. REACTION 3 2 H+ + (CH3O)2Mg Mg+ + 2 CH30H T Hydrogen + Magnesium Magnesium + Methyl alcohol ions methoxide ion evaporates. 'Merrill, Macormac, and Mauersberger (1949), pp. 619-20. '2Trotman (1964). 4' Barrow Research Laboratory (1964), p. 15, Fig. 1. " Wilson and Forshee (1959), p. 153. 45 Langwell (1965). "See n. 37. 47Anderson and Thomas (1963), p. 832.
284 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY the event water (sorbed by the paper) was encountered before hydrogen ions, react according to Reaction 4; forming magnesium hydroxide, which subse- quently reacts to produce neutrality as per Reaction 5; or precipitates into the paper as a mildly alkaline buffer and in- hibitor.48 The use of the lower aliphatic alco- hols and their alkoxides may offer sig- nificant advantages in the deacidifica- tion of paper because: (1) the harmful effects of water on paper may be evad- ed; (2) the organic solvent (in the sam- ple case, methyl alcohol) would vol- atilize out of the paper; and (3) the assertion that magnesium hydroxide would promote the long-term perma- nence of paper is defensible.49 PRELIMINARY RESULTS This investigator found, through ex- periments to justify this study, that single sheets and books could be deacid- ified by the type of immersion treat- ments previously discussed, although the results must still be regarded as ten- tative, awaiting more refined experi- mentation. For one thing, the method used to estimate pH was primitive and probably inaccurate. A piece of Hy- drion "A" or "B" short-range indicator paper was laid upon the paper to be tested and a drop or two of distilled water added at one end of this pH color-sensitive paper. A comparison was made with the standard color range provided by the manufacturer at the peak of color intensity. An estimate of the pH of the paper being tested was thereby obtained. Even though Barrow reported that a somewhat similar meth- od using pH indicator paper gave accu- rate results, it is believed best to limit the results of these tests to implying that a pH shift did occur as a result of REACTION 4 2 HOH + (CH30)2Mg > Mg(OH)2 { + 2 CH30H Water + Magnesium Magnesium hydroxide + Methyl alcohol methoxide precipitates. evaporates. REACTION 5 2 H + Mg(OH)2 Mg+ + 2 HOH Hydrogen + Magnesium Magnesium + Water ions hydroxide ion '8 The sorbed water content in the paper of books in libraries would vary with the relative humidity. Normally, the water content ranges from 5 to 7 per cent by weight. With greater variation of rela- tive humidity, the water content might range from 4 to 8 per cent (personal correspondence with Dr. B. L. Browning, June 29, 1966). "One defense might use ionization equilibria to compute the pH of magnesium hydroxide, mag- nesium carbonate, and calcium carbonate in satu- rated aqueous solutions containing an excess of solid phase. Such values would not represent the true pH in a paper substrate which had been im- pregnated with and retained a residue of these chemicals. However, the computed pH values should, at least, indicate the relative relationship. The computation indicates that the pH of the cal- cium carbonate solution would approach 9.7, that of magnesium hydroxide 10.6, and that of mag- nesium carbonate 10.9. The relative pH bounds of a paper impregnated with an excess of magnesium methoxide would have the pH of magnesium hy- droxide (10.6) as a minimum and that of mag- nesium carbonate (10.9) as a maximum. It seems possible that in time the magnesium hydroxide might tend to convert to the carbonate. This argument rests on evidence presented by various authorities (e.g., Barrow Research Laboratory, 1964) that magnesium carbonate promotes the permanence of paper.
PAPER DEACIDIFICATION 285 the treatment.50 That is, the pH values which are reported below should not be taken to indicate literally the pH value which would be obtained if a water ex- tract were made. The leaves of a 1964 Dutch imprint were cut apart and half of each leaf im- mersed for periods of approximately 24 seconds to eighty minutes in a solution containing 6 per cent magnesium ace- tate, 2 per cent diethylene glycol, 5 per cent water, and 87 per cent ethyl alco- hol.51 The pH shift was from about 5 on the untreated sheets to about 9 or 10 on the treated sheets. The time of im- mersion did not appear significant. (The diethylene glycol was included to act as a plasticizer. No definite conclu- sion was reached as to whether it re- duced paper brittleness.) The same solution was used to treat a variety of books selected from dis- cards of the University of Chicago Li- brary. Each book was split down the spine and one section totally immersed (boards and all) in the treatment solu- tion for thirty minutes. No effort was made to insure that all parts of the book would be wetted, that is, circulating the solution, splaying the leaves, or moving the book about. The section was then removed and pressed, by hand, against a flat surface to squeeze out as much of the solution as possible. The wet section was either (1) set on end with its leaves splayed or (2) laid on its side, board down, with every second or third signa- ture turned over and tucked into the spine to facilitate airflow, and then al- lowed to air dry overnight. In each case, the untreated section was retained to act as the control. It took several days for the pH of the treated sections to stabilize due to the evolution of acetic acid. The location of the pH test was at the center of a leaf in the middle of each section. The pH shift depended upon the original pH of the paper in the book being treated; averages were from a pH of 4 before treatment to a pH of 6 after treatment and similarly from 5 to 7 or 8. The spines and the boards were not tested but only checked to insure that they had been wetted. These results were encouraging in that the acidity of the paper undergoing treatment was reduced. (It is my opin- ion that the treatment reached the in- nermost parts of the book.) The boards and leaves of the treated sections showed essentially no cockling or warp- ing on drying. The treated sections were entirely usable. The ink and dyes from the type images of a few foreign im- prints did bleed and run. However, these foreign imprints remained entire- ly legible although they were aestheti- cally unpleasant. The dyes from the speckle fore-edge and from the cloth bindings of a number of domestic and foreign imprints were leached sufficient- ly to color the treatment solution. Al- though this solution did darken the col- or tone of the leaves of these sections or those sections subsequently treated, librarians who inspected the results judged the bluing in those cases to be inconsequential. Preliminary experiments with a 5 per cent by weight solution of magnesium methoxide solution in methyl alcohol were limited to treating single sheets. The procedure was simple; the test sheets were dipped into the solution, moved about for a few seconds until wetted, and then removed and hung up 'Barrow Research Laboratory (1963), p. 25. ' The 5 per cent water derives from the water of crystallization of magnesium acetate tetra- hydrate, (CH3COO)2Mg * 4 H20; the source of the 6 per cent magnesium acetate.
286 TIHE LIBRARY QUARTERLY to dry. The pH shift was from about 4 to 10. Although more cockling occurred than with ethyl alcohol, the amount of cockling was significantly less than when another sheet of this same paper was wet with water and dried. It appears, then, that the use of ali- phatic alcohols as the solvent for and carrier of a basic formate or an acetate or alkoxide may offer a practical de- acidification treatment for paper. It al- so seems likely that substantially great- er quantities of these stabilizing agents may be introduced into paper because of their greater solubility in alcohol as contrasted to the solubility of conven- tional stabilizing agents (calcium hy- droxide, calcium bicarbonate, and mag- nesium bicarbonate) in water. It is my belief that some combination of these materials will provide at least one route toward a major breakthrough in the wet deacidification of single sheets. It is too early to predict the ultimate out- come of this investigation with regard to treating books. There are too many unsolved problems in efficiently treating a variable mass of leaves held immobile along one edge, as in a book. The goal of the proposed study is to set the stage for a mechanized, pilot plant operation wherein whole books are deacidified. Some probability of success is indicated by (1) the Latin American practice of thoroughly wet- ting whole books with gasoline and (2) the non-aqueous deacidification treat- ment developed by Baynes-Cope, Brit- ish Museum Research Laboratory.52 If this study does develop an efficient lab- oratory method of deacidifying whole books, there will remain formidable problems in expanding these results to processing the quantity and variety of books in a research library on a produc- tion-line basis. PROPOSED LABORATORY INVESTIGATION The laboratory investigation, in which the above treatments (and per- haps others) may be studied, might be subdivided into three stages. The initial set of experiments could evaluate the effect of different treatments upon sev- eral kinds of book papers. The book papers, themselves, might be selected to act as constants with the treatments being evaluated as variables. The sec- ond series of experiments could extend and support these initial results by evaluating effective treatments on book papers selected to represent the varie- ties of paper found in books in libraries. In this series, the treatments would be 52 In an interview with Harold W. Tribolet (October 13, 1965), he asserted the feasibility of treating books in organic solvents based upon the Latin American practice of soaking books in gasoline to prevent insect and rodent attack. (Pa- per, when wet by hydrocarbon solvents like gaso- line, does not lose strength or expand.) The normal British Museum practice is to use the Barrow immersion process as their routine method of paper deacidification. A. D. Baynes- Cope, British Museum Research Laboratory, de- veloped a non-aqueous deacidification process for documents which cannot be treated with water. The criteria for selection of paper for this special treatment are (1) the nature of the ink, i.e., if the ink is likely to be susceptible to water damage; and (2) the actual fragile nature of the paper, i.e., if the paper would become dangerously weak if wetted by water. The treatment solution is prepared by dissolving 1.86 gms. of barium hydroxide octahydrate, Ba(OH)2 * 8 H20, in 100 ml. of methyl alcohol to form a 1 per cent by weight-volume solution of barium hydroxide, Ba(OH)2. This deacidification solution is applied (1) by an immersion treatment or (2) by brushing or spraying when the paper is very fragile. The treated document is hung for air drying so that any residue of barium hydroxide might react with carbon dioxide from the sur- rounding air to form barium carbonate. Sensible precautions should be taken in applying this process because (1) barium and most of its compounds are toxic, (2) methyl alcohol fumes are both ex- plosive and toxic, and (3) many colored inks (e.g., ballpoint-pen inks) are soluble in methyl alcohol (Werner, 1966).
PAPER DEACIDIFICATION 287 considered as constants and the papers as variables. A final set of experiments might attempt to expand efficient treat- ments to the deacidification of whole books. The utility of the deacidification treatments could be evaluated using the standardized tests established by the Technical Association of the Pulp and Paper Industry or by more rigorous procedures designed by authorities on paper to improve the consistency of the TAPPI tests. PROBLEMS IN DEACIDIFYING BOOKS Certain problems in the wet deacidi- fication of whole books, and sometimes single sheets, deserve further discus- sion. Although cellulose is a relatively inert material, paper fibers are neces- sarily surface-active. Such activity might adsorb some of the deacidifica- tion agent out of solution as the treat- ment is penetrating into a closed book. Or as the book is drying, the deacidifi- cation agent might be carried out to the book's surface and deposited near the point where the solvent evaporates. It is evident that these actions must occur to some degree, and to the extent that additional protection is required at the periphery of the book, these actions are desirable. How can the handling problems of impregnating and drying books be mechanized? Will vacuum processing techniques facilitate processing at ordi- nary temperatures? Or will it prove de- sirable to dry books using dielectric heating whereby the book can be warmed uniformly? Would a centrifug- ing stage provide assistance by reducing the amount of solvent to be removed by drying? What methods of solution treatment will be desirable so that recycling, as necessary in a continuous process, can occur? Obviously, filtering will remove particulate matter, but what of the col- orants leached from the book by the or- ganic solvent? Would these dissolved materials be adsorbed by a surface- active filtrant or will another method, such as distillation, be indicated? If a given treatment is applicable to a certain kind of paper or book or con- dition of paper or book, will the treat- ment be applicable for all kinds of pa- pers and books? Will formic and acetic acids com- pletely volatilize out of the paper, and are these acids and their parent com- pounds (for example, the alkali metal and alkaline earth formates and ace- tates) benign to paper and book mate- rials as some of the literature indicates? What is likely to occur with different inks and their colorants and media? Fortunately, most book printing inks utilize carbon-black pigments and the boiled linseed or tung-oil-type media. These materials tolerate both alcohols and shifts in pH range. However, the small quantities of blue-black dyestuffs incorporated by present-day practice into printing inks do bleed in alcohols. The result, technically speaking, would be a grayer paper and a slightly brown- er type image. Actually, the treated pa- per might appear whiter to the human eye because the dyestuff will tend to neutralize the yellowish hue of the pa- per. The problem of colored illustra- tions is considerably more serious as a very great variety of dyes and pigments are used. Some dyes and pigments are understood to be unstable in alkaline conditions, and they or other ink com- ponents might be soluble in alcohol. Al- though verification is necessary, it is believed that most inks used in printing and illustrating books will tolerate the
288 THIE LIBRARY QUARTERLY sort of treatment this discussion has proposed.53 The secondary paper-making mate- rials, such as fillers, starch, coatings, and alum-resin size, should not be detri- mentally affected by this treatment. Likewise, cotton and linen cords or cloth and boards, which are cellulosic in nature and comparable to paper, should not be affected. Animal glues and starch pastes should be unaffected. However, the pyroxylin clothbound books may create a problem. The pyroxylin, that is, cellulose nitrate, is soluble in alco- hols. It is probable that leather bookbind- ings should not be immersed into or wetted by the treatment solution be- cause the alkaline solution might detan the leather, and the alcoholic solvent might tend to dry and harden the bind- ing.54 Some leather colorants are solu- ble in alcohol and could stain the book's leaves. It may be possible to evade this problem through a hand treatment for leather-bound books. The leaves could be immersed while holding the boards up out of the solution. A special rack would be necessary to support the book and hold the boards away from the leaves during drying. A conditioning treatment might be required to protect the flexibility of the book's spine or hinges. SUMMARY This paper has: 1. Superficially sketched the mechanism and effect of the acid-catalyzed hydrolysis of cellulose on paper fibers; 2. Briefly reviewed current wet deacidification practices as an aid in suggesting desirable improvements in practice; 3. Introduced several new approaches to the problems of paper deacidification in books stored in libraries; 4. Described a few of the preliminary experi- ments indicating probable success of the proposed investigation; 5. Cited a number of problems on which more information is needed; and 6. Outlined a plan by which these ideas on paper deacidification could be investigated. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS.-This study was made possible through encouragement and guidance from the Institute of Paper Chemistry, Ap- pleton, Wisconsin, and from the Department of Chemistry and the Graduate Library School, University of Chicago. The author appreciates the assistance received from Paul N. Banks, Conservator, Newberry Library, Chicago; For- rest F. Carhart, Jr., Director, Library Tech- nology Program, American Library Associa- tion, Chicago; and A. E. Werner, Keeper, Brit- ish Museum Research Laboratory, London. The author is particularly indebted to B. L. Browning, Chairman, Organic Chemistry Sec- tion, Institute of Paper Chemistry, Appleton, Wisconsin; Marvin C. Rogers, Director, Chi- cago Paper Testing Laboratory, and Executive Director, Photoengraving Research Institute, Chicago; Leon Stock, Department of Chem- istry, University of Chicago; and Harold W. Tribolet, Manager, Extra Bindery, R. R. Don- nelley and Sons Co., Chicago, for background on the nature of cellulose, paper, and books. Thanks are also due to Herman H. Fussler, Director, University of Chicago Library; George W. Troyan, Assistant District Sales Manager, Allied Chemical Corporation, Gen- eral Chemical Division, Chicago; and James D. Innes, Assistant to the Director of Marketing, Stauffer Chemical Company, New York City, for gifts of books, magnesium acetate, and sodium and magnesium methylate (methoxide). Rogers (April 5, 1966). 'Roddy (1966).
PAPER DEACIDIFICATION 289 BIBLIOGRAPHY ARTICLES AND PERIODICALS Anderson, A. R., and Thomas, I. M. "Alkox- ides, Metal," in R. E. Kirk and D. F. Oth- mer (eds.), Encyclopedia of Chemical Tech- nology. 2d ed. New York: John Wiley & Son, Inc., 1963, 1, 832-51. Barrow, W. J., and Sproull, R. C. "Perma- nence in Book Papers," Science, 129 (April 24, 1959), 1075-84. Belen'kaya, N. G. "Methods of Restoration of Books and Documents," New Methods for the Restoration and Preservationt of Documents and Books. Editor-in-Chief N. Ya. Solechnik. Translated by Mlrs. J. Brown and Others. Jerusalem: Israel Pro- gram for Scientific Translations (for the National Science Foundation, Washington, D.C., and the Council on Library Resources, Inc.), 1964, pp. 24-49. Available (OTS 64- 11054) from the Office of Technical Services, U.S. Dept. of Commerce, Washington, D.C. "Break for Bibliophiles," Chemical Week, 96 (April 23, 1966), 93-94. Clapp, Verner W. "Permanent/Durable Book Papers," ALA Bulletin, 57 (October, 1963), 847-52. . "Closing the Circuit; Automation and Data Processing for Libraries," Library Journal, 91 (March 1, 1966), 1165-71. Czepiel, Thomas P. "The Influence of Se- lected Metal Traces on the Color and Color Stability of Purified Cotton Linters," TAPPI, 43 (April, 1960), 289-99. Grove, Lee E. "Paper Deterioration-an Old Story," College and Researchi Libraries, 25 (September, 1964), 365-74. Hudson, F. Lyth, Grant, R. L., and Hockey, J. A. "The Pick-up of Sulphur Dioxide by Paper," Journal of Applied Chemistry, 14 (October, 1964), 444-47. Istrubtsina, T. V., and Pravilova, T. A. "Con- servation of Paper Documents by Buffer- ing," Probl. Dolgovechnosti Dokumentov i Bumagi, Akad. Nauk SSSR, Lab. Kon- servatsii i Restavratsii Dokumentov 1964, 71-81, through Chemical A bstracts, 62 (1965), 2911. Kathpalia, Y. P. "Deterioration and Conser- vation of Paper; I: Biological Deteriora- tion," Indian Pulp and Paper, 15 (July, 1960), 117-19. . "Deterioration and Conservation of Paper; II: Physical Deterioration," ibid., 15 (January, 1961), 445-47. (a) . "Deterioration and Conservation of Paper; III: Chemical Deterioration," ibid., 16 (November, 1961), 314-16. (b) . "Deterioration and Conservation of Paper; IV: Neutralization," ibid., 17 (Oc- tober, 1962), 245-51. Langwell, W. H. "The Permanence of Paper Records," Library Association Record, 55 (July, 1953), 212-15. . "The Vapour Phase Deacidification of Books and Documents," Journal of the So- ciety of Archivists, 3 (April, 1966), 137-38. Pravilova, T. A. "Aging of Paper," New Methods for the Restoration and Preserva- tion of Documents and Books. Editor-in- Chief N. Ya. Solechnik. Translated by Mrs. J. Brown and others. Jerusalem: Is- rael Program for Scientific Translations (for the National Science Foundation, Washington, D.C., and the Council on Li- brary Resources, Inc.), 1964, pp. 69-78. Available (OTS 64-11054) from the Office of Technical Services, U.S. Dept. of Com- merce, Washington, D.C. Raff, R. A. V., Herrick, I. W., and Adams, M. F. "Archives Document Preservation," Northwest Science, 40 (February, 1966), 17-24. Richardson, Marie S. "Bibliography on Air and Water Pollution," Special Libraries, 57 (July-August, 1966), 385-90. Sergeeva, Z. I. "Sulfur Black as Catalyst in the Degradation of Dyed Fabric." Veda a Vyzkum v Prom. Text., IV ( ?, 1958), 147- 153; through Textile Institute Jouirnal Ab- stracts, 53 (1962), 583. Shearon, Will H., Jr. "The Old Grey Book," Industrial Engineering Chemistry, 49 (No- vember, 1957), 25A-26A. Spinner, I. H. "Brightness Reversion: A Criti- cal Review with Suggestions for Further Research," TAPPI, 45 (June, 1962), 495- 514. Technical Association of the Pulp and Paper Industry. TAPPI Standard Test T435-52; Hydrogen Ion Content (pH). New York: Technical Association of the Pulp and Paper Industry, 1952. Wilson, William K., and Forshee, B. W.
290 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY "Degradation of Cellulose Acetate Films," SPE Journal, 15 (February, 1959), 146-56. Yabrova, R. R. "The Prevention of Aging of Books and Newspapers," Collection of iMa- terials on the Preservation of Library Re- sources. Edited by L. G. Petrova. Trans- lated by B. Toker and others. Jerusalem: Israel Program for Scientific Translations (for the National Science Foundation, Washington, D.C., and the Council on Li- brary Resources, Inc.), 1964, pp. 3-17. Available (OTS 64-11053) from the Office of Technical Services, U.S. Dept. of Com- merce, Washington, D.C. BOOKS, INDEXES, AND REPORTS American Pulp and Paper Association. The Dictionary of Paper Including Pulp, Paper- board, Paper Properties and Related Paper- making Terms. 3d ed. New York: American Pulp and Paper Association, 1965. APCA Abstracts. Pittsburgh, Pa.: Air Pollu- tion Control Association, in co-operation with the U.S. Ptublic Health Service and the Library of Congress, 1956 to present. Barrow, W. J. Manuscripts and Documents: Their Deterioration and Restoration. Char- lottesville: University of Virginia Press, 1955. . The Barrow Method of Restoring Deteriorated Documents. Richmond, Va.: Published by the Author, 1965. (a) . Procedures and Equipment Used in the Barrow Alethod of Restoring Manu- scripts and Docuiments. Richmond, Va.: Published by the Author, 1965. (b) Barrow, W. J., Research Laboratory. Per- manence/Durability of the Book: A Two- Year Research Program. Richmond, Va.: WV. J. Barrow Research Laboratory, 1963. . Permantence/Durability of the Book. 3: SpIray Deacidification. Richmond, Va.: W. J. Barrow Research Laboratory, 1964. Biological Abstracts. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania, 1926 to present. Britt, Kenneth WV. (ed.). Handbook of Pulp and Paper Technology. New York: Rein- hold Publishing Co., 1964. Byrne, Jerry, and WVeiner, Jack. Permanence. (Institute of Paper Chemistry Bibliographic Series No. 213.) Appleton, Wis.: Institute of Paper Chemistry, 1964. Casey, James P. Pulp and Paper, Chemistry anId Chemical Technology. Vol. 1: Pulp- ing and Bleachintg. Vol. 2: Papermaking. Vol. 3: Paper Testing and Converting. 2d ed., rev. and enlarged. New York: Inter- science Publishers, Inc., 1960. Chemical Abstracts. Easton, Pa.: American Chemical Society, 1907 to present. Church, John A. "The Role of Oxygen in the Accelerated Aging of Paper at 1000 C." Unpublished paper. Appleton, Wis.: Insti- tute of Paper Chemistry, May, 1961. Church, Randolph W. (ed.). Deterioration of Book Stock: Causes and Remedies; Two Studies on the Permanence Book Stock. Conducted by W. J. Barrow. (Virginia State Library Publications, No. 10.) Rich- mond: Virginia State Library, 1959. Environmental Effects on Materials and Equip- mrent, Section A. WVashington: Preserva- tion from Deterioration Center, Division of Chemistry and Chemical Technology, National Academy of Sciences-National Research Council, 1962 to present. Fussler, Herman H., and Simon, Julian L. Patterns in the Use of Books in Large Re- search Libraries. Chicago: University of Chicago Library, 1961. Grant, Julius. Books and Documents; Dating, Permanence and Preservation. London: Grafton & Co., 1937. Greathouse, Glenn A., and Wessel, Carl J. (eds.). Deterioration of Materials; Causes and Preventative Techniques. New York: Reinhold Publishing Co., 1954. Hansen, Fred S. "A Study of Some of the Factors Which Affect the Resistance of Paper to Natural Aging." Unpublished Master's dissertation, Institute of Paper Chemistry, 1937. Published as "Resistance of Paper to Natural Aging," Paper Industry and Paper World, 20 (February, 1939), 115 7-63. Institute of Paper Chemistry. Abstract Bul- letin of the Institute of Paper Chemistry. Appleton, Wis., 1930 to present. . Institute of Paper Chemistry Biblio- graphic Series. Appleton, Wis.: Institute of Paper Chemistry, 1936 to present. International Institute for the Conservation of Historic and Artistic Works. Abstracts of the Technical Literature on Archaeology and the Fine Arts. London: International Institute for the Conservation of Historic and Artistic Works, 1955 to present. Jarrell, T. D., Hankins, J. M., and Veitch,
PAPER DEACIDIFICATION 291 F. P. Deterioration of Book antd Record Papers. (U.S. Dept. of Agriculture Tech- nical Bulletin No. 541.) Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1936. Kantrowitz, Morris S., Spencer, Ernest W., and Simmons, Robert H. Permanence and Durability of Paper: An Annotated Bibliog- raphy of the Technical Literature from 1885 A.D. to 1939 A.D. (U.S. Government Printing Office Technical Bulletin No. 22.) Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1940. Langwell, W. H. The Conservation of Books and Documents. London: Sir Isaac Pitman & Sons, 1957. Libby, C. Earl (ed.). Pulp and Paper; Sci- ence and Technology. Vol. 1: Pulp. Vol. 2: Paper. (Prepared under the direction of the Joint Textbook Committee of the Paper Industry.) New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1962. Mauersberger, Herbert R. (ed.). Matthews' Textile Fibers: Their Physical, Microscopic, and Chemical Properties. 6th ed. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1954. Merrill, Gilbert R., Macormac, Alfred R., and MIauersberger, Herbert R. Americana Cotton Handbook: A Practical Text and Reference Book for the Entire Cotton Industry. 2d rev. ed. New York: Textile Book Publish- ers, Inc., 1949. Ott, Emil, Spurlin, Harold M., and Grafflin, Mildred W. (eds.). Cellulose and Cellulose Derivatives. 2d completely rev. and aug- mented ed. 3 vols. New York: Interscience Publishers, Inc., 1954. Plenderleith, H. J. The Conservation of Antiq- uities and Works of Art: Treatment, Re- pair, and Restoration. Reprinted 1957, and with additions in 1962. London: Oxford University Press, 1962. Preservation from Deterioration A bstracts. Washington: Prevention of Deterioration Center, Division of Chemistry and Chemi- cal Technology, National Academy of Sci- ences-National Research Council, 1946 to 1961/62. Sansone, Antonio. Recent Progress in the In- dustries of Dyeing and Calico Printing. Manchester: Abel Heyword & Sons, 1895. Speel, Henry C. (ed.). Textile Chemicals and Auxiliaries. New York: Reinhold Publishing Co., 1952. Technical Association of the Pulp and Paper Industry. Pulp and Paper Manufacture; Bibliography and United States Patents (former title: Bibliography of Pulp and Pa- per Making). New York: Technical Associa- tion of the Pulp and Paper Industry, 1929 to present. . TAPPI Standard Tests. New York: Technical Association of the Pulp and Paper Industry. Dates vary. Trotman, E. R. Dyeing and Chemical Tech- nology of Textile Fibers. 3d ed. London: Charles Griffin & Co., 1964. Williams, Gordon R. The Preservation of De- teriorating Books: An Examination of the Problem with Recommendations for a So- lution. Report of the Committee on the Preservation of Research Library Materials to the Association of Research Libraries. Chicago, September, 1964. Published as "The Preservation of Deteriorating Books, Part 1: An Examination of the Problem," Li- brary Journal, 91 (January 1, 1966), 52- 66; and "The Preservation of Deteriorating Books, Part 2: Recommendations for a So- lution," ibid., 91 (January 15, 1966), 189- 94. Van Nostrand's Scientific Encyclopedia. 3d ed. New York: D. Van Nostrand Co., 1958. OTHER SOURCES Banks, Paul N. (Conservator, Newberry Li- brary). Personal correspondence and inter- views. Various dates in 1965 and 1966. Institute of Paper Chemistry. Personal inter- views and correspondence with the presi- dent and members of the staff. Appleton, Wis. Various dates in 1965 and 1966. Roddy, William T. (Director, Department of Basic Science in Tanning Research, Uni- versity of Cincinnati). Personal communi- cation, June 30, 1966. Rogers, Marvin C. (Director, Chicago Paper Testing Laboratory, and Executive Director, Photoengravers Research Institute, Chica- go). Personal interviews. Various dates in 1966. Stock, Leon (Department of Chemistry, Uni- versity of Chicago). Personal interviews. Various dates in 1965 and 1966. Tribolet, Harold W. (Manager, Extra Bindery, R. R. Donnelley and Sons Co., Chicago). Personal interviews. Various dates in 1965 and 1966. Werner, A. E. (Keeper, Research Laboratory,
292 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY British Museum, London). Personal corres- pondence, June to August, 1966. PATENTS Holden, G. E., and Maguire, P. An Improved Process for Preventing Tendering of Cot- toni, Linen, or Mixed Goods That Have Been Dyed with Sulphide Colours. (Gt. Brit. Pat- ent No. 3087-A.D. 1909; accepted February 3, 1910.) London: His Majesty's Stationery Office, 1910. Langwell, W. G. Improvements in or Relat- ing to the Preservation of Documents for Storage. (Gt. Brit. Patent Specification No. 1,007,981; complete specification published October 22, 1965.) London: Her Majesty's Stationery Office, 1965. Ontario Research Foundation. Improvements in Processes for the Chemical Stabilization of Paper and Product. (Gt. Brit. Patent Specification No. 443,534; complete speci- fication accepted March 2, 1936.) London: His Majesty's Stationery Office, 1936. Schierholtz, Otto J. Process for the Chemical Stabilization of Paper and Product. (U.S. Patent No. 2,033,452.) Washington: U.S. Patent Office, March 10, 1936. Studney, John, Pollard, John D., and Landes, Chester G. Permanent Paper and Method of Making Same. (U.S. Patent Nos. 2,492,- 821; 2,492,822; and 2,539,558.) Washing- ton: U.S. Patent Office, December 27, 1949, December 27, 1949, and January 30, 1951.