ORGANIZATIONS OF EMPLOYEES, WITH ESPECIAL REFERENCE TO LIBRARY PERSONNEL' ORME W. PHELPS IN THIS discussion I arrive at the con- clusion that the library profession would be benefited by the establish- ment of a national association of library personnel, authorized and able to speak for the profession as a whole. The con- clusion is not revolutionary; in fact, it is hardly individual, since it is derived from the experience of occupational groups in this country during the last one hundred and fifty years. However, if it thereby lacks the quality of drama, it enjoys the virtue of obviousness, which in the pres- ent context is the more desirable. In arriving at the conclusion just stat- ed, my opening argument, and certainly my most difficult one because of its in- tangibility, is the usefulness of organiza- tions of employees in the maintenance of the morale of the working force. The pragmatic evidence of this fact lies all about us in a world which Professor T. V. Smith has described as "overorganized" and in which the demands of employee organizations of all types have become more insistent with each passing decade. A more recent development, however, is the growth of a body of analytical data concerning employee attitudes and their effects upon co-operation and productiv- ity. In these studies the drive for and impetus of employee organization is a constantly recurring theme. When com- bined with the professional character of library administration, these proposi- tions produce a secondary conclusion to the effect that vigorous employee organi- zation should be supported and encour- aged by library managements out of pure self-interest. Several intermediate steps are in- volved in moving from the question of staff morale to the verdict of a powerful, centralized fraternity of library profes- sionals. Employee organizations have advantages and disadvantages, and the thesis is strengthened if these are bal- anced against each other before a com- mitment is made. Institutional require- ments are not uniform, and it may be said for some more than for others that employee organization will show a decid- ed profit. It is well also to pay more than lip service to historical tendencies and current practice within the employing unit. Employee association is a growth, sometimes rapid, more often slow, and it usually builds upon earlier foundations. The appropriateness of a given type of organization to the requirements of em- ployees is a fairly complicated problem of analysis, simplified only where the vary- ing needs of the staff-economic, social, professional, etc.-point in succession to the same type of agency. It is submitted in the following comments that the de- sirable form of organization for library employees can be laid down with con- siderable assurance and that its outlines should prove attractive to administrators as well as to staff. Our first step in that project will be to expand the meaning of the word "organization." 1 This article constitutes a chapter in the forth- coming, publication, Personnd Administration in Li- braries, ed. LoweH Martin (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1946). 20
ORGANIZATIONS OF EMPLOYEES 21 FORMAL AND INFORMAL EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION In this connection, I think it will be useful to distinguish between two im- portant types or "species" of organiza- zation. One of these, "formal" organiza- tion, whether of employees or of manage- ment, has for a long time been the sub- ject of clinical examination, and its the- ory and practice comprise an extensive literature. Its counterpart, which I shall call "informal" organization after one of its leading theorists, while hidden be- tween the lines of many a treatise on formal organization, has only recently become a subject of investigation in its own right, at least with respect to its con- tribution to the functioning of purposive groups. Now, however, the advance of current research into the patterns of social groups and their significance for society and industry is promising to ex- plain modes of conduct hitherto incom- patible with the formal theory of man- agement. The minimum obligation of the student of administration would seem to be to incorporate these findings into his conception of organization, to the extent that matters previously regarded as extraneous have been shown to affect morale and production. As a matter of fact, this has been done. One writer who has discussed the subject in a very broad and suggestive fashion is Chester I. Barnard, in his treatise on The Functions of the Executive,2 to which I shall refer again. There is no necessity of reviewing here the characteristics of formal organiza- tions; but it might be helpful to sum- marize the features of "informal organi- zations," in the sense that the words are used in this paper. The term and the description are both taken from Bar- nard's book. Under the heading "What Informal Organizations Are," the author says: It is a matter of general observation and experience that persons are frequently in con- tact and interact with each other when their relationships are not a part of or governed by any formal organization. The magnitude of the numbers involved varies from two persons to that of a large mob or crowd. The characteristic of these contacts or interactions is that they occur and continue or are repeated without any specific conscious joint purpose. The con- tact may be accidental, or incidental to organ- ized activities, or arise from some personal de- sire or gregarious instinct; it may be friendly or hostile. But whatever the origins, the fact of such contacts, interactions, or groupings changes the experience, knowledge, attitudes, and emotions of the individuals affected..... The persistence of such effects is embodied in "states of mind" and habits of action which indicate the capacities of memory, experience, and social conditioning. As a result of these capacities some of the effects of contacts of persons with limited numbers of persons can spread through very large numbers in a sort of endless chain of interaction over wide ter- ritories and through long periods of time. By infornal organization I mean the aggre- gate of the personal contacts and interactions and the associated groupings of people that I have just described. Though common or joint purposes are excluded by definition, common or joint results of important character never- theless come from such organization.3 The functions of informal organiza- tions, listed by Barnard, are three: (i) the facilitation of communication; (2) "the maintenance of cohesiveness in formal organizations through regulating the willingness to serve and the stability of objective authority"; and (3) "the maintenance of the feeling of personal integrity, of self-respect, of independent choice."4 Now, while Barnard was writ- ing as an executive and for executives, an examination of the functions ascribed to 2 (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1942), see esp. chaps. ix and xv. 3 pP I14-IS. 4 P. I22.
22 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY informal organizations indicates their extreme importance to personnel at all levels, and no one who has read the book carefully can fail to be impressed with the breadth and inclusiveness of its gen- eralizations. A healthy informal organi- zation is a prerequisite to good morale, of executives, professionals, or rank-and- file, which brings us to the relationship between formal and informal organiza- tions. It is unnecessary for our purposes and would probably be meaningless to at- tempt to establish a hierarchy of im- portance as between formal and informal organization. Certainly, the latter is the more pervasive. Large numbers of groups of varying size and at least semipurpos- ive in character-for example, families, many partnerships, etc.-come into ex- istence, operate successfully for many years, and pass out of the picture with little or no formal organization through- out their history. A more profitable line of inquiry might be the division of pro- cedural jurisdictions. Here it is observed that formality is relied on in the fields of policy, authoritarian direction and ap- peals, supervision and control, and the selection of leaders. On the other hand, operations-the "carrying-out" of policy, directions, and orders-is an informal matter. Especially at the final step of contact between employee and customer, employee and materials, employee and employee, in the absence of the most rigorous motion study and supervision, the method, tempo, approach, attitude, and personality of the operator are mat- ters of individual choice and are condi- tioned by the many elements described by Barnard and others.5 It is an over- simplification, but I believe a useful one, to say that informal organizations get things done, and it is a function of formal organization, among other things, to facilitate informal organization.6 I come now to a full statement of the purpose of this discussion. It is peculiarly true that formal employee organizations in general have only indirect functional relationship to the objectives of the par- ent-association: the library, the firm, the governmental unit, or the school. This has resulted in criticism and op- position, which frequently has extended to controversy and conflict. It is respect- fully submitted that an understanding of the requirements of informal organiza- tions and their essential importance to operating units provides a clue to the usefulness of formal organizations of em- ployees and a basis for analyzing their appropriateness in a given situation. ("Appropriateness" is a complex term in this connection, involving not only the structure, function, and methodology of the operating unit, but also the purposes, attitudes, ideologies, and backgrounds of the employees.) In the light of these ob- servations, it is the purpose of this paper to examine the contribution which for- mal organizations of library employees might be expected to make to the needs and purposes of the unit of which they are members and to draw some conclu- s See Burleigh Gardner, Human Relations in Industry (Chicago: Richard D. Irwin, Inc., 1945); Elton Mayo, The Human Problems of an Industrial Civilization (New York: Macmillan Co., 1933); T. N. Whitehead, Leadership in a Free Society (Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press, 1936); and F. J. Roethlisberger and W. J. Dickson, Management and the Worker: Technical vs. Social Organization in an Industrial Plant ("Business Research Studies," No. g [Boston: Harvard Gradu- ate School of Business Administration, 1934]). 6The interlocking character of the process is indicated by Barnard's statement: "Formal organ- izations arise out of and are necessary to informal organization; but when formal organizations come into operation, they create and require informal organizations" (Op. Cit., p. 120).
ORGANIZATIONS OF EMPLOYEES 23 sions as to the type of organization most appropriate for the purpose. TYPES OF FORMAL ORGANIEZATIONS Organizations of employees7 are today the rule and not the exception. Wherever one looks, he finds a professional associa- tion, a trade-union, a technical society, a staff clinic, a labor-management commit- tee, an employee-representation plan, an office club, or some other designation in- dicating collective action on the part of personnel.8 Variations in structure seem almost as numerous. The question natur- ally arises: Does this proliferation of form reflect a basic differentiation in sub- stance and function? The matter has been argued violently by management, trade-unionists, economists, and legisla- tors, and a decision has been reached with regard to one fundamental point of divergence. An employee organization initiated, sponsored, maintained, sup- ported, or assisted in any way by man- agement is not a bona fide employee organization for purposes of collective bar- gaining. The conclusion is embodied in the Wagner Act and similar state legisla- tion and is now supported by one of the most remarkably unbroken lines of court decisions in our judicial history. The is- sue there decided is instructive for em- ployee groups of less militant character. The Wagner Act spelled the death of company unionism in private industry, a term which stood for employee represen- tation limited in scope to the employing unit and barred from co-operation with outside groups. If any single point has become accepted in the economics of collective bargaining, it is that independ- ent, local employee organizations may perform social, recreational, and welfare functions but are practically without in- fluence upon wages and conditions of work, in establishing or enforcing stand- ards of entrance into the occupation, or in imposing sanctlons upon nonconform- ist administrations. This is as true of a professional society as of a trade-union. With this primary difference disposed of, let us examine the similarities among employee organizations. There has been a tendency for likenesses to be concealed as a result of the controversial position of the labor movement, especially in recent years, and the special pleading for and against certain types of association. Up- on impartial examination, however, we find at least three important character- istics which appear in all formal aggrega- tions of personnel. First, we find an ex- tension of the principle of "industrial democracy," popularized by the Webbs, which implies some measure of popular sovereignty on basic issues and in the selection of leaders. The leaders may be nothing more than committee chairmen and the issues may be restricted to per- sonnel matters, but the employees have more voice in the matter with organiza- tion than without it. Second, employee organization is always accompanied by the opening-up of new channels of com- munication to management. The com- plaint, the grievance, or the suggestion, so often smothered (or believed to be smothered) in the past in its transmis- sion through line officers, is passed along a "private wire," so to speak, by individ- uals who consider it a major responsibili- ty rather than incidental to their jobs. Third, the employees are introduced to 7 Throughout the remainder of this paper, the term "employee organization" will be used in the customary sense as meaning "formal" organization. 8 See Harry A. Millis and Royal E. Montgomery, Organized Labor ("The Economics of Labor," Vol. III [New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc., 19451), p. 830, for a discussion of the variety of titles developed in connection with industrial em- ployee-representation plans, or "company union- ism."
24 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY the idea of self-help through organiza- tion. The results range from credit unions to beer parties and from community opera to dental clinics. Co-operation has spread widely through economic, social, welfare, fiscal, recreational, and voca- tional activities, with an influence in the aggregate which no one can measure. Employee organization may originate with management or with employees or may result from an outside stimulus. Whatever the source, its persistence and spread are indicative of a felt need which requires to be served. MANAGERIAL ADVANTAGES AND DIS- ADVANTAGES OF EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATIONS Like the tariff, employee organization is a local issue. It comes to a focus upon certain employees, members of a certain employing unit, in a given locality. The all-important factor external to the group is the reaction of management. This categorical statement may be justi- fied by the observation that, without recognition, employee organization can- not survive, and it is management that decides whether or not to recognize and what recognition means. In the past, managerial response has run the gamut from initiation and spon- sorship to active opposition. While the personalities and immediate circum- stances of each case have always been influential, a fairly consistent distinction may be drawn between the attitudes of proprietors of profit-seeking and not-for- profit institutions. The former frequently (and understandably) have been much more opposed to any relinquishment of authority than the latter. The explana- tion, of course, is no secret to anyone even moderately familiar with business and institutional practice. It lies in the exigencies of competition, the constant imminence of bankruptcy, and the clarity and directness of opposition of interest.9 The managers of nonprofit institu- tions, on the other hand, are only rarely confronted with vigorous, direct compe- tition; their budgets are often independ- ent of their revenues; and it is uncommon that an increase in the share going to em- ployees means a reduction in their per- sonal incomes. This explanation is by no means exhaustive. Many other factors have been involved: the temper and limitations of the employee organization concerned; conditions of employment- particularly the matter of uncertainty; background and training of both parties; ignorance and misunderstanding of pur- poses, etc. One observation may be made with assurance. During the past decade there has been a remarkable increase in managerial curiosity concerning the ad- vantages and disadvantages of organiza- tions of employees. Let us see how these balance off. Certain spokesmen for industrial man- agement to the contrary notwithstand- ing, I believe that it is fairly well agreed by now that there are definite, observ- able gains to administrators from em- ployee organization of even the most militant type. In large part these bene- fits are indirect, but they are there, and more and more administrators are realiz- ing them. In all cases they must be weighed against the disadvantages, which are just as real and often much more obvious, though perhaps not for 9 "Opposition of interest" is not a settled issue, but its scope is much too large to be debated here. For the purposes of this discussion it will be suffi- cient to state that I agree with Millis that the theory of collective bargaining implies opposition of interests, which concept in the form of inequality of bargaining power is stated in the Preamble to the Wagner Act (see Millis and Montgomery, op. cit., pp. 354-56).
ORGANIZATIONS OF EMPLOYEES 25 that reason necessarily more important in either the short or the long run. Again without attempting to be exhaustive, a few of the principal gains and losses will be detailed. First on any list of profits from the collective action of employees would be "improved morale," or the strengthen- ing of informal organization. How does it come about? I am not sure that anyone knows for certain, but the theory has been advanced that the employee gains status from his membership and partici- pation, his increased contacts and sym- pathies, and his (at least supposed) greater importance when speaking through his group than as an individual. His self-respect is improved, his power of initiative strengthened, and his capacity to co-operate enlivened. These qualities are intangibles of a high order. However, few supervisors are unaware of them or their consequences. Benefits closely related to the preced- ing have grown out of the creation of new lines of communication for the handling of grievances and, in some cases, em- ployee suggestions. The establishment of grievance procedure has two counts in its favor. First, it provides an emotional re- lease for the employee by satisfying him that what he considers an unfairness will certainly receive a hearing. Accurate measurement of the amount of future trouble thus avoided is impossible. How- ever, as an employee for five years of a large industrial establishment with no grievance procedure whatever, my per- sonal testimony would be that nothing is more important to good relations. The second count favoring grievance proce- dure is the removal of the mass of com- plaints, accusations, and misunderstand- ings, with their high emotional charge, from the functional lines of communica- tion, whose principal responsibility is to get the day's work done. This incom- patibility of temper in communications alone, it seems to me, is sufficient ex- planation of the breakdown of adjust- ments in large, highly formalized estab- lishments. Employee suggestions for the im- provement of practice and method are as valuable a potential source of assist- ance as employee grievances are a hin- drance. They run to the technical side and hence seem well adapted to the standard lines of communication. How- ever, the "throttling" or "appropriation" of employee suggestions has at times turned out to be a major grievance, and some well-run suggestion systems have produced a startling output of ideas, which seemed at least indicative of previ- ous interference. Here the explanation seems to lie in the proprietary attitudes of individuals toward their jobs and the improvements that they can devise for doing them. Many instances have been uncovered of employees' refusing to make known special methods or devices which they had worked out and which enabled them to excel, even though the advantage was not reflected in their pay.'0 It is notable that some of the most successful suggestion systems have ap- peared in the presence of formal em- ployee organization of one form or an- other. We shall mention two more features of employee organization, in both of which the gain to management is more direct. One is the assumption by the employee group of certain staff functions which would otherwise require special attention and personnel for their discharge. In- duction, training, and indoctrination are commonly so assigned. Employee man- uals and house organs have been pre- 10 Suggestion systems really fall within the pur- view of incentive compensation.
26 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY pared in this manner. Welfare activities, with recreational, financial, and educa- tional objectives, are commonly recog- nized as obligations of the union, the committee, or the council. Since some or all of the foregoing are accepted as re- sponsibilities by some or all manage- ments, their transfer to employee groups is a direct saving of time and effort. Fi- nally, but by no means least in impor- tance, there are examples of organized employee assistance in external affairs, notably in the lobbyist activities of ag- gregations of public employees and the support given to institutional adminis- tration by professional societies such as the American Association of University Professors. Recognizing that a stronger and more comprehensive case can be made for the credit side by a "true believer," let us turn to some of the more obvious disad- vantages which accompany formal or- ganizations of employees. They exist, and they deserve equal attention with the advantages. High on the list with administrative officers, and not to be passed over too lightly by the observer without responsibility, is the placing of limitations upon or the loss of sovereign- ty, which to the manager means the right to make rapid, unchallenged, arbi- trary decisions.", This can mean a serious loss of short-run efficiency and perhaps of long-run effectiveness. It is altogether too true of many activities that "the in- stitution is only the lengthened shadow of a man." In competitive situations the reduction in flexibility may easily be fatal. It is worth noting that those or- ganizations with the simplest objectives, for which efficiency is the highest goal-I refer to the armed services-have never permitted the slightest modification of authority in dealing with subordinates, and no one expects them to. Some em- ployee organizations today present the paradox of the most authoritarian and arbitrary dictation upon the part of their leaders while at the same time demand- ing "industrial democracy" from their employers. Leadership is the subject of an extensive literature, none of it too explicit. Whatever its components may be, it is an intangible of equal potency to employee morale and perhaps tampered with at equally as great a cost. Following close upon the heels of limi- tation of managerial authority, another drawback of employee organization is the almost unavoidable blurring of lines of authority which accompanies the multiplication of channels of communi- cation. (You will recall that Barnard considers formal channels of communica- tion and lines of authority as practically synonymous and executives as primarily "centers of communication.") The cur- rent controversy over the unionization of foremen and the many discussions of the troubles of "middle management" are directly related to this redistribution of managerial prerogatives-for that is what it amounts to.'2 In this respect, al- so, equity is probably' paid for at the ex- pense of efficiency, though it is possible to "1 The extent to which this has occurred among industrial managements during the past few years of rapid unionization is illustrated by Neil Chamber- lain's article, "The Organized Business in America," Journal of Political Economy, LII (June, I944), 97-III. 12 Particularly in the industrial sector, American institutions have been undergoing a rapid rearrange- ment and redistribution of power for more than a decade. Those who are interested in a careful and competent account of analogous Russian industrial experience during the trial-and-error period from 1923 to 1939 should read G. Bienstock, Solomon N. Schwarz, and Aaron Yugow, Management in Russian In-dustry and A griculture (London: Oxford Uni- versity Press, I944). Although magnified many times (or perhaps because of that), the analogy to American experience is instructive.
ORGANIZATIONS OF EMPLOYEES 27 argue in the reverse from premises stated earlier. Another weakness arises from the in- stitution of grievance procedure through special agencies. A forum is automatical- ly supplied for the agitator, the trouble- maker, and the perpetually dissatisfied. The comfortable assumption that every staff is composed solely of well-balanced, normal individuals who need only an opportunity for self-expression and an equal chance to bring out their essential- ly co-operative tendencies needs only to be stated to be rejected. The formal em- ployee organization, no matter how paternalistic, is a political unit, and the rhetoric of politics is the traditional lan- guage of collective bargaining. The co- operative and level-headed employee is not always the articulate one. One ex- tremist on a committee has been known to disrupt the whole process of joint ac- tion. What is more, the delicacy of the situation often makes suppression of even the most excessive claims inadvis- able. In this respect, it is possible for the public relations function of the employee organization to become distorted until it is a serious liability. As the last on our brief list of disad- vantages, there is the loss in time and energy from conferring, dealing, bar- gaining, and discussing with employee groups in their various capacities. First- hand investigation of personnel matters makes it hard to avoid the conclusion that simple pressure for time has forced official after official to put off staff con- ferences, cancel committee meetings, delegate representative functions to sub- ordinates, and generally neglect con- tacts whose importance they would not deny, solely because of their time-con- suming nature. Undoubtedly, the war- time emergency has aggravated the det- riments arising from this source, but they were felt before and will remain after it. Unfortunately, the staff or com- mittee meeting is rarely dramatic. It often resembles a discussion group and seldom radiates the impression of "get- ting somewhere)" To busy executives who have more demands on their time than they can possibly meet, it frequent- ly cannot help seeming a waste and goes far down on the list of priorities. The recognition of employee organizations implies dealing with them, and dealing takes time. It is one of the costs of a step whose advantages may not seem either immediate or certain. EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATIONS IN LIBRARIES Our next step is to relate the gains and losses just enumerated to a specific class of institutional managers-librari- ans. While the generalizations which follow will probably not fit all cases, I believe they can be defended as typical. The library director operates a non- profit institution, frequently under gov- ernmental auspices, which offers a pro- fessional service under noncompetitive conditions. His staff contains a high per- centage of professional people, who are subject to the usual neuroses of that class. Hence staff morale is a major con- cern. His budget is customarily set for him, and his own rate of pay is fixed in the same manner as that of his subor- dinates. Economic conflict of interest is therefore at a minimum. His organiza- tion deals almost solely in ideas, which means that the intangible factors in personal service are of major importance. A professional organization contains more than the usual proportion of staff personnel and staff functions.13 Em- '3 "Staff" is here used in its customary sense, as differentiated from line authority in the "chain of command."
28 THE LLBRARY QUARTERLY ployee organizations have been shown to be well adapted to such responsi- bilities. Public relations are highly im- portant to libraries. The usefulness of employee groups in insuring public sup- port has been proved in closely related fields-for example, education. Under customary budgetary procedure and in the absence of vigorous, direct competi- tion, the short-run demands of library management appear to require less of rapid, flexible, arbitrary decision and lend themselves more to persuasion and co-operation. On balance, it seems to this observer that the advantages of employee organization considerably out- weigh the disadvantages to library offi- cials. From the standpoint of the em- ployees, the benefits are even more ob- vious. It is not surprising to discover a growth of formal employee organiza- tions among library employees and an interest upon the part of library manage- ments in the subject. Let us then pro- ceed to a consideration of the appropri- ate type of formal organization for li- brary personnel. We shall operate on the assumption that the forms of organization which have developed in the past have borne some reasonable relation to the pur- poses and needs of employees served by them and that the many differentia- tions of structure and function were an outgrowth of a process of natural selec- tion and survival of the fittest. We shall also assume that it is possible to survey a particular type of employee and his surroundings in relation to the various forms of employee organization which have already appeared in that environ- ment or which might reasonably be ex- pected to develop and to say with some confidence that a particular kind of organization is better adapted to his requirements than another.'4 However persuasive the statement proves to be, it may or may not affect his choice. That is a different matter. But in the case of library personnel, I believe that we can be rather specific with a good deal of confidence. The practical choice in the past and currently for library employees seems to lie between a trade-union and a local staff association (or whatever it may be called), with the latter far more widely adopted. Thus far, library unionism has been a negligible portion of the sub- merged tenth of the American trade- union movement, with about a dozen locals scattered from Butte, Montana, to Washington, D.C. The Monthly Labor Review for June, I944, reported the unionization of clerical and professional workers as totaling i ,400,ooo-about one-tenth of all union membership and one-eighth of the employees in those classifications. However, a majority of the I,4oo,ooo were government em- ployees, and the great majority of them were in the postal service. Outside the postal service and the government, "only a little over 5 per cent of the cleri- cal and professional workers" were unionized. The future of white-collar unionism was just as bleak, according to one experienced observer and con- firmed trade-unionist.'5 Staff associa- tions, on the other hand, have had a steady growth since their origin in I9I6 and have increased rapidly since their 14 This statement will be recognized as a modifi- cation of the "one best way" assumption of the early scientific-management theorists. IS Merlyn S. Pitzele, "The Outlook for White- Collar Unionism," Management Reviewv, XXXIII (June, z944), I84-89; see also Bernard Berelson, "Library Unionization," Library Quarterly, IX (I939), 477-5IO, for an exhaustive report on library unions here and abroad.
ORGANIZATIONS OF EMPLOYEES 29 indorsement by the American Library Association in 1937. There were thirty of them by 1936 and double that number two years later; since that time they have become the accepted form of em- ployee organization for libraries.'6 It is not difficult to explain the limited success of trade-unions among library employees to date. Library personnel may be characterized fairly easily, and each of the characteristics, in turn, is associated with a group which has proved unresponsive to the organized labor movement. A large majority of library personnel are public employees, and the remainder work, for nonprofit public service institutions. An overwhelming proportion of them, almost go per cent, are women.I7 Almost without exception they are white-collar workers, with a large percentage of professionally trained personnel. And, finally, they are widely dispersed in small groups throughout any given territory. These factors would be enough to make any union organizer think twice before committing his time and his reputation. Consider the first item-governmental employment. Berelson reports that, like other organized public employees, li- brary unions repudiated strikes and picketing in favor of negotiation, lobby- ing, petitions, and the like. These limita- tions on union striking power help to explain why only an insignificant por- tion of the federal service and of some municipalities is organized and why in state employment and most cities the unions can hardly be said to have a toehold. Government groups also con- tain large numbers of women and white- collar workers. Women have never been good material for organization. Perhaps they do not have the proletarian outlook; perhaps it is because for many long years the trade-unions did not want women and either barred them or shunted them off into auxiliaries with little voice and less influence. Probably no one knows for sure why white-collar employees resist organization. Many explanations have been advanced, to wit: they are salaried (security), class-conscious, suffer from education and ambition, and reject the permanence of status implied in union membership. Union organizers under- stand both geography and communica- tions. The dispersal of library units and employees is a final obstacle to aggressive action. There are other, more subtle and perhaps equally persuasive, reasons for doubting the "organizability" of library employees, but those outlined above will suffice. It is clear that neither the temperament nor the surroundings of the library staff lend themselves to typical hard-hitting American business unionism, with its class-conflict basis and its anti-employer methodology. However similar it may ultimately prove to be in purpose and function, a professional or "staff" association offers much less of semantical sales resistance to clerical and professional personnel than trade-unionism does. For example, the A.A.U.P., although a youthful group by trade-union standards, has a repre- sentative and growing membership, most of whom seem to find as much satisfac- tion in the connection as does the con- stituency of the Brotherhood of Loco- motive Firemen and Enginemen. The i6 As of August 14, 1945, there were xri staff organizations in the United States, of which 12 were unions (letter from Margia W. Proctor of the Buffalo Public Library to Hazel B. Timmerman, chief of the Personnel Office, American Library Asso- ciation, and furnished to the writer by the latter). 17 U.S. Bureau of the Census, Statistical Abstract of the United States, 943 (Washington: Government Printing Office, 1944), p. 124.
30 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY association's most active organ is Com- mittee A on Academic Freedom and Tenure, whose principal responsibility is the investigation of alleged unjustified dismissals of associates. It censures uni- versity and college administrations and publishes a blacklist which is almost identical in content and meaning with that formerly employed by the American Federation of Labor and for which Samuel Gompers almost went to jail. It maintains an employment service, re- porting vacancies and teachers available. It has made several important studies and recommendations concerning sal- aries and conditions of work of college teachers, the suggestions tending strong- ly in the direction of a "standard rate." Its control of entrance to the trade is in- formal, genteel, and approached through the medium of higher standards for the profession. They are the subject of many an article in the association journal, edited by its very able business agent, General Secretary Himstead. This series of essentially defensive and protectionist operations is supported by a group of dignified trade-unionists who hail from all sections of the country and are led by Professor Quincy Wright of our own local. It is my union, and I am proud to be a member. The A.A.U.P. is a dignified and re- spectable professional society. Its en- deavors on behalf of its membership are no more rapacious, predacious, or ruth- less than similar actions by the American Medical Association, the American Bar Association, or other professional groups. Its objectives differ somewhat from those of the medical and bar associations, be- cause its members are primarily em- ployees rather than entrepreneurs. (In this respect the teacher is similar to the library professional.) Those objec- tives, however, are primarily economic and are aimed at the protection of the individual through insistence upon cer- tain standards to be observed by em- ploying institutions. Where the trade- union is deprived of the right to strike, picket, boycott, and co-operate with other unions, its advantage in aggres- sive tactics is greatly lessened and may be wiped out. Its weapons then consist of the lobby, the petition, the negotia- tion, and the public relations campaign, all of them a part of strategy with which professional organizations are familiar and at which they have proved that they can excel. THE CASE FOR A NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF LIBRARIANS The library staff association is a rela- tively recent development, whose func- tions are already settling into the familiar patterns of employee organization, past and present. I shall rely upon Messrs McDiarmid for a summary of the roles played by staff organizations up to I943. They were then diagnosed as social, pro- fessional, economic, and representative."8 The professional dimension, including lecture meetings, book talks, forum dis- cussions, convention reports, study pro- grams, institutes, and staff libraries, was regarded as the major interest. It is happily true that the salaried pro- fessional and subprofessional employees are practically free from the "scarcity consciousness" which Perlman considered the fundamental explanation of trade- unionism. Service, especially of a public, institutional nature, is almost an un- limited concept. This enables the em- ployee organization to turn its attention to expanding its field of operations or '8 E. W. and John McDiarmid, The Administra- tion of the American Public Library (Chicago: American Library Association and University of Illinois Press, 1943), pp. I90-94.
ORGANIZATIONS OF EMPLOYEES 31 improving existing procedures rather than struggling with jurisdictional dis- putes and enforcing work-limitation pro- grams. Social activities consist of parties, teas, receptions, and dances. The eco- nomic or protective function has to do with salaries, hours, and working con- ditions, as well as credit unions, hospital and health plans, and the like. The authors reported that vigorous action in this sector was limited to a small minority of organizations. Representa- tive services consist of the presentation of grievances and the forwarding of suggestions, as well as assistance to the administration on special problems of the library. Here we have the usual galaxy of vocational, social, and eco- nomic functions associated with special- interest groups of employees.'0 How well is the library staff association equipped to discharge them? Social duties may be disposed of briefly; they are local, ad hoc, intimate, and fall naturally within the orbit of an employing unit. The same is true of certain of the "representative" activi- ties, namely, suggestion programs and committee attention to specific library problems. However, the picture changes somewhat as we move to professional and economic objectives. Conceived sole- ly as a program of improvement of staff and an outlet for the ambitions of ener- getic assistants, the "professional" func- tion could probably be discharged with moderate success on a local basis, al- though there would certainly be con- siderable unevenness in the quality of training imparted. It seems likely that the development of the profession as a whole would be strengthened by national organization and centralized accumu- lation and distribution of materials. Viewed from another angle, the pro- fessional function is of prime importance economically; the reference here is to the establishment of minimum qualifi- cations for library personnel of all grades and the insistence that employing insti- tutions observe the standards set. In the language of organized labor this is con- trol of entrance to the trade. It calls for compulsion in some instances, par- ticularly in the early stages of profes- sional growth and consolidation. The whole history of employee organization denies that it will come about naturally or that it can be accomplished by local groups. The control of entrance to the trade, or, in more euphonious terminology, the stabilization of minimum qualifications for professional employment, is a major factor in the economic well-being of any occupational group. In the long run, it is the decisive element in the determina- tion of salaries and conditions of work. It may be that library employees have no economic problems, but on the out- side chance that such may arise in the future, I shall devote some brief atten- tion to the economics of salary deter- mination, starting with the familiar premise of the classification technician that persons doing work similar in diffi- culty and responsibility should receive equal pay. While the assumption of "equal pay for equal work" is persua- sive and appropriate in the context of a salary survey and standardization pro- gram, it is bad economics. The princi- pal basis of value in services as well as in commodities is scarcity. A glut of li- brary directors and a shortage of cata- logers means that directors' salaries will "9 For a good brief summary of the functions of a staff association, see "Why a Library Staff Or- ganization," AsSORTment: Buletin of the Sta.ff Organizations Round Table, American Library As- sociation (December, I944), p. 6. The writer is in- debted to Hazel B. Timmerman for these and other data on staff organizations in libraries.
32 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY fall and the remuneration of the cata- logers will rise. Likewise, a glut of li- brarians or-and this is important-of persons deemed competent to do library work, relative to other occupational groups, means that librarians will suffer in salary and perquisites. No short-run program of amelioration will be very effective so long as the boundaries of the profession are poorly defined, stand- ards are low, and the general public remains uneducated to the need for trained and competent personnel in the acquisition, housing, management, and distribution of the accumulated knowl- edge of the race. What is equally im- portant, no long-run program of ameli- oration is likely to progress far unless sponsored and led by a tightly inte- grated, nation-wide organization capable of speaking authoritatively for the pro- fession as a whole. The economic func- tion of an employee organization cannot be discharged effectively by independent groups, even when they are working for the same end. The conclusion is just as appropriate to grievance adjustment as when applied to more basic issues of terms and conditions of employment. Witness the experience of the A.A.U.P., the medical and bar associations, and the railroad unions. Another important gain is achieved through co-ordinated rather than in- dependent action. It is probable that managerial dictation is less arbitrary in library affairs than in some other forms of institutional activity and much less than in private enterprise. For reasons which should be fairly evident by now and which I shall underline explicitly, I should expect library managements to inaugurate and nourish formal organi- zations of their employees on grounds of prime self-interest. Nonetheless, the ex- perience of trade-unionism and the les- son of the Wagner Act should not be for- gotten. Organizations of employees, whether professional, clerical, trade, or la- bor, should not be dominated by manage- rial representatives. The more successful employee representation plans in private industry flourished in an atmosphere of employer co-operation, but outright managerial domination and direction were conspicuously absent. A large num- ber of such groups have been certified as bona fide independent unions by the National Labor Relations Board, and no one, to my knowledge, has accused the board of trying to legalize employer- dominated bodies. A national organiza- tion of library employees, even though it included administrative officials as qualified members, would be far less likely to reflect exclusively the adminis- trative point of view and would have a much freer hand in the investigation of grievances or other alleged departures from approved managerial practice. Librarians are not numerous. In total numbers they are a negligible propor- tion of even the professional population, which at last report was about 6 per cent of the civilian labor force. Their economic weight is small enough at best. If economic problems have an im- portant place in the concerns of library personnel, the conclusion seems inescap- able that they have not as yet evolved the type of formal organization best suited to their needs. An amalgamation or extension of the staff association to a professional society on a national scale would be a long step in that direction. None of the other activities-social, rep- resentative, or professional-would be weakened by the move, and many of them would be strengthened thereby. In view of the limited numbers of li- brary personnel in the aggregate, I should also respectfully suggest the con-
ORGANIZATIONS OF EMPLOYEES 33 sideration of alliance with other groups of similar backgrounds and aims. This affinity could be anything from casual and informal contact to formal federa- tion. It would be in the best tradition of co-operation between like-minded trade and professional groups, and in the past such compacts have yielded important strategic gains. Perhaps a word of apology and one of warning are called for at this point. The apology consists of a brief justifi- cation of employee organization, which has thus far been presented mostly in its negative aspects of protection. Ethi- cally, the defense of an occupation is justified in the same manner as the de- fense of anything else-namely, in terms of its usefulness to society. If the mem- bers of the library profession feel that they are performing a socially valuable service, it is my conviction that they are justified in using all legitimate methods to bring that fact to the attention of either the general public or specially interested parties. It has certainly been demonstrated again and again that no one else will take the trouble. If the result is an improvement of the position of the profession so that it can render a better service, the gain is social. It is freely granted that advancement of the group can be pushed too far and may rest on too limited a basis; that is for the group and society to decide. In the case of librarians, I doubt that they have yet overreached themselves in the matters of power and position. The warning is more serious. Nothing could be further from my intention than to imply that a national professional association of librarians (or a national association of library employees) would automatically solve the personnel prob- lems of library employees or adminis- trators. I am convinced that it would be a step in the right direction or, to put it another way, that steps in that direc- tion would be beneficial and help in solving many problems. At the same time they would raise problems of their own. The associational advancement of personnel of any type is a job of con- siderable delicacy and poses many diffi- culties for its initiators and supporters. Agreement upon objectives is often easier than agreement upon methods of reaching them. The organization of li- brary employees is a problem to be worked out through time by library per- sonnel and administrators within the ex- isting institutional framework and with due regard to the peculiarities of the profession. In many ways the situation is one of unusual complexity, involving, as it does, degrees of professional compe- tence, the individualities of government- al procedure, and civil service require- ments, as well as the exigencies of the general labor market. It would be im- pertinent for an outsider to do any more than generalize from the experience of other employee organizations which have met in their various ways the same types of problems which library personnel face and to attempt to indicate the factors which have spelled out success or failure. The relevance of these remarks to li- brary administrators is twofold. In the first place, library officials are profes- sional people, and the welfare of the profession is their welfare. If the pro- fession gains in esteem and vitality, they rise with it; if the opposite occurs, theirs is the greatest loss. A vigorous formal organization representative of the profession could hardly fail to improve its position with the public and with particular elements of the public whose decisions are crucial to the success of its work. In the second place, whether they
34 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY admit it or not, library administrators are concerned with the informal organi- zation of their staffs. One of the func- tions of formal organization is to assist and facilitate a healthy informal organi- zation. Formal organizations of em- ployees could hardly be as prevalent as they are today if they were not catering to a definite need on the part of their members. If this conclusion seems rea- sonable-and it is supported by a con- siderable body of analytical evidence- it is submitted that managements are serving themselves as well as their sub- ordinates if they help them to realize their ends. SUMMARY To summarize briefly, this analysis rests upon the belief that formal organi- zation contributes to the success of in- formal organization and that the latter is a principal ingredient of morale. The many varieties of formal organization among employees have several basic features in common: the extension of the principle of popular sovereignty within functional groups, the opening of new channels of communication, and the principle of employee self-help through organization. Their differences represent adjustments to the individuali- ties of background, purpose, and method of occupational groups. Their advan- tages appear to outweigh their disad- vantages for librarians. The current practical choice of library personnel is between a trade-union, on the one hand, and a local staff association, on the other. For reasons outlined in some detail, it is doubted that trade-unionism is the appropriate form of organization for library personnel or that it will develop much more attraction for them in the future than it has in the past. The staff association, as now constituted, has the fatal weakness of independence, if it is to play a significant part in the de- velopment of the profession. The chief recommendation contained herein is for amalgamation or extension of local staff groups into a national organization qualified and able to speak for librarians on matters of special interest to them. In addition, it is suggested that librarians consider the possibility of alliance with other groups, to overcome the numerical weakness of their profession. Finally, it is submitted that it is to the interests of library administrators to assist their employees in the development of formal organizations suitable to their needs.