READJUSTMENTS BY THE LIBRARIAN HERMAN H. FUSSLER IN THIS paper an effort wil be made to try to relate some of the current con- cerns and operating problems of the larger research library to aspects of the basic intellectual world of which the li- brary is a part. In approaching this task we shall try to emphasize some of those situations that now seem likely to require major attention or solution in the next ten to twenty years. The librarian is ac- customed to trying to peer into the fu- ture in order to provide the kinds of ma- terials that he thinks, or hopes, will be needed. He also tries to look backward to evaluate and account for elements of strength and weakness in his collections -and what sometimes appear to be the successes and the errors of his prede- cessors. Let us begin with a very brief exami- nation of one or two general aspects of the scholarly library. It is not an institu- tion of marked fluidity. It cannot, over- night, mobilize great strength in a sub- ject or a particular form of literature. Barring a fortunate block purchase, this usually takes time, more time than it should perhaps, and in the future possi- bly less time than we now like to think is necessary, but it takes time nonetheless. The library and scholarly methods of or- ganizing the matenral at hand are increas- ingly baffling in their complexity and cost. Yet very little concrete information is available on the effectiveness of these organizational devices. The use of a scholarly library would present an alarm- ing picture to any modern industrialist. In his terms, the investment in the inven- tory is fantastically high, yet only a very small proportion of the inventory is in use at any one time, and much of the more expensive-and perhaps most valu- able-parts of the inventory are never, or almost never used. On the basis of con- ventional industrial economics, such an organization should long since have been dedared bankrupt and liquidated or completely reorganized under more en- lightened management. Yet scholarly li- braries are economically poor, and rela- tive to most trends they are becoming poorer rather than richer, despite the fact that in the light of the concepts by which they operate they are not ineffi- cient. The situation faced by the modem re- search library is so complex that to haz- ard a relatively brief discussion of its problems inevitably risks fairly detailed treatment of only one or two more obvi- ous matters, or superficial discussion of a larger area of the obvious. It will be the major theme of this paper that many (though not all) of the principal current problems of the scholarly library go back in one way or another to the growth of knowledge and the mediums of commu- nication. Interestingly enough, this pre- occupation is not a new one for librarians. The intellectuals of ancient Rome were worried about it too. While the basic problem may not be new, the problem has new dimensions that require us to re- consider the nature of the scholarly li- brary and its methods of operation. This, in turn, requires that we also consider the needs and methods of the present and 216
READJUSTMENTS BY THE LIBRARIAN 217 future scholars who depend upon the li- brary. In this discussion I shall try mere- ly to outline some of the problems, with here and there an indication of the direc- tion solutions may take, rather than at- tempt to descnrbe the solutions them- selves. It is important that we recognize in this context that the librarian is not a completely free agent. He can adjust and readjust, as the title of this paper im- plies, but only within real, and some- times quite narrow, limits. The need for readjustment, as well as the nature of the readjustments, has its origins in factors of greater generality than those con- trolled by the librarian alone. While the librarian undoubtedly needs readjust- ment from time to time, like a fine watch, the library which he administers and the constituency which he serves may also be in occasional need of readjustment. Either the ideal or the actual scholarly library is affected by four different kinds of influences. First, it is affected by the desires, needs, and customs of society, and particularly of that part of society which forms the library's constituency. Second, the resources of the library in money and manpower (and manpower must include capability as well as quanti- ty) have a major bearing upon opera- tions. Third, the extent and basic charac- teristics of the materials from which li- braries assemble their collections are very critical factors. Finally, the state of our knowledge or of our understanding of the operations of libraries and the needs of readers must certainly influence our behavior and our operations. An initial consideration of the kinds of readjustments to which librarians are likely to be subjected reveals that the factors listed above are not convenient rubrics for the discussion of change or re- adjustment, primarily because many of the probable changes or readjustments are related to more than one factor. Since the four pnrncipal forces which affect scholarly libraries are not convenient devices under which to organize a dis- cussion, I submit the following six ma- jor categories under which readjustments might, with reasonable convenience, be discussed: (1) the state of our basic knowledge of libraries and the library profession; (2) characteristics of print and scholarship; (3) co-operation among libraries and librarians; (4) financial problems; (5) problems of personnel and staffing; and (6) machines and techno- logical developments. There is only a vague element of cohesiveness among these topics, and many others could be added to the list. The justification of this list grows essentially out of the existence of major contemporary problems in these areas, and out of contemporary problems change is most likely to arise. BASIC KNOWLEDGE We may dispose of our first major cat- egory, that of the basic knowledge of li- braries and the library profession, vety quickly by saying that the scholarly li- brary has almost no basic principles or basic knowledge on which to operate. The deficiency in this area is fundamen- tal and critical if we are to plan sensibly for the future. The research library has been built largely upon a tradition of li- brarianship and scholarship that has many of its origins far in the past. As librarians, we do not know nearly enough about the devices by which scholars are led to particular forms of print or from one area of print to another, the uses which they actually make of print or li- braries, and their actual needs for books and print. We know, for example, that the demands of scholarship are extremely broad. We sense that librarians may tend
218 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY to define scholarly demands as being broader than they actually are, but they are urged to this course by scholars them- selves. It is said, for example, that schol- arship has no limits in its need or poten- tial future need for print, and therefore libraries, taken collectively, may have no limits either. As I shall try to show in later sections of this paper, the sound operation of scholarly libraries may be jeopardized if this premise is correct, and we lack convincing evidence that it is correct. The underlying question is whether the traditions of scholarly librarianship will support and sustain its future opera- tions successfully. Change, if change is to come, ought to be based upon a genuine understanding of the fundamental proc- esses and principles that are involved. In the absence of such knowledge, change may be imposed through economic or in- tellectual collapse and may be anything but constructive in nature. We would hope, therefore, that in the next ten to twenty years, major research efforts could be directed toward an improved understanding of the processes of com- munication in scholarship. Only from such studies may the scholarly library successfully and soundly plot its future operations and development. CHARACTERISTICS OF PRINT AND SCHOLARSHIP Under our second topic, characteristics of print and scholarship, we have loosely associated a series of partially related matters. To the extent that there are gen- eral empirical concepts underlying the scholarly library, these have most of the virtues of age. Some of them certainly go back to the medieval university. Yet there are fundamental differences in the situation of the scholarly library today from that of its predecessors of only a few generations ago, and the virtues of age may not be far from the discourage- ments of senility. The medieval scholarly libraries were principally devoted to theology and the humanities. The literature of the physi- cal, biological, and, especially, the social sciences, with the exception of certain professional literatures, is a recent, al- most a contemporary, phenomenon. The medieval users of print were an elite. The problems of communication among scholars were elementary and perhaps not even very important. Production of new texts was infrequent, by any com- parative standard at least, and as a con- sequence the growth of literature has not been a serious factor until recent times. The major physical growth in scholarly libraries in this country has occurred within one century, and the bulk of that growth has been contained within the last fifty years. In contrast to its predecessors, the fu- ture scholarly library will be confronted with a situation of entirely different mag- nitudes. It is widely recognized that knowledge is growing along roughly ex- ponential lines and, barring a major cat- aclysm, will probably continue to do so for some time to come. The growth of knowledge is probably reflected in an even greater growth of print since print has become a common device for facili- tating all sorts of communication and record-keeping, and no one would now seriously assert that all printed matter- with print broadly interpreted to include manuscripts, near-print, etc.-represents contributions to knowledge, intellectual experience, or even necessary reflections of our time. The growth in the number of users of scholarly print has been substan- tial and is likely to continue. Not only have the users increased quantitatively, but they have increased the difficulty
READJUSTMENTS BY THE LIBRARIAN 219 and the scope of their demands and the complexity in the patterns of their uses of print. All these closely interrelated factors present the general scholarly library with serious and fundamental difficulties in maintaining its traditions of autonomous coverage and organization of material. It has become apparent to some librarians that they can no longer expect to retain general coverage of print and near-print materials in any substantial number of scholarly fields along the lines of tradi- tional concepts when coverage must be based upon an enormously expanded out- flow of print from an enormously com- plex variety of sources. Even if the librarians were able to maintain comprehensiveness in broad subject coverage, there are questions as to whether they could organize the mate- rial along traditional lines and still have it useful. It has been apparent for some time to the librarian, and is becoming ap- parent to many scholars, that the use of this enormously increased mass of mate- rials is presenting its own special array of difficulties in indexing, listing, subject dassifying, cataloging-in short, in the entire field of bibliographical organiza- tion which presupposes subsequent con- structive scholarly use. One may ask whether the resources of existing libraries, inadequate as librari- ans know them to be, are being utilized effectively by scholars. As librarians, we know how inadequate our bibliographical organization is, and we have a fair im- pression of the inadequacies of our cover- age. We also know of the enormous diver- sification in the value and importance of different kinds of pnrnt from an increas- ing variety of sources. Scholars are more and more frequently recognizing these problems of use in, I think, at least three different directions. The first direction is that of staying reasonably abreast and aware of current information and work in a field. I have the general impression that, as yet, most scholars are not as se- riously alarmed about this aspect of their literature as are librarians. The second problem of scholarship is that of identify- ing and securing access to the body of literature, both current and retrospec- tive, related to any particular topic. Here, both scholars and librarians are in- creasingly concerned and aware of the major obstacles to efficient operations. The third problem is that of scholarly di- gestion and use of literature after it has been identified and access secured. This, today, is almost exclusively the concern of the scholar, but scholars are beginning to worry more and more about the diffi- culty of handling this task well in the time available to them. The current aspect of all these things that I have been describing, when taken together, seems to me to require a basic shift in the orientation of the scholarly library. In part, this shift is one of out- look and philosophy and may not initial- ly be apparent in the day-to-day opera- tions of the library. It would require a shift away from an exclusive preoccupa- tion with the building, organization, and servicing of a series of autonomous book collections, each as comprehensive as possible, to a preoccupation with one or more fields of knowledge in their entire- ty, recognizing at the outset that a par- ticular library's resources with respect to most fields of knowledge will usually be incomplete. To put this latter point bluntly, I am not convinced that scholar- ship either requires or can afford exhaus- tive or inclusive coverage of all the world's literature either in one library or in the libraries of this country taken as a whole. I am sure that we need the best of the world's literature; that much of this
220 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY will have to be distributed among a se- ries of libraries; and that only in some fields -usually sharply defined-will par- ticular libraries want, and scholarship re- quire, substantially all the literature that exists on a particular topic. This view is contrary to another rather widely held attitude which admits that it is now possible that no one library can in- dusively cover more than a few subject areas but proposes for the libranres of the country the goal of comprehensive, in- clusive coverage of domestic and foreign publications, of all kinds, including the purely local and mediocre. I am in- clined to question our ability to attain such a goal and the necessity for doing so. I believe that the goal we seek may be at- tained only if we are prepared to recog- nize the need for high standards in the selection of materials, acting collectively as well as individually. The underlying premise here is that scholarship now and in the future does not require access to more than a fraction of the total output of print; that as time goes on this fraction may be a diminishing one; and that the fraction now being collected may be in- adequate-but how seriously inadequate is not known. This premise requires the most careful and critical examination, if we are to build up and maintain useful research libraries. Finer appraisals on the part of both li- brarians and scholars of what is really re- quired are essential, if we are to avoid the inconclusive dissipation of our limited re- sources. I take it that the major objective of the scholarly library is to secure, or- ganize, and service for a scholarly con- stituency, however defined, the materials really required for scholarly study and investigation. The question before li- brarians and scholars is whether or not the traditional methods of scholarly li- brary collecting, organizing, and servic- ing provide the necessary facilities in the most efficient way, considering the re- sources of the scholarly world as a whole, the needs of the scholarly world, and the needs of individual scholars and institu- tions. Money and time are relevant co- ordinates in all these matters. One of the great difficulties, of course, of scholarly libraries is that they can appraise the value of their services only very approxi- mately, just as scholars can appraise the value of research and investigation only intangibly. The final outcome of exploration in these fields would seem to me still ob- scure, but it is my feeling that libraries inevitably must not only become more selective in their acquisition policies than they are now; the libraries' parent insti- tutions may also have to become increas- ingly critical of certain kinds of scholar- ship and of the geographical distribution of certain kinds of scholarship. Library resources may force institutions to un- dertake research only where the institu- tion can, in a meaningful sense, afford the facilities for that kind of research, for li- braries, in the national interest, are going to have to increase the specialization in their collections. Scholars will thus find it necessary to describe in rather specific terms what their goals are, or ought to be, with reference to acquisition and li- brary service in particular fields-and scholars thus far have been reluctant to do this. Out of more rigid selection, co-opera- tive acquisition, regional deposit libraries for less-used materials, and related devel- opments, one might hope that individual scholarly libraries could in the future more nearly stabilize their size. There must be, for a particular point in time and a particular institution, an optimum size of collection. If one goes beyond this optimum size, the institution supporting
READJUSTMENTS BY THE LIBRARIAN 221 the library is diverting a higher propor- tion than necessary of its resources into library support, as against other and more direct scholarly enterprises. If the library is too small, the resulting limita- tions upon the scholarship of the institu- tion represent a waste of its resources be- cause of the inadequate facilities. The difficulty, of course, with setting up a limitation on the size of a particular li- brary is that, as long as knowledge is still increasing, the literature reflecting the increase of knowledge will in turn ex- pand. As a consequence, storage libraries, specialized acquisition among libraries, and even microprint and microfilm may not completely stabilize the size of the li- brary. Yet within broad and perhaps gradually shifting limits, the setting of optimum sizes may be possible. The li- brarian of Harvard has said that his li- brary is too large for the current needs of Harvard; many other university libraries are clearly too small. Can the definitions for a mean be found? If the book resources of individual in- stitutions become more limited in rela- tion to the totality of print, as now seems likely, the importance of bibliography in a variety of forms wil increase. Since elaborate institutionalized bibliography, which is extremely expensive, is also like- ly to be curtailed, the development of good international, national, form, and subject bibliography must be encour- aged. Bibliographical facilities need to be sufficiently complete for scholarship to learn of relevant literature, so that ade- quate decisions as to its usefulness may be made, and to provide for its quick and efficient location for scholars, wherever they may be. Libraries and scholars must look more critically at the facilities and controlling factors governing communication among scholars. The question of whether, for example, the scholarly journal is not technologically obsolete is only one of many similar, important problems. While most scholars, and virtually all journal editors, will today dismiss the idea as pure fantasy, there is an increasing body of evidence pointing toward the ineffi- ciency of the scholarly journal as a device for the current communication of schol- arly information and its permanent re- cording in libraries. The direct distribu- tion of individual scholarly papers, ac- companied by a "self-organizing" biblio- graphical apparatus, has been suggested as a possible step forward in the commu- nication of current information, especial- ly in technology and the natural sci- ences. This so-called "self-organization" of current literature with direct distribution to scholars, independently of libraries or journals, is already occurring on a limited scale, for example, with government dis- tribution to investigators of much of the classified and unclassified literature as- sociated with government research con- tracts. With greatly improved biblio- graphical apparatus and distributive mechanisms, it offers a pattern that is capable of application to other subject areas and kinds of scholarship, possibly with important benefits to the efficiency of scholarly and library processes. With- out a bibliographical organization of such material as an integral part of the plan, such distribution of knowledge tends to- ward chaos rather than simplification. Finally, perhaps a word should be said about the variety in the forms of material which scholarly libraries must in the fu- ture obtain. We need only to recognize that printed books in stiff covers no long- er constitute adequate collections for re- search; nor have they for many years. While the traditional library has been de- signed around the printed book in stiff
222 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY covers, the scholarly library of the future must provide convenient access to pam- phlets, loose sheets, microfilm, micro- cards, motion-picture films, photoprints, slides, filmstrips, records, magnetic re- cordings in wire and tape, as among the necessary paraphernalia of the scholarly world. These will, in the next generation, become a completely normal part of the scholarly library rather than an extraor- dinary appendage to it. CO-OPERATION Our third topic, co-operation, has a long history in libraries, but, on the whole, a number of specific institutions and projects excepted, the scholarly li- brary apparatus of the country is not the result of co-operative action. With but few exceptions, the scholarly libraries of the country are completely independent of one another in collecting policy, in service, and, above all, in terms of con- trol, government, or support. Under these circumstances, the conditions for successful co-operation are both limited and important. Co-operation can hardly be imposed upon a completely loose ag- gregation of institutions with differing purposes, resources, and service goals. We believe that successful co-operation can grow only out of a recognition of sim- ilar goals, which must be immediately desirable by the potentially co-operating institutions. Furthermore, the potential- ly co-operating institutions must not only have recognized a set of common goals but must have the resources to at- tain them in one way or another and must recognize service problems which actually require solution. Most of the country's scholarly libraries are associat- ed with universities, and they are not, therefore, completely free agents. Such libraries are, and they will continue to be, subject to the resources of their parent- institutions, and they must give their first attention to the most pressing needs and demands of these institutions, con- sidered separately more than collective- ly. Co-operation, if it is to be successful under these conditions, must show major and substantial elements of self-interest for the individual co-operating institu- tions. That is to say, there must be tan- gible benefits for tangible needs, if cop- tributions of money or manpower are to be placed at the disposition of co-opera- tive projects. Some co-operative schemes have probably failed because the benefits were too intangible or the needs too re- mote. We must also recognize that the scholarly libraries of the country are, de- spite the current total rate of expendi- tures, meagerly supported, in relation to the pressures upon them, which are very great indeed. Co-operative goals mustas a consequence be realistically set and carried through. Where these conditions have been met, there is no conflict be- tween local needs and, say, national needs. Up to this point we have dealt largely with the restrictive forces affecting co- operation. Now that this has been done, it is appropriate to record my conviction that co-operation can be, and must be, exploited if we are to solve many of the basic dilemmas which we now face. I merely insist that in planning for co-op- erative action it is imperative that we measure our gunpowder to match the size of the projectile and the range of the objective. The most obvious benefits of near-term co-operative action are likely to come from extended coverage in acqui- sition, extended access to materials, and extended bibliographical organization. These three matters are closely related but are not identical. By way of illustration, a promising current co-operative enterprise among
READJUSTMENTS BY THE LIBRARIAN 223 the major scholarly libranres of this coun- try, the Farmington Plan, is devoted to the co-operative acquisition of certain foreign publications. There are a number of interesting, even critical, questions with reference to this plan. One relates to whether coverage of the plan will remain consistent with the coverage needs of the co-operating institutions. If the plan re- sults in obtaining substantial amounts of marginal material over and beyond the needs of the majority of co-operating in- stitutions, it unquestionably will be in jeopardy of failure. On the other hand, if, through the plan, adequate coverage is not attained, it may fail even more quickly. As a consequence, a very deli- cate balance must be maintained in such endeavors, which will reflect not only the assumed needs of the co-operating insti- tutions, but, as time goes on, an increas- ingly precise and accurate reflection of the real needs of scholarship. Other aspects of scholarly library co- operation are so widely known as to re- quire little or no discussion in this paper. The emergence of the regional storage library, the reliance upon cataloging by the Library of Congress, and so forth, have been widely treated in the profes- sional literature of librarianship, and we shall not discuss them further, except to predict the future extension of such ac- tivities. FINANCIAL SUPPORT Since the financial support of scholarly libranres is the subject of a separate paper in this conference, we shall touch only upon one or two aspects of this extremely important matter. The resources devoted to scholarly libraries in this country are minuscule in relation to the expenditures for horse-race betting, tobacco, television sets, or alcoholic beverages. Library ex- penditures are larger than they were ten or fifteen years ago, but, in relation to in- creased costs, needs, and the expendi- tures of the parent-institutions, library costs remain modest. The financal re- sources of the scholarly library have never been adequate; it is unlikely that if librarians remain reasonably alert they ever will be. Yet at the moment there appears little probability of a vast in- crease in the funds available for scholarly libraries. We should particularly note the posi- tion at the present time of many of the scholarly libraries of privately supported institutions. The purchasing value of en- dowment income has so greatly dimin- ished in recent years as to present senrous financial problems to the endowed institu- tions. This matter is important, for the private institutions have been the pio- neers in the bulding-up of most of the great scholarly libraries of the country. The libraries of Harvard, Yale, Colum- bia, the University of Chicago, the refer- ence department of the New York Public Library, and so forth, have all been cre- ated with private funds, gifts, and be- quests. The possibilities of income for private institutions from a few individu- als of great wealth seem to be vanishing -except in Texas. Many private institu- tions are broadening the public base of support (and are already only quasi- private), but it has not yet been demon- strated that the public is willing to take over all of this burden. Business and in- dustrial organizations are also assisting in the support of independent teaching and research. Despite such efforts, the current growth in size and resources of the tax-supported libraries of the state universities and of the federal govern- ment leads to the condusion that they are likely to supplant in considerable measure, in the next generation or two, the pre-eminent position in size and gross
224 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY support heretofore held by the libraries of the great private institutions. This shift in gross support and gross size is not necessarily altogether bad for the private institutions, for excellence depends, as it always has, on what goes to make up the bulk. If the private insti- tutions can find the financial resources and sound intellectual bases for the care- ful and selective building of good re- search collections and can rely upon the resources of the tax-supported libraries for much of the modern ephemera and marginalia, which are expensive to or- ganize, house, and preserve, they may suffer no real loss in scholarly efficiency and may actually gain. Both the public and the private li- brary must look in the future, as they have in the past, to the support of indi- vidual book-collectors and other inter- ested persons for rare books, manu- scripts, distinguished special collections, and, most particularly, for the endowed funds to collect intensively in restricted fields. From a general point of view, the ab- sence of a balance sheetwhich will reflect the efficiency of a library's operations may shield and protect the library for some time to come. Under these condi- tions, it is important that librarians rec- ognize that the investment in the acquisi- tion, organization, and storage of rela- tively unused materials represents the major costs of the scholarly library. Al- ternative solutions, which would make such material available with greater effi- ciency and with less cost, require careful consideration and exploration. Librari- ans are already aware that the invest- ment in duplicate cataloging operations in a large number of institutions repre- sents a major waste of potential re- sources and will almost certainly be able in the future to reduce such operations even further than they already have. Now I do not wish to imply for an in- stant that the scholarly library can, or should try to, apply conventional busi- ness economics to its operations. I do be- lieve, however, that the scholarly library cannot be indifferent to efficiency in its operations. In general, the library lacks and should construct, reasonable stand- ards of such efficiency-always relating them to the ends to be served. Standards of efficiency that are not so related are meaningless. It is here that the difficulty arises, for in business the general end to be served is that of making a monetary profit. The scholarly library serves ends much more difficult to evaluate, and cri- teria other than money are essential. PERSONNEL AND STAFFING The training, qualifications, status, and aspirations of library personnel can- not help influencing the future change and development of the scholarly library. The librarians in the scholarly library, until only a few generations ago, occu- pied relatively unimportant posts. The librarians were usually custodians; some- times they were, in addition, scholars, occasionally of great distinction. The li- brary was a quiet place in which to pur- sue an investigation, relatively free of in- terruptions and distractions. The stipend was modest, but so were the duties. This situation has now changed-at least the duties have. There is still a partially nostalgic de- sire for scholarly librarians to be, if not scholarly, at least what we have loosely come to call "bookmen." I am not al- ways sure of the precise definition of a bookman in this context, but I am sure that scholarly libraries require personnel who have a great variety of capabilities, some of which, at least, are not common- ly thought of as the general attributes of
READJUSTMENTS BY THE LIBRARIAN 225 a "bookman." Library staff members certainly must have a svmpathy for books, they must know a good deal about them-the more the better-they must know and understand the methods and purposes of a variety of kinds of scholar- ly research and investigation and the lit- erature of these disciplines. That they should also know something of manage- ment, finance, personnel, bibliography, the purposes and methods of teaching, and the internal technical processes of li- braries may surprise the scholars but not the librarians. There may be a question at the present time as to whether enough good people are being recruited for librarianship. Are we able to attract personnel with suffi- cient intellectual attainments, with the imagination, the vigor, and the subject backgrounds necessary for the proper ad- vancement of the scholarly library now and in the future? This is a matter that is partly associated with the construction of library-school curriculums and the time when one commonly elects to enter the profession of librarianship. The pro- fession is at best emerging and still lacks prestige and a subject content akin to that of law, medicine, or engineering. The recruitment of the best possible people is as critical a matter to the health and vigor of the library profession as it is for any other profession. It is perfectly obvious that if we are to recruit the best people, we must educate them efficiently for the tasks to which they will go, and we must be sure that the tasks to which they go in libranres are so organized as to utilize their intellectu- al and professional abilities. It is my feel- ing that in the future the scholarly li- braries will require a greater number of skilled subject specialists on their staffs. Able and skilled subject specialists will, I believe, if they have attained the Mas- ter's or doctorate level in a subject disci- pline, be impatient with much of the tra- ditional training of the library schools, and perhaps with cause. It may be that the library schools will have to recognize sharper distinctions in the kind of train- ing to be offered to different kinds of prospective personnel for the scholarly libraries. The profession, if it is to meet the demands upon it in the future, must provide a variety of responsible, well- paying, specialized positions, outside the field of general administration, to which competent people may aspire as perma- nent careers. Thus far, the number of such positions is far too small, and the at- tractions of general administration are thus falsely enhanced. MACHINES AND TECHNOLOGY We turn our attention now to the place of machines and technological develop- ment in the library of the future. The most obvious requirement along these lines seems to us to be an adequate com- munication network for handling the very rapid transmission of large quanti- ties of textual materials from one library to another. Thus it should be possible for a reader in Texas to secure from a library in Chicago the complete copy of a book, periodical article, or a series of newspa- per pages, in a matter of a few minutes and at a very low cost. Such a rapid com- munication system would have a sharp impact upon the economics of publishing and the antiquanran book market, and its relationship to copyright is obscure, but these difficulties should not blind us to the advantages of such a network. That such technical possibilities are on the horizon is altogether evident. A few years ago, a transmission system referred to as "Ultrafax" conferred even greater distinction upon the complete text of Gone with the Wind by transmitting it
226 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY from Washington to New York within a few minutes. The Atomic Energy Com- mission at Oak Ridge has now installed a facsimile system for transmitting periodi- cal articles from a central library to vari- ous laboratory installations a number of miles away. Ultrafax required that the text to be sent be first reduced to micro- film form; the AEC method is still rela- tively slow, requiring about one minute to scan a conventional journal page. Such slow transmission cannot meet our long- range needs, and probably preliminary conversion into microfilm is not a satis- factory technical prospect. What is re- quired here is a machine with a reliable, automatic page turner, which would transmit hundreds of pages, perhaps, in a few minutes. While such innovations may have a Welisian sound, the technical knowledge is largely available. The diffi- culty, of course, is that knowledge of how to accomplish an end, does not mean that the end can be attained in common prac- tice. The cost may be too great, or the need may be exaggerated, or the tech- nique may be too imperfect. Yet wide- spread, quick, and easy access to books is badly needed and would, if attained, have a profound effect upon our acquisi- tion policies. The communication network would also provide facilities for assistance in the location and identification of textual ma- terials, so that a scholar might readily learn of the existence of particular works anywhere in the country and secure them promptly and easily. Even more intrigu- ing, but probably more remote, is the possibility of continuous access to a mas- ter-union catalog of some sort which would be continuously monitored, with the results of the monitoring transmitted by some sort of network to at least the major research libraries of the country. A sufficiently good system of monitoring might even make it possible for such li- branres to discontinue the maintenance of parts of their own elaborate catalogs. While this is all quite nebulous, note that there is a growing amount of transmis- sion of facsimile information throughout the country for commercial purposes, that utility companies are maintaining continuous radio networks simply for the purpose of locating power-line breaks instantly and automatically, that there are continuous broadcasts of time, and almost continuous broadcasts of weather information. The library literature has made it abundantly clear that machines for stor- ing information and for selecting infor- mation are on the nearer honrzon of the library and the intellectual world. A ma- chine which is capable of housing the present Library of Congress catalog in roughly two and one-half cubic feet and which can sort and analyze bibliographi- cal material in some considerable detail and reproduce copies of desired items has been constructed and is operating. It is unreasonable to assume that the devices embodied in this instrument-the Shaw Rapid Selector-have reached a final stage of perfection and that machines cannot be more extensively applied to the bibliographical problems of libraries. At the same time, we should not, for the moment at least, abandon our card cata- logs, for they are not altogether ineffi- cient, particularly for the location of single works by known authors. Nor can we ignore the obvious fact that one can extract from a bibliographical machine only what has been put into it, and put- ting information into a machine is still a slow and difficult intellectual process. For many of the recording, searching, and repetitive jobs of libraries, mechani- zation seems to promise a great deal, once we ascertain how to mechanize. The
READJUSTMENTS BY THE LIBRARIAN 227 compilation of catalogs and lists, the re- cording of serials, and so forth, are opera- tions involving enormous amounts of de- tailed record-keeping, much of it repeti- tive, which are cumbersome and expen- sive. The application of punch cards and other machine techniques to these neces- sary and essential recording operations seems imminent and highly desirable. They will extend the possible biblio- graphical operations of libraries and scholarship widely, once we find our- selves able to handle the material. Cau- tion must again be urged, however. The existence of interesting machines is not sufficient to justify their use. A job must need doing; it must be of a nature to re- quire machine operation; and there must be a machine appropriate for the job. Scholarly libraries and scholars must accustom themselves to the handling of textual materials which require some sort of machine or projector for consultation. We have become modestly familiar with this in microfilm, microcard, and micro- print, and we should anticipate a further extension of microtechniques in the pres- ervation and dissemination of textual materials. These activities may well in- clude the initial and only distribution of increasing amounts of scholarly informa- tion. The high costs of conventional scholarly publishing are eliminating in- creasing quantities of material of impor- tance for which there is only a limited audience. Conversion of such matenral into microcard, microfilm, microprint, or variants yet to be seen offers the pros- pects of reasonably efficient distribution, once we overcome our prejudices against these kinds of devices and their continu- ing technical limitations. Microfilm and microcards are still imperfect for the needs of institutions as well as individu- als. Microfilm in flat sheets for certain applications is an emerging technical pos- sibility. A variant of this-strip micro- film mounted in transparent envelopes- is being actively explored at present. We must not try to channel all forms of pho- tographic or textual reproduction in mi- crosizes into one particular format. The variety of demands requires a diversity and flexibility greater than that offered by any one technique now in use. Perhaps this is an appropriate time to point out that we are exploiting these newer techniques thus far in a very limit- ed and traditional manner. They already offer more than we have accepted. For example, considerable sums of money have been devoted to the microfilm copy- ing of long runs of material in one library in order to have the microfilm or a copy of it in a neighboring library. Much of this material is very rarely used, and some may never be consulted. Thus one of the great advantages offered by micro- film, that of ordering copies tailored to meet an actual, definite need, has been lost. Microfilm, teletype, and possible fu- ture facsimile transmission offer us the opportunity of using one another's re- sources to meet some needs as they arise rather than endeavoring to anticipate all needs in advance. We must find ways of capitalizing upon such techniques where we can. That these procedures would af- fect scholarly habits cannot be denied, but that scholarly habits are now all cor- rect, efficient, and immutable requires more convincing proof than it has had. One of the most promising of the new- er photographic techniques on the hori- zon is very high speed, lost cost reproduc- tion in either full or reduced sizes. If the scholarly reference and university li- braries, for example, found it possible to copy in microfilm, or some other form, texts, and especially periodical artides, in a matter of a few minutes or seconds and hand the copy, in a form convenient
228 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY to use, to the scholar in lieu of circula- tion of the original, it would make a very great contribution to the efficiency of scholarly research and would greatly in- crease the accessibility of library materi- als. Such technical possibilities are, again, within sight if not yet in practice. SUMARY In summary, what differences will one see in the library or in the librarian ten or twenty years hence? The importance of teaching, research, study, and investigation of sound, well- supported and well-managed scholarly li- braries will be far more widely under- stood. The bases of support for libraries will be broadened, but we are unlikely to be rich or, perhaps, even well supported. The role of the library as an auxiliary to teaching, research, and study will con- tinue to be complex. It is likely that some officers and faculty members of institu- tions of higher education will still not have a thorough grasp of the relation of the library to the objectives of the uni- versity. The bases for collecting research ma- terials will have undergone perceptible change. There will be greater access to general collections, but the competition between, and duplication of efforts among, contemporary libraries for rare and recondite materials of lesser value for current investigations will be diminished by co-operative acquisition and related measures in a variety of directions, to- gether with greatly improved co-opera- tive access to materials wherever held. The participation of the state, the federal government, and business and industry, both directly and indirectly, in building scholarly libraries will be conspicuous. The library will continue to be subject to local needs and pressures, but much of the day-to-day responsibility or initia- tive for building collections will hAve shifted from members of faculties in aca- demic institutions to competent mem- bers of the library staff who will be able to devote to this task the time it requires -time which faculty members are in- creasingly reluctant to give. The facul- ty's advice in universities will continue to be vital, but much of the detail will shift to the library. Librarians will continue to increase their services to investigators and scholars and, if the bibliographical organization of literature continues to increase in complexity, will become indis- pensable to scholars in aiding them in finding needed information or literature. Acquisitions are more likely to follow longer-term plans than the whims of in- dividuals in order to maintain important strength once it has been created and to avoid dispersion of funds on short-range projects. This in turn may force academ- ic institutions to look more closely and critically at their research and teaching programs. They may be less likely to en- ter entirely new fields if there are sub- stantial literature requirements-espe- cially if these requirements have been met by a neighboring institution. Yet the scholarly libraries as a group must find ways of providing the materials required by an individual investigator, for the in- dividual is still critical to scholarship. Planning must extend resources, not stifle research and initiative. Books in stiff covers will still be avail- able, but they will be found in convenient association with other books and other forms of communication. Libraries will be busy places, in which two structural differences will be conspicuous. The read- ers' direct access to books will be com- fortable and convenient with a minimum of barriers, and more readers will be housed with some degree of privacy than are readers today. Vast reading rooms
READJUSTMENTS BY THE LIBRARIAN 229 are unlikely to be built in the future, nor are libranres going to lend themselves to beaux-arts traditional exercises in archi- tecture. There may also be space in which to accommodate the library staff with efficiency, but this may be only wishful thinking. One quotes either Aristotle or Plato with some hesitancy these days, but one of Aristotle's statements seems so fitting a conclusion to these speculative remarks that I cannot resist the temptation: "In practical matters the end is not mere speculative knowledge of what is to be done, but rather the doing of it. It is not enough to know about Virtue, then, but we must endeavor to possess it, and to use it, or to take any other steps that may make us good."' Aristotle Nicomachean Ethks x. 9.