From Our Readers . . . I would like to add my protest to others you may have received about the treatment of Donald O. Case and John V. Richardson's very fine re- search study " Predictors of Student Performance with Emphasis on Gen- der and Ethnic Determinants" (JELIS, Winter 1990) as expressed in the letter from UCLA faculty in the Fall 1990 issue oí JELIS. I have reread the article very carefully several times, and can find no indication of racial or ethnic bias. What is most distressing to me about the letter's implicit tone of disas- sociation with Case and Richardson is that these professors are two of the most conscientious researchers in our field. Moreover, their findings con- firm much published research on the subject of diversity in higher educa- tion (see, for example, Andrew Hack- er's "Affirmative Action: The New Look," The New York Review of Books, October 12, 1989). To charge Case and Richardson with ' 'racist" state- ments (none of which are specified) also discredits the referee process of JELIS, and in a larger sense, indicts the " racism" of library schools, all of whom are struggling desperately to re- cruit students and faculty from a vari- ety of racial and ethnic backgrounds. Having been through the JELIS pro- cess of review, I am fully aware of the painstaking care exerted by referees; and serving on two Race and Gender Committees at my university, I am also aware of the effort required to keep discussion of ' 'diversity" issues on a constructive, rather than a defen- sive or paranoiac plane. Disclaimers such as the one authored by the UCLA faculty do not further the goals of ob- jective research or multicultural dia- logue, if by that we mean the open shar- ing of all ideas, research findings, and opinions. It is ironic that after the re- searchers have exerted so much effort to follow exacting statistical and ana- lytical procedures to ensure the valid- ity of their findings, they should then be redressed for unfelicitous turns of phrase. I am mystified as to which turns of phrase those could have been, however. UCLA's faculty is one of the most stellar in the country. Has the "diver- sity" of California made its citizens, including students and faculty, so thin-skinned that professors must now be subjected to a "white scare"? I am fully aware of asking this question as a white male southerner working in the South, and no doubt anything I say may be discounted on that basis alone. It is foolish to assume that align- ment with any "minority" cause will ensure political correctness. Who dares claim a place of honor at the bot- tom of the social order these days? Everyone in America belongs to some sort of minority, even white Anglo- Saxon Protestant male educators; there is no longer a sense of popular consciousness which expresses "the will of the people. ' ' Educators and the professoriate in particular have had to fight hard for academic freedom in the past decade due to an extremely con- servative political climate. What, then, is to be gained by disunity in faculty ranks, especially in the name of "political correctness"? It would seem to be the better part of wisdom to protect the right of our colleagues to conduct and publish research, even 84 Volume 33, Number 1
From Our Readers . . . if we don't like their findings or the way in which they phrase them. Wasn't it Voltaire who said, "I dis- agree with what you say, but defend to the death your right to say it"? The question of Case. and Richardson's choice of politically incorrect phrases seems moot, as I have not yet seen a dictionary with usage labels like "p.c," or "p. i.e." (Few dictionaries dare identify gauche grammar any more, much less impure political state- ments.) I doubt if there would be agreement among any given minority on what was a politically correct phrase, anyway. I remember one li- brary historian being raked over the coals by a feminist historian in the mid-1970s for his use of the word ' 'la- dies" in speaking of turn-of-the- century female librarians. Thank heavens Women's Studies specialists have moved on to more substantive equity issues in the 1980s and 1990s. I am proud to be part of a depart- ment and school where I feel confident in the support of my colleagues. I am sure any of them would privately dress me down within an inch of my life if I embarrassed the school, but would defend me fearlessly if I became the object of outside attack. This may be an advantage of working in a smaller university. I look forward to hearing my stu- dents' reactions to Case and Richard- son's article in my academic library course in the spring, where we discuss the whole changing nature of the uni- versity environment, read educational polemicists as politically diverse as Dinesh D'Souza, Paul Goodman, Harold Bloom, and Robert Maynard Hutchins, and try to find just compro- mises, not necessarily easy ones, be- tween educational elitism and educa- tional anarchy. It grieves me to think what pressure must have been exerted on the faculty to have triggered their letter to you. I hasten to add that this letter is written in the spirit of one who has been burned both by his own liberalism and his own conservatism in the past, and I wish to reaffirm my great admiration for UCLA faculty. At the same time, neither Case nor Richardson deserves any reproach for what may be the best study of some factors in student per- formance to date. It would seem that their article points to the need for radi- cal reassessment of the standards by which educators evaluate students and their programs. James V. Carmichael, Jr. Assistant Professor Department of Library and Infor- mation Studies University of North Carolina at Greensboro I enjoy Lois N. Upham's column, "The Standards Connection," but feel obligated to point out a misleading statement in the most recent edition (JELIS, Summer/Fall 1991). As chair of the committee that is re- vising the thesaurus standard, Z39. 19, I was surprised not to see this standard listed among those being bal- loted (p. 139, col. 2). Since Ms. Upham based her report on the April 1991 issue of Information Standards Quarterly, and the thesaurus standard was sent out for ballot in May, that is reasonable. Later in the same column, however, it is reported that the stan- dard "has been reissued and is avail- able from NISO for thirty dollars." This statement gives the impression that the revision is complete and that the standard has been published. (The initial revision was sent out for com- ment only; the second revision was distributed for ballot.) Upham was quoting from a press release prepared at NISO headquar- ters. Perhaps the title of the release, "Thesaurus Standard Reissued," gives the impression that the standard has been published, but the text fea- tures the terms "proposed standard" and "draft standard." JELIS readers may be surprised that there is a charge for a draft standard; I have questioned this policy myself in the past, but learned that it is necessary for NISO to recoup the administrative Winter 1992 85
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science costs incurred in duplicating and mail- ing draft standards. The proposed revi- sion of the thesaurus standard, for ex- ample, contains 126 pages. When comments were solicited on the initial draft revision, interested parties - including many library and informa- tion science educators - were sent the draft at no charge. As I face the many comments and ballot forms, I wish it were indeed true that the revision process for the the- saurus standard is complete, but feel it is important to point out to your readers that it is not. Bella Hass Weinberg Associate Professor Division of Library and Informa- tion Science St. John's University, Jamaica, NY Vacancy - Secretary General of IFLA The present Secretary General, Paul Nauta, will retire on October 1, 1992. The Executive Board of IFLA therefore invites applications for the post. ESSENTIAL REQUIREMENTS • a sound professional and academic background • managerial skills which have been demonstrated at a senior level within librarianship or a related area • ease in internal and external communication and sensitivity to different cultures • ability to withstand stress • experience in international work • fluency in English and a reasonable knowledge of French, German, and Spanish. RESPONSIBILITIES • direct and coordinate the various IFLA activities, including the IFLA bu- reaus • assume responsibility for the management and further development of IFLA programs • act as financial manager and obtain funding for IFLA activities • anticipate decision making by the IFLA Executive Board • take decisive action on the basis of Executive Board authorization and guide- lines • represent IFLA as required • report to the Executive Board on action taken. It is the intention to fill the post as of October 1, 1992. The level of the position will be comparable to that of a University Librarian in the Netherlands. Salary range (before tax): NLG 8,000-10,000 per month, depending on qualifications and experience. The post is full-time and the appoint- ment will in principle be on a permanent basis. The post is located at IFLA HQ in The Hague, Netherlands. Further information may be obtained from the present Secretary General, Paul Nauta, IFLA HQ, POB 95312, 2509 CH The Hague, Netherlands, Telephone: *31-70-3140884. Fax: *31-70-3834827. Applications in writing including details of previous positions held and names, addresses, telephone and fax numbers of at least two references, should be for- warded to the IFLA Secretary General at the above address not later than January 1, 1992. Applications will be treated in confidence. Short-listed applicants will be called for interview in spring 1992. 86 Volume 33, Number 1