A JELIS in the '90s Evelyn Daniel What were/are our preoccupations in the articles and columns written in the Journal of Education for Library and Information Science (JELIS) in the '90s? Not surprisingly, the standard concerns of educators everywhere - the curricu- lum, the faculty, the students, and the school as a whole - occupied much of our attention. However, in addition to these recurring topics - different in their specificity but perennial in their general subject matter - three large and related themes pervade the JELIS articles and columns in the 1990s: the nature of library and information science (LIS) and the domain of concern for LIS edu- cation; the importance of diversity and multiculturalism and suggestions about how we should deal with these issues; and a growing recognition that LIS is an international field and that Association for Library and Information Science Education (ALISE) members in the United States and Canada must be aware of and connected to developments in LIS education in all parts of the world. In this overview, I will first comment on these three major themes before turning the specifics of our attention to curricu- lum, faculty, student, and school issues; and finally, I will comment on the struc- ture of JELIS and its authors during this period. The big issue in the 1990s is that of domain. The question of paradigm shift in "the field" first raised tentatively in the 70s and more insistently in the '80s seems to have solidified in the '90s into an acceptance of a larger definition. No one appears to be arguing for a narrow view of the field as solely librarianship. The emotional issues that surrounded the name change of the association and the journal to include information science seem to have passed. Most school names have changed to reflect the larger scope of the field. Yet we are still struggling toward a consensual defini- tion of what our unique understanding of library and information science will be. Some compelling articles address various formulations of the new inclu- sive paradigm: David Carr's 1990 article on cultural institutions; Michael Malinconico on "What Librarians Need to Know to Survive in an Age of Technology"; Karen Ceppos urging inno- vation for survival; Mike Pemberton and Christine Nugent describing the emer- gent field of information studies and what they suggest is a convergent cur- riculum; Fran Miksa's splendid article tracing the cultural legacy of what he calls the "modern library" to the "emerg- ing library"; Bob Grover and the Emporia crew with their evocatively titled article "The Wind beneath Our Wings"; and Mary Maack suggesting a new model of the information professions.1 The most cited article among this set of explo- rations of the LIS domain is Van House and Sutton's "The Panda Syndrome - An Ecology of LIS Education," in which the authors assert that fundamental changes are shaping the future environment of LIS educational programs.2 They point to greater competition from other profes- sions in the information field and sug- gest that LIS education needs to substi- tute (even more than it already has) an information-centered focus for its tradi- tional institutional focus. The authors Winter 2000 45
46 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science About the Author Evelyn Daniel is Professor, School of Information and Library Science, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. have since revisited the Panda Syndrome with another provocative contribution. Not only have we broadened our intellectual domain, we have also broad- ened our geographical boundaries. A strong international emphasis pervades the pages oiJELlS in the '90s, led by the forty fine columns on international library education that Mohammed Aman has edited throughout the decade, building on the structure put in place by Jean Lowrie. Dean Aman has solicited descriptions of educational programs from countries around the world - Africa, the Middle East, Asia, and Europe. Only South America is not yet well served. In addition, nearly thirty countries are represented through authors of articles during this decade - often writing about educational issues in their own countries or regions or about international issues in general. The activities of UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization) and IFLA (International Federation of Library Associations) are reported regularly. The Winter 1998 issue focused on education in the Arabian Gulf Region plus John Richardson's account of education in Russia, description made possible by an ALISE project conceived by Pam Richards to send ALISE educators to Russia for short periods of collaboration and mutual learning.3 Earlier in the decade the Summer/Fall 1991 double issue, guest edited by Michel Menou, provided thirteen articles on informa- tion science education worldwide.4 International students in U.S. and Canadian schools also have been a topic of interest, beginning with an article by Bill Nasri in which he provides sugges- tions for "serving" our international students.5 Marta Dosa provided some suggestions for recruiting international students based on the admirable exam- ple set by Syracuse.6 Perhaps not surprisingly, a strong parallel current in this decade has been a powerful concern with issues of diversi- ty - multiculturalism and issues of gen- der and race. Susan Freiband describes multicultural concerns.7 E. J. Josey describes the challenges of recruiting faculty and students from different back- grounds.8 Ismail Abdullahi provides useful suggestions for the recruitment and mentoring of minority students.9 Dennis East and Errol Lam search for multiculturalism in the curriculum without a great deal of success but with some good suggestions for improve- ment.10 William Welburn questions whether we really need cultural diversi- ty in the LIS curriculum.11 Jane Anne Hannigan gives us the feminist perspec- tive for LIS education.12 And Lorna Peterson raises race issues in "Alternative Perspectives in Library and Information Science."13 The article that generated the most controversy during this period is a research study by Don Case and John Richardson on predictors of student performance with emphasis on gender and ethnic determinants.14 Within the more traditional preoc- cupations, which made up the bulk of the articles in this ten-year period, more articles were published on curricular issues than other educational matters, perhaps an understandable emphasis given the substantial changes wrenching the field. Four areas of the curriculum received the most attention: the organi- zation area, including cataloging, index- Volume 4L Number 1
JELIS in the '90s 47 ing, and technical services; reference and online searching; archives, preser- vation, and records management; and field experience, including experiential education and mentoring. The histori- ans, although few in number, energeti- cally argue the need to perceive our changes from a long perspective; notable among these was the literate and witty article by Jim Carmichael.15 Ways of teaching research methods are reported. Wayne Wiegand almost single-handedly, champions the importance of attention to the study of reading.16 Various special populations received some mention, notably children and young adults, the health professions, and rural librarian- ship; even prison librarians came in for some attention. Information policy seems to be an area that might emerge in importance; although beyond one early article by Karen Sy and two guest columns more recently, little has been written.17 Despite the fact that many of the broader changes in our field have been wrought by technology in one form or another, I am happy to report that our curricular interests in this decade have been more conceptual in nature, with few articles directly focused on the teaching of technological skills. Faculty is another perennial focus for attention. Articles dealing with vari- ous aspects of research and key vari- ables, plus articles on the assessment of faculty and faculty productivity are numerous, but it is gratifying to discern an equal concern with teaching and teaching methods during this period. One important article on the former topic by Virgil Blake and Renee Tjoumas presents evidence on the growing importance of research productivity in faculty evaluation.18 Barbara Moran fol- lows with an administrator's view of fac- ulty evaluation.19 Dan O'Connor and Phil Mulvaney weigh faculty research against the needs of the practitioner.20 The Summer 1998 issue, guest edited by Charles Curran, focuses entirely on LIS teaching.21 One article in this issue is particularly outstanding - David Carr's thoughtful discussion on the tensions of teaching.22 Faculty colleagues will enjoy reading about themselves in Charles Curran's summary of "What Sixty-One Superior LIS Teachers Say about Superior LIS Teaching."23 Readers looking for the third aspect of the three-legged faculty stool of research, teaching, and service will look in vain for any article devoted to the service aspects of the faculty role. Perhaps the closest we come is the arti- cle by Bert Boyce and Carol Hendren arguing for authorship as a measure of productivity of LIS schools to include writings in nonrefereed professional journals (an area usually considered service).24 Mary Kim, in a "Research Record" column, addresses the publica- tion productivity of part-time faculty, a growing constituency in LIS schools and academia in general.25 Some of the articles about students' recruitment and socialization have been identified above in the discussion of diversity. Myron Sywak reports on a thirteen-year study of student attitudes; Kathleen de la Peña McCook and William Moen describe some of the fac- tors involved in master's students' choices of programs; Patricia Reeling compares doctoral recipients in library science with those in other disciplines; Terry Crowley describes one of the ways in which a teacher learns from his or her students; and Ruth Small compares the experience of resident and distance LIS graduate students.26 One might claim a fourth major theme for the decade. In addition to the three already reported on above, dis- tance education emerges as an important new initiative for the field as a whole. Nineteen articles and columns appear dealing with distance education in a variety of ways, beginning, as we might Winter 2000
48 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science expect, with that strong spokesperson for this alternative form of educational delivery, Dan Barron.27 Many of these articles describe ways to incorporate interactive technology. Howard B esser and Maria Bonn discuss the challenges to traditional academic roles.28 Traditional school topics addressing the master's and doctoral degree pro- grams are well represented, and some of the first of what I suspect will become a flood of articles on undergraduate mod- els of LIS education appeared in this period. The entire Winter 1995 issue was devoted to support staff, with twelve short articles describing career paths, certificate possibilities, library technical assistant (LTA) programs, pro- fessional organizations, staff develop- ment and training, and mentoring. Continuing education (CE) is ably represented throughout this decade by Darlene Weingand's strong arguments for the need and value of CE, her inclu- sive view of potential audiences, and her marketing savvy in developing for- mal CE programs. School management issues appear sporadically. Keith Swigger addresses enrollment management, Glen Sparks gives a tutorial on strategic planning for LIS schools, and Glen Wittig suggests ways of using goals and objectives for internal program evaluation.29 Many other articles not mentioned here con- tributed to the strength and diversity of our professional journal in the '90s. As readers, we have been fortunate in the continuity of editors Joe Mika and Ron Powell. The structure of the journal has changed little throughout this period. A typical volume will include two issues with three to five articles, sometimes on related topics but often not; one guest- edited issue; and one issue containing selected papers from the annual ALISE conference. Association news, four or five columns, a book review section, an occasional letter to the editors, and a directory of member schools round out the volume. Dean Aman's "International Library Education" and Weingand's "Continuing Education" columns have been commented on above. In addition, a column aptly termed "The Visible College" was edited for the first half of the period by Elizabeth Aversa and for the latter half by Ling Hwey Jeng. This column has provided hospitality to a wide variety of topics - field experience, disability and AIDS awareness, critical incident approaches to teaching, analy- sis of job ads, methods of online search- ing instruction, quality in technical services, ethics, mentoring, required readings, hypertext programs, informa- tion broker education, bibliometrics, intertextual ity in children's literature, and many articles on multiculturalism and distance education. The "Research Record" column was first edited by Evelyn Curry beginning with volume 31 and then taken over by Mary Kim with volume 34. Periodic reports of dissertations in progress (four over the ten-year period) and reports on research poster sessions were a mainstay with occasional short articles on research-related topics. Mary Kay Biagini edited a book review column for one or two issues before Terry Crowley took over the task with volume 32. Discursive reviews are encouraged, with usually one to three in an issue. About a dozen letters to the editors were printed during this period. A look at the articles published dur- ing the '90s in JELIS shows that faculty contributed about two-thirds of them, with all ranks about equally represented and a fair number of articles (twenty- seven) by deans, directors, or other des- ignated heads of programs. Library administrators and academic librarians provided about a tenth of the articles. Doctoral students, adjunct faculty, and post-doctoral fellows averaged about Volume 41, Number 1
JELIS in the '90s 49 one article a year, as did consultants and medical/health science folks combined. Only seventeen articles from nonLIS folks (often invited conference speakers) found their way into the journal. Most articles were written by a single author, with about sixty jointly authored - usu- ally by two people, occasionally by three or four, and in one case by five people. The editorial board of JELJS, as well as the editors, surely deserve kudos for the steady improvement in the quality of the journal throughout this period. What can we look to in the next millennium? Perhaps the only thing we can say for sure is that it will be hard to predict what the major themes and preoccupa- tions of the next ten years will be, although the bread and butter of educa- tional issues will continue. References 1. David Can, "Qualitative Meaning in Cultural Institutions," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 3, no. 2 (Fall 1990): 97-104; S. Michael Malinconico, "What Librarians Need to Know to Survive in an Age of Technology," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 33, no. 3 (Summer 1992): 226-40; Karen F. Ceppos, "Innovation and Survival in Schools of Library and Information Science," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 33, no. 4 (Fall 1992): 277-83; J. Michael Pemberton and Christine R. Nugent, "Information Studies: Emergent Field, Convergent Curriculum," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 36, no. 2 (Spring 1995): 126-38; Francis Miksa, "The Cultural Legacy of the 'Modern Library' for the Future," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 37, no. 2 (Spring 1996): 100-19; Robert Grover and others, "The Wind beneath Our Wings: Chaos Theory and the Butterfly Effect in Curriculum Design," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 38, no. 2 (Fall 1997): 268-82; Mary Niles Maack, "Toward a New Model of the Information Professions: Embracing Empowerment," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 48, no. 4 (Fall 1997): 283-302. 2. Nancy VanHouse and Stuart A. Sutton, "The Panda Syndrome - An Ecology of LIS Education," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 37, no. 2 (Spring 1996): 131-47. 3. John V. Richardson Jr., "Education for Library and Information Science in Russia: A Case Study of the St. Petersburg State Academy of Culture," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 39, no. 1 (Winter 1998): 14-27. 4. Michel J. Menou, ed. "Alliance toward the Improvement of Information Science Education Worldwide," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 32, no. 1-2 (Summer/Fall 1991). 5. William Nasri, "International Students: How Do We Serve Them?" Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 32, no. 1-2 (Summer/Fall 1991): 117-20. 6. Marta Dosa, "Recruitment of International Students: Suggestions from Syracuse," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 34, no. 2 (Spring 1993): 99-112. 7. Susan J. Freiband, "Multicultural Issues and Concerns in Library Education," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 33, no. 4 (Fall 1992): 287-94. 8. E. J. Josey, "The Challenges of Cultural Diversity in the Recruitment of Faculty and Students from Diverse Backgrounds," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 34, no. 4 (Fall 1993): 302-11. 9. Ismail Abdullahi, "Recruitment and Mentoring of Minority Students," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 33, no. 4 (Fall 1992): 307-10. 10. Dennis East and Errol Lam, "In Search of Multiculturalism in the Library Science Curriculum," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 36, no. 3 (Summer 1995): 199-216. Winter 2000
50 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 11. William C. Welburn, "Do We Really Need Cultural Diversity in the Library and Information Science Curriculum?" Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 35, no. 4 (Fall 1994): 328-30. 12. Jane Anne Hannigan, "A Feminist Standpoint for Library and Information Science Education," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 35, no. 4 (Fall 1994): 297-319. 13. Lorna Peterson, "Alternative Perspectives in Library and Information Science: Issues of Race," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 37, no. 2 (Spring 1996): 163-74. 14. Donald O. Case and John V. Richardson, "Predictors of Student Performance with Emphasis on Gender and Ethnic Determinants," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 30, no. 3 (Winter 1990): 163-82. 15. James V. Carmichael Jr., "Ahistoricity and the Library Profession: Perceptions of Biographical Researchers in LIS Concerning Research Problems, Practices, and Barriers," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 31, no. 4 (Spring 1991): 329-56. 16. Wayne A. Wiegand, "Out of Sight, Out of Mind: Why Don't We Have Any Schools of Library and Reading Studies?" Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 38, no. 4 (Fall 1997): 314-26. 17. Karen J. Sy, "Are Library and Information Science Faculty Ready to Participate in Information Policy Advising?" Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 30, no. 4 (Spring 1990): 298-314; Philip Doty, "Why Study Information Policy?" Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 39, no. 1 (Winter 1998): 58-64; Ronald D. Doctor, "TIP- Teaching Information Policy," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 37, no. 3 (Summer 1996): 297-99. 18. Virgil L. P. Blake and Renee Tjoumas, "Research as a Factor in Faculty Evaluation: The Rules Are A-Changin'," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 31, no. 1 (Summer 1990): 3-24. 19. Barbara B. Moran, "Evaluation of Faculty in Schools of Library and Information Science: An Element in Educational Excellence," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 32, no. 3-4 (Fall/Winter 1991): 207-15. 20. Daniel O'Connor and J. Philip Mulvaney, "LIS Faculty Research and Expectations of the Academic Culture versus the Needs of the Practitioner," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 37, no. 4 (Fall 1996): 306-16. 21. Charles Curran, "Introduction to This Issue Devoted to LIS Teaching," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 39, no. 3 (Summer 1998): 162. 22. David Carr, "Tensions of Teaching," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 39, no. 3 (Summer 1998): 195-203. 23. Charles Curran, "What Sixty-One Superior LIS Teachers Say about Superior LIS Teaching, Plus Comments from Six Knowledgeable Observers," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 39, no. 3 (Summer 1998): 183-94. 24. Bert R. Boyce and Carol Henren, "Authorship as a Measure of the Productivity of Schools of Library and Information Science," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 37, no. 3 (Summer 1996): 250-71. 25. Mary Kim, "Publication Productivity of Part-Time Faculty at Schools of Library and Information Science," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 33, no. 2 (Spring 1992): 159-63. 26. Myron Sywak, A Thirteen- Year Study of Library School Student Attitudes," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 20, no. 4 (Spring 1990): 285-97; Kathleen de la Peña McCook and William E. Moen, "Patterns of Program Selection: Ranked Factors in the Choice of a Master's Degree Program in Library and Information Studies," Journal of Education for Library and Volume 41, Number 1
JELIS in the '90s 51 Information Science 33, no. 3 (Summer 1992): 212-25; Patricia G. Reeling, "Doctorate Recipients in Library Science: How They Compare with Doctorate Recipients in Other Disciplines," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 33, no. 4 (Fall 1992): 311-29; Terry Crowley, "In the Beginning Was the Word: Lessons from Students," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 39, no. 3 (Summer 1998): 204-07; Ruth V. Small, "A Comparison of the Resident and Distance Learning Experience in Library and Information Science Graduate Students," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 40, no. 1 (Winter 1999): 27-47. 27. Daniel L. Barron, "Perceptions of Faculty and Administrative Staff in ALA-Accredited Programs toward Part- Time and Distance Students in LIS Education," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 34, no. 3 (Summer 1993): 187-99. 28. Howard Besser and Maria Bonn, "Interactive Distance-Independent Education: Challenges to Traditional Academic Roles," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 38, no. 1 (Winter 1997): 14-34. 29. Keith Swigger, "Enrollment Management in the Library School," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 30, no. 4 (Spring 1990): 259-74; C. Glenn Sparks, "An Adaptation of Strategic Planning for Schools of Library and Information Science," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 31, no. 3 (Winter 1991): 179-86; Glenn R. Wittig, "Making Use of Goals and Objectives for Internal Program Evaluation," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 33, no. 2 (Spring 1992): 129-40. Winter 2000