In Search of Multiculturalism in the Library Science Curriculum Dennis East and Errol Lam This article discusses the need for multiculturalism to be an integral part of the library science curriculum and relates the results of a survey of library schools on the issue of multiculturalism and curriculum modification/revision. The authors conclude that the issue has received increased attention and positive action, but that a certain tension exists. They also found that the least activity in modification/revision con- cerning multiculturalism has taken place, curiously, in academic librarianship courses. The authors support extended efforts of library schools to prepare librarians for work in an increasingly diverse society and library environment. Librarians and those who educate them would agree that library education con- tinues to face multifaceted pressures on its nature and relevance. Indeed, in re- cent years library education programs have been closed or seriously ques- tioned at several universities. Among the reoccurring points of debate is whether a one-year or two-year gradu- ate curriculum is sufficient for the edu- cation of librarians. Some argue that, regardless of the length of the period of study, the emphasis should be on re- search and/or courses on managerial theory. Even if Barbara Moran 's appeal that critics "stop bashing library educa- tion" is heeded, a number of significant problems remain.1 In spite of the closing of library education programs at Columbia, Case Western Reserve, and Brigham Young, among others, the deans and directors of such programs voice optimism about the future of library education, in part because it is their job.2 But they are also "shrewd students of their environ- ments."3 No one grant, windfall dona- tion, program initiative, curriculum revision, or banner recruiting effort will cause the threats - real or imagined - to go away . . . forever. The future of any library education program will be ir- revocably linked to the local university environment and the leadership and shrewdness of the deans or directors and the faculty members. Among the plethora of suggestions for changes and improvements in the library school curriculum, two voices speak clearly of broad societal concerns under which the issue of multicultural- ism fits. Marcum believes that the role of library education in the university and the importance of libraries in soci- ety also greatly influence this issue. She outlines several actions that library Summer 1995 199
200 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science About the Authors Dennis East is Associate Dean of Libraries and Learning Resources, Jerome Library, Bowling Green State University. At the time this article was prepared, Errol Lam was Reference Librarian, Jerome Library, Bowl- ing Green State University. Manuscript received September 1993; ac- cepted January 1995. educators need to take to maintain li- brary education at the academy. Among them is demonstrating what the library profession brings to "important societal debates."4 Auld identifies recruiting minority faculty and students and bringing an international perspective to the training of American librarians among seven imperatives he believes library education needs to address.5 In- creasing recognition of multicultural- ism in the United States has been firmly established. Michael Gorman's state- ment that America's libraries "will have to deal with the issues and challenges that arise from multiculturalism" by the year 2001 reflects demographic reality.6 Further evidence of that reality can be found in the report One-Third of a Na- tion: by the year 2000 one-third of all school-age children in the United States will be minorities.7 Predicted shifts in the workplace with expert systems and other forms of artificial intelligence dis- placing workers and projections of growth in the nonwhite labor force will have an as yet unknown impact on our schools, universities, and employers.8 By extension, these changes and transi- tions directly relate to libraries and li- brary education. In California, with its large cultur- ally and ethnically diverse population, there is a futuristic view concerning changing demographic characteristics and their impact upon public libraries.9 A symposium held in New York in No- vember 1991 represents the new for- ward thinking that library science should embrace as we approach the year 2000. The symposium - "The Chal- lenge of Diversity in the Academy: In- volvement or Alienation?" - explored important facets that will be affected by multiculturalism. The topics consid- ered included the academic library's serving the multicultural campus, or- ganizing an academic library's response to diversity, and collection develop- ment and other multicultural initiatives worth considering.10 The issue of multiculturalism/di- versity and librarianship on campuses and in society is also recognized out- side the United States. In the United Kingdom several writers have urged gearing librarian training and education toward the emerging multicultural soci- ety or bringing attention to the special needs of ethnic minorities in British libraries.11 Patel, at an international conference of librarians, has also drawn attention to the importance of this new aspect of librarianship.12 Understanding the Terms Diversity and Multiculturalism As embraced in a variety of social, politi- cal, and media-shaped contexts, defini- tional lines between diversity and multiculturalism have become some- what blurred. Cari M. Dominquez sees diversity as "a composite of racial, sex, ethnic, national origin, cultural, attitu- dinal, socio-economic, and personal differences in every human being."13 Volume 36, Number 3
In Search of Multiculturalism in the Library Science Curriculum 201 Getinet Belay believes an ambiguity in conceptualizing multiculturalism exists. In an administrative-political context she sees multiculturalism as "policy issues" designed to include in- dividuals and groups belonging to "cul- tural minorities."14 Within the realm of curriculum development and scholar- ship she believes "multiculturalism re- fers to the need to recognize and to address the cultural diversity of human cognitive styles, contextual interpreta- tive perspectives, and behavioral modes."15 As a consequence, multicul- turalism in curricular matters should be "conceptualized separately" from the policy-issues aspects of multicultural- ism.16 Distinctions between the two, as delineated by Michael Smithee, seem most relevant and useful for our study. For him, "diversity" connotes promo- tional efforts to establish conditions within the university in which faculty, staff, and the student body are repre- sentative of the cultural and ethnic variances found locally, nationally, or globally.17 As the term is used today, he believes diversity includes "the en- couragement, celebration, support, and maintenance of a mixture of peoples on campus."18 Viewed in such a way, di- versity becomes more than "the free ex- change of ideas" and extends to many constituents - feminists, the sexually different, the disabled, and nontradi- tional students - among others.19 Mul- ticulturalism, in sharp contrast, while similar to diversity, rests on "criteria of ethnicity and race, often to the exclu- sion of other dimensions of differ- ence."20 Curriculum Change in Higher Education Simultaneous with all the debate, diag- nosis, and dissection of library educa- tion, the challenge of multiculturalism has arisen in our society and at our institutions of higher learning. Curricu- lum-reform initiatives are not novel in higher education. They are viewed as appropriate by many professions and fields. In higher education, recent dis- cussion about curricular reform has fo- cused on the general education, or core, curriculum. One of the leading advo- cates of educational reform, Ernest L. Boyer, president of the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching, believes there is "height- ened interest [in] and attention" to cultural pluralism in America and in- corporation of new scholarship on these topics into the core curriculum of the nation's undergraduate colleges.21 He also states that a core curriculum must be both "integrative and inclusive."22 Boyer believes that affirmation of diver- sity is important, but that students must also understand they are at once "autonomous individuals" as well as "members of a human community to which they are accountable. "23 For him, "the task is to think through educa- tional experiences that reaffirm 'the hu- man commonalities,' to focus on those conditions that make us human, and, therefore, that bind us."24 In Boyer's view, we should not be motivated by altruism or sentimentality, but because "our future well-being, even our sur- vival, may depend on whether students understand their connections with each other."25 Daryl Smith writes of the national challenges facing higher education as a result of demographic changes. In his view, the results of successfully meet- ing these challenges will ultimately benefit all community members as well as our educational institutions.26 Our nation's changing demographic compo- sition will continue to apply pressure to reform the curriculum. In the business field, Thomas believes that the present and future diverse work force will be a Summer 1995
202 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science corporation's and an organization's greatest potential strength when man- aged properly.27 As a result of the emerging multicultural world in which executives operate, business schools have implemented programs that in- clude diversity.28 Kennedy and Everest have advised: "Your company's success may depend on its ability to compete for tomorrow's multicultural work force. Communication is the key."29 Also within the business community, others have noted the centrality of the mul- ticulturalism-diversity issue to compe- tition and the future work force.30 Similarly, the Council on Cultural Di- versity in Nursing Practice of the American Nurses' Association is intent on developing and implementing nurs- ing school curriculum that incorporates practice related to concepts of cultural diversity. It insists that there must be improvement of nursing practice through the development of knowledge of the cultural diversity prevalent in society.31 That librarianship should also be part of the action involved in such social courses seems reasonable and necessary. As Patricia Glass Schu- man, former president of the American Library Association, says: [I]f we are to communicate effectively with the majority of the world's people - who are neither white nor English- speaking - we must know more about how they see the world. Knowing about each other does not guarantee a more tolerant, understanding, or educated so- ciety. It is a prerequisite.32 Calls for Curriculum Changes in Library Schools Libraries and library education pro- grams have not, of course, been immune to the issue of multiculturalism. The relevance of multiculturalism diversity in the library school curriculum has had its proponents. As early as 1978, Carter called for multicultural graduate library education that both recruited persons of diverse racial and ethnic backgrounds and suggested necessary curricular changes to attract these diverse per- sons.33 In two articles written in 1980, Cohen argued for an increased sensitiv- ity among librarians toward racial and ethnic minorities. He believes programs and institutes similar to the ones held at Queens College Graduate School of Library and Information Studies since 1972 are needed.34 Simsova, in 1980, provided the ra- tionale for establishing training for services to minority ethnic groups.35 Cohen and Sherrill (1982) wrote about the need to incorporate the treatment of ethnic minorities in library school cur- ricula. An integrated curriculum to in- clude coverage of ethnic minorities was suggested and initiated.36 In 1983, the National Commission on Libraries and Information Science's Report of the Task Force on Library and Information Services to Cultural Minorities urged library schools and other library agen- cies and associations to seek funds to encourage and assist more minority persons to enter the profession.37 In- itiatives on behalf of multiculturalism seem implicit in McCabe's look at trends in library administration and or- ganization.38 The report of the Library Educa- tion Task Force of the Ethnic Materials Information Exchange Round Table (EMIERT) included the results of a 1986 survey of forty-six library schools about the treatment of ethnic- ity in the education of librarians. Two curricular recommendations - to "in- clude materials and services to ethnic and minority groups as an integral part of the core library curriculum" and "to prepare guidelines concerning specific ethnic and minority topics re- Volume 36, Number 3
In Search of Multiculturalism in the Library Science Curriculum 203 lated to each area of the curriculum" - emerged.39 In a recent article, Knowles and Jolivet strongly recommended that spe- cific courses are needed to prepare li- brarians to serve the emerging majority communities.40 E. J. Josey concluded that library and information science schools should be including multicul- tural topics and approaches to the cur- riculum. He urged that the majority faculty members at these schools be- come more knowledgeable about mi- nority experiences and the information needs of various races and ethnic groups. Josey reached these conclu- sions after surveying North American library schools about their perceived role in educating students about library services to cultural minorities.41 The Fall 1991 issue of Library Administra- tion & Management related the progress of the library profession in recognizing the need for ethnic minorities to gain their place in librarianship, while pointing out that much work remains to achieve that end.42 A timely and rele- vant article in that same issue called for librarians to prepare for the pluralistic campus of the twenty-first century. Leadership seems highly desirable in preparing compatible environments for students and faculty of diverse cultures on campuses where the former will be a growing proportion of library patrons in the next century.43 In 1992, at the First National Conference of African- Ameri- can Librarians, William D. Cunningham provided an in-depth view of diversity in the library school curriculum.44 Susan J. Freiband, focusing specifi- cally on the issues of multiculturalism and the library curriculum, poses ques- tions for librarian educators to consider, describes aspects of the curriculum she believes need to be addressed, suggests specific curricular programs to pur- sue, and lists the skills, knowledge, and attitudes needed by the graduates of library and information science pro- grams.45 Getinet Belay, who offers con- ceptual strategies for dealing with multiculturalism in the curriculum, be- lieves it is not only a challenge, but an opportunity "to revitalize education."46 And, most recently, McCook and Gon- salves offer ten issues for consideration concerning diversity.47 For them, "sen- sitization" about multiculturalism dur- ing professional study is essential.48 That, of necessity, involves the cur- riculum that library educators are now examining.49 With these calls in the literature for positive adjustments and changes in library school education, the advocacy of specific multicultural courses or the addition of multicultu- ral/diversity content to core classes seems legitimate and relevant. Curriculum Changes at Library Schools In response to the focus on multicultu- ral education, there has been movement in the schools of library and informa- tion science to offer courses that have a multicultural flavor, if not emphasis. Examples include Kent State Univer- sity's Ethnic Library Services and Col- lections, Wayne State University's Foundations of African- American Bib- liography and Resources, and the Uni- versity of Wisconsin-Milwaukee's Preparing Librarians to Serve Ethnic Communities, offered in the summer of 1987. 50 At the University of Michigan the approach to incorporat- ing multiculturalism/diversity into the curriculum involves a cooperative program between the library school and the university. One of the two offered courses is Information Resources in the Knowledge-Based Society. A second course, concerning diversity in the United States, explores (1) how cultural differences influence the manner in which information is shared with an Summer 1995
204 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science ethnic or a cultural group and among individuals belonging to different groups and (2) how society's dominant culture has influenced the intellectual and practical accessibility of informa- tion.51 William Welburn has reported on the relationship of librarianship to in- formation needs and uses within a multicultural society in his class at the University of Iowa School of Li- brary and Information Science. He also includes readings that represent back- ground materials for understanding multicultural communities.52 Such courses indicate the direction that li- brary science curriculum is taking in response to growing cultural diversity in our society and the multicultural is- sues that abound. Survey Results In light of the increased emphasis on bringing multiculturalism to the library school curriculum and in an effort to determine if and how library science programs are addressing the issue, fifty- nine questionnaires were mailed in January 1992 to accredited graduate programs in library science in the United States and Canada. Thirty-nine questionnaires (66 percent) were re- turned. Two of the questionnaires were incomplete, resulting in the use of thirty-seven (62.7 percent) of the total questionnaires for this study.53 Multiculturalism and curriculum modification are complex subjects. Our survey attempted neither to fathom the depths of the processes and procedures of curriculum modification nor to ob- tain details about the mechanics of bringing multiculturalism/cultural di- versity to the curriculum. Through our survey we hoped only to obtain evi- dence óf activity and an impression of attitudes in this sensitive area. A clear majority of twenty-four re- spondents (65 percent) indicated that their library science program had un- dertaken modification or revision of its curriculum to include multicultural topics and issues, while ten (27 percent) admitted that no such review or modi- fication had taken place (see survey question 1). Three respondents (8 per- cent) provided no answer to this ques- tion. Of the ten respondents (27 percent) indicating that no modifica- tion or revision had been undertaken to incorporate multicultural issues into the curriculum, five (13.5 percent) re- ported that no such consideration had been made, while the remaining five respondents (13.5 percent) reported that some discussion of the issue had been undertaken. Nineteen (51 percent) of the twenty-four respondents who had undertaken curriculum modification or revision offered explanations as to why they had undertaken such action. Among these respondents, five (13.5 percent) undertook such action as part of their standard practice of reviewing the curriculum. Others generally stated that multiculturalism was introduced into the curriculum because of its grow- ing significance and relevance to future librarians. Further evidence of the positive re- sponse of library schools to multicultu- ral issues can be found in the following selective comments from those who have undertaken curriculum modifica- tion or revision to include multicultu- ralism (see survey question 1): We are doing so in order to confront the societal changes taking place so as to prepare our graduates to deal effectively with the library's changing publics. As a faculty and as a university we rec- ognize the need for it. Practitioners are also feeling pressure to be more knowl- edgeable in this area. Volume 36, Number 3
In Search of Multiculturalism in the Library Science Curriculum 205 To prepare students to work effectively in the real world. The change was made because we felt it was appropriate to needs of the students. To meet the information needs of all per- sons in all types of library and informa- tion settings. Not a formal revision but frequent dis- cussions in faculty meetings in which we discussed the need for integration throughout the curriculum just as U.S. society is increasingly multicultural. This topic is crucial, especially in a pro- gram in a state lacking in diversity. It is critical to producing well-prepared librarians who do not ever work in ho- mogeneous communities. These comments reflect a positive response by library science school fac- ulties to either modifying or adapting the library science curriculum to is- sues of multiculturalism. Those pro- grams reflect a high awareness of the multicultural issue, and some of their respective institutions (1) have taken steps to address the issues; (2) have considered it in the past and recognize it will be a factor in future discussions of curriculum; (3) have added mul- ticultural-related material in core courses; (4) have addressed the issue in a goals and objectives statement; and (5) either have tested or are test- ing courses in resources and services for "special populations." Twenty-four (65 percent) of all re- spondents reported that no special committee had been established to un- dertake curriculum modification or revision to incorporate multicultural issues, while five (13 percent) indicated that they had such a committee (see survey question 2). Eight respondents (22 percent) did not answer this ques- tion, perhaps because they had offered an affirmative answer to the question about having undertaken curriculum modification or revision. The survey sought to ascertain whether library schools would address the issue of modifying or revising the curriculum to include multicultural topics at some future time (see survey question 3). Eight respondents (22 per- cent) reported that they expected the issue would be addressed within the next year, while five (23 percent) ex- pected the issue to be considered within the next two years. Again, a large num- ber of respondents - twenty-two (59 percent) - offered no answer to this question. Only one respondent ex- pressed uncertainty that the issue would be addressed, while another reported it would be one to two years before atten- tion was devoted to the issue. The questionnaire asked how the library schools proposed to go about addressing the issue of curriculum modification or revision (see survey question 4). Sixteen respondents (43 percent) provided no answer to this question. We believe this occurred be- cause the respondents believed they had previously provided the informa- tion. Comments provided by the re- spondents are quite informative: We have addressed the issue for years - have strong curricular emphasis in this area. Revision not necessary - updating is going on. Each professor is academically and so- cially responsible for addressing this is- sue within framework of the courses. All children's and YA [young adult] lit- erature courses currently integrate mul- ticultural literature; discussing revision of our international librarianship course to be a "multicultural" librarianship course; discussing changing our ad- vanced reference course to bibliographic instruction for diverse populations. Identify competencies or "learner out- Summerl995
206 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science comes" and integrate them into various courses. Expect multicultural librarian- ship to become part of the curriculum. On a course-by-course basis, faculty will examine their syllabi and bibliog- raphies/reading lists to include mul- ticultural topics and issues. Will look at the entire curriculum; stu- dents who have to take the elective course advocate requiring it - how can we have that immersion experience? One respondent noted that a sub- committee of a curriculum committee would address the issue, while another observed that an educational policy committee is in the process of making recommendations to the faculty about multiculturalism in the curriculum. And others stated the issue would be addressed "through normal process" and "as we have in the past." Again, the responses and comments reflect a high level of awareness of the need to ad- dress the inclusion of multiculturalism in the curriculum and indicate that many library science schools are ac- tively taking steps to do so. Through our survey we wanted to determine if there were particular rea- sons, such as lack of budget, availability of qualified faculty, or other factors, in- fluencing library schools not to under- take modification or revision of the curriculum (see survey question 5). Among the seventeen respondents (45 percent), two mentioned the lack of qualified faculty as a deterrent to imple- menting multiculturalism in the cur- riculum, and two others noted that the existence of an already large, rich cur- riculum was a factor. Lack of urgency over the issue, lack of time, more press- ing noncurricular issues, and other cur- ricular issues surfaced as other reasons for lack of action in this particular area. Only one respondent identified lack of resources - personal and fiscal - as de- terrents to bringing multiculturalism to the curriculum. Clearly this was a trou- blesome question for some respondents, three of whom took exception to our question. For example, one respondent asked, "Have you stopped beating your wife yet?" Another opined that we had posed a bad question and inquired, "Why presume we were prevented? We were not." The final commentator noted, "Nothing has prevented us - your question is not very helpful - we are undertaking the activity now be- cause it is the proper time to do so." In posing our question, we did not seek to stand in judgment of those schools that had not addressed the issue. We sought only to determine whether there were specific reasons or factors that pre- vented, deterred, or delayed library schools from addressing the multicultu- ralism issue. Thirty-three survey respondents (89 percent) affirmed that their respec- tive institutions offered library science courses with a special emphasis on multicultural topics and issues (see sur- vey question 6). Our survey also asked library schools to identify whether "tra- ditional library science courses" incor- porated multicultural topics and issues (see survey question 7). Only three re- spondents (8 percent) did not answer this question. The courses identified in the survey and the rank-order responses are listed in table 1. The difficulty of integrating mate- rial pertinent to the multicultural issue in cataloging and classification courses is somewhat understandable. Yet, the other two lowest-ranked courses - In- formation Sources and Services and Academic Librarianship - would seem to be logical candidates for the inclu- sion of multicultural material. With the increasingly multicultural character of colleges and universities, it seems logical that a course in academic li- brarianship would be a natural choice Volume 36, Number 3
In Search of Multiculturalism in the Library Science Curriculum 207 to include multicultural material or emphasis. In connection with this question, the survey asked respon- dents to identify any other courses that included multicultural issues and topics. Courses in African-American literature, current topics, children's and young-adult literature, multicul- tural populations, the public library, Asian literature, humanities re- sources, adult services, services to special populations, school library management, research methods in sampling populations, a component on changing demographics within a foun- dations of librarianship course, micro- computers, comparative and international librarianship, and school media centers, among others, were spe- cifically mentioned. Among these courses, those in children's and young- adult literature and children's and young-adult services were identified most frequently as including multicul- tural topics and issues. Fifteen of the respondents (44 percent) identified such courses. The inclusion of multicul- tural information or material in these li- brary science courses, particularly in the children's and young adults' offerings, is indicative of the positive response and action of the library schools to this impor- tant initiative and issue. One survey question asked, "If you plan to add a single course on multicul- tural issues, do you anticipate it being required, highly recommended, recom- mended, or optional?" (see survey ques- tion 8). Although eighteen of the respondents (49 percent) provided no answer to the question, only two (5 per- cent) indicated that they had no such plans. The results from seventeen re- spondents are given in table 2. The fact that the largest number of respondents would make such a course optional does not mean necessarily that there is less of a commitment to multicultural- ism in the curriculum. Each library school faces a variety of pressures and considerations in giving such designa- tions to its courses. In the open-com- ment section of the survey (see survey question 10), respondents were asked to offer any observations or opinions they might have concerning the topic of the curriculum and multiculturalism. The comments received from seventeen re- spondents (47 percent) indicate that positive awareness of and attention to Table 1 Courses Offered Having Emphasis on Multicultural Topics Course Respondents % Selection and Acquisition of Library Materials 28 76 Foundations of Librarianship 26 68 Reference and Bibliography 24 65 Library Management 23 62 Information Sources and Services 21 57 Cataloging and Classifying Library Materials 15 40 Academic Librarianship* 1 3 35 *Two respondents indicated they did not have an academic librarianship course in their curriculum. Table 2 "If You Plan to Add a Single Course on Multicultural Issues, Do You Anticipate It Being ..." Respondents % Required 1 3 Highly 4 1 1 Recommended Recommended 3 8 Optional 9 24 Summer 1995
208 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science multiculturalism in the library science curriculum are present. The absence of comments from the other twenty re- spondents (54 percent) should not be construed as a lack of such interest or awareness. Several selective comments are provided below: We will offer for the first time a special topics course entitled Multicultural Li- brarianship, taught by our Native American faculty member. What we've discovered already from the preenroll- ment is that practitioners who have MLSs and are working in libraries are enrolling in the course. . . . This tells us that they perceive a need for skills in this area. It is important that multicultural- ism be integrated into all courses and not rely on one elective course to carry the responsibility for conveying the impor- tant issues addressed by this subject. We recognize the issue and are working to diversify our faculty and courses. We also recruit minority students, though we're not as successful as we want. My suggestion is schools that have not modified their curriculum should just do it\ It is generally known today that by the year 2000 the majority of our work force will be non-Caucasian and fe- males. Many of our cities will have mi- norities as a majority. For many of us who have been in librarianship for twenty-five years or more the current discussions on multicultural matters are not new. What has happened? Has the rush to automate, conservative profes- sional leadership nationally, etc., di- verted the profession's attention from outreach programs that flourished in the schools of LIS, ethnic bibliography courses in the 1960s and 1970s? We must get back on track. This is essen- tially an information profession grounded in humanistic principles. We feel that we reflect multicultural con- cerns in a number of existing courses as indicated. . . . We are unsure whether a single course represents a better or worse approach. Our course includes "all" "special" populations, with the recognition that experiences vary a great deal with type - especially between those with visible and invisible stigmas - it's a lot to do in a two-hour course but becoming easier - students by the time they get to this elective now are telling me that some things are happening in the theory classes especially that reinforce or pre- pare them for this class . . . In the undergraduate program we re- quire three literature courses which in- clude multicultural literature, a course on disabilities, a course on multicultu- ralism. On the graduate level, multicul- turalism is a required integration in our required collection development and reference courses as well as all of our literature courses, discussion under way of an elective devoted to the topic. Our curriculum is under continuous re- view as it relates to societal and global changes and developments. The school's Curriculum Committee selects specific areas for in-depth review each year; however, the faculty are expected to keep their courses relevant to the world in which our graduates will work. Not all of the commentaries offered were positive as regards the topic and our questionnaire. The most negative comments are offered below: I almost threw this away. A question- naire on this topic comes almost every week. ... I wonder if those who suggest cur- riculum changes to meet their particular agendas realize just how many groups we hear from every year with such agen- das. We could easily remove all basic librarianship from the curriculum and still not have time to meet these needs. Volume 36, Number 3
In Search of Multiculturolism in the Library Science Curriculum 209 This is a very crude instrument which couldn't possibly capture the complex- ity of this issue. You didn't ask good questions. Tsk! Tsk! Library and Information Science Education Statistical Reports Each annual statistical report of the As- sociation for Library and Information Science Education (ALISE) from the pe- riod 1985-1991 was examined for infor- mation on new courses, courses dropped, and experimental or trial courses in library science schools in the United States and Canada.54 The information is ambiguous as to whether courses dropped, new courses added, and experimental or trial courses contain a multicultural compo- nent or emphasis. If the course title does not readily reflect a relevance to mul- ticulturalism, it is impossible to deter- mine if the course concerns itself with the topic in any way. For example, courses entitled Current Trends in Li- brary and Information, Information in Society, Current Trends, or Linguistics for Information Studies may indeed in- corporate multiculturally related mate- rial. The ALISE statistical reports, while valuable, do not help elucidate beyond a doubt the issue of the adop- tion of multiculturally related courses in library schools, as such information is not specifically sought. While our survey generally reflects increased awareness and inclusion of multicultu- ral issues or topics in library science school courses, the information ob- tained from the ALISE reports would appear to indicate relatively little pro- gress in this regard. For example, of 241 new courses adopted in library schools between 1984 and 1991, only 7 courses (3 percent) in American and four courses (2 percent) in Canadian library science schools can be easily identified as being related to multiculturalism.55 Regarding experimental or trial courses adopted in the library schools, out of 184 such courses, 11 (6 percent) seem to relate to multiculturalism.56 For the same time period, 168 courses have been dropped from library schools, and 9 (5 percent) of those are believed to be multiculturally related.57 Because of in- consistencies in compilation and be- cause no question directly asks about multiculturalism, ALISE reports do not invalidate the results of our recent sur- vey on multiculturalism and curricu- lum modifications or revisions in library schools. Conclusion It seems likely that for the remainder of this century the quality of colleges and universities may be gauged in part by the quality of life on the campuses themselves. The changes that will occur on the campus will demand increas- ingly decisive, high-quality leadership on many fronts. The acceptance of mul- ticulturalism grows concomitantly, but there is also a tension over its presence. As a result, to value diversity and em- brace multiculturalism will require that its message be communicated to each entering class and to both new and con- tinuing members of the academy, in- cluding librarians and library staff. As the remaining years of this dec- ade present both unprecedented chal- lenges to and new opportunities for higher education in an era of vast global changes, librarians should play an ac- tive role. After all, librarianship has a historical precedent in dealing with the ethnic population in this country. Stephen Stern has identified the role of the library community in a variety of ethnic and culturally diverse instances in our history. For him, the library com- munity has "always responded - Summer 1995
210 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science quickly to some, not fast enough to oth- ers - to the changing needs of ethnic groups in the country." He believes that librarians, in expanding library service to all people - the enfranchised and dis- enfranchised alike - are arguing that "ethnicity is not a reality rooted in the past, nor a concept relegated to a spe- cific economic class, nor the exclusive property of one cultural group." Rather he sees it as a "resource for living" that all can utilize to perpetuate and rein- force a "sense of community, intimacy, and values." Quite simply, he sees li- brarians' activities as "solidifying their role as important centers of pluralism in the United States."58 Our survey of library schools' re- sponses to the multiculturalism issue as it relates to curriculum modification or revision demonstrates that there has been increased attention and positive action in this regard. The actions taken by library schools on this issue may not be either bold or rapid enough for some. A groundswell or movement may not have taken place. While some resis- tance, outright opposition, uncertainty, and tension over the issue may exist, our survey indicates that an awareness of the issue exists and that substantive change is happening. Our survey re- sults, curiously, indicate that academic librarianship courses need attention so far as the embracing of multicultural- ism is concerned. We have no solid in- formation to help understand why programs may be omitting multicultu- ral material from their academic li- brary-related courses. The inclusion of multicultural material or emphases in other courses - core or otherwise - may more than compensate for the apparent oversight in academic librarianship courses. Based on our survey results and the comments received, our belief is that our library science schools will be preparing librarians to work effec- tively and serve in an increasingly cul- turally diverse society and library envi- ronment. It remains to be seen whether there will be sufficient numbers of such librarians to meet the needs of our mul- ticultural society and how well those needs will be met.59 References and Notes 1. Tom Gaughan, "Ed. Notes," American Li- braries 22 (Dec. 1991): 1012. 2. Tom Gaughan, "Taking the Pulse of Li- brary Education," American Libraries 22 (Dec. 1991): 1020-21, 1072; 23 (Jan. 1992): 24-25, 120. 3. Gaughan, "Taking the Pulse" (Jan. 1992): 120. 4. Deanna B. Marcum, "Library Education: A Challenge for the 1990s," in The Bowker Annual: Library and Book Trade Almanac, 1991, 36th ed. (New Provi- dence, N.J.: Bowker, 1991), 88. 5. Lawrence W. S. Auld, "Seven Imperatives for Library Education," Library Journal 115 (May 1,1990): 55-59. 6. Michael Gorman, "The Academic Library in the Year 2001: Dream or Nightmare or Something in Between?" Journal of Aca- demic Librarianship 17: 9. 7. American Council on Education and the Education Commission of the States, One-Third of a Nation: A Report of the Commission on Minority Participation in Education and American Life (Washing- ton, D.C.: American Council on Educa- tion, 1988), 2. 8. Robert A. Goddard, "Workforce 2000," Personnel Journal 68 (Feb. 1989): 69; Wil- lis R. Johnston, project director, Work- force 2000: Work and Workers for the Twenty-First Century, report HI 3796-RR (Indianapolis, Ind.: Hudson Institute, June 1987), xix. 9. Judith Payne, ed., Public Libraries Face California's Ethnic and Racial Diversity (Santa Monica, Calif.: Rand, 1985); Nora Jacob, ed., A State of Change: California's Ethnic Future and Libraries (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford Univ. Pr., 1988). 10. "The Challenge of Diversity in the Acad- emy: Involvement or Alienation?" (Asso- Volume 36, Number 3
In Search of Multiculturalism in the Library Science Curriculum 2 1 1 ciation of College and Research Libraries symposium, New York, Nov. 15, 1991). 11. Parvez Akhtar, "Meeting Ethnic Minori- ties Needs," Assistant Librarian 7 (Oct. 1984): 120-22; Aruna Shah, "How to Meet the Ethnic Need," Library Associa- tion Record 86 (Jan. 1984): 15-16; Aruna Shah, "The Positive and Negative of Mul- tiethnic Provision," Library Association Record 86 (May 1984): 215, 217; Judith Bowen, Paty Hiley, and Ed Walley, "Working in a Multi-cultural Society: Education and Training for Librarians and Information Scientists," IFLA Journal 12 (1986): 192-202. 12. Jashu Patel, "Ethnic Librarianship and Its International Developments in North America" (papers presented at the 53d IFLA General Conference, Brighton, Eng- land, Aug. 16-21, 1987): 86-97 (ED 300003). 13. Cari M. Dominquez, "The Challenge of Workforce 2000," The Bureaucrat: The Journal for Public Managers 20 (Winter 1991-92): 16. 141 Getinet Belay, "Conceptual Strategies for Operationalizing Multicultural Curric- ula," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 33 (Fall 1992): 295. 15. Ibid., 295-96. 16. Ibid., 296. 17. Michael Smithee, "Internationalism, Di- versity, and Multiculturalism: Are They Compatible?" NAFSA Newsletter 42, no. 6 (Apr./May 1991): 1. 18. Ibid. 19. Ibid. 20. Ibid., 1-2. 21. Ernest L. Boyer, "Higher Education, Di- versity and the Nation's Future," in A Higher Education Map for the 1990s, ed. Gene A. Budig (New York: Macmillan, 1992), 77-78. 22. Ibid., 78. 23. Ibid. 24. Ibid. 25. Ibid. 26. Daryl G. Smith, The Challenge of Diver- sity: Involvement or Alienation in the Academy, ASHE-ERIC Higher Educa- tion Report 5 (Washington, D.C.: School of Education and Human Development, George Washington University, 1989). 27. R. Roosevelt Thomas Jr., Beyond Race and Gender: Unleashing the Power of Your Total Work Force by Managing Di- versity (New York: AMACON, 1991). 28. Debra E. Blum, "Business Schools Rush to Revise Curricula in Response to Critics and Competition," Chronicle of Higher Education 38, no. 15 (Dec. 4, 1991): A23, A28-29. 29. Jim Kennedy and Anna Everest, "Put Di- versity in Context," Personnel Journal 70 (Sept. 1991): 50. 30. Sharon Nelton, "Winning with Diver- sity," Nation's Business 80 (Sept. 1992): 18-24; Dominquez, "Challenge of Work- force 2000," 16. 31. American Nurses' Association, Cultural Diversity in the Nursing Curriculum: A Guide for Implementation (Kansas City, Mo.: ANA, 1986). 32. Patricia Glass Schuman, "Inequalities Will Not Build the American Dream," American Libraries 23 (Jan. 1992): 114. 33. Jane Robbins Carter, "Multi-cultural Graduate Library Education," Journal of Education for Librarianship 18 (Spring 1978): 295-314. 34. David Cohen, "Ethnicity in Librarian- ship: Imperatives of Library Training Pro- grams for Minority Groups," Catholic Library World 51 (Mar. 1980): 342-46; David Cohen, "Ethnicity in Librarian- ship: A Rationale for Multiethnic Library Services in a Heterogeneous Society," Li- brary Trends 29 (Fall 1980): 179-90. 35. Sylva Simsova, "Library Training for Services to Minority Ethnic Groups: Con- cepts and General Principles," Library Trends 29 (Fall 1980): 245-58. 36. David Cohen and Laurence Sherrill, "A Model and Course of Study for Library School Ethnic Curricula," Ethnic Forum 2 (Spring 1982): 51-58. 37. National Commission on Libraries and Information Science, Report of the Task Force on Library and Information Serv- ices to Cultural Minorities (Washington, D.C.: NCLIS, 1983), 15-17. 38. Gerard B. McCabe, "Contemporary Trends in Academic Library Administra- tion and Organization," in Issues in Aca- demic Librarianship: Views and Case Studies for the 1980s and 1990s, ed. Peter Spyers-Duran and Thomas W. Mann Jr. (Westport, Conn.: Greenwood, 1985), 23. Summer 1995
212 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 39. EMIERT, "Ethnic and Minority Concerns in Library Education," EMIE Bulletin 6 (Summer 1989): 8. 40. Em Claire Knowles and Linda Jolivet, "Recruiting the Underrepresented: Col- laborative Efforts between Library Educa- tors and Library Practitioners," Library Administration & Management 5 (Fall 1991): 189-93. 41. E. J. Josey, "Education for Library Serv- ices to Cultural Minorities," Education Libraries 15 (Winter 1991): 16-22. 42. Knowles and Jolivet, "Recruiting the Un- derrepresented." Library Administration & Management 5 (Fall 1991): 189-93. 43. Janet E. Welch and R. Errol Lam, "The Library and the Pluralistic Campus in the Year 2000: Implications for Administra- tors," Library Administration & Manage- ment 5 (Fall 1991): 212-16. 44. William D. Cunningham, "Is Cultural Di- versity Being Addressed in Library Schools?" (program, First National Con- ference of African- American Librarians, Columbus, Ohio, Sept. 4-6, 1992). 45. Susan J. Freiband, "Multicultural Issues and Concerns in Library Education," Jour- nal of Education for Library and Informa- tion Science 33 (Fall 1992): 287-94. 46. Belay, "Conceptual Strategies," 295-306. 47. Kathleen de la Peña McCook and Tosca O. Gonsalves, "Diversity: Ten Issues to Con- sider," The Bottom Line 60 (Winter 1992/Spring 1993): 43-48. 48. Ibid., 46. 49. Ibid. 50. Mary W. Lockett, "Preparing Librarians to Serve Ethnic Communities," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 29 (Fall 1988): 141-42. 51. Alexandra Dimitroff and others, "Alli- ance for Information: Michigan Librari- ans and Library Faculty Join Forces for the Future," Research Strategies 8 (Spring 1990): 52-58. 52. William Welburn, Libraries in a Multicul- tural Society (class offered in fall 1991 at the University of Iowa School of Library and Information Science). 53. The results of our survey compare favor- ably with a survey conducted in the sum- mer of 1991. See Clara M. Chu, "Education for Multicultural Librarian- ship," in Multiculturalism in Libraries, Rosemary Ruhig Du Mont, Lois Buttlar, and William Caynon (Westport, Conn.: Greenwood, 1994), 127-56. The tabula- tion of the responses to survey question 9 produced little useful comparative in- formation, resulting in their omission from this study. 54. Timothy W. Sineath, ed., Library and In- formation Science Education Statistical Reports (Raleigh, N.C.: ALISE, 1986), 187-93; (1987) 183-91; (1988) 182-93; (1989) 161-77; (1990) 213-25; (1991) 262-65; (1992) 317-22. 55. Ibid. The titles of new courses adopted, 1984-1991, in the United States are Li- brary and Information Services to Special Groups; Ethnic Groups; Information Sources for Hawaiian Studies; National and International Information Policy; Slavic Bibliography; Foundations of Afri- can-American Bibliography and Re- sources; International and Comparative Librarianship; and Comparative and In- ternational Study of Information Serv- ices. In Canada, the new courses are Global Education in the Media Cen- ter/Videotapes in a Global Classroom; In- ternational Documents and Publications; Global Education in Media Centers; and Videotapes in a Global Classroom. 56. The titles of the experimental/trial courses in the United States are Asian- American Resources for Young People; Afro- American Resources; Multiethnic Materials for Children and Young Adults; Minority Issues in Library Science; Afri- can-American History and Culture; Eth- nic Materials for Children and Young Adults; Afro- American Bibliography; In- ternational Children's Literature; Inter- national Librarianship; and Ethnic Literature for Children. One Canadian school identified Multicultural Librari- anship as an experimental/trial course. No specific titles of experimental/trial courses for 1990-1991 were available. 57. The titles of courses dropped by library schools in the United States for 1984- 1991 are Ethnic Groups and Libraries; Comparative Analysis and International Studies; Ethnic Collections and Publica- tions; Latin American Materials in the Volume 36, Number 3
In Search of Multiculturalism in the Library Science Curriculum 213 Humanities and Social Sciences; Library Development in Latin America; Docu- ments and Publications of International Organizations; European Librarianship; Library Materials and Services to Ethnic Minorities; Comprehensive and Interna- tional Library and Information Services. 58. Stephen Stern, "Ethnic Libraries and Li- brarianship in the United States: Models and Prospects," in Advances in Librari- anship, ed. Irene P. Godden, vol. 15 (San Diego, Calif.: Academic, 1991), 99. 59. The growing importance of the multicul- tural issue in librarianship and the edu- cation of librarians is quite evident, since this article was submitted for publication consideration in 1993. Please see Kather- ine Hoover Hill, ed., Diversity and Mul- ticulturalism in Libraries (Greenwich, Conn.: JAI, 1994), and Rosemary Ruhig Du Mont, Lois Buttlar, and William Caynon, Multiculturalism in Libraries (Westport, Conn.: Greenwood, 1994), for the most recent and comprehensive works in this area Reading List A basic reading list of texts and articles for inclusion in any multicultural/diver- sity component of a course or class may include representative materials and re- sources such as those listed below. Basic Texts Banks, James A. Teaching Strategies for Eth- nic Studies. 5th ed. Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1991. A valuable source for multicultural educa- tion resources on many ethnic groups in the United States. Du Mont, Rosemary Ruhig, Lois Buttlar, and William Caynon. Multiculturalism in Li- braries. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood, 1994. Hill, Katherine Hoover, ed. Diversity and Multiculturalism in Libraries (Greenwich, Conn.: JAI, 1994). The works by Du Mont et al. and Hill are the most comprehensive, diverse, analyti- cal, and recent treatments of the subject of diversity and multiculturalism as related to librarianship. Higher Education and Diversity Blake, J. Herman, and others. "The Challenge of Diversity." In Ethics and Higher Educa- tion, ed. William W. Way, 231-48. New York: Macmillan, 1990. Chester, Mark A., and James E. Crowfoot, "Ra- cism on Campus." In Ethics and Higher Education, ed. Way, 195-230. Shavlik, Donna. "Affirmative Action: Solu- tion or Problem?" In Ethics and Higher Education, ed. Way, 157-69. Smith, Daryl G. The Challenge of Diversity: Involvement or Alienation in the Acad- emy. ASHE-ERIC Higher Education Re- port 5. Washington, D.C.: School of Edu- cation and Human Development, George Washington University, 1989. A monograph urging the role and concern that higher education should play and dis- play, respectively, for diversity. Takaki, Ronald. "An Educated and Culturally Literate Person Must Study America's Mul- ticultural Reality." Chronicle of Higher Education 36: 26 (Mar. 8, 1989): Bl-2. An essay calling for an opening of the American mind to greater acceptance of cultural diversity. The Library and Diversity Jacob, Nora, ed. A State of Change: Califor- nia's Ethnic Future and Libraries. Stan- ford, Calif.: Stanford Univ. Pr., 1988. See Payne entry below. Librarians Association of the University of California. The Many Voices of Diversity. Report of the Ad Hoc Committee on LAUC Regional Workshops on Cultural Diversity in Libraries. Santa Barbara, Calif.: Univ. of Calif., 1992, ED 357744. Contains the recommendations of the is- sues papers and other papers developed for a series of workshops conducted by the Librarians Association of the University of California, Santa Barbara, related to is- sues of cultural diversity and future li- brary collections and services. Summer 1995
214 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Payne, Judith, and others. Public Libraries Face California 's Ethnic and Racial Diver- sity. Santa Monica, Calif.: Rand, 1985. In recognition of the state's vastly chang- ing racial and ethnic composition in the 2000s, this document poses some relevant questions and possible answers to how the state's public libraries will react to this diversity. Shaver, Marilyn. Cultural Diversity Program- ming in ARL Libraries: SPEC Kit 165. Washington, D.C.: Association of Re- search Libraries, 1990. Lists three sections: planning documents, activities, and position descriptions of some ARL libraries actively participating in diversity programming. Diversity in the Workplace Jamieson, David, and Julie O 'Mara. Managing Workforce 2000: Gaining the Diversity Ad- vantage. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1991. Offers an approach for developing a new workplace that understands the diverse work force. Part 7 - "Resources for Gain- ing the Diversity Advantage: Where to Go for Help" - lists many organizations on pages 193-228. Internationalism Lynch, James. Multicultural Education in a Global Society. Bristol, Pa.: Falmer, 1989. Extends the frontiers of current considera- tion of multicultural education and sets it firmly within a global context. The core of this book focuses sharply on human rights as a central motivation in any commit- ment to multicultural education. Smithee, Michael. "Internationalism, Diver- sity, and Multiculturalism: Are They Com- patible?" NAFSA Newsletter 42:6 (Apr./May 1991): 1, 8-10. Washington, D.C.: National Association of Foreign Stu- dent Advisors, Association of Interna- tional Educators. Posits internationalism as covering non- domestic cultural issues; diversity as that occurring within the university; and mul- ticulturalism as emphasizing ethnicity and race. Videotape Resources The following are representative of some of the videotapes available. Diversity in Higher Education: Can We Meet the Challenge? Nov. 20, 1991. Enhancing Race Relations on Campus: New Challenges and Opportunities. Nov. 17, 1992. Racism on Campus: Toward an Agenda for Action. Mar. 22, 1988. The Rise of Campus Racism: Causes and So- lutions. Feb. 20, 1991. All of the above are available from Black Issues in Higher Education, 10520 War- wick Ave, Suite B-8, Fairfax, VA 20200- 3108; (703) 385-2981. There are other video conferences being held each year that will be available. Valuing Diversity, a seven-part film/video se- ries including Managing Differences, Di- versity at Work, Communicating across Cultures, You Make the Difference, Super- vising Differences, Champions of Diver- sity, Profiles in Change. Available from Copeland Griggs Produc- tions, 302 23rd Ave., San Francisco, CA 94121; (415) 668-4200. Bibliographies Cohen, David, and Suzanne Li. "Beyond the Melting Pot: School Library Media Center Resources for Dealing with the World of Difference." The Bookmark 50, no. 1 (Fall 1991): 1-5. Loomba, Mary A. "Selected Bibliography." Compiled for "The Challenge of Diversity in the Academy: Involvement or Aliena- tion?" Association of College and Re- source Libraries symposium. New York, Nov. 15, 1991. Weinberg, Meyer. Racism in the United States: A Comprehensive Classified Bibli- ography. New York: Greenwood, 1990. Volume 36, Number 3
In Search of Multiculturolism in the Library Science Curriculum 2 1 5 Appendix Curriculum Modification and Multicultural Affairs Questionnaire 1. Has your department/school actually undertaken modification/revision of the library sci- ence curriculum to include multicultural topics and issues likely to confront librarians in the future? Yes No Comment: la.If you answered "no" to question 1, has your school discussed the possibility of modify- ing/revising the library science curriculum to include multicultural topics and issues? Yes No lb.If you answered "yes" to question 1, please explain why this has been done. 2. Has your department/ school established a special committee to consider the possibility of modifying/revising the library science curriculum to include multicultural topics and issues? Yes No 3. Do you anticipate that your department/school will address the issue of modifying/revis- ing the library science curriculum to include multicultural topics and issues within the next year or the next two years? 4. How do you propose to go about addressing this issue? 5. What has prevented you from addressing this issue in the past (i.e., budget, availability of qualified faculty, other)? 6. Do any of the library science courses offered by your department/school include a spe- cial emphasis on multicultural topics and issues? Yes Continued Summer 1995
216 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 7. Please identify, from the following list of rather traditional library science courses, those which currently and routinely incorporate multicultural topics and issues. The Academic Library Library Management Selection and Acquisition of Library Materials Reference and Bibliography Information Sources and Services Foundations of Librarianship Cataloging and Classifying Library Materials Other (please specify) 8. If you plan to add a single course on multicultural issues do you anticipate it being: Required Highly Recommended Recommended Optional Comment: 9. Is your school a one-year or a two-year program? one-year program two-year program 10. Please feel free to comment on the topic of modifying/revising the library science curricu- lum regarding multicultural topics and issues (i.e., importance of modification, rele- vancy of this topic, major drawbacks to such modification). Please use the back of this form for your comments if you need additional space. Thank you for your assistance. Volume 36, Number 3