U.S. Government Information Policy KATHLEEN EISENBEIS The purpose of this article is to provide an understanding of the federal informa- tion policy. Some definitions of that policy will be provided along with an idea of the range of issues being covered. Some of the current actors and policy initiatives are highlighted, as are suggestions of ways faculty can participate in the policy process. /. The Basics of U. S. Government Information Policy Originally, I had intended to raise the question of whether we have a federal information policy. A year ago I would have argued that what we have is merely a policy for the efficient management of government in- formation. But, even though this is partly true, it only represents a nar- row perspective that goes nowhere. In the strictest sense, we also have a policy if nothing is done. I have decided to begin by presenting a new mental image, a model, if you will, for federal information policy. For those who may not be as familiar with the subject as some of us foolish enough to dwell on it, I can assure you that the references made to it have not always been positive. We struggle with an image problem. Government information policy is likened to mud and jello and described as nasty, messy, confusing, and ambiguous. So, clear your mind, or flush it, as the topic may warrant, and let us begin anew. I envision federal information policy as a crystal. This crystal is three- dimensional, with multiple facets. It is a bright and shining object of fas- cination, comprised of many sides, and reflects a spectrum of color as it turns. To the observer, what one sees depends on where one stands. No one perspective is any better or worse than the other, but the beauty is only evident in the light. So too, is information policy comprised of many aspects, many issues that must be seen as parts of a whole. What Kathleen Eisenbeis is a doctoral student and University Fellow, Graduate School of Li- brary and Information Science, University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712-1276. 92 Volume 29, Number 2
U. S. Government Information Policy perspective one has will determine what face of the issue one sees - what colors the policy. It is a complex image - but rather than be discouraged or frightened away by the complexity, recognize that there is power in the value of the resource. The value of information comes from its use, and the policies that govern its use will shape a national treasure - the crystal is a powerful image to keep in mind. We as information profes- sionals have always protected the public's right to information. Let us begin to rethink the opportunities we have for contributing to the devel- opment of the federal information policy. Definitions Generally, the term policy is used to designate the behavior of some actor or group of actors in a given area of activity. Added to this are ele- ments of purposive action directed toward some goal or goals or people doing something to deal with a problem or matter of concern. In infor- mation policy we can assume that the broad area of concern is informa- tion. Simple enough. Not quite. The origins of concern in federal information policy have been traced back to the mid-thirties, as cited in " Milestones in the Evolution of In- formation Policy Issues," compiled as part of the 1976 Rockefeller re- port, National Information Policy.1 The focus was communication. In the next two decades the focus was scientific information and, in the seven- ties, libraries and information networks. Today the focus is information technology and the effective management of government information resources. All these streams have converged into "information policy/' what Kathleen Heim refers to as ' 'a catch-all term. ' ' Heim cites an essay by Eileen Trauth that calls for an integrative approach to information policy research in which U.S. information policy is characterized as de- centralized and "implicit in nature consisting of a collection of laws, precedents, expectations and social norms which are generally autono- mous and have emanated from diverse sources."2 Robert Lee Chartrand, of Congressional Research Service, calls the struggle to define the term "an unflagging area of discussion. ' ' He often cites the 1976 report to the president by the Domestic Council Commit- tee on the Right of Privacy, popularly referred to as the Rockefeller re- port, as "now-classic' ' and explains that although there are many differ- ent connotations, all have one thing in common: they deal with the policies that govern the way information affects society.4 The report de- scribes a common family of interdependent and intersecting interest: in- formation communication, information technology, information eco- nomics, information privacy, information systems, information confidentiality, information science, information networks, and infor- mation management. The Congressional Research Service is now compiling an annual re- view of the bills and resolutions concerned with information policy and Fall 1988 93
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science the utilization of advanced information technologies. Nine major cate- gories are used and give the best indication of the range of legislative activity: 1. Telecommunications, broadcasting, and satellite transmission 2. International communications and information policy 3. Library and archives policy 4. Information disclosure, confidentiality, and the right of privacy 5. Computer security and crime 6. Intellectual property 7. Information technology for education, innovation, and competi- tiveness 8. Federal information resources management 9. Government information systems, clearinghouse, and dissemina- tion5 Peter Hernon and Charles McClure published a book on information policy in 1987 entitled Federal Information Policies in the 1980's: Conflicts and Issues. As part of the change for the project done for the U.S. Office of Technology Assessment, a review of prior studies on the effects of infor- mation technology on government provision of information and a bibli- ography are included. Also included in the book is a list of significant legislation and developments. Worthy of note is the chapter " Informa- tion Policy Analysis, ' ' in which a new typology for 297 significant policy issues is identified from the existing literature. Based on criteria they de- fined, Hernon and McClure then selected 14 significant issues they felt have the greatest impact on the effectiveness with which the government provides information and organized them under five broad categories: 1 . Federal organization for information policies 2. Relationship between the federal government and other stake- holders in the information sector 3. Information technology 4. The economics of government information 5. Public access and availability to government information //. Federal Information Policies of the 1980s Some of the current actors in the information policy arena are in the legislative branch and the executive branch. More attention is likely to be paid to the role of the judicial branch in future years. Congress The Joint Committee on Printing has been the most visible and famil- iar actor involved with federal information policy because of its involve- ment with the Government Printing Office and the Depository Library Program. The work of the Ad Hoc Committee on Depository Library Access to Federal Automated Data Bases is also noteworthy. The recom- 94 Volume 29, Number 2
U. S. Government Information Policy mendations for pilot projects now await funding and implementation. The Government Printing Office has established an Information Tech- nology Program to head the effort. The primary actors in the formulation of federal information policy are in the legislative committees. The Congressional Research Service is now monitoring the information-related legislation. During the 99th Congress, 1985-1986, more than 500 bills and resolutions were intro- duced. A few will be discussed here. Two of the most active subcommittees have been the House Commit- tee on Government Operations, Subcommittee on Government Infor- mation, Justice, and Agricultures, under Glenn English; and the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, Subcommittee on Sci- ence, Research, and Technology, under Doug Walgren. The Subcommittee on Government Information, Justice, and Agri- culture is concentrating on government information systems, especially the electronic filing and dissemination of information by federal agen- cies. Its report issued in 1986, Electronic Collection and Dissemination of In- formation by Federal Agencies : A Policy Overview, addresses the major policy issues in that area, especially government competition with the private sector. English sees the real problem to be "how to minimize the con- flicts between government and private information companies." The House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology has been involved with the recent efforts to stop privatization of the National Technical Information Service. It has recently published the record of their hearing, which includes in the appendixes many of the reports compiled by and for the 1986 Task Force of the Department of Com- merce that were presented to the Office of Management and Budget for their action. The committee's most recent initiative has been in review- ing the area of science information policy. Hearings were conducted in July 1987 to reexamine the existing policy framework and search for al- ternative structures. A congressional support agency, the Office of Technology Assess- ment, has been involved in major information policy studies at the re- quest of Congress, focusing on information technology and services. Al- ready mentioned was a 1986 project on federal information management. Its current project, due for completion in 1988, deals with the changing nature of federal information dissemination. Another active participant in the area, although less visible outside of Washington, has been the Federal Library and Information Center Committee. This interagency committee, located within the Library of Congress, has held a series of annual forums on federal information poli- cies to give those in academe and the public and private sectors an oppor- tunity to articulate concerns regarding trends in government informa- tion policies. Summaries of proceedings are available and distributed to depository libraries. Fall 1988 95
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science The Executive Branch Within the executive branch, the single most powerful actor has been the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) and its Office of Informa- tion and Regulatory Affairs . Assuming oversight of government policies related to the collection and distribution of information, OMB has, through a series of circulars and bulletins, established new directions for the management of government information. The review process for A- 130 elicited much comment from the library community. OMB has sought to redefine how the government will provide information to the public, and the impacts of their initiatives to define information policies based on cost-effective criteria have yet to be measured. Hernon and McClure have stated that the central issue, which must be resolved before any consistent and coherent information policy will develop, relates to the extent to which federal information policy is the responsibility of the executive branch and what the role of the legislative branch is in setting governmentwide information policies and practices. I, too, feel this is a fundamental conflict that may only see resolution through judicial intervention. ///. Current Initiatives Some of the topics of activity during the 100th Congress include: • Computer security • Copyright • Electronic filing • Electronic bulletin boards • Freedom of Information Act • A General Accounting Office survey of federal information users for the Office of Technology project • Privatization of NTIS • OTA study on the impact of new technology access to and dissemi- nation of government information • NCLIS hearings on the national security information issue IV. Faculty Participation The breadth of issues relating to federal information policy suggests that it is important for information professionals to become involved in the policy process. The first step is to be informed regarding the issues. Because there is so much going on, faculty need to select areas that relate to their own work. Second, faculty must begin to communicate with members of Congress, especially their staff members, regarding their area of con- cern. Faculty must make an effort to let congressional staff members know that there are experts in library and information science who can assist them in research. Staff members may also suggest topics where more research is needed. Committees responsible for agency oversight 96 Volume 29, Number 2
U. S. Government Information Policy may even welcome assistance in developing user studies. Agencies have been given a mandate by OMB to make maximum use of information technologies but little assistance on how this is to be accomplished. Infor- mation systems are being developed in many agencies by well- intentioned bureaucrats seeking to accomplish their information dis- semination mission. Studies evaluating the impact of new information systems on the user community will be critical to future policy develop- ment. As Heim has already suggested, "let us no longer be blind to the problems of the agencies and decisionmakers' ' but find research that can be transformed into results. Institutions and school of library and information science should be adding the study of federal information policy to the curriculum. Al- though few programs will have the flexibility to add an entire course, a lecture or series of lectures should be integrated. Federal information policy issues can relate to library administration, bibliographic control, information systems, online database searching, reference services, lit- erature of science, and, obviously, government documents courses. Faculty in other departments may already be involved in research or be serving as members of advisory committees and could benefit from library/information science faculty members' knowledge. They will not be knocking on library school doors; they must be sought out. Coopera- tive research projects will only expand library/information science methodologies and provide more visibility for the discipline. Why are the computer science engineers receiving the contracts for information use studies? The opportunities are there. What is now called "federal information policy" may not be everything desired, but many of the critical issues are still largely questions that need attention before others who are closer to the policymakers and farther from the users have answered them for the library/information science field. "Nothing can take the place of thousands of librarians who under- stand and work effectively within the political system to advocate, on be- half of the user, better access to the riches of the world's information. "10 References and Notes 1 . The National Commission on Libraries and Information Science published the report by the Domestic Council Committee on the Right of Privacy, Nelson A. Rockefeller, chair. National Infor- mation Policy (Washington, D.C.: Govt. Print. Off., 1976). The tables entitled "Milestones ..." appear between pages 10 and 1 1 . 2. Heim, K.: "Information Policy and the Profession, The Information Society 5:28 (1987). 3. Chartrand, R. L.: "Policy Imperatives in the Information Age, ^4ò/ò Bulletin ll.b (reb./ Mar. 1986). 4. Ibid. 5. Ibid. 6. Hernon, P. , and McClure, C. R. : Federal Information Policies in the 1980's: Conflicts and Issues (Norwood, N.J.: Ablex, 1987), p. 263. The criteria defined for selecting which of the issues were most significant (excluding those related to privacy and civil liberties) are (1) frequency with which the issues were mentioned in the readings examined, (2) breadth of time over which the issue has retained attention, and (3) potential for producing significant changes in the responsibilities of fed- Fall 1988 97
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science eral agencies for the collection, organization, storage, retrieval, distribution, and dissemination of government information. 7. English, G.: "Battle Over Sale of Federal Data," Information Week, Aug. 24, 1987, p. 20. 8. U.S. Congress. House. Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Technology, Hearing on the Privatization of the National Technical Information Service . . . 100th Congress, 1st session, March 4 (Washington, D.C.: Govt. Print. Off., 1987). 9. Heim, K. M. : "Dimensions of Faculty Public Service: A Policy Science Approach to Ques- tions of Information Provision," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 28:160 (Sum- mer 1987). 10. Heim, ref. 2, p.32. Selected Sources of Information on Federal Information Policy Association Newsletter/Bulletins American Library Association. Washington Office. Especially the ongoing chronology: "Less Access to Less Information by and about the U.S. Government" American Library Association. Government Documents Round Table DTTP American Society for Information Science Bulletin Association of Research Libraries Newsletter. Features "Government Information Developments." Coalition on Government Information Newsletter. Comprised entirely of contributions from member organizations working "to ensure equal and readily available access to government information to meet the needs of all people" Special Libraries Association. The Specialist. Updates Periodicals/Newspapers Federal Computer Week. Focuses on government information systems and policy developments Special articles on individuals and their current activities. Government Computer News Government Publications Review Government Information Quarterly The Information Society Annuals Federal Library and Information Center Committee. Library of Congress, Summary of Proceed- ings 1987: Fourth Annual Forum, Federal Information Policies: Views of a Concerned Commu- nity. Books Hernon, Peter, and Charles R. McClure, Federal Information Policies in the 1980's (Norwood, N.J.: Ablex, 1987). Contains an extensive bibliography of books, articles, contributions to books, government pub- lications, and pamphlets. Public Access to Government Information: Issues, Trends and Strategies (Norwood, N.J.: Ablex, 1984). Recent Publications Worthy of Special Note: Association of Research Libraries, Task Force on Government Information in Electronic For- mat, Technology and U.S. Government Information Policies: Catalysts for New Partnerships, October 1987. U.S. House. Committee on Government Operations, Electronic Collection and Dissemination of In- formation by Federal Agencies: A Policy Overview. 99th Congress, 2d session, H. Report 99-560. 1986 (Popularly referred to as the Gellman Report). U.S. House. Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, Hearing on the Privatization of the National Technical Information Service. 100th Congress, 1st session, March 4, 1987 (Superin- tendent of Documents no: Y.4 Sci2. 100/5). 98 Volume 29, Number 2