PRINTING IN NINETEENTH-CENTURY BELIZE' Roderick Cave After an initial period in which the printing needs of the British settlements in Central America were met from Jamaica, printing was introduced into Belize in 1825. The settlement's first press was unusual in being bought with public funds and controlled by the magistrates. Subsequent printing developments in Belize were closer to the norm for British colonies in the West Indies, with government contractual printing and newspaper publishing forming the mainstay of most printers' businesses in the nineteenth century. Printing for two other former British areas, the Bay Islands and the Mosquito Coast, is also discussed. The article is based on a variety of sources, principally the Belize Archives and the sets of Belize papers preserved in the British Library. Handlists of Belize printers and of Belizean newspapers published in the nineteenth century are included as appendices. Although the spread of printing in the British settlements of North America has been thoroughly chronicled, as to a lesser extent has that in the "sugar islands" of the West Indies, the origins and early development of printing in the English-speaking areas of Central America have remained shrouded in obscurity. Of these areas, the only one remaining in the Commonwealth is Belize (officially called British Honduras until 1973). Still a British colony, Belize is a subtropical country bounded on the north by Mexico, on the west and south by Guatemala, and on the east by the Caribbean Sea, dotted with many islets and cays. About twice the size of Jamaica, its small but rapidly growing population (119,645 at the 1970 census) is composed of many differ- ent racial and cultural groups. In the early nineteenth century these were Mayan Indians, Caribs, European settlers and their Negro slaves, plus a free Creole element. The troubled state of the Central American republics and, from the late 1840s, the caste wars of Yucatan led to a considerable influx of 1. Thanks are due to Mrs. Narda Dobson, the staff of the National Library Service, Belize (and particularly Miss A. Gibson and Miss T. Fairweather), Ms. Irene Moran, Bancroft Library, F. E. Leese, Rhodes House Library, D. H. Simpson, Royal Commonwealth Society, and Clinton Black, Jamaica Archives. Without their help this paper would have been much more tentative in nature. [Library Quarterly, vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 20-371 ? 1976 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 20
PRINTING IN BELIZE 21 Spanish-speaking peoples, particularly in the northern part of the country. After 1865 there was also some immigration from the defeated Confederate States [1, pp. 243-58]. Though there were considerable settlements of "Baymen," the British log- wood and mahogany woodcutters and their Negro slaves, by the end of the seventeenth century the constitutional position of the British on the Spanish Main was by no means clear. Indeed, the problems of sovereignty over British Honduras-which was described in a Parliamentary Act of 1817 as "a settle- ment, for certain purposes, in the possession and under the protection of His Majesty, but not within the territory and dominion of His Majesty"-have always been very complex. The settlement was regarded in London as being a place where British subjects had the right to cut timber but which neverthe- less was under Spanish sovereignty, however fitfully and ineffectually that was exercised through the captains-general of Yucatan. Not until 1786 was the first superintendent in the Bay of Honduras appointed as Crown repre- sentative by the British governor in Jamaica; not until 1862 did Britain officially create British Honduras a colony [1, pp. 79-92, 179-213]. The prin- cipal barrier to the country's independence today stems from this old consti- tutional problem, Guatemala claiming (by the doctrine of uti possidetis) that she inherited Spanish sovereignty over the area and that "Belice" is a depart- ment of the Republic of Guatemala [1, pp. 229-42]. In the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries control over the af- fairs of the settlement was divided between the superintendent and the local settlers. The superintendent's powers were not great, and his authority could not be increased while the authorities in Whitehall persisted in denying that the British had anything more than usufructuary rights in the Bay. As late as 1838 a Colonial Office memorandum described the superintendent as "not much more than a Looker-on, and who supplies the want of authority by dexterity and address in acquiring and using influence over the general meet- ing and the Magistracy." Real power in the settlement was vested in the Public Meeting of the settlers. The qualifications for membership varied at different periods, but it is roughly true to say that it represented the monied section of the community, including free men of color, and was a lot closer to Athenian ideas of democracy than most other modern governments. For most practical purposes the power of the Public Meeting was delegated to the seven magistrates who were elected from its members [1, pp. 95-120]. In the very small British settlement at the town of Belize, there was little call for printing at an early stage. The government and the trade of the Bay settlements came through Jamaica, and one may safely assume that if stan- dard printed proformas for such things as laborers' agreements and bills of lading were required in the settlement they would have been provided from Jamaica. As late as 1824, when a number of the more powerful settlers in Belize were incensed by a report to Parliament by Colonel Arthur, an ex- superintendent who had criticized their position over slavery, they had to
22 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY have their Defence of the Settlers of Honduras against the Unjust and Undefended Representations of Colonel George Arthur printed for them by Alexander Aikman, Jr., in Kingston, Jamaica, for subsequent distribution to members of Parlia- ment in London. It may be speculated that it was as a result of this special order for printing from Jamaica, with the difficulties and expense caused by having the work done at such a distance, that the need for a press in Belize was felt to be urgent. In Colonel Arthur's evidence to the House of Commons the settle- ment had been described as "the most detestable spot on the face of the globe" [1, p. 159]. This was not the best publicity for a territory anxious to encourage immigration, and the early productions of the Belize press were certainly designed to show that the settlement was better than Arthur had suggested. In the West Indian islands under British rule printing was introduced in a number of different ways in the eighteenth century. In Jamaica, where Rob- ert Baldwin started printing in 1718, the impetus seems to have come partly from the House of Assembly but above all from the governor, Sir Nicholas Lawes, who was of the opinion that a press there would be "a publick conve- nience and advantage to commerce." Baldwin was induced to come, not only as a printer licensed to the governor to undertake official printing on a con- tractual basis, but also as able to undertake private ventures on his own behalf as well [2]. In Barbados, on the other hand, David Harry set up office as a printer in 1731 as a normal commercial venture [3], and this was to be the more common pattern in most of the larger and more prosperous island colonies, although in some like Tobago in 1799-it was only the induce- ment of public support which made the introduction of printing a reasonable venture to undertake [4]. In Belize the situation was closer to that in Jamaica a century earlier, with printing starting not because a printer arrived but because local pressure caused a printer to be sent for. No doubt the guarantee of official support was necessary to persuade a printer to come to Belize at all, for in 1835 (ten years after the first introduction of printing) the total population of the settlement, including slaves, was under 4,000 [1, p. 243], and the commercial prospects for a printer were not very promising. Local pressure came from some of the magistrates of the settlement who had begun to plan for the new press in Belize by the fall of 1825. On Decem- ber 6, 1825, at a meeting of the magistrates, it was ordered that a "printing apparatus" should be procured without delay so that the records and laws of the settlement could be printed [5, p. 288]. No records survive to show what kind of "printing apparatus" was thus procured with public funds. There seems little doubt that for letterpress work it was an iron press of the Stanhope/Columbian/Albion variety imported from Britain. The presswork of the earliest productions is excellent, bearing comparison with good English provincial work of the period and in general far superior to that prevailing in Belize later in the century. The choice of types was such as would have been made by an English newspaper-cum-
PRINTING IN BELIZE 23 jobbing printer of the period: Scotch romans for the text faces, plus a range of fat-faced romans, black letter, grotesques, and shaded types in display sizes. Some of these appear to have come from the typefoundry of Vincent Figgins in London. To the types were added a number of printers' flowers and type- founders' stockblocks of wood engravings of a sub-Bewickian character. Equipped with this material, the first Belize press was able to produce publi- cations of more than merely competent design in the self-assured Regency manner. In addition to the letterpress equipment, there is some indication that the "printing apparatus" included an engravers' rolling press, since early vol- umes of the Honduras Almanack include a number of engraved plates. By 1829 some lithographic plates of good quality had also been printed for inclusion in local publications, and (though no later lithographic work from Belize has been traced) it is probable that these were printed locally rather than import- ed. Lithography was already practiced in Jamaica in the 1820s and a small iron lithographic press like those marketed in Britain by Taylor and Marti- neau, or Ruthven [6] no doubt formed part of the equipment imported by the magistrates of Belize. The first substantial piece of work to be printed in the settlement, and the earliest to have survived, was the Honduras Almanack for the Year of Our Lord 1827, Calculated to the Meridian of Belize, which was published "by authority of the Magistrates" on March 9, 1826. The compilers of this first almanac were not named in it. No doubt in so small a society it was felt to be superfluous. The printer was James Cruickshank, apparently a Scot like so many of the printers and other craftsmen who moved to the West Indian colonies in the early nineteenth century. By the middle of 1826 Cruickshank was sufficiently well settled in the printing office-the precise location of which is never given, again a superfluity in a very small town-for his sponsors to embark on a weekly paper, the Honduras Gazette and Commercial Advertiser. According to a manuscript note by Thomas Philip Pickstock at the end of the first volume of his set,2 the Honduras Gazette was, from "1 July 1826 to no. 38 in [sic] 17 March 1827, Edited by the Magistrates; and from that period, until the 5th November 1827, vol. 2 no. 88 conducted by the Printer: when, on that day, the Legislative Assembly at their Meeting, in their Wisdom, took it out of his hands, by reason of his intemperence, and very properly appoint- ed a Committee, for its better Government." Pickstock was one of the Belize magistrates at this time and, as will be shown below, was very closely involved in the editorial direction of this first Belize press. The Honduras Almanacks The 1826 Almanack3 is a small octavo v0Jume of 92 + 4 + 21 pages, well printed, with an engraved title leaf and two other copper plates. Its contents 2. Now in Rhodes House Library, Oxford. 3. Copies in the British Library and in Rhodes House Library.
24 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY are characteristic of such compilations: a historical account of the settlement, calendar, list of superintendents, of sovereigns of Europe, of the civil and military establishment in Belize, conversion tables, directions for mariners navigating to the coast of Honduras, and so forth. The last 21-page section deals with the Honduras Society for the Propogation of Christian Knowledge which had been established in 1825; and I suspect that it was also issued separately from the Almanack, its production costs being underwritten by an- other source. The plates are an unsigned chart of the "Private Signals of the Merchants of Belize" and a "View of St John's Church." This and the en- graved title were both signed A & S sc. The paper is an unwatermarked wove; the text types typical Scotch romans of the period and evidently new. As early as December 16, 1825 the secretary of state for the colonies had requested that two copies of the Almanack be forwarded to him each year [7]. The superintendent's letter of transmittal was dated March 1, 1826 [8], eight days before the date of publication named in subsequent issues of the Alma- nack. The 1827 Almanack4 was also printed by Cruickshank, and advertised by him for sale on February 17, 1827 at $3.00, copies of the 1826 volume being offered at half price. The same engraved title leaf, suitably corrected in the plate, was used. There was also a fresh folding plate of the merchants' private signals and, as frontispiece, a further copper engraving of the "Manner of Trucking Mahogany in Honduras" signed A. Bayntun del. The text, of 188 + iv + [iv] pages, shows considerable change from the previous issue (including a long and useful account of the methods used in the timber trade). There was also an editorial request that addenda and corrigenda should be notified to the Office of the Keeper of the Records or to the resi- dences of John Waldron Wright or Thomas Pickstock. Some 78 subscribers to the volume are listed. Andrew Bayntun, keeper of the records, was a public notary and assistant to the clerk of the courts. Both Wright and Pickstock were merchants and magistrates. Together with William Walsh, the public treasurer, it seems almost certain that they formed the editorial body to which the Public Meet- ing of March 5, 1827 expressed appreciation, according to the account given in the Honduras Gazette of March 17, 1827: "Resolved unanimously, That the thanks of this Meeting, be given to the Gentlemen, who have hitherto con- ducted the compilation, and publication, of the HONDURAS ALMA- NACK; and they are hereby requested to accept the same accordingly, and should the subscription not be adequate to the expence, that this PUBLIC should make good the deficiency." I have not seen a copy of the 1828 Almanack. The only copy traced lacks title leaf and prelims but has one plate, an unsigned lithograph of the Court- house of Belize.5 4. Copy in the British Library. 5. In the Royal Commonwealth Society, London.
PRINTING IN BELIZE 25 The volume for 1829, like its predecessors, is a substantial octavo volume.6 Like the 1828 issue, it contains some lithographic plates: Andrew Bayntun drew "A View in Belize" which was used as frontispiece; there are "A View of Fort George" and "The Honduras Lighthouse," both signed Pickstock del., and a freshly drawn but unsigned plate of the merchants' signals. At the end is a folding map of Belize City "by William Maskell, Surveyor." Some copies contain an engraved title leaf, apparently an adaptation of that signed A & S sc. in earlier issues. There is no indication of the printer. The list of subscri- bers totals 85. The A lmanack for 1830' is in the same typographical dress as its forerunners and shows yet further variety in its illustrations. It contains an aquatint frontispiece by Bayntun of the "Interior of the Courts of British Honduras" (rather crudely hand colored in the copies I have handled), a fresh "View in Belize" also by Bayntun and reproduced by lithography, and a redrawn and amended version of Maskell's map of the city, also lithographed. For the first time the list of public departments and officers in the settlement which is given in the text includes the "Printing Department" with Henry Whitney named as head printer and John Lindo as his assistant. There were 84 sub- scribers. The only other Honduras Almanack I traced is that for the year 1839,8 which is a much thinner and althogether inferior work to the volumes already de- scribed. Like the 1830 issue it was printed by Henry Whitney: it is therefore possible that the series continued throughout the 1830s, although (if this were the case) it is surprising that none of these issues for 1831-38 has survived in any of the usual repositories. The Honduras Gazette The Honduras Gazette and Commercial Advertiser which commenced publication on July 1, 1826 was, by Pickstock's account, edited at first by the magistrates, although in practice the work probably devolved upon the same smaller group responsible for the content of the Almanacks. The first issue contains an address "To the Public" similar to those in many new colonial papers: "In offering this GAZETTE to the notice of the public, we solicit that due allow- ance be made for the imperfections which like all new undertakings we are sensible it must contain. It is our intention to be strictly careful of its improve- ment, so as to render it useful, convenient, and amusing to the community. Its establishment has been projected under the idea of benefiting the settlement, 6. Copies in the British Library, the Royal Commonwealth Society, and the Bancroft Library, Berkeley. 7. Copies in the British Library, Rhodes House Library, the Institute of Jamaica and the National Library Service, Belize. 8. Copy in Rhodes House Library; there is also one with the U.S. consular dispatches from Kingston, Jamaica, in the National Archives, Washington.
26 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY and nothing shall be left undone on our part to accomplish the object." The editors continued by enlarging on the advantages of a newspaper, stressing their intention to be impartial. After a request that their venture should be patronized, they went on: We feel satisfied that our present endeavour, humble as it may be, will raise us in the scale of the BRITISH COLONIES. It will preserve our rights, encrease our Commerce, and improve our rising generation. Let us, therefore, ever remember, that the LIBERTY OF THE PRESS, is the PALLADIUM of all the rights-Civil, Religious and Political- which Nations, or Communities enjoy. THE HONDURAS GAZEYTE will be published weekly, at eight dollars, per annum, payable in advance, or ls.8d. [Belizean currency]9 each number. Subscribers residing in the Interior may have it delivered to their AGENTS in town. The paper will be issued every Saturday morning; advertisements or other matter intended for insertion, can only be introduced, if sent on or before the preceding Thursday. Advertisements will be inserted ONCE, at the rate of FIFrEEN shillings for twelve lines or less, and for greater lengths in proportion. Payment of the first year's subscription will be received during the present week by WILLIAM WALSH ESQ. The content of the paper (the "normal" issues of which were of 4 pages approximately 12 1/4 x 9 5/8 inches, each of 2 columns) was very similar to that of most West Indian papers of the period: shipping intelligence, overseas news culled from the English, American, and West Indian papers brought by the latest vessels to call at the settlement, merchants' advertisements, govern- ment proclamations, some literary matter, and local news. Because of the very close interest the Baymen took in the decidedly unsettled affairs of the neighboring Central American republics, considerable attention was devoted by the Gazette to reports received from Guatemala, El Salvador, and Hondu- ras. This was to be a continuing pattern for Belize papers. On several occasions subscribers received, free of charge, supplements to the regular paper. Usually these contained proclamations and other govern- ment matter plus additional advertisements squeezed out of the regular edi- tion, but on occasion the supplement was of foreign news, just received in the settlement. That for August 26, 1826, for instance, contained a list of candi- dates in the forthcoming parliamentary election in Britain. At the rather high price charged for the Honduras Gazette its circulation in the settlement cannot have been very large, but with a substantial income derived from advertising it probably paid its way.'0 Some copies no doubt 9. The sum of ?1 Belize equaled 13s sterling. Unless otherwise stated all references are to Belize currency which, until stabilized in 1894, was liable to fluctuate considerably as did the mongrel currency common to the other Central American states which also circulated in Belize. 10. Because of local currency fluctuations it is very difficult to compare with other colonial papers, but writing in 1841 Simmonds [9] quoted subscription rates of 56.00-58.00 for week- lies in the eastern Caribbean; ?5 6s 8d for Jamaican dailies. In Jamaica (a high-cost colony)
PRINTING IN BELIZE 27 circulated to the British settlements in the Bay Islands and on the Mosquito Coast. That there was a demand for the paper is shown by the fact that in the issue for March 3, 1827 Cruickshank was offering 50? each for copies of some 11 different issues he needed to complete sets for subscribers in England and the United States. Undoubtedly from the earliest days of the Honduras Gazette Cruickshank had some part in its editorial production, but he was quick to take refuge behind authority when it suited him, as on July 8, 1826: "To correspondents. 'Paul Pry' who informs us he should just like to pop in and take a 'peep' at our Printing Office, is informed that by doing so he would greatly 'intrude', as no person whatever can be admitted to the interior, except on special business, without an order, in writing, from the Magistrates." Government by committee is bad enough; editorship by committee an abomination, and particularly so in a small community where the editors can be made accountable by those who dislike their editorial direction. In the report of the Public Meeting of March 5, 1827, given in the issue for March 17, 1827, Cruickshank recorded that Mr Coffin . . . desired Mr Westby to read the notice of his motion in regard to the Printing Establishment, which enables us to supply the Public with the information, and in consequence of the proceedings that followed, we are not sory to say, is no longer a Public but a Private Establishment; but we shall be most happy at all times to employ it in the manner which may be most conducive to the Public weal, . . . 'Resolved, that the Public will not from this time be liable to any further charge of, or expense arising from, the Printing Establishment of this Settlement (except the con- tracts already entered into) but that the present Printer shall be allowed the use of the Printing Press during the pleasure of the Public. The motion was seconded by Mr Maskall, and carried unanimously.' The first period of Belizean journalism, with what was in effect a state- controlled newspaper, was over. The settlement seemed to be moving closer to the pattern of the West Indian islands, with a printer/proprietor in sole charge of a paper's direction. Interference with the liberty of the press was of course common enough in the other colonies: in some printers could be chased out of the colony for criticizing the governor too freely," in others printers were harassed by the House of Assembly for breach of privilege'2 or by overfree recourse to libel actions. More subtly papers could be killed or brought to heel by the withholding of government advertising.'3 Cruick- advertisements "of moderate length" cost 5s per week, or 15s for a month's insertions in the weekly papers; in the Turks Islands a similar rate was charged in the 1840s. The charge in Belize therefore seems distinctly high. 11. As happened to two Bermuda printers, Edmund Ward (dismissed by Governor Cockburn in 1812) and Charles Beach (ousted by Governor Lumley in 1824) [10, pp. 107, 189]. 12. The fate of several Jamaican printers [1 1, pp. 37-38]. 13. In St. Lucia the press was stifled for nearly five years, 1831-36, by these means [12, pp. 265- 97], while in the Turks Islands in the 1850s both papers were at different times disciplined by this method [13].
28 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY shank, who was allowed the use of the Belize press "during the pleasure of the Public," was in a peculiarly vulnerable position and, as Pickstock records, did not enjoy this right very long. The intemperence to which Pickstock referred was not of course drunkenness (few officials would have lasted long in the West Indies, one gathers, had this been regarded as serious) but rather an outspokenness which was found objectionable by enough members of the Public Meeting to have him removed from office after the issue of the Hondu- ras Gazette of November 3, 1827. The new series of the paper at first bore the imprint "Printed and published at the Honduras Gazette Office for the Edi- tor"; later this became "Printed and published by Henry Whitney." Pickstock's set of the newspaper ceases with the issue of June 27, 1829, which may have been the last issue published. Cruickshank's Other Work As well as printing the Almanack and the Gazette, Cruickshank was a jobbing printer, from time to time advertising the usual range of blank proformas for bills of lading, powers of attorney, manifests, laborers' agreements and the like. He also published A Comprehensive Interest Table (advertised on November 25, 1826 for publication "on Saturday next," price 10d). The Gazette of Febru- ary 10, 1827 contained an advertisement for "two responsible lads" as ap- prentices. It is tempting to see his successors at the printing establishment, Whitney and Lindo, in these apprentices. Like most printers in pioneering areas, Cruickshank's business interests were diversified. He was a binder, a stationer, and a bookseller (advertising stock in both English and Spanish) who attempted to attack the feminine market by importing the Ladies Magazine and other suitable reading. He had an interest in a hotel and in the running of the Olympic Theatre. On April 27, 1827 he advertised that he intended "opening a well-supplied Newspaper and General Reading Room, on Liberal Terms, provided he receives adequate encouragement. Gentlemen therefore wishing to patronize it, will oblige him by sending in their names." There is no evidence surviving as to the success of this venture, which would no doubt have been the first subscription library in Belize. Nor, after his loss of favor later that year, is there any evidence for Cruickshank's later career. Later Printers in Belize As in all the West Indian colonies, the printers of British Honduras for a long time were dependent upon the production of a newspaper to provide a back- bone for their business. Apart from newspaper printing and contract work for the government, there was little chance of great commercial success in the declining state of the colony in the second half of the century. Even then it
PRINTING IN BELIZE 29 was a meager living, and many of the later newspaper proprietors were also merchants or hotel keepers. From files of Belizean papers which have sur- vived it is possible to create a reasonably complete list of the printers of the settlement, given as appendix I. Henry Whitney, Cruickshank's successor in producing the Honduras Gazette, seems to have enjoyed a monopoly of printing in the settlement throughout the 1830s. On September 29, 1838 he commenced publication of the Belize Advertiser, a weekly paper which Peter L. Simmonds (who had a good knowl- edge of the West Indian press) described as "likely to last" in a paper on newspaper printing which he read to the Statistical Society of London in 1841 [9]. But at the time Simmonds delivered his paper there was already a rival paper being published in the settlement, the Honduras Observer, which had started publication on November 25, 1840. "There can hardly be room for two papers here" was Simmonds's observation, and a correct one. Some time in 1841 the Belize Advertiser ceased publication, and Whitney went out of business. It may have been succeeded by the Belize Gazette, a weekly published by E. Cramond, which started soon after the Honduras Observer. John M. Daly, the printer of the Observer, was the longest-lasting of Belize printers in the nineteenth century, though like many of his contemporaries elsewhere he was associated with several different papers at different times. As early as November 1841 Daly had fallen foul of the superintendent by attacking the local government in the columns of the Observer. Superinten- dents had much less power than governors of colonies, and Superintendent McDonald was unsure what action he could take against the paper. "In the absence of everything in the shape of a law authority here," he wrote rather plaintively to the secretary of state for the colonies asking advice on how to deal with these attacks and enclosed copies of the offending paper and also of the Belize Gazette [5, vol. 3, p. 52]. The reply, when it came eighteen months later, reflected a more liberal approach to criticism than many colonial gov- ernors would have liked: 17 April 1843. Jamaican Governor to Superintendent. I entirely concur with Sir Charles Metcalfe in recommending a disregard of false attacks in the Newspapers unless they be so serious as to render legal Proceedings unavoidable. However annoying it may be to faithful Public Servants to find their actions and motives misinterpreted and however considerable the temporary inconve- nience which the Public Service may sustain from such false attacks I am of opinion that a recurrence to forcible measures of repression has a tendency to produce evils of greater magnitude. Nor can I doubt that Justice will ultimately be done to those who exhibit forbearance, and maintain a calm and dignified demeanour under such inflic- tions. [Ibid.] Only the first few volumes of the Honduras Observer were both printed and published by Daly. In March 1844 Henry Gunter became the paper's propri- etor with Daly continuing to print it as before. But by November of the same
30 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY year its direction and production were in other hands. Daly continued as a printer, doing some contract work for the government and again attempting newspaper publishing on his own account with the Packet Intell'gencer in 1854 and Daly's Advertising Sheet in 1867. Subsequently, his equipment passed into the possession of Edward C. Garnett at the "New Era Printing Office," which was active in the early 1870s. Daly's successor as printer of the Honduras Observer was William E. Fitzgib- bon, an American citizen, who in 1845 absorbed his paper's old rival. Hence- forth his own was named the Honduras Observer and Belize Gazette. Early in 1848 Fitzgibbon ran into trouble with the legal authorities of the settlement for printing the text of a letter purporting to have been written by the chief justice, a memorial signed by various jurors protesting at the contents of this letter, the text of a resolution of the Public Meeting, and a couple of other documents relating to the chief justice's letter. On the chief justice's orders Fitzgibbon was arrested by the provost marshal and taken before the chief justice, who fined him ?100 (local currency) and sentenced him to six months' imprisonment for contempt of court [5, vol. 3, p. 1031. West Indian law officers were often much more willing to interfere with the freedom of the press than was the executive branch of government. There was the case of Matthew Gallagher in Trinidad in 1810, who was imprisoned by George Smith, the one-man Royal Audiencia, despite the protests of Gover- nor Hislop [14, p. 293], or the trumped-up libel action brought by the only two lawyers practicing in the Supreme Court of Grand Turk against the printer of the Royal Standard of the Turks and Caicos Islands in 1854 [13], which will serve to illustrate the response of the West Indian legal mind to criticism or even comment. In Fitzgibbon's case, Superintendent Fancourt was suffi- ciently troubled by the chief justice's action to request the advice of the Colonial Office in London. In June 1848 he received their recommendation that Fitzgibbon be released from jail and his fine remitted [5, vol. 3, p. 107]. The previous year Fitzgibbon had experienced another difficulty not infre- quently encountered by West Indian printers: that of collecting payment for official printing. In January 1847 he had submitted a tender for printing government documents and inserting public advertisements in his paper, for ?100 (local currency) per annum. The superintendent had authorized this for a four-month period, but a subsequent Public Meeting had rejected the ten- der. He was paid $100 for the four months, but by the time the Public Meeting rejected his tender he had completed eight months' work. It took him a great deal of trouble before the Public Meeting of February 1, 1848, in considering his petition for payment, agreed in view of the "peculiar circum- stances" to disburse a further ?33 6s 8d [151. With this difficulty in collecting payment, exacerbated by his fine and imprisonment the following year, Fitz- gibbon may well have decided to seek new pastures. I have found no trace of printing by him after 1848. Other government printing on a contractual basis was undertaken in the 1850s by Daly and also by Edward L. Rhys, later the publisher of the Colonist
PRINTING IN BELIZE 31 newspaper. On Rhys's death in November 1866 his plant was bought for $900 by one John Jex, who worked in collaboration with Middleton and Company, publishers of the British Honduras Colonist and Belize Advertiser, and whose imprint appears on several government publications of the late sixties. The Government Printing Office The first press in the settlement had been bought with public funds for public printing. There appears to have survived no evidence as to the eventual fate of this equipment, and by the 1840s official printing was being farmed out among the various printers in Belize. There are several references to public printing in the National Archives in Belize City from which it is clear that all the printers named above were engaged at one time or another on govern- ment work. Permission for the purchase of a press was given at the meeting of the council on April 10, 1871, after some consideration of comparative print- ing costs, and it appears that the establishment of the Government Printing Office dates from this decision. Regular printing of the Government Gazette had started in 1865. At some stage, perhaps as early as 1889 and certainly by 1904, a press and other equipment were set up in the prison. Some routine printing of government forms, etc., was farmed out by the Government Print- ing Office to the Prisons Department, printing and binding being two of the trades taught the prisoners.'4 Printing in the Bay Islands and on the Mosquito Coast The colony now called Belize was only one of several areas on the Caribbean coast of Central America to be occupied from time to time by groups of British logwood cutters. In most cases these settlements were purely tempo- rary, without even the equivocal status of the Baymen in Belize itself. But there were two other areas in which more permanent settlements were estab- lished. These were the Bay Islands (Ruatan, Bonacca, Utilla) a few miles off the coast of Honduras, and the Mosquito Coast, the Caribbean seaboard of Nicaragua from Cape Gracios a Dios (or even further north into Honduran territory) down to the mouth of the San Juan River. The British had long enjoyed cordial relations with the Mosquito Indians, with some of the Mos- quito kings being educated in Jamaica, etc. A protectorate over Mosquitia was proclaimed in 1847. The clash between British and American expansionism in Central America 14. The Government Printing Office is scheduled to be moved in the near future from Belize City to the new capital of Belize at Belmopan. I was able to visit it in April 1974. Apart from a ruling press, a couple of platen jobbers, and a disused Monotype caster of early date (which may date back to the original installation of Monotypes in the printing office in 1921), there was little to detain the printing historian since all the equipment was modern and, as elsewhere, with letterpress being ousted fairly rapidly by lithography.
32 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY in the mid-nineteenth century and the confusion of treaties to resolve it are fortunately none of our conern here. There is no evidence in the Archives of Belize or those of the short-lived Bay Islands Colony'5 (1852-59) to suggest that printing was carried on there before the islands were ceded by Britain to Honduras in 1859. Similarly I have found no evidence for a press in Blue- fields or elsewhere on the Mosquito Coast before the Anglo-Nicaraguan trea- ty of 1860 brought the separate existence of Mosquitia to an end. It seems clear that just as before 1826 Belize's printing needs were met from Jamaica, so Belize later provided whatever printing was required for these territories. One of the most interesting pieces of early Belize printing to have survived is the Order of Service for the Coronation of George Augustus Frederick, King of the Mosquito Nation,'6 which was printed by William E. Fitzgibbon in Belize in 1845. "Mosquitiana" is today excessively rare. Apart from Fitzgibbon's corona- tion service I have been able to trace only some printed proformas for Mos- quito land grants [16]. Another document in the library of the Royal Com- monwealth Society, appointing Leonard Cox "Receiver General of the Mosquito Nation" in 1840, has been ably described by D. H. Simpson [17]. Like the coronation service, these documents were probably printed in Belize as a part of the contract printing for the government of the settlement by the printers discussed above. APPENDIX I A LIST OF PRINTERS IN BELIZE IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY A list of Belize printers in the nineteenth century includes: 1. James Cruickshank: active 1825-28?; printer of the Honduras Gazette, Honduras A lmanacks. 2. Henry Whitney: active 1828-41?; printer of the Honduras Gazette, Hondu- ras AImanacks, Belize Advertiser 1838-41. 3. John M. Daly: active 1841-67?; printer of the Honduras Observer 1840-44, Packet Intelligencer 1854, Daly's Advertising Sheet 1867; Acts of British Honduras 1861-66. His equipment later passed into the possession of the New Era Printing Office. 4. E. Cramond: publisher of the Belize Gazette in 1842; otherwise no refer- ences found. 5. William E. Fitzgibbon: active 1844-48?; printer of the Honduras Observer from November 1844; absorbed the Belize Gazette 1845. Contractor for govern- ment printing. 15. Now housed in the Jamaica Archives, Spanish Town. 16. In the National Library Service, Belize City.
PRINTING IN BELIZE 33 6. Edward L. Rhys: active 1850-66; contractor for various government printing contracts and printer of the Colonist. On his death in November 1866 his plant was purchased for $900 by John Jex, who was associated with Middleton and Co. (see below, no. 8). 7. The Colonist Office, publishers of the Colonist newspaper before it was taken over by Rhys in November 1864. It advertised that it had a job-print- ing department. I have been unable to discover the names of its proprietors. 8. Middleton and Co.: active 1867-69?; contractors for government print- ing and printers of the British Honduras Colonist. 9. W. J. S. Scobell: publisher of the Commercial Advertiser in 1867. 10. Edward C. Garnett: proprietor of the New Era Printing Office and successor to Daly (see above, no. 3). Printer of the New Era and contractor for government printing in the early 1870s. 11. J. Robert Caines: active 1882-86; at first at the Colonial Press Associa- tion, Ltd. as printer of the Colonial Guardian and later printer of the Observer. 12. Claude L. Goodrich: active from 1881 as printer of the Belize Advertiser at C. T. Hunter's Printing Office and from 1888 associated with George Banham in the firm of Banham and Goodrich, publishers of the Belize Inde- pendent. There was a firm of jobbing printers, V. Goodrich, active in Belize in 1925, which may have been a continuation of the firm. 13. George S. Banham: active from 1887 as publisher of the Belize Advertiser and British Honduras Gazette, new series; later a partner in the firm of Banham and Goodrich. 14. George Mitchell: publisher of the Belize Advertiser 1888-89. 15. W. A. Burn: active 1894-96 as publisher of the Times of Central America. 16. Philip Stanley Woods: proprietor of the Clarion from 1897 until after 1925. 17. The Angelus Press: a firm of Roman Catholic booksellers, stationers, binders, and jobbing printers; started in 1885 and still in existence. APPENDIX II A HANDLIST OF BELIZE NEWSPAPERS PUBLISHED BEFORE 1900 In common with many West Indian colonies, nineteenth-century Belize saw the production of many newspapers. Most of them were short lived and sel- dom had a large circulation. As late as 1925 the two weekly papers then being published in the colony, the Clarion and the Belize Independent, had circu- lations of only 800 and 1,000 copies, respectively, and these were both long lived and successful ventures. Circulation of the papers outside the colony was very limited, and their survival rate has been poor. Because of the situation of Belize, its press has been ill-served by bibliogra- phers. As it is in Central America and not the West Indies, it was not includ- ed in Ragatz [18]. As it is a British colony, it has been excluded from bibliog- raphies and union lists concerned with Latin America. The handlist which follows is based upon the holdings of the British Li-
34 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY brary Reference Division (and particularly the contents of the Newspaper Room, Colindale); the National Library Service, Belize; the Jamaica Ar- chives; the West India Reference Library of the Institute of Jamaica; the Royal Commonwealth Society, London; Rhodes House Library, Oxford; and the Bancroft Library at Berkeley; with reference to other locations as traced. The contents of the Belize papers of the second half of the nineteenth century have been well discussed by Clegern [191, whose work was largely based on the Bancroft Library's microfilm copies of the British Library's holdings at Colindale. 1. Honduras Gazette and Commercial Advertiser; weekly July 1, 1826-June 27, 1829 or later. Edited by the magistrates, and for a period by its first printer, James Cruickshank. Rhodes House Library has set for period given above; British Library has volume I (July 1826-June 1827). 2. Belize Advertiser; printed and published weekly by Henry Whitney from September 29, 1838 until some time in 1841. The British Library has num- bers 40-68 (June 29, 1839-January 11, 1840). 3. Honduras Observer; weekly from November 25, 1840 until 1848 or later. At first printed and published by John M. Daly, in March 1844 Henry Gunter became proprietor and in November 1844 it passed into the hands of William E. Fitzgibbon, absorbing the Belize Gazette (see below, no. 4) the following year. A copy of number 16 (March 10, 1841) is with U.S. consular dispatches from Jamaica in the National Archives, Washington; the Royal Common- wealth Society has issues for May 12, 1841, May 19, 1841, June 9, 1841, and February 15, 1844; the National Library Service in Belize owns an incom- plete run from January 1844-November 1847. 4. Belize Gazette; published weekly by E. Cramond, started publication on December 12, 1840. Absorbed by the Honduras Observer 1845. A copy of the issue for June 18, 1842 was included with U.S. consular dispatches from Kingston, Jamaica, and is in the National Archives, Washington. 5. Packet Intelligencer; weekly, published by John M. Daly from June 10, 1854. The Bancroft Library, Berkeley, has a copy of the second issue for June 17. 6. Colonist; published weekly from the Colonist Office, Regent Street, Bel- ize, from December 31, 1864. In the issue for November 4, 1865, Edward L. Rhys announced that the paper had changed its conduct for the third time and was now under his direction. At the end of that year Rhys announced that the paper would no longer be issued in its present form; that the income from the paper was $2,000, of which staffing costs absorbed at least $1,200, and paper, type, etc. another $500, leaving the editor $300. Public and job- bing printing, he concluded, could be done without a newspaper for a quarter of the outlay. Nevertheless he continued with a new series of the paper in a more economical format in 1866. The British Library's set runs from Decem- ber 31, 1864 to October 13, 1866. 7. Daly's Advertising Sheet. The only copy traced, for December 1 7, 1867, was included in U.S. consular dispatches from Belize and is now in the National Archives, Washington. 8. British Honduras Colonist and Belize Advertiser; published weekly by Middle- ton and Co. and sold also by John Jex who had purchased Rhys's plant. The
PRINTING IN BELIZE 35 British Library's set runs from July 20, 1867 to November 28, 1868 (nos. 1- 72). 9. Commercial Advertiser; published weekly by W. J. S. Scobell, proprietor, from July 3, 1867. The British Library's holdings cease with number 9 (Au- gust 28, 1867); there is no indication in the paper that it was ceasing publica- tion. 10. New Era, and British Honduras Chronicle; weekly, printed and published by Edward C. Garnett, who had taken over John Daly's plant, from January 7, 1871. The British Library's set runs from February 11, 1871 to May 18, 1872; there is no internal evidence in the paper that it was ceasing publica- tion. 11. Central American Telegraph; published twice monthly from March 12, 1873 under the editorship of Dr. F. Gahne (see also below, no. 15), Colonel John Tracy, Rafael Padilla, and General E. Viada. There is no indication of the printer. A pioneering attempt at a paper in Spanish and English, evident- ly intended to circulate in Honduras as well as Belize, it attracted few subscri- bers and ceased publication after the first quarter. The British Library has numbers 2-6 (March 26-May 26, 1873). 12. Belize Advertiser; published weekly from the Printing Office of C. T. Hunter, North Front Street, Belize, from May 21, 1881 and printed at first by Claude L. Goodrich. Its first proprietor, C. T. Hunter, was a controversial figure in Belizean affairs [19, pp. 76-77, 80-91]. On November 26, 1881 Hunter was replaced by A. R. Gibbs as proprietor. The British Library's holdings are incomplete (vol. 1-vol. 4, no. I [May 21, 1881-October 25, 1884]; n. s. nos. 1-2 [December 25, 1886-January 1, 1887]), but it is clear from these that the paper was running into financial difficulties. 13. Belize Advertiser and British Honduras Gazette, "New Series," which com- menced weekly publication on February 26, 1887, purports to be a continua- tion, under the direction of George S. Banham, of number 12 (and is so treated in the British Library's cataloging), but in fact is a distinct journal, with a different editorial standpoint. The British Library's holdings cease with volume 2, number 20 (May 19, 1888), and I suspect that Banham was bought out or persuaded by other means to cease by those allied to C. T. Hunter's interests. 14. Belize Advertiser, new series; printed and published weekly by George Mitchell at North Front Street, Belize (the original Advertiser office). The British Library has a set from volume 1, number I to volume 2, number 16 (July 28, 1888-November 9, 1889). 15. Colonial Guardian; printed weekly at the office of the Colonial Press Association, Ltd., Albert Street, Belize, initially by J. Robert Caines. The paper, which first appeared on January 7, 1882, was throughout its life edited by Dr. Frederick Gahne, the most important of all Belizean editors [19, pp. 193-94]. It ceased publication in 1913 (set in the British Library). 16. Observer; printed and published weekly by John Robert Caines at the Observer Printing Office, Water Lane, Belize, after Caines had severed his connection with the Colonial Guardian. It was evidently not a success and ceased publication after one year with the issue for February 13, 1886 (set in the British Library). The last few issues of the paper advertise the Observer
36 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY office (with the opportunity to continue the paper) for lease or sale. The offer included the types, a Novelty Press which was worked by a boy and used to print the paper, and a self-inking Excelsior Press which was used for jobbing work.'7 If the plant were not disposed of before the publication of the last issue of the paper, the firm was going to continue with jobbing printing only. I have not been able to trace the subsequent history of this plant. 17. Belize Independent; edited by George S. Banham and published weekly by Banham and Goodrich from October 11, 1888 as a sort of continuation of Banham's previous venture (see above, no. 13) and as a rival to the Belize Advertiser, new series (see above, no. 14). More successful than most other Belizean papers, it continued publication until near the end of World War II (set in the British Library). 18. Times of Central America; printed and published weekly from July 6, 1894 by Walter Adam Burn, barrister-at-law, from his printing office in the Hunt- er Building, North Front Street, Belize-from which address one presumes a connection with the Belize Advertiser and the interests of C. T. Hunter. One of the worst-printed of Belizean papers, publication was suspended from De- cember 31, 1896. The British Library has a set from number 9 (August 31, 1894) onward. 19. Clarion; printed and published weekly by Philip Stanley Woods of For- esters' Hall, Regent Street, at the Clarion Office, Hunter's Buildings, North Front Street, Belize, from November 19, 1897. In the first issue of the paper it was emphasized that the journal and the press, types, and other accessories were the sole property of the proprietor, and that the paper was "not called into existence for the sole purpose of puffing the enterprises of Mr C. T. Hunter." Despite an inauspicious start (publication of the first issue being delayed because the press had broken down) this was to be the most successful of all Belizean papers, remaining under Woods's editorial direction for well over a quarter of a century. It was transformed into a daily paper in 1935, eventually ceasing publication in 1961. REFERENCES 1. Dobson, Narda. A History of Belize. Port-of-Spain: Longmans Caribbean, 1973. 2. Cave, Roderick. "Printing Comes to Jamaica: The Work of Robert and Mary Baldwin." Jamaica Journal (in press). 3. Shilstone, E. M. "Some Notes on Early Presses and Newspapers in Barbados." Joumnal of the Barbados Museum and Historical Society 26 (November 1958): 19-33. 4. McMurtrie, Douglas. The First Printing on the Island of Tobago. Fort Worth, Tex.: National Association for Printing Education, 1943. 5. Burdon, Sir John, ed. The Archives of British Honduras. London: Sifton Praed, 1931-35. 17. The Novelty Press was a lightweight treadle platen of simplc clamshell design, marketed by B. 0. Woods of Boston; several different firms marketed presses with the name excelsior; this may have been the very small card and job press developed by William Kelsey which is substantially the same as that still being marketed for amateur use by the Kelsey Company of Meriden, Connecticut [20; 21, pp. 241-42].
PRINTING IN BELIZE 37 6. Twyman, Michael. "The Lithographic Handpress 1 796-1850." Joumal of the Printing Histori- cal Society 3 (1967): 3-50. 7. Belize Archives, R 5 a, p. 122. 8. Belize Archives, R 6 a, p. 13. 9. Simmonds, Peter L. "Statistics of Newpapers in Various Countries." Journal of the Statistical Societ of London 4 (1841): 111-36. 10. Kennedy, Jean de Chantal. Biography of a Colonial Town. Hamilton, Bernuda 1790-1897. Hamil- ton: Bermuda Book Stores, [1962]. 11. Cundall, Frank. The Press and Printers of Jamaica prior to 1820. Worcester, Mass.: American Antiquarian Society, 1916. 12. Breen, Henry H. St Lucia: Histonrcal, Statistical and Descriptive. London: Longmans, 1844. 13. Cave, Roderick. "The Early Printers of Grand Turk." Papers of the Bibliographical Socity of America (in press). 14. Naipaul, V. S. 7he Loss of El Dorado. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1970. 15. Belize Archives, R 20, pp. 62-65. 16. Institute of Jamaica, MSS 1260 and 1374. 17. Simpson, D. H. "A Document of the Mosquito Nation." Royal Commonwealth Society Library Notes, n.s. 57 (September 1961): 2-4. 18. Ragatz, Lowell J. A Guide for the Study of British Caribbean History 1763-1834. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1932. 19. Clegern, Wayne M. British Honduras: Colonial Dead End 1859-1900. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1967. 20. Green, Ralph. A Histoty of the Platen Jobber. Chicago: Printing Office of Philip Reed, 1953. 21. Moran, James. Printing Presses: History and Development from the Fifteenth Century to Modern Times. London: Faber & Faber, 1973.