SOCIAL REFORM, EDUCATION, AND THE LIBRARY, 1850-1900 SIDNEY DITZION T NHE middle of the nineteenth century is generally con- ceded to have marked the inception of the free tax- supported town and city library in the United States. The idea of organizing and supporting libraries in this manner developed from the experiences of many earlier library types. State legislative libraries and district school libraries provided precedent for tax support. Proprietary and subscription librar- ies, the lyceum, denominational, mechanics', and mercantile libraries all illustrated the vast possibilities of, and indeed created the need for, centrally located public book collections. The only one of these types that was in every sense "public" was the district school library. Its utter failure was clearly due to socio-geographical contradictions rather than to popular re- sistance to culture. The geographic unit and its income were too small; hence in many school districts the tax became burden- some; and, finally, there was an obvious loss of interest in preserving and circulating collections of limited size and con- tent.' The fate of some of these libraries was complete dissolu- tion; others were eventually absorbed by public library sys- temS.2 The earliest real recognition of the principle of tax support in towns and cities is to be found in permissive laws passed in I 849 by the New Hampshire and Massachusetts state legislatures. Their example was followed in subsequent years by Maine, Vermont, and Connecticut. Boston started the movement in 1852 when it established its public library on broad popular t "System of common schools in Ohio," Barnard's American journal of education, VI (1859), 540-42; Annual encyclopedia, I887, p. 418. ILibrary journal, I (1876), IOO; 4merican library annual, I9I5-I6, pp. 28I, 285; ibid., I9I6-17, p. 328. x56
SOCIAL REFORM, EDUCATION, AND THE LIBRARY 157 lines. By I863 there were a thousand libraries which were pub- lic in nature; in I875 there were two thousand city and town libraries with a'thousand books or more in their collections; and by I900 the total number of free circulating libraries with collections of three hundred books or more was nine thousand.3 What were the social conditions and changes attending the growth of the public library? In what sort of milieu did the public library progress? How did the economic and social posi- tion of the wage-earner affect the library movement? Before presenting the evidence which specifically relates the public library to the needs of the wage-earner, an attempt must be made to answer these questions in a general way. A broad cor- relation of social forces with library expansion will provide a background for subsequent analysis. Of fundamental importance to the nurture of th,e public library idea was that crystallization of social desire which at- tends great concentrations of people. The introduction of new tools of manufacture in the form of larger and more complex machine units naturally resulted in creating new industrial cen- ters and in increasing the population density of old ones. This process of urbanization which occurred at an accelerated pace in New England in the i 8so's and sixties reached the Middle West in the seventies and eighties. It is pertinent to note that of the ten states which ranked first in industrial population in i8704 all but two ranked among the ten which led in the establishment of public libraries. Only one of these states, New Jersey, presents a significant variation in the two orders of rank-viz., sixth in industrial population, but twentieth in establishment of libraries.5 This correlation is not used as conclusive proof of any causal connection, but it is significant in the light of more specific social phenomena which arose out of the new modes of industrial organization, new 3A. C. Cole, The irrepressible conflict, t85o-.i86g (New York: Macmillan, 1934), p. 217; Allan Nevins, The emergence of modern America, 1865-1878 (New York: Mac- millan, 1935), p. 243; and A. M. Schlesinger, The rise of the city, 1878-1898 (New York: Macmillan, 1933), p. I77. 4 U.S. Bureau of the Census, Ninth census, I (1870), 671. s U.S. Bureau of Education, Bulletin, 1915, No. 2S.
I 58 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY methods of production, and the concentration of industrial populations. Crowded living conditions and poor and insufficient housing in the cities doubtless were responsible in a large measure for an increase in delinquency, crime, and inebriety.6 Moreover, the wretched conditions of the mass of low wage-earners can better be explained in terms of the increasing length and severity of depression periods after i 85o. The post-mid-century accelera- tion of the industrial revolution brought with it the recurrence of periods of poverty and unemployment as well as periods of exuberant prosperity. Thus in I854 the country experienced a panic during which fifteen to twenty thousand workers were unemployed in New York City alone.7 Another depression, which began in I 857 and lasted until the start of the Civil War, worked similar havoc with the unemployed in cities.8 The Civil War ushered in an era of unparalleled expansion in manufac- tures, adoption of new machinery, establishment of banks, and building of railroads. Unemployment practically disappeared and wages skyrocketed. However, with the close of the war when the armies were demobilized and the extraordinary war industries tapered off, unemployment reappeared. Neverthe- less, industry, nurtured by the introduction of new machinery and by a general business inflation, kept expanding until I873, when the bubble burst and the country was thrown into a six- year depression.9 The year 1893 witnessed a similar reaction. In each of these periods there appeared humanitarian groups which attempted to combat crime, drinking, prostitution, igno- rance, poverty, and unemployment. The humanitarians, recog- nizing the concatenation of all these forms of vice and human degradation, suggested and carried out many educational and charitable projects.10 Notable among the humanitarian workers were Horace Mann, John B. Gough, Charles Loring Brace, and 6 W. G. Moody, Land and labor in the United States (New York: Scribner, 1883), pp. 286-88. 7 Cole, op. Cit., p. 32. 8 Ibid., p. 33. 9 Moody, op. cit., pp. 2I8-24. I' Cole, op. cit., pp. I53-60; Nevins, op. cit., p. 30I; and Schlesinger, op. cit., pp. 157- 58.
SOCIAL REFORM, EDUCATION, 4ND THE LIBRARY xSg Henry Ward Beecher, each of whom supported at one time or another all movements for uplift-e.g., better working condi- tions, abolition of child labor, and penal reform. The true Humanitarian was a person of catholic sympathies. He was at one time abolitionist, economic reformer, pro-feminist and friend to public education. He was an "integralist"; he saw, or thought he saw, a common uni- ty in the causes of the under-dog, whether that under-dog was a working man, an illiterate child, a Negro or a woman. In his incisive treatment of the sources of American educational development, Frank Tracy Carlton de- scribes Humanitarianism as one of the residues of the industrial revolution in New England." The contention of some that there was in this period no "working class" for which there was urgent need for special library provision is probably correct if one looks for a large, well-defined "body of uneducated and unskilled artisans newly drafted into the factories as a result of the industrial revolu- tion."'2 On the other hand, one cannot gainsay the fact that there took place in the latter half of the nineteenth century a gradual "stratification of economics" and economic classes in which "those who had lost in the gamble of pre-emption and exploitation were added to the growing multitude of the proletariat. "13 The two broad economic changes which impelled employer and employee to seek new forms of vocational and technical education may be cited as follows: (I) corporate ownership of large industrial enterprises; and (2) the shift from handicraft and small-unit production to complex large units of machine production. Whereas formerly the small entrepreneur and mas- ter mechanic was interested in the direct teaching of his work- men and in the provision of apprentices' educational institu- tions, the investor and big industrialist had no contact with his employees and did not feel the need of furnishing educational "i "Horace Mann in New Orleans: a note on the decline of humanitarianism in American education, 1837-1937," School and society, XLV (I937), 6o8. 12 J. H. Wellard, Book selection: its principles and practice (London: Grafton, I937), p. 24. '3 V. L. Parrington, Main currents in American thought (New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1930), III, 26.
I6o THE LIBR4RY QU4RTERLY facilities from his private resources. The desire to educate ma- chine workers and mechanics, to make more efficient the vast army of foreign-born hands,'4 now had its outlet in the advocacy of public institutions of learning. Added to this was the circum- stance in which advancement to the owning class was rare and difficult. The former interest in helping the worker out of his class now became the stress on making the mill hand and mechanic more efficient in his own class. That these changes were sensed by contemporary minds is evidenced and epitomized by two writers. The first, D. J. O'Donoghue,'s was keenly aware of the breakdown of the old apprenticeship system. He spoke of the disappearance of crafts, the secrets of which are handed down by master workmen to four or five apprentices. One now had, he claimed, an employer with from forty to four thousand hands, in a factory where it was no longer possible to pick up the odds and ends of manufac- turing technique. The second, an eclectic writer on library sub- jects, quotes: "Let those," says a recent writer, "who pride themselves upon their devo- tion to the so-called practical, reflect that the advantages of a library are no longer of a purely literary character, and are becoming less and less so; that the arts and mysteries of manufacture are no longer taught by word of mouth alone to indentured apprentices, but that the 'master workmen' of the nine- teenth century speak through books to all; and that in proportion as our workmen become intelligent and skillfull does their labour increase in value to themselves and to the state!"'6 The public library implications of this last statement-viz., the advantages of a better educated employee to the industrial community-will be expanded upon subsequently, along with a discussion of the advantage of the library in improving the status of the skilled workman. REFORMERS AND EDUCATORS As we have observed, the humanitarians of the nineteenth century operated on every front of human need. So, then, when- '4 Schlesinger, op. cit., pp. 64-72. 'S "Manual vs. technical education," American federationist, 11 (I895), 82-84. 6 Thomas Greenwood, Public libraries (London: Simpkin, I 890), p. 34.
SOCIAL REFORM, EDUCATION, AND THE LIBRARY i6i ever the library was advocated as an instrument of moral uplift, it was endowed with the ability to assist in accomplishing the following: (i) the library would keep people away from cheap and harmful forms of entertainment, e.g., drinking; (2) it would prevent crimes and delinquency, even rehabilitate the delin- quent; (3) it would provide relaxation for the tired workingmen; and (4) it would provide reading for the poor and their children. It seems absolutely correct and essential to start a discussion of the humanitarian motives of public library promotion with a reference to the district school library; for, indeed, this was the embryo of the town and city library idea. Among the first to see the broad implications of endeavor toward public education was Henry Barnard. In his fourth annual report as secretary to the Board of Commissioners of Common Schools in Connecticut in 1842, he proposes libraries as an aid "in strengthening the virtuous habits of the young, and alluring them from vicious tastes and pursuits.""7 He further asserts, in his report on the condition and improvement of the public schools of Rhode Is- land in 1845, that "libraries can be readily supported to .... preserve from hurtful amusements and gross indulgences, bless the fireside, and give dignity and increased value to mere muscular labor."'8 Interestingly enough, the first concerted efforts to provide books and reading-rooms for the underprivileged and demoral- ized classes took place in New York during the pre-Civil War depression. Charles Loring Brace, as part of an attempt to re- habilitate the "dangerous classes," financed the "eleventh ward free reading room," which was established in the proximity of the Novelty Iron Works of New York.'9 This, the first of Brace's many experiments, presented a curious institution where, in addition to supplying reading matter, coffee was sold as a competitor to liquor. The reading-room, though at first used by a large number of laboring men, soon saw its clientele 17J. S. Brubacher, Henry Barnard on education (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1931), p. 36. ii Ibid., p. 46. "9 C. L. Brace, The dangerous classes of New York and twenty years' work among them (New York: Wynkoop & Hallenbeck, I872), pp. 266-97.
X62 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY dwindle and had to admit failure. This failure was attributed at the time to the possibility that the men felt themselves obliged to order coffee in order to read. In the religious revival of i858, Brace found one, Orville Gardner, a reformed pugilist, and made him superintendent of the "Coffee and reading room" in the fourth ward, then con- sidered the worst district in the city. The frequenters of the "Coffee and reading room" were said to be former habitues of saloons-"broken down gentlemen, ruined merchants, penniless clerks, homeless laboring men, and printers." It was claimed that this institution put as many as seven hundred men on the right path. Having decided that refreshments do not attract the working classes, Brace, with the aid of charitable groups, opened various free reading-rooms throughout the city. Several of these were attached to boys' lodging-houses; one of them inaugurated a useful course of popular lectures for laboring people. The lesson drawn from Brace's many essays was that ideally the laboring classes should be induced to start reading-rooms themselves. However, since the lower stratum of this class had no apparent initiative or desire, and to those higher in the social scale Cooper Union was available, "for the present, the Reading Room [was to be] looked upon like the Public School, as a means of im- provement offered by society, in its own interest, to all." Nor did humanitarian zeal overlook the reading-room as a means of drawing city women up from the depths into which they had fallen. On October 26, i858, a meeting was held in New York for the purpose of establishing a free library for women. Mayor Tiemann, who presided, spoke of the assem- blage as having "met to consider the improvement of a class which had been oppressed almost from all time the seam- stresses." Henry Ward Beecher, the main speaker, based his appeal on the premise that the class for whom aid was being asked-the working women-needed assistance not because of its own weakness but because of the degradation of society; these women had not achieved their proper woman's place in the home and therefore were in a fallen state which was fraught
SOCIAL REFORM, EDUCATION, AND THE LIBRARY I63 with danger. The Mercantile Library had opened its doors to female clerks, but female clerks were few in number. What chance would a woman have there? What chance would a poor- ly clad woman have there? It was a gilded library for gilded men! Jason T. Brody, another speaker, raised the dramatic ques- tion of what would happen if the courage of these poor women failed. Seek the answer in those palaces of sin, where, while I speak, hundreds of women at this moment pursue a life to which many of them have been driven by poverty. Seek it in that tide of vice which, at this very moment, comes through the avenues of this great city. In true humanitarian spirit the meeting ended with a dual resolution: That we earnestly recommend to the employers of workmen to lessen the number of hours' labor required of them, to assist in preventing their want of employment, and generally aid in the improvement of their social condition; And That in my opinion, the poorer classes of females in this city, and especially the operatives, may be much aided in obtaining subsistence and securing elevation of character by the establishment of an institution for females, combining with a library and reading-rooms, a system of judicious instruc- tion.... 20 Several newspaper editorials and public meetings in later years confirmed the contention that humanitarianism was a potent force in public library growth. Thus the New York times of February 9, I879, deplored the circumstance in which New York City had no free library to provide cultural stimuli, "while every agency calculated to debase and weaken the common mind is found here in full force. "2t There were also edi- torials in the New York daily tribune22 which remarked upon the lack of library facilities for poor and unemployed mechanics. The establishment of a free reading-room and circulating li- brary in New York23 was the subject of a meeting held in the Il New York daily tribune, October 27, I858, p. 5. ,"Library journal, IV (I879), 133-34. 22 February 5, I882, p. 6, col. 2. 23 Ibid., January 2i, i 882, p. 5, col. 3.
164 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY halls of the Union League Club of New. York in i882. Mr. Joseph H. Choate spoke of the role of libraries in the elimina- tion of crime. Dr. J. Hall lamented the fact that in a city of one and one-quarter million people there was not yet one free cir- culating library to aid the poor among the working classes. The keynote of Dr. Potter's speech was fighting evil in the city with books. In I 890, New York, still without adequate free library service, heard another series of speeches on the same subject. This time Mr. Choate pleaded for funds with which to purchase fiction for the "tired" people of New York. Henry E. Howland related how the opening of a branch library in Bond Street had driven a nearby saloon out of business. His more direct appeal to the audience was: "Imagine yourselves in sickness or enforced idle- ness deprived of books, and think of the thousands of poor people who, without these libraries, could have none."24 MISCELLANEOUS INFLUENCES Several additional citations of humanitarian appeal may be offered. In 1878, during a country-wide temperance agitation, a lady delivered an address advocating a public library for Lan- caster, Ohio, so that boys could spend evenings there instead of in saloons.'5 Joshua Bates, in giving a donation to the Wor- cester Public Library, made stipulations concerning comfort- able, well-lighted library rooms, to be open during the evening. According to his statement, he was giving the money "by sym- pathy for those who, like himself in early life, had, after the labors of the day, no convenient place for study at their lodg- ings."26 Accompanying a bequest to the town of Sheboygan, Wisconsin, James A. Mead wrote: "There being no place of public resort for them [boys] except where intoxicating drinks are sold."27 Edmund C. Pechin, president of the Commercial 24 "Meeting in favor of the New York Free Circulating Library," Library journal, XV (i890), io6. s C. B. Galbreath, Sketches of Ohio libraries (Columbus: Heer & Co., x902), p. 208. 26 Worcester Public Library, Fourth annual report, 1863, p. 7. 27 "Library economy and history," Library journal, XV (I890), I26.
SOCIAL REFORM, EDUCATION, AND THE LIBRARY i65 Association of Roanoke, Virginia, appealed for a public library partly because "it will offer inducement for him [the young man] to spend his time profitably instead of idly, and sur- rounded by healthy instead of possibly unhealthy influences."28 Public recognition of the moral motive for reading-rooms is intimated in the special hearing conducted by the U.S. Indus- trial Commission in I9OI: Q. (Repr. Bell): How do they [miners] entertain themselves now, away from the saloons? A. (C. A. Callis, a former miner): That is one of the failings of the social system. In Park City they have a library .... the men in our town have to furnish themselves with reading matter.29 HUMANITARIANISM AMONG THE LIBRARY INTERESTS However suspicious or callous one is in his examination of the humanitarian spirit of library committees, trustees, and librar- ians, he will in the end concede the genuineness and sincerity of missionary zeal among these groups. Moreover, even if one at- tributes this moral fervor in part to a desire for professional aggrandizement, there still remains as valid evidence that major portion of it which either arises from true sentiment or reflects a current desire or emotion of the general public. Since most li- brary reports were written for the consumption of public offi- cials, we may at least assume that the ideas expressed therein did not run counter to the public mind. The Brookline, Massachusetts, Public Library was quick to justify its existence and book-buying policy by the logic of uplift. Its i859-60 report maintained that "some, if not sup- plied with fiction, will seek other amusements and employments which aren't good for them."30 Further: There are those also whose circumstances have unfortunately been such, that they are not aware of the advantages which the informed possess over the ignorant. They have not the time to spend, nor can they command the a8 E. C. Pechin, "A business man's appeal for a library," Library journal, XVII (I892), I26. 29 U.S. Industrial Commission, Report on the relations and conditions of capital and labor, XII, (I9OI), 631. 3? Brookline, Massachusetts, Public Library, Annual report, 859-60, p. 34.
x66 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY means of helping themselves to the extent which they desire. They hail with gratitude .... the privileges offered by the library to them and their chil dren.3" Taxation for library purposes has most unusual justification when "The philanthropy of the higher classes can reach the lower without the stigma of charity because the public library is the common property of all."32 In 1878 this same library, emphasizing its increased useful- ness in a period of economic stringency, reported that its circula- tion had increased because the unemployed mechanics and laborers were beginning to show a preference for reading as a preoccupation superior to "hanging out on the street corner." The management of the library felt that the town was fortunate in having a safe asylum for hands and brains that might err in periods of enforced idleness.33 Thus the appeal to humane instincts, found to be an effective entree into the taxpayer's pocket, was used at the beginning of the library movement and was repeated throughout the period with which this essay is concerned. The Worcester Public Li- brary, hampered by small appropriations, rhetorically asked the readers of its third annual report: "To how many does it afford profitable occupation for time which would otherwise be mis- spent and lost! How many intellects does it feed, which, but for its facilities, would remain destitute of the nutriment which they crave!"34 And the year following: "it is no less necessary to make a liberal provision to encourage the virtues requisite for national power, to counteract and reform the vices, which are fostered by the condition of the country ...9"35 The Chicago Public Library from its first year based its claims for public support on the contention that it furnished the working masses of Chicago with "the opportunity of that men- tal improvement denied them by a hard fortune, or extreme penury" who, if they lack the counsel of books, "are easily led aside into the haunts of vice and folly, wasting time in places of 31Ibid., p. 35. 32 Ibid. 33 Library journal, III (I878), 122. 34 Worcester Public Library, Third annual report, i86z, p. i i. 35 Worcester Public Library, Fourth annual report, 1863, p. 2.
SOCIAL REFORM, EDUCATION, AND THE LIBRARY 167 ill reputation, contracting habits of crime and ignorance such as disgrace our modern civilization."36 The Aguilar Free Library Society, which constituted one of the roots of the later free-library system, was brought into existence principally to supply wholesome literature where it was most needed-i.e., in the densely populated lower districts of New York City.37 It cites, as partial evidence of its success, an evening clientele consisting of working boys.38 From the point of view of spreading the free-library idea and obtaining financial support from municipalities, there is a body of evidence of infinitely greater importance than that used above. Though most of the literature in this category was not designed to further the interests of any one library, there are extremely interesting examples of local campaigning which should be offered at this point. In I865 the directors of the Lowell, Massachusetts, Library felt justified in petitioning their city council for a free public library. The city levied taxes to punish crime: why should it not do the same to prevent crime? Let the library be free to all, and then, perhaps, there will be one young man less in the place where intoxicating drinks are found ... . Make the library free to all, and then, perhaps, there will be one young woman less to fall from the path of purity and goodness down to that depth of degradation and misery to which only a woman can fall.39 A most fruitful source of humanitarian appeal is to be found in the ten-year campaign waged by librarian Frederick M. Crunden to the end of making the St. Louis library tax-sup- ported and completely free. One of Crunden's early publica- tions cites a letter from a Bridgeport librarian which testifies to the influence of the public library in a manufacturing com- munity and its effect on illiteracy and crime. The letter asserts that many of its readers belong to "the poorest orders of the 36 Chicago Public Library, First annual report of the board of directors, 7une, 1873, P 5- 37Aguilar Free Library Society of the City of New York, First annual report, 1889, P.5. 3s Ibid., 1889-9, p. 8. 39 Lowell, Massachusetts, City Library, Innual report, S865, p. 5.
i68 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY population" and that many of its regular Sunday attendants have voluntarily yielded the information "that they used for- merly to spend their Sundays in low saloons because they had no home, but a boarding house."40 Some years later, the same author cites Professor Jevons on the social economy of libraries: "Even if they were costly, free libraries would be less expensive than prisons, poorhouses, and other institutions maintained by public money, or the gin-palaces, music halls, and theatres maintained by private expenditure . "a4 In a subsequent speech, Crunden, apparently fearing that this same argument might not be convincing enough to St. Louis businessmen, changed his line of argument. He granted that the mechanic or laborer might still prefer his drink to the opportunities afforded by a library. "Yet," said he, "his [the laborer's] children will use the library, if he does not."42 These children, who left school at an early age to become breadwinners, had little intellectual or moral training. They were, therefore, prone to give "their evenings to sport, seldom of the elevating character." The de- crease in police expense would much more than make up the cost of the library.43 Of far wider influence than this local literature were the articles published for lay and library audiences of the entire country. A review of Edwards' Free town libraries in the Nation was apparently addressed to taxpaying townsmen who were unable to see the advantage of reading for clerks, artisans, servants, and mill operatives.44 The reviewer, Charles A. Cut- ter, speaks of the pleasure and relief from weariness and anxiety which libraries have given. He remarks also on how libraries prevent visits to low resorts by supplying cheaper and better amusement. The onset of hard times in I893 gave another writer opportunity to show how the library is a social ameliora- 40 F. C. Crunden, Tht function of a public library and its value to a community (St. Louis: Nixon-Jones, 1884), p. 15. v ""The value of a free library," Library journal, XV (1890), 79. 42 Crunden, The free public library, its uses and value (St. Louis: Studley, 1893), p. 4. 43 Crunden, "The free public library," Lend a hand, X (1893), 403. 44 C. A. Cutter, "A librarian on free lending libraries," Nation, IX (I869), 233-45.
SOCIAL REFORM, EDUCATION, AND THE LIBRARY x69 tive: "If society cannot provide work for all, the idle- chronic or temporary-are much safer with a book in the library than elsewhere."45 The American Library Association was quick to seize upon the humanitarian rationale as campaign material for more and better supported libraries. Whether the underlying motive was idealistic or materialistic is not of great importance. The suc- cess of this appeal to the general public and its tax-controlling officers is hardly to be questioned. We find that in the very first year of its national organization, the library profession realized that it could demand support as a fair compensation for "keep- ing order in the community by giving people a harmless source of recreation."46 In true style it was pointed out that the state would economize on the cost of prisons if it diverted more funds to libraries.47 The library was publicized as a competitor of the "street, the saloon and the low amusement places of the poor; [it would] lift them above the sordid surroundings of their daily life."48 Concern for the poor was frequently expressed in edi- torial items.49 At the San Francisco conference of the American Library Association in I89I, informative circulars were distributed for the use of enterprising librarians. Their logic ran thus: Since vice incubates in ignorance, no love of humanity could deny the special fitness of librarians to enlighten, purify, and elevate mankind.S? This very document, oddly enough, crops up in the report of the Endowment Committee to the i89i conference.s' The social-economy aspect of libraries was behind many an attempt to wheedle more money out of the taxpayer. If the citizen was interested in reducing costs engendered by pauper- ism and crime, he would certainly recognize that the library is 4s T. L. Kelso, "Some economical features of public libraries," Arena, VII (1893), 711. 46 Library journal, I (1876), 99. 47Ibid., XII (I887), I82. 48J. M. Hubbard, "Are public libraries blessings?" Library journal, XIV (I889), 407. 49 Library journal, XV (I890), 86, 35I. so Ibid., XVI (I89I), 77. s' Ibid., XVI (1891), 34I.
170 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY the most potent means of attaining this end.A "The young man who has acquired the reading habit, except in very rare in- stances, becomes neither a loafer, a drunkard, or a charge upon the town."53 The experience gained by librarianship in early years along the lines of bringing over the public to its point of view was epitomized in its suggestive pamphlets for library missioners. Much of the humanitarian is to be found in these informal manuals, the Il.L.I1. library primer contains two such items bearing upon the library's service to the community: "It sup- plies the public with recreative reading. To the masses of people -hard-worked and living humdrum lives-the novel comes as an open door to an ideal life, in the enjoyment of which one may forget, for a time, the hardships or the tedium of the real."S4 And then: "The free reading room connected with most of our public libraries is a powerful agent for counteracting the attrac- tions of saloons and low resorts."ss A collection of quotations comprising a pamphlet called ?.L.A. materialfor a public library campaign also contains sev- eral items which are pertinent: I. It offers the easiest escape from the depressing monotony of every day life.-E. A. Birge. ,2. Affords relief from monotony.-Andrew Carnegie. 3. It gives boys books of adventure; girls, of fancy; tired housewives, of happiness; and the hard-worked man, relaxation.-W. I. Fletcher. 4. It affords to thousands the highest and purest entertainment, and thus lessens crime and disorder.-F. M. Crunden. S. It gives wholesome employment to all classes for those idle hours that wreck more lives than any other cause.-F. A. Hutchins.S6 EDUCATION FOR THE WAGE-EARNER When we examine the whole body of evidence relating to the social nexus between the working class and the public library, we see that humanitarian efforts constitute but a particularized S2 J. H. Whittier, "State aid to libraries," Library journal, XVII (I892), 104. 3Library journal, XVII (1892), 241. S4 "A.L.A. library primer," Public libraries, I (I896), S. S Ibid., p. 6. -' Chalmers Hadley, A.L.A. materialfor a public library campaign (Boston: Ameri can Library Association, i907), passim.
SOCIAL REFORM, EDUCATION, AND THE LIBRARY 171 form of pleading for reading matter for the masses. If we re- move the emotional content from this method of justifying the existence and extension of the public library, we have left a movement for the education of that part of the extra-school population which could not afford to buy its own books; we have a desire on the part of people in all walks of life to provide for the cultural advancement and vocational improvement of those whose schooling has been meager, and who have neither sufficient intellectual impetus nor the material means of carry- ing forward their education. Only such a broad interpretation of the basic social phi- losophy of the library movement can explain the presence of library data in the reports of the Bureau of Statistics of Labor of Massachusetts. From I889 to I901 the section of these re- ports devoted to "Conditions of workingmen" contained enu- merations and lists of libraries in Massachusetts, with statistics of the size of their book collections and the extent of their circulation.S7 A thought-provoking ideology is uncovered when we find names of newly established libraries listed under "Labor and industrial chronology." It is inevitable, when we consider the obvious democratic appeal on which the reform argument rests, that we should find it well used by library crusaders of all types. One of the first pamphlets on the foundation and administration of public li- braries states as an accepted fact that the public library has made a great achievement in "spreading intelligence" among artisans and those whose limited means do not allow them free access to books.58 An advocate of public libraries for manufac- turing communities proves beyond doubt that it would be im- possible for workers with an average income of $I.25 a day to have private libraries, however small. Many of these people couldn't even give up their children's earnings for a three-month compulsory school period.s9 57 Library journal, XV (i 890), I 5 I; ibid., XVI ( 891), 27. 58 American Social Science Association, Free public libraries (New York: Hurd & Houghton, 1871), pp. 6-7. 39 M. A. Sanders, "Possibilities of public libraries in manufacturing communities," in A. E. Bostwick, The library and society (New York: H. W. Wilson, 920), p. 404.
172 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY The public library was frequently advanced as an apt sub- stitute for the schools, which many could not attend very long "owing to circumstances." "They are the colleges and univer- sities of thousands who .... were unable to attend school in their youth."6o A pamphlet sent out as propaganda for state aid to libraries makes capital of the same point. The library would help regain some ground lost in the battle of life at that time when necessity compelled one to transfer from the schoolroom to the factory.6' State library associations found occasion to use the same sort of publicity. The Connecticut Library Association pointed to the need for libraries in manufacturing towns where many people of foreign birth were employed; and then libraries were valuable also "in country towns to help hold the young men who are drifting to the large cities."62 The Michigan Library Association was shown how small a percentage of children got to the graduating class, and how necesary it was, therefore, to make libraries a means of higher education for the masses.63 In Nebraska, a committee of the state teachers' association issued a circular urging support for the "poor man's univer- sity."64 In the statements which accompanied the donation and erec- tion of library buildings are to be found several expressions of purpose which lend substance to the "workingman's univer- sity" idea. Mount Holly, Pennsylvania, was the recipient of a fully furnished library donated by the daughter of the founder of two large paper mills in that town. The gift was avowedly for the benefit of the "working people and the mill hands" of these manufacturing establishments.6s The Carnegie Free Library at Allegheny, Pennsylvania, was dedicated with the hope "that the masses of workingmen and women, the wage earners of Alleghe- 60 Jessie Cohen, "Value of libraries," Library journal, XVI (I891), 174. 6I J. H. Whittier, State aid to libraries (Rochester, N.H.: Courier Power Book, I893), p.6. 6"Library journal, XVI (i 89I), I 8 i. 63 Ibid., p. 28I. 64 Ibid., p. i8i. 6s W. H. Brett, "Library endowments," Library journal, XV (1890), 53.
SOCIAL REFORM, EDUCATION, AND THE LIBRARY I73 ny, would remember and act upon the fact that this is their library, their gallery, and their hall."66 At Bayonne, New Jersey, the public library was "for working people of both sexes";67 at Newmarket, New Hampshire, the will of J. Webster granted money toward a public library for the employees of the Newmarket Manufacturing Company;68 at Grove City, Pennsylvania, a town which was almost wholly the property of the library benefactor, Carnegie, the employees were to benefit by the newly established public library.69 It is conceivable that much of the foregoing evidence may be attacked as being charged with sentimentality and self-interest. However, in so far as one is concerned with the social drive of the shaping and expansion of public library systems, all this material must gain an aspect of objective historical truth, if only from the quantity and consistency of the literature. More- over, the force of expressions of contemporary opinion becomes greater when it is combined with a study of the social ideas of library administrators themselves-viz., examining boards, boards of trustees, etc. That most basic and enlightening Preliminary report of the Boston Public Library speaks of the library's aim "toward satis- fying the demands for healthy, nourishing reading made by the great masses of our people, who cannot be expected to purchase such reading for themselves."70 The "gospel of mental culture to the poor"7x is considered by the management as being com- parable to the purpose of the free schools; "first regard should be shown .... to the wants of those who can in no other way supply themselves with interesting reading ....... 72 Further, the library's successful functioning is to be measured by its ability "to carry as many of them [books] as possible into the homes of the young; into poor families; into cheap boarding 66 "The Carnegie Free Library," Library journal, XV (I890), 8I. 67 Library journal, XVI (I89I), 56. " Ibid., XVII (1892), 32. 69 Ibid., XXV (1900), 192. 70 Boston Public Library, Preliminary report, 1852, p. I 5. 7I Boston Public Library, Annual report, 1859, p. 31. 72 Boston Public Library, Preliminary report, z852, p. I6.
174 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY houses; in short, wherever they will be most likely to affect life and raise personal character and condition."73 In i 86i the Bos- ton Public Library, citing its high circulation figures of Lower Hall, the popular division of the library, announced that it had been successful in its primary object-viz., to supply books to those "who are less able than they wish" to furnish books to themselves and to their families.74 The practice of supplementing statistics with qualitative measures of the library's benefits is not confined to the Boston Public Library. A library trustee's report from Watertown, Massachusetts, insists that no figures can give a just picture of the incalculable good done for the city's clerks, apprentices, and factory hands.75 The Committee on Ways and Means of the New York Free Circulating Library- by way of justifying larger appropriations-states the purpose of that institution: "[The library] should exist as a direct response of the people to the need of the people; not as charity, but as one of the most progressive means toward the moral and intellectual elevation of the masses." 6 The same committee, nine years later, ex- plains that its circulation figures are directly indicative of the information and cheer translated into the homes of the poor.77 The Chicago Public Library, in its drive for a new building, cites the fire hazard of the one then in use as a danger to the education and entertainment of the scientific and working classes.78 The address of a board of trustees' president at War- ren, Ohio, in 1899, is an apt peroration to the "line" of the li- brary movement: "An institution established for the sole pur- pose of cultivating a studious reading habit among the masses * .. . of placing within the reach of the laboring classes refresh- ing, elevating and educating literature .... will no more fail to 73 Ibid., p. 20. 74 Boston Public Library, Annual report, x86i, p. 6. 7S Watertown, Massachusetts, Free Public Library, Third annual report, z869-7o, P.3. 7' New York Free Circulating Library, First annual report, S88o, p. I6. 77New York Free Circulating Library, Tenth annual report, 1889, p. 6. 78 Chicago Public Library, Tenth annual report, S882, p. 7.
SOCIAL REFORM, EDUCATION, AND THE LIBRARY 175 receive due recognition and generous support than will our schools and churches."79 The public-library movement in New York City repeatedly advanced its complaint against the paucity of library service for the city's people. Discussion of the Government Library Re- port of I876 provided an opportunity for exposing New York's system of subscription and reference libraries. The example of the latter type most often cited is the Astor Library, from which "Mr. Astor alone might borrow overnight."Bo Some provision was sought for those who had neither the means to hire books nor the time to read them during the working hours of the Astor. More free circulating libraries were demanded for the impecunious who, it was said, could most use the elevating in- fluences of books.8' Library protagonists pointed to Boston as an example of a city which had made provision for its "edu- cated, poor and struggling mechanics."82 Library literature yields a sentimental story about the coal-heaver who returned borrowed books carefully wrapped in paper to shield them from his sooty hands; who "remarked that it was very nice now to have some entertainment at home of an evening."83 Mention was also made of the debt New York owed to the multitude which had made the city great.84 There are numerous instances where libraries included in their reports remarks about the vocations of the borrowers or made statistical analyses of the occupations of their registered readers. On occasion it was observed by outsiders that "opera- tives in the various manufactories of the country"8s are the heaviest users of public libraries. A visitor to the free reading- 79 Galbreath, op. cit., p. 279. so New York tribune, July 9, 1877, p. 4, col. 4. at Ibid., February 23, 1883, p. 3, col. I. "Ibid., August 24, 1883, p. 4, col. 4. 83 "Meeting in favor of the New York Free Circulating Library," Library journal, XV (I89o), io6. 84 Ibid., p. 109. 8S "How to 'promote' a library. An interview with Judge Keatley," Library journal, XV (1890), 234.
176 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY room of Cooper Union places the majority of its readers among the laboring classes.86 However impressive these general observations are, they do not approach in value the evidence found in official library reports. The very first report of the Chicago Public Library notes that its most numerous and studious group of patrons in the evening and on Sunday is composed of young artisans, clerks, and laborers. This seems to have been particularly en- couraging to a library administration which maintained from the beginning that the library was "for none more than the laborers and mechanics."87 The Worcester librarians, apparent- ly having had unpleasant contacts with hoi polloi, were very gratified upon seeing "rude manners and vulgar practices" gradually disappear from its lower (popular) reading-room. The "uncultured" began to speak in low tones and even to re- move their hats.88 The examining board of the Boston Public Library wrote its unqualified indorsement of the work of the lower hall and branch libraries. Significant to them was the large attendance of working people of both sexes and the methods by which "persons of an humble class are encouraged to make their wants known."89 The staff at New Brunswick, New Jersey, told of the manner in which they could tell, by the odors which clung to a book, at which factory each borrower worked. This library re- ported that it was patronized almost entirely by factory hands.90 A statement of the experience of the Carnegie Free Library of Allegheny is somewhat equivocal, viz., "the majority of readers is from the great middle class, or working class."91 Lancaster, Pennsylvania, a manufacturing town, states flatly that its pa- trons are mainly of the laboring class.92 86 U.S. Bureau of Education, Public libraries in the United States (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, I876), P. 463. 87 Chicago Public Library, First annual report, 1873, p. 25. 88 Worcester Public Library, Fourteenth annual report, 1873, p. 23. 89 Boston Public Library, Annual report, 1882, p. 14; also "The library and the laborer," Library journal, XXV (I900), I1i2. 90 Library journal, XVI (i 89 I), 27. 9" Ibid., XVIII (I 893), 197. 92 E. A. Berge, "The effect of the 'Two book system' on circulation," ibid., XXIII (I898), 99.
S0CIAL REFORM, EDUCATION, AND THE LIBRARY 177 Since analyses of readers' occupations were made only to- ward the end of the period covered by this paper, and then by few libraries, the writer considers them of limited importance. The one made by the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh in I898 took a sampling of thirty-five registrants.93 Moreover, a survey made by the same library in i9oo yields a very positive state- ment to the effect that 7I per cent of the borrowers were em- ployees in the various industrial and mercantile establishments of the city, not including managers and superintendents.94 Especially interesting here is the pointed distinction made be- tween the working-class readers and those who might fall into a managerial category. The tabulation of professions, trades, and occupations made at Newark shows about 6o per cent in what we may properly call a wage-earning class.9s During the I890's the librarians' concept of their function in the community took on the positive aspect of bringing the li- brary to the industrial employee. In one instance, special cir- culars were sent to all the manufacturers in a Massachusetts city asking them to encourage their employees to use the li- brary.96 In another, manufacturers of Paterson, New Jersey, permitted the library to distribute circulars and book lists among the operatives as they left the mills.97 Wishing to publicize its library among mill operatives, one library placed in a prominent position in many factories a box of library applications. This box bore the inscription: FREE PUBLIC LIBRARY BOOKS LOANED FREE Take one of the applications . .. . and books will be loaned to you without any charge.98 93 Seventeen ladies, boys, and girls, 2 teachers, 2 clerks, 2 chemical engineers, I stenog- rapher, I engineer, I letter carrier, I gas inspector, i foreman, I meter finisher, i com- positor, I mechanical engineer, I shipping clerk, I laborer, I bookkeeper, I iron worker. 94 Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Annual report, z9oo-o1, p. 13. 9S Newark Public Library, Eleventh annual report, 1899, p. i6. 9 A. L. Heywood, "The training of a librarian," Library journal, XVII (1892), 479. 97 Library journal, XVIII ( 893), 23. 98 Ibid., XXIII (I 898), io8.
178 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY The librarian of the Brookline, Massachusetts, Public Library advocated that "the laborer be approached by meeting the labor leader of the town."'9 Apropos of this method, it was reported that workingmen's club meetings were held under the auspices of the Gloversville Public Library.Io0 This experiment was sup- pose,dly undertaken in order to raise the level of reading of the workingman. Librarians of the nineteenth century-and this holds true in the twentieth-were periodically made painfully aware of the latest reading needs of their working-class public. They were faced with a curious contradiction wherein, in periods of eco- nomic stress when appropriations were pruned down, enforced idleness resulted in an increased pressure on their resources. The approach of the post-Civil War depression and the 1873 panic was foreshadowed in the I867 report of the Worcester Public Library. The crowding of both reference and reading- rooms was here attributed to the business depression.0x? In 1874 and 1875 this observation was confirmed.102 Moreover, in the latter year, the library administration started to squirm under the "harmful policy" of cutting appropriations during hard times. The tapering off of the depression in I 879 found its corol- lary in a decrease of circulation which was readily pinned onto the general resumption of business and a consequent smaller need for filling unoccupied time.103 In the first year of the Chicago Public Library (I873), the secretary of that institution thought it important to remark that many men and youths who seemed to be out of work spent much of their time in the library.104 He added that these were 99 C. K. Bolton, "The librarian's duty as a citizen," Library journal, XXI (I 896), 2I9. zoo Library journal, XXIII (I 898), 249. tot Worcester, Massachusetts, Public Library, Eighth annual report, 1867, p. I5. 102 Worcester, Massachusetts, Public Libary, Fifteenth annual report, 1874, p. 13; Sixteenth annual report, 1875, p. 24. 103 Worcester, Massachusetts, Public Library, Twentieth annual report, 1879, p. 7. 104 Chicago Public Library, First annual report, 1873, p. 25.
SOCIAL REFORM, EDUCATION, AND THE LIBRARY I79 intelligent people who called for a better-grade book. Although this is not the place for a comparative study of employment con- ditions of the two sexes, it is suggestive to note that as late as I88I, when a general rise in employment was being felt, the women's counter of the Chicago Public Library was "daily thronged by representatives from every degree and condition of society, and especially from the ranks of the toilers in the too scanty avenues of employment open to them."I5 At Brookline, pride in circulation growth combined with humanitarian zeal to produce the following: [An increase of issues is] accounted for by the fact that many of the unem- ployed mechanics and laborers have found it more profitable to read library books than to frequent street-corner rendezvous. The town is to be congratu- lated that it possesses such a helpful and safe asylum for hands and brains that might, through forced idleness and discouragement, be led to harm."?6 By I893 it was already possible for library administrators to generalize upon the relationship between unemployment and depression. One report declared that "in times of financial panic the circulation of a library always increases."I07 At Lynn, near- ly 11,ooo more books were issued in I894 than in I892, and there were many standing-room-only hours for reading-room patrons.Io0 Libraries noticed that reading-rooms were "par- ticularly well-patronized on days when the mills are idle,"109 and that, although increased pressure had necessitated extensions of activity, branches and space facilities had not been expanded to meet demands.II0 As in 1879, the I897 revival brought reports of circulation decreases. "Multitudes who [heretofore], in their enforced leisure, sought refuge in books, are now at work.","' los Chicago Public Library, Ninth annual report, z88i, pp. 17-I8. 106Library journal, III (I878), 122. 107 Newark, New Jersey, Free Public Library, Annual report of the board of trustees, 1893, p. II. Io8 Library journal, XIX (I894), 102. I9 Ibid., XXI (I896), 514. IIO Minneapolis Public Library, Annual report, 1896, p. 8. III Ibid., 1897, p. 14
I 8o THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY TECHNICAL EDUCATION OF THE WORKER The selling point most fondly embraced by library promoters was the technical-education build-up. Perhaps this entree into the public conscience was most effective because it contained within it the greatest measure of palpable truth. This raison d'etre was practical, comprehensible, and convincing to all, in- cluding factory manager, owner, and employee. The mechanic and artisan saw in the library the means of making themselves more proficient,112 thereby increasing their wage-earning power. The entrepreneur could envisage a better product and a con- sequently higher profit. A foreign observer, noting the prolixity of public libraries in New England, attributed the industrial excellence of that section to its facilities for reading."'3 Samuel Swett Green advised his fellow-librarians that annual appropriations are sometimes proportionate to one's ability to demonstrate to successful men-about-town the practical ad- vantages of books. These people must be shown that a large collection on "technical subjects adds to the material prosperity of the town or city.""I4 Green cited many statements of busi- nessmen relating to the direct benefits to industry through technical information, and to the indirect benefits through the workers' increased theoretical and practical knowledge of in- dustrial techniques. Those businessmen also showed an appre- ciation of the good derived by workingmen, by way of increased opportunity for advancement and growth of self-respect. Other writers spoke of the advantage which the "book-intel- ligent" worker had in the "race of life."I"s The role of the library as a free technical institute was especially important in manu- facturing towns because the high cost of technical books put them beyond the reach of the average wage-earner. In addition to its function as an instrument of technical education, the 1I2 Dayton, Ohio, Public Library, Dedication .... 7anuary 24, i888 (I888), p. 30; Los Angeles Public Library, Scevnth annual report, 1897, p. 7. 13 A. L. Guthrie, Library work cumulated, (Minneapolis: H. W.Wilson, I9I2), p. 2iI. 14 S. S. Green, "The library in its relations to persons engaged in industrial pur- suits," Library journal, XIV (I889), 215. 1X5 "The relation of the public library to industries," Library journal, XV (I890), 237.
SOCIAL REFORM, EDUCATION, AND THE LIBRARY i8i library was viewed in some quarters as one of the things which stimulated the demand for industrial schools.",6 The education- al value to ambitious artisans is thus epitomized by Fletcher: Passing now to more obvious benefits, one of the most noteworthy is the supplying of books needed to give those workers in every department who care to read and study the means of perfecting themselves in their work. A good public library will be made full along those lines in which the local in- dustries are specialized, and will at the same time provide the leading books on kindred arts. The artisan can no longer afford to despise book- learning."7 Among the various minor claims for the public library was its part in stimulating invention",8 and in assisting young workers to rise "Horatio Alger" style from their newsboy beginnings."'g To be sure, the library's contribution to the economic effective- ness of the nation was not overlooked.I20 Just as in the other phases of public-library justification and promotion already discussed, the American Library Associa- tion's collection of quotable campaign material contained sev- eral items which support the technical-education idea."'t The portion which answers questions as to "what the public library does for the community" includes: I. It furnishes books and periodicals for the technical instruction and information of mechanics, artisans, manufacturers, engineers, and all others whose work requires technical knowledge-f all persons upon whom depends the prosperity of the city.-F. M. Crunden. 2. It furnishes to the ambitious artisan the opportunity to rise.-Henry E. Legler. 3. Information to the working class.-Waller Irene Bullock. 4. It improves the masses.-Andrew Carnegie. zz6 U.S. Industrial Commissioner, Reports, V (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1900), 125. II7W. I. Fletcher, Public libraries in America (Boston: Roberts Bros., I894), pp. 34-35. Id "Importance of public libraries," Library journal, XVI (I 89I), 94. 19 W. E. Foster, "The argument for public support of public libraries," Library journal, XVI (I89I), 44. nSo C. A. Cutter, "Development of public libraries," U.S. Commissioner of Educa- tion, Report, o900-0, p. 1359. It" Hadley, op. cit.
I82 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Soon after the free-library movement gained stride in the fifties, librarians and citizen library promoters boasted of the practical utility of providing books to the working classes. The free reading-room of Cooper Union, opened in I 857, was meant specifically to aid in carrying forward a program of vocational education.122 The Worcester Public Library in its second year tried flattery in its drive for greater support. According to the management, a city so unusually gifted with enterprise and mechanical genius was twice blessed with a public library which enhanced the genius of its citizens.'23 There was much to com- mend the then existing economic structure in which the mechanic arts, which are the chief employment of our people, pursued * . . . not in large organizations owned and controlled by a few persons, but cultivated with that variety of pursuit, which gives each individual his choice of the fields of labor . . . . tend, as all history teaches, to elevate a people even more than commerce.'24 The directors of the Chicago Public Library considered it just plain good business for a government to invest in such a compre- hensive plan of public education as the public library affords. It is possible that libraries contribute significantly in the process "to raise the whole body of people one distinct grade in indus- trial character."125 The library trustees at Newark, in their first report on the operation of the free library, injected a reminder that their institution had been chartered originally in I847 to furnish the numerous apprentices in the city at that time with instructive reading. X26 Frederick M. Crunden, who, it will be recalled, used every type of appeal in his vigorous campaign to make the St. Louis Public Library absolutely free, brought to the attention of his fellow-citizens the library's incalculable "educational value to the adults among the masses." As proof of the validity of his I22 Cole, Op. Cit., p. 21 5. 123 Worcester, Massachusetts, Public Library, Second annual report, z86z, p. I4. 124 Worcester, Massachusetts, Public Library, Seventh annual report, i866, p. 19. 12s Chicago Public Library, Fifth annual report, z877, p. 7. "26Newark, New Jersey, Free Public Library, Annual reports of the board of trustees, I-II (I889-9o), 19.
SOCIAL REFORM, EDUCATION, AND THE LIBRARY I83 claims he cited a move then fresh in everyone's mind to solicit subscriptions from the city's manufacturers for the establish- ment of a technological department especially designed for the use of the skilled mechanics in local industries.127 A manufac- turer's testimonial as to the good derived by his workers, and incidentally to his own business, added much strength to the public-library cause.I28 At Minneapolis, Librarian Putnam exhorted employers to act as guarantors for the books borrowed by their employees. The risk entailed, according to Putnam, was minute compared to the "benefits [which] will appear not only in increased enjoy- ment of their leisure hours, but also (through familiarity with technical literature) in a more intelligent efficiency in their work itself.""29 Those who attended the opening of the Allegheny Public Library, a Carnegie benefaction, heard how it was only through the mental development of the men who ran the mills that these local industrial advances, as well as the prosperity of the country as a whole, could be achieved.13o The Boston Public Library justified its attempts to reach the artisan and skilled workingmen on the same basis-viz., that the welfare of the city depended largely on the intelligence of this class of citi- zens."3" An attempt at interpretation of the foregoing material seems superfluous. Little doubt remains as to the historical validity of the humanitarian and vocational aspects of the public-library movement in the United States. As concrete and effective aims, the education and uplift of the wage-earner were significantly operative not only in obtaining support for the free tax-sup- ported public library, but also, as will be evident from a casual study of source materials, in furthering the cause of mechanics' and apprentices' libraries, the school district library, and social libraries of the subscription and proprietary type. 127 Library journal, XIV (I 8 89), 48 I . IZ2 Crunden, X free public library, its uses and values, p. i8. 129 Library journal, XV (I 890), 313. I30 J. H. Whittier, "State aid to libraries," Library journal, XVII (x892), I04. '3' C. C. Soule, "The Boston Public Library," Library journal, XVII (I892), 90.
184 THE LIBRARY QUdRTERLY Evaluation of the role played by the specific social factors discussed in this article would be futile and, indeed, dangerous. The complete picture of social backgrounds in the progress and expansion of the public library demands a development of many vital ideas. Among these are: (i) education for intelligent par- ticipation in the mechanics of our political democracy; (2) the perfectibility of man and his social relationships by means of the broadest possible diffusion of knowledge; (3) the undercur- rent of fear in some quarters of possible violence and disorder which might result from discontent plus ignorance; (4) the atti- tudes of organized labor toward mass education through the medium of books and reading. Much can also be learned from a study of the impact of all these factors on the extension of li- brary facilities, the adaptation of service techniques, and, most important, the selection of books.