COMMENT February 24, 1999 Dear Editor: I am perplexed by Wayne Wiegand's piece in theJanuary 1999 issue of the Library Quarterly, "Tunnel Vision and Blind Spots." While I agree with his sentiment that we need to look outside of our own discipline for theory and inspiration in our research, and appreciate his careful scholarship in the first twentyne pages of the article, the last five pages (not counting the references) are puzzling. What begins as a thesis about the importance of studying "the library in the life of the user," grounded in a review of the history of American librarianship, con- cludes with an editorial that does not rise to the usual standards of the Library Quar- terly regarding evidence and logic. I refer to the section "Assessing the Present . . ." that begins on page 22, and in particular to the remarks on pages 23 and 24. On those pages the sequence of the author's chain of reasoning goes something like this: 1. It is essential for us to study the effect of libraries on their users, particularly groups like women and ethnic minorities. 2. In studying librarianship and the role of libraries, we are not paying enough attention to critical theorists and philosophers of science. 3. We should build on the work of six writers in particular: Foucault, Gramsci, Habermas, Longino, Jacob, and Harding. 4. The author looked at the citations in two years of JASIS and did not see any citations to those six authors. 5. Therefore the content of JASIS is misguided. Indeed all of "information sci- ence" is "trapped in its own discursive formations, where members speak mostly to each other." Therefore the scholarship in our discipline (except for Library Quar- terly, Libraries and Culture, and five monographs mentioned specifically in the article) suffers from "tunnel vision and blind spots." These last three arguments strike me as amazingly limp. They beg to be ques- tioned. Consider the following responses: 1. Why is the effect of libraries on subgroups of their users the primary agenda our discipline should consider? Could not there be other valid and important research questions, such as whether an information technology effectively serves its users, or whether our national policies on technology and information truly promote the public good? 2. Why these six writers? Why are they the litmus test of good theory? And even if we take their themes to be primary to our discipline, why are they the best repre- sentatives of it? Foucault but not Giddens? Gramsci but not Ellul? Habermas but not Lyotard? In the September 1992 issue of American Libraries, Wiegand suggested that "librarians need to read" a different group of the "few brilliant people in the world," consisting of Foucault, Bourdieu, Harding, and Stanley Fish, but not the others. Wiegand's "Big Six" list is neither inclusive nor consistent. 536
COMMENT 537 3. Why JASIS? Why not Library and Information Science Research, or Information Pro- cessing & Management? It may be true that not all six theorists are cited in JASIS, but why must they be? Relatively few articles in JASIS have discussed connections between power and knowledge that affect issues of race, class, age, and gender, but some have. The bulk of JASIS articles have addressed other issues that the members of its association believe are important. Why is that a fault? 4. Finally, why examine two discontinuous years (1991 and 1995) of a journal? Why not sample a meaningful number of years? If Wiegand had examined JASIS issues in 1994, for example, he would have seen citations to Foucault, Gramsci, and Habermas, among other critical theorists. The 1995 volume he did examine even includes references to Stanley Fish-but now he is no longer fishing for Fish. It is the opportunistic sample that is most questionable. In reasoning about the present we have a duty to be systematic about our selection of evidence, and to consider as much relevant data as practical. Yet Wiegand reaches sweeping conclu- sions on the basis of highly selective facts. That he admits to being "rather unscien- tific" is no excuse. Then again, I agree with Wiegand on several points: that people are more impor- tant than things; that too much attention (and money) is spent on addressing tech- nical issues in libraries; that more attention ought to be paid to social theory; that we ought to be reading (and citing) more often outside of our discipline; and that social factors, such as class and creed (or, more to the point, wealth and religion), have influenced the roles and practices of libraries, just as they have many other social phenomena. However, I differ with him in that I value the diversity of scholarship in our disci- pline. I do not agree that promoting a new canon, or criticizing one journal for not being more like another, will improve the quality of our research. After all, one scholar's "tunnel vision" may be another scholar's microscope. I am disappointed that Wiegand's essay deteriorates into yet another instance of disciplinary navel- gazing; isn't that one of the traps Wiegand urges us to avoid? Donald 0. Case, School of Library and Information Science, University of Kentucky