Introduction A medieval cathedral does not only picture the feudal world. It is at the same time an element in the building of this world. It does not only reproduce medieval reality. It also produces it. Every piece of art thus has a double character: it is an expression of reality, but at the same time it creates reality. [1, p. 23] The dialectical relationship between the cathedral and the feudal world that the Czech philosopher Karel Kosík points out in the quotation above can also be applied to the relationship between the public library and cultural and societal development in general. The public library is a product of modernity that follows in the wake of industrialization, urbanization, and popular movements, while at the same time the public library itself supports the building up and development of modernity. The very institutionalization of the public library as an independent area of society can be looked upon as a structural characteristic of modernity, just as the public library supports the concepts of democracy, empowerment, and social mobility in a secularized reality. This connection between the public library and societal development is also in evidence today whether we choose to talk about late modernity or postmodernity. The public library of today is a product of late modern or postmodern society just as the public library contributes to create this society. Today, public libraries have thus become part of a society that is complex, bewildering, and, to a large extent, without a sense of direction. It is on the foundation of this deep‐rooted uncertainty that there are so many visions for the future role of the public library and that they seem to point in different directions. One moment the book is declared dead, the next moment it is proclaimed very much alive, and, while some argue that the library should dissolve its physical presence into cyberspace, others suggest that the library should strengthen its role as a physical space in the local community. At the same time, the tasks of the public library have become manifold, and the public library now does more than merely disseminate the traditional values of enlightenment and “good literature” to the general public. On the contrary, the individual library stimulates the development of cultural diversity and thereby also the increased reflexivity that characterizes late modern or postmodern society. This relationship between the public library and cultural and societal trends and their impacts is unfortunately too often overlooked in the present debate on the public library, which first and foremost focuses on ways to legitimize the library to politicians and the authorities empowered to make grants. This article will examine some crucial aspects of the relationship between the public library and modernity. On the basis of this examination and by means of contributions from significant social theorists, such as the English sociologist Anthony Giddens, the French philosopher Jean‐François Lyotard, and the American sociologist Scott Lash, we shall pinpoint three major characteristics of late modernity or postmodernity and discuss these in relation to the development of the public library. The characteristics are the concept of posttraditional society, the idea of the ambiguity of belief in progress, and the tendency toward dedifferentiation. Some of our specific examples will be rooted in a Danish context, but at the same time they will be significant outside the borders of Denmark. Our point of departure is that just like the task of the public library once was to qualify the individual to live in the modern age, the task today must be to provide somehow a foundation for the individual to live in a late modern or postmodern age. In order to do this, we need to study the relationship between the public library and the development from modernity to late modernity or postmodernity. Modernity and the Belief in Change A key characteristic of modernity is that the transition to modernity not only marks a change but that change in itself, and the awareness of this change, becomes symbolic of the modern age. This contrasts with the feudal and traditional society, which was characterized by stability rather than by change. The feudal social structure, and the religious legitimating of it, did not leave much room for concepts such as empowerment and social mobility and thus made little sense to a large proportion of the population. According to the social environment one was born into, the family’s social standing, and one’s gender, it was up to the individual to deal with the role apportioned to him in life as well as possible. According to the Danish communication scholar Lars Qvortrup [2], modern man’s birth can be traced back to 1486 when the Italian Renaissance philosopher Giovanni Pico della Mirando (1463–94) published Oration on the Dignity of Man. In this work, God speaks to Adam, saying, “You, by contrast, impeded by no such restrictions, may, by your own free will, to whose custody We have assigned you, trace for yourself the lineaments of your own nature” [2, p. 7]. For Qvortrup the essence in this quotation is that the perspective for observing the world changes from the divine to man himself. Thereby, man is not tied to a god‐given order, but he becomes the optic through which to view the world. This means that man is not only left to a divinely preordained course of life but must, to a certain extent, act on his own volition. In other words: man himself can orchestrate changes to his own benefit. The age of modernity sees a further development of the philosophy that exchanges divine Providence with man. In 1783 Immanuel Kant (1724–1804) published the essay “What Is Enlightenment?” Here Kant argues in favor of enlightenment being man’s liberation from his self‐inflicted state of submissiveness. The means by which man can empower himself is reason—and Kant believes that man should have the courage to seek enlightenment. He sees man as a creature of reason, but the development of reason is not, according to Kant, an automatic process, and this is where enlightenment must intervene. It is in fact a question of interplay between reason and enlightenment. On the one hand, enlightenment can lead to reason, and, on the other hand, reason can be used critically in relation to that which one is being enlightened about [3, p. 97]. But Kant does not only break with the religious picture of the world of the feudal society by moving the optic from the divine to man himself. He furthermore separates antiquity’s (and also the Renaissance’s) unified formation ideal about the true, the good, and the beautiful into knowledge, norms, and art. This happens in his work Critique of Pure Reason (1781), which introduces three separate forms of reason: the scientific, the moral, and the aesthetic. These three forms of reason each steer according to their own logic: scientific reason takes as point of reference the truth about the object and is particularly directed at the control of nature. Human action and consciousness belong within the realm of moral philosophy, while aesthetic reason encompasses art and the subjective experiences associated with art. With this trichotomy of reason, Kant introduces three separate expert areas that generate an important dynamism that may potentially penetrate and break down experience born of tradition as opposed to the given answers of the religious picture of the world. Moreover, Kant’s differentiation of reason into three different expert areas is a portent of some of the structural changes such as secularization, industrialization, and urbanization that characterize the modernization of Western society. These changes inherently demand enlightenment and social mobility, and they are built on a foundation of belief in progress and a certain degree of disciplining of the individual. The Public Library and Modernity This belief in progress as well as the demand for discipline is clearly visible in the library pioneers’ ideas on the objectives of the public library. Right back to George Ticknor, who was one of the founders of the first major public library in the world, the Boston Public Library, in 1850, the public library has been considered an agent of change as well as a stabilizing factor. Ticknor wanted a library that would be instrumental in improving conditions for “the common man” while at the same time protecting the latter against revolutionary activities [4]. This same tendency is to be seen in a Nordic context, where the public library was also considered as an institution that was to support enlightenment as well as social mobility and furthermore to counteract socially conditioned rebellion [3, 5]. This is similar to the views of the British library historian Alistair Black [6], who has argued in favor of the modern public library as having supported not only enlightenment, to the benefit of the development of the individual as well as society, but also an additional supervisory function for libraries. Black takes as his point of reference the French historian and sociologist Michel Foucault’s (1926–84) concept of panopticon. According to Foucault, the disciplining of the individual is an inevitable and inseparable part of the emerging capitalistic society. In connection with this disciplining process, supervising takes on an important role. Foucault finds the most extreme form of supervision in the British philosopher Jeremy Bentham’s idea from 1791 about a panopticon or inspection house: a prison built around an inner tower where the unseen jailers were able to watch the prisoners, who were placed in an outer circle of cells. This was a rational solution to the way in which a minority could watch the majority, while the majority could never be sure when they were being watched and therefore had to adapt their lives to the thought of continuous surveillance. This also means that the disciplining of the individual in the course of time is internalized: it moves from primarily having been an outer measure to becoming an inner form of self‐discipline. This principle of inner disciplining, which is a major characteristic in the modernization process, Foucault finds not only behind prison walls but also in military barracks, factory buildings, or the classroom. Black reads the same tendency in modern library design, where the circulation desk as well as the librarian’s table are often placed so that the staff can survey the entire library room. This kind of surveillance can be seen as a precaution when the libraries introduced open shelves and where the centrally placed (but not invisible) librarian needed to ensure that the library’s books would not be stolen. The new possibilities that are both part of modernity and of the public library demand a new form of inner disciplining, which, as far as the library is concerned, can be observed from its design as well as in the choice of materials. Differentiation of Society The development of the public library also supports another important characteristic of societal modernization: that modernity is characterized by an increased differentiation of various areas of practice. Modernity in practice brings about any number of independent fields or expert systems with their own logic. The development of natural science and art into independent fields is a paradigmatic example of this modernization process. Science’s differentiation as a field was, from the Renaissance and onward, a struggle against the religious doxa that regarded knowledge revealed in the Bible as being superior in relation to logical thinking and empirical experiences. The creation of a natural‐scientific field with relative autonomy in opposition to the church was a result of an alliance with the growing traders' class in the towns, which was in need of new technology, knowledge of astronomy for navigation purposes, and a new picture of the world for the capitalist way of life it was developing. The same tendency toward autonomy can be seen in art. In traditional society art was created by request from the church, the king, or a well‐to‐do citizen—and often for the purpose of praising God, king, or certain values. But concurrently with the development of capitalism, there emerges a real market for art, which turns into a commodity produced for anonymous customers. Art is hereby not only taken out of the contexts in which it has up till now been embedded; it also becomes more autonomous, with the result that art is not exclusively defined by the king or others requiring works of art, but to a greater extent by art itself. Like the development of natural science and art into independent fields, the establishment of the modern public library in Denmark can also be seen as part of the augmented differentiation of society. The predecessors of the public libraries, the parish libraries, were in fact a philanthropic project organized by the clergy in continuation of their church duties. The primary task was to turn the users, the agrarian peasantry, into good Christians as well as efficient farmers. So it was not a question of the parish libraries being carriers of modern thoughts on change and social mobility. On the contrary, the purpose of the information disseminated by the parish libraries was to serve God in accordance with the emerging new class structure. Therefore, the parish libraries were a safeguard against, rather than part of, the secularization that is associated with the European Enlightenment tradition [7]. It is a different situation with the public libraries, whose foundations were laid during the first two decades of the twentieth century and which, like other modern institutions of enlightenment such as open universities and museums, differentiated themselves by cutting their ties to the church. Just as we see a further differentiation between these new institutions of enlightenment in relation to tasks, target groups, and ideologies, we likewise can observe a further differentiation in the public libraries. First and foremost, it can be seen in relation to the classification of documents where an adapted version of Dewey’s universal decimal classification is more than a functional tool for storing and retrieval—it is also a symbol of modern society’s endeavors toward differentiation and putting everything in its rightful place. At the same time, classification, together with other specific library techniques, is an important link in the building up of libraries into a specific social area of expertise. Reflexivity Both the belief in development as inherently positive and the differentiation of society underpin a third characteristic of modernity: reflexivity, which concurrently with modernization becomes an increasingly fundamental condition for the individual as well as the institutions of society. Somewhat simplified, reflexivity can be translated as regarding oneself and one’s surroundings from a distance: to be conscious, but not necessarily reflective, in terms of one’s actions. The British sociologist Anthony Giddens operates with two forms of reflexivity that must be characterized as “ideal‐typical” [8, pp. 38–45]. The first is a reflexive regulation of action that is a common trait of all human action—that one relates reflexively to one’s surroundings. The other form of reflexivity is associated only with modernity, as it is a logical consequence of increased knowledge and a horizon of possibilities. This form is the differentiation of various expert areas and the belief in another and better future. Such reflexivity opens up for the recognition of the fact that things might be different, which is the very essence of modern reflexivity. In this way, on the one hand, the construction of the public library is the result of a reflexive process, as it represents something new and different, while, on the other hand, the libraries are themselves mediators of reflexivity. They are to empower the population, which is in itself a reflexive process, and furthermore the library does not offer unambiguous answers in this process. The libraries’ universal decimal classification system, which reflects modernity’s differentiation of separate expert areas, is an example of this, as the universal shelf mark system explicitly gives religious, technical, or social‐scientific answers. Although libraries do not directly appear in Giddens’s analysis of reflexivity, they are indirectly a piece in this understanding, as he finds that society’s reflexive level increases concurrently with our ability to store and collect information [9, pp. 207–8]. The Library in Late Modern Society The apparently unimpressive prefix “post” has in recent decades had a prominent position in the discussion of the present and the future society. At the same time, the abundance of definitions of “post” has rendered its exact meaning somewhat nebulous. One of the reasons for this is that the concept of postmodernity is often confused with postmodernism, which refers to stylistic expressions within various art forms such as, for example, architecture and literature. Postmodernistic characteristics can therefore be a mixture of various aesthetic styles, an absence of a hierarchical distinction between highbrow culture and mass culture, and the breakdown of the borders between art and daily life. The concept of postmodernity, however, which is our focus in this context, relates to a social‐theoretical isolation of the characteristics of the present society such as the question of whether we are witnessing an epochal shift [10, pp. 1–12]. Opinions on this abound: based on enlightenment notions, the German social philosopher Jürgen Habermas has described the modern as an incomplete project. Giddens speaks of a late modern society where some of the previously described characteristics of modernity have been radicalized, while the postmodern as a description of a new historical period can be traced back to the 1950s. Like Giddens, we prefer the concept of “late modernity” instead of “postmodernity,” and we regard a number of societal tendencies as an expression of a radicalization of something already in existence and not as an expression of something radically different. But whatever prefix is used to label present society, there is fundamental agreement that increased reflexivity is a central characteristic of present society, just as there is general consensus that increased reflexivity is an important dynamo in the understanding of societal changes [11]. The Posttraditional Society Giddens maintains that increased reflexivity is closely associated with what he calls the posttraditional society [12]. In a sociological and anthropological context, the concept of tradition normally refers to the epoch immediately predating modernity, which has constancy and circularity as distinct characteristics. Contrary to this, Giddens finds that it is more profitable to understand tradition in relation to the conception of truth, where the traditional is defined by one particular formula of truth. Tradition is thus not something static but, on the contrary, something that can be changed in the course of time. Although the modern project with its roots in the age of enlightenment was a confrontation with traditional ties, Giddens regards the time right up until the 1960s as a period during which modernity and tradition existed side by side. Instead of a religious formula of truth, this period is characterized by science, and in particular, natural science acting as a new form of tradition. But as opposed to before, it is characteristic of modernity that several traditions exist concurrently, such as in the notions associated with the concepts of people, nation, and culture [13, pp. 36–50]. When seen in relation to the emergence of the public library, this means that the library in itself, as well as its mediation, is an expression of increased reflexivity but one that is firmly anchored in the European Enlightenment tradition, which at one and the same time focuses on and limits reflexivity. In other words the library’s aim, contents, and activities in this phase of modernity have not been essentially questioned. The posttraditional society that Giddens studies from the beginning of the 1960s has to do with an undermining of the formulas of truth in different traditions. As opposed to the fathers of the Enlightenment tradition, who believed that increased knowledge about nature and society would make it possible to change the world for the better, the situation today is more complex and uncertain, as more knowledge does not equal more certain knowledge. According to Giddens, an example of this is the uncertainty associated with the theories on global warming where the experts disagree on the causes as well as the consequences of climate changes. Tradition has also been attacked, problematized, and undermined in relation to questions of family life, gender, marriage, and upbringing in such a way that the individual’s choice cannot today be made on the basis of tradition. The lack of tradition can also be perceived at an institutional level, where the public library is an excellent example. At the beginning of the 1960s, the public libraries were characterized by one defining function: enlightenment; one medium: the book; and a quality concept: the literary canon where quality was seen as something universal embedded in the individual work. However, as the rest of society’s increasing detraditionalization takes place, the stable perception of the library changes. This happened in Denmark in, for example, the journal Biblioteksdebat (Library debate), published by the Association of Younger Librarians (1965–70). The articles published here argued in favor of new quality criteria based on the users’ own needs and new and more extrovert forms of mediation that broke away from the more passive and neutral mediation that had up until then been the emblem of the public library [14]. This was a breakaway from the common ideal of equality, uniformity, and universality in the Danish library system in favor of more differentiated local library solutions. It was a challenge to the prevailing tradition within the library service that really turned the running of a library into a reflexive issue and which over time has meant that the question of what constitutes a public library is today not as self‐evident as it would seem at first glance. It is no longer only one overall function but several. Apart from the function of enlightenment, the library is also a meeting place; it acts as a cultural center and provider for smaller businesses in the local community. The book is now one medium among several. And last, but not least, today we are faced with a number of quality concepts. Literature appealing to a minority of readers can still be found in the library, but, compared with previous times, demand is taken more into account, just as the library also tries to consider the literary preferences of every section of the population. Quality is thus no longer only a universal entity but can also be observed in variation and demand. The present diversity of functions, media, and quality concepts has meant that suggestions as to the library of the future are manifold and point in all directions: some argue in favor of a reversal to the traditional library, others want to make the library more customer oriented, while yet another group wants to dissolve the library’s physical walls in cyberspace [15, p. 83]. As we have seen, the reflexivity that characterizes modernity is a condition that, on the one hand, determines the development in the public library and that, on the other hand, the public library supports by itself. In relation to the development in the public library, the increased reflexivity forms the basis for a deep‐rooted uncertainty that can make it difficult for the institution to maintain a concrete identity. This might be a problem, but at the same time it is important that we do not consider the complexity and plurality that form the basic condition for the public library today only as something problematic. On the contrary, the library’s strength and justification today might indeed be the very fact that it actually reflects and supports the individual cultural search processes in late modernity or postmodernity. In this context, the development toward an all‐embracing library we have witnessed during the recent decades has been of great importance to the present scale of library use. Today, when seen in terms of number of users, the public library is the most popular cultural institution in Denmark. Ambiguity of the Belief in Progress As described earlier, the belief in progress is a principal concept in modernity. In 1979 this concept was challenged by French philosopher Lyotard (1924–98) in his famous thesis on the dissolution of the great stories [16]. According to Lyotard, science in modern society is embedded in various great accounts of the journey of the human race toward a better future. Whether these stories carry headlines like liberalism, socialism, or enlightenment, their aim is the universal liberation of man. But, according to Lyotard, history has undermined the legitimacy of the great stories: Communism would safeguard the interests of the people, but these same people have opposed the Communist system. Economic crises and problems of distribution have shown that the liberal doctrine of the free market’s benefits for the public good has proved problematic—just as enlightenment, seen from a modernistic position, has gradually been transformed to entertainment, where indifferent quantity takes preference over universal quality in the struggle for attention. The dissolution of these modern liberation narratives results in a need for new forms of legitimization. The result will often be that judgment on results within the various areas becomes the legitimating aspect. This tendency is not difficult to relate to the Danish library system. Previously, the legitimacy of public libraries was associated with their enlightening function, which was primarily related to the building of quality collections, but, as libraries’ detraditionalization takes its course, performative rationality has become prevalent. For example, this can be deduced from the increased focus on lending figures, an extended use of other forms of evaluation mechanisms, and the introduction of various forms of performance contracts. These are all initiatives that focus on efficiency rather than rely on a value‐rational basis. At the same time, there is the aforementioned diversity of opinions on the library of the future, which can also be seen as a postmodern tendency, along with a greater concentration on what the library can do to legitimate its service, rather than on why exactly it ought to do precisely this or the other. A crucial question is therefore whether performative rationality in time will “overlay” the libraries’ ideological foundation, and, if this should be the case, can the focusing on rationality and efficiency in itself legitimize the libraries in regard to the rest of society? In relation to this problem, it is important to maintain that even if history has undermined the legitimacy of great stories and belief in progress, and enlightenment is consequently challenged, the public library still has a responsibility that goes beyond performative rationality. This responsibility of course concerns ways to support empowerment in present society. An essential task for the public library in late modernity or postmodernity could be to play a central role in the process of cultural diversity in relation to the development of a multiethnic society. In this connection mention is frequently made of public libraries as an alternative venue for ethnic minorities, just as a new study reveals that the professional identity of librarians is determined by an image of the public library as a free and democratic space for cultural encounters and intercultural socialization [17]. Also, it is obvious that the public library carries a certain responsibility in avoiding societal divisions in relation to the explosive development of information technology and increasing globalization. Last but not least, the public library could undoubtedly become a more active part of civil society and thereby participate in supporting democratic debate in a time characterized by a considerable overload of information. Dedifferentiation as a Postmodern Characteristic As we have seen, the differentiation of society in various expert systems is an important characteristic of modernity. But, according to sociologists such as Scott Lash [18], Mike Featherstone [10], and Bryan Turner [19], who in the early 1990s were prominent in proclaiming the postmodern society, we are witnessing the beginning of a dedifferentiation of society and, particularly in the case of Scott Lash, this is seen as a distinct characteristic of postmodernity. Lash is especially interested in the artistic field, where he perceives changes in production as well as consumption of art as catalyst for the dedifferentiation. One of the previously mentioned examples of society’s processes of modernization was the detachment of art from the contexts of life in which it formed a part—in other words, the fact that art became a specific sphere that is different from the rest of the world. But today this distinction between art and everyday life is being dismantled. On the one hand, ordinary objects from everyday life have been included in the collections of art galleries. On the other, we have been witnessing that the previous distinction separating highbrow culture and mass culture is under demolition. According to Lash, this dedifferentiation has been encouraged by the pattern of consumption in the new postindustrial middle class that would include employees in the expanding information and service industries and the rapidly increasing number of students. This concept of a new postindustrial middle class can be looked upon as very similar to the American economist Richard Florida's popular concept of “the creative class” [20]. This class possesses a relatively high cultural capital where the demand for cultural activities is increasing. The postindustrial middle class has, moreover, through a varied consumption of culture, marked a difference in relation to the old middle class that primarily cultivates modernistic art. The result of this, on the one hand, is a situation where everything can potentially be described as art or culture. On the other hand, however, the hierarchy between different art forms and isms is being demolished with the result that the distinction for the individual consumer of culture can no longer be expressed only by occupying oneself with a particularly exclusive form of art; it can also be expressed in the reception and contextualization of a multitude of expressions. In a Danish context, structural changes in cultural policy have also encouraged the tendency toward dedifferentiation in the artistic field. An obvious example of this is the political visions about more intensive cooperation between culture and business, as expressed in the report Danmarks kreative potentiale (Denmark’s creative potential) [21]. It is argued here that these two areas may be of mutual benefit. The development of trade can become more dynamic through a meeting of the innovation and creativity that, according to the report, characterize the cultural sector. In return, the cultural sector can obtain new sources of funding and knowledge about marketing. According to Lash, there is a close connection between the tendencies toward dedifferentiation and yielding autonomy [18, p. 263] that can also be observed within the artistic field. Since the establishment of the Arts Foundation in 1964, the main principle in Danish art policy has been the principle of arm’s length—the fact that the politicians have determined the framework for the allocation of funding, while the players within the artistic field themselves have apportioned the grants. This principle has helped secure a greater degree of autonomy for the artistic field, as the artistic production to a large extent has been directed at, as well as judged by, players within the field. But with the cooperation between culture and business life and the new rules for tax exemption of businesses’ purchase of art, players from external fields have to a greater extent than before begun to define the field. A similar tendency of yielding autonomy can also be detected in relation to the public libraries as a result of cultural‐political changes. Here, too, it has been a question of field‐external players getting more and more involved in defining the activities of the public libraries. With the changes in the library act of 1983, the former government budget reimbursements were replaced by fixed block grants for the municipal running of the libraries. This was symbolic for a decentralization of library policy, which in 1990 resulted in the abolishment of the State Inspectorate of Public Libraries. The consequence of these two changes has been that today it is more up to the individual municipality to decide how much the local libraries should be supported, with the result that the allocations for library service vary greatly from municipality to municipality [22]. Although it has never been a question of the arm’s‐length principle in Danish library policy, where the funding for the libraries has been distributed internally in the field, these cultural‐political changes have meant that the libraries have witnessed increased competition for grants, not only in relation to other cultural activities but also in relation to the entire municipal area. In the case of the public libraries (as with the artistic field), it is also possible to detect—together with the yielding autonomy—a beginning dedifferentiation. The many and diversified suggestions as to the future of the library are examples of this, as is the fact that the libraries’ boundaries in relation to the surrounding world are becoming more and more indistinct: today the library promotes other media than the book, while booksellers institute cafés that, like the libraries, encourage use on the spot. Internet cafés have also arrived with offers that could in some contexts be compared with those of libraries, while libraries themselves have become one of many venues for users of the net. Moreover, many libraries are designed and built together with other institutions—as part of a local cultural center, or, for example, together with schools or sports facilities. A key question in relation to these tendencies toward dedifferentiation is whether we are witnessing the beginning of a restructuring or perhaps even dismantling of the library as an independent field? There is no doubt that the borderlines between libraries and other neighboring fields will to some extent become blurred in the future, just as the high priority given to new media and the Internet by the public library, on the one hand, and commercial Internet cafés and bookstores’ growing interest in book cafés and the like, on the other hand, will probably change the common perception of the library. But at the same time it is characteristic that research we have carried out on the basis of qualitative interviews with library users and nonusers revealed how important the public library actually is as a physical place [23]. This is probably not least due to the fact that the public library is one of the very few remaining free public spaces in communities today. What seems to be important in relation to the tendency toward dedifferentiation is primarily that the public library becomes aware of the new and intensified competition between the public library and various competing offers. In a particular Danish context it is of great importance for the public libraries to be visible to the local authorities empowered to make grants because they often seem to be economically downgraded in comparison with other and more headline‐grabbing options such as a new theater or concert hall. In connection to this, there might not necessarily be a conflict of interest between a more prosaic wish for visibility and a more value‐based desire to create a basis for enlightenment and empowerment. Various cultural and social initiatives arising from the public libraries, such as being a venue for ethnic minorities, thus have the potential to fulfill both aims. A more general possibility might be that the tendency toward dedifferentiation as far as it concerns the linkage between the libraries and other public institutions or facilities actually can be seen as an opportunity to get in contact with the population to an even more considerable extent than is the case today. Conclusion Our aim in this article has been to emphasize the dynamic character between the development in the public library and society in general. At the same time we have tried to identify some of the problems and possibilities that characterize the public library in late modernity or postmodernity. There is no doubt that late modern or postmodern characteristics such as increased reflexivity, the undermining of the belief in enlightenment and progress, and the movement toward dedifferentiation have consequences for the public library just as the library in itself supports the development of these tendencies. In this situation it is of great importance that the public library should reconsider its value‐based origin and connect this to the reality of late modern or postmodern society. For example, there is no doubt that by attaching great importance to the value of cultural diversity the public library would correspond to cultural and societal tendencies in present society as well as to the main theme that characterizes the cultural policy of most of the Western democracies today. As we have seen, the challenges facing the public library are manifold, but by seizing the available opportunities the library can participate in providing a foundation for the individual in late modernity or postmodernity just as it once did in modernity.