Introduction Archival studies is one of the most rapidly expanding, interdisciplinary, and multimethodological areas of research within iSchools as well as library and information science (LIS) programs in North America, and the same phenomenon is occurring in comparable schools around the globe [1]. Beginning with a brief preamble on the development and maturation of professional archival education in the United States, this article highlights the unprecedented volume and richness of scholarship in archival studies that is now emanating from these programs. It posits, however, that while archival studies research has been flourishing within boundary‐crossing iSchools, archival education within both iSchool and library and information science programs still focuses too narrowly on the traditional paradigmatic aspects of archival science (i.e., the professional canon of theory and practice). As such, it fails to engage wider scholarship in ways that might help to broaden and pluralize the construction of archival education and practice and perhaps, by example, of the information fields more generally. Drawing upon the findings and recommendations of two recent research projects, we suggest ways in which archival education—both professional and research—together with pedagogy (i.e., how educational content is conveyed and internalized) can play a central role in promoting more reflexive and inclusive archival ideas, practices, and research. We argue that such reflexivity and inclusivity also encourage beneficial interactions with those in other academic and professional fields with shared interests or concerns. The article concludes with a brief discussion of three current educational initiatives that are seeking to address some of these considerations. Background on the Development and Nature of Archival Education and Research within U.S. Library and Information Programs The archival profession developed comparatively later in the United States than the library profession and considerably later than the archival profession in Europe, where formal archival education began as early as the late eighteenth century in Bologna, Naples, and then, in 1821 most notably at the École des Chartes in Paris. The development of a distinct professional archival field in the United States only began in earnest after the 1934 founding of the National Archives and the establishment in 1936 of the Society of American Archivists as an outgrowth of the American Historical Association, which itself was not founded until 1884. While the need for some form of archival education and training in the United States was acknowledged from the late nineteenth century onward, there has been continuous debate among both archivists and historians about the appropriate location, nature, and duration of that education. In 1938–39, Solon Justus Buck, publications director for the National Archives, taught the nation’s first archival administration course at Columbia University’s library school. In the following year, he cotaught a similar course for American University’s Department of History with Ernst Posner, a former senior archivist with the Prussian Privy State Archives who had recently emigrated to the United States after being removed from his position in Germany because of his Jewish heritage. In 1941, when Buck became the second Archivist of the United States, Posner took over teaching the course for American University on his own, joining the faculty of American University and eventually becoming dean. The American University program became the first formal, ongoing graduate archival education in the United States [2]. In 1958, however, at the annual meeting of the Society of American Archivists in Salt Lake City, Theodore Schellenberg, assistant archivist at the National Archives, and the man who would come to be viewed as the father of American archival theory, called for separate archival training courses incorporating archival techniques and principles to be taught within library schools. In 1960, he taught at the Archives Institute hosted by the library school of the University of Texas at Austin, thus initiating what was to become a half century of entrenched professional debate over whether archival science or archival administration should best be taught as a component of history or public history programs or of library and information science [2]. Either way, archival education was taught as an ancillary and practice‐oriented area of the larger field within which it was housed, as both the terms “administration” and “science” might indicate, and really only came into its own as a field of education and research in the 1990s. Prior to the 1990s, history‐trained archivists dominated the archival profession. Since that time, graduates from archival education programs located within library and information science and, more recently, iSchools and information studies programs have accounted for the largest numbers of entrants into the archival profession. With this change has come a new discussion about the nature and purpose of archival education. Should archival education focus on archival science, which “studies the characteristics of records in their social and cultural contexts and how they are created, used, selected and transferred through time” [3] and be based around practice‐based concerns, principles, and techniques? Could it also encompass disciplinary, transdisciplinary, and professional studies of topics relevant to archival ideas, roles, and interests, that is, broaden its scope into archival studies? A study of archival education programs by Elizabeth Yakel, published in 2000, demonstrated the considerable growth in archival education offerings within LIS and other information‐based programs [4]. However, that education was still quite traditional in terms of its content. By contrast, reviews of recent archival research indicate that archival studies appears to occupy much broader intellectual territory that can be located at various nexuses between the following: • texts (regardless of their media and format) that serve to record, document, narrate, educate, and entertain; • axiomatic constructs, such as evidence, memory, culture, identity, accountability, trust, ethics, space time, enterprise, and power relations; • processes, such as testifying, remembering, forgetting, representing, interpreting, investigating, adjudicating, storytelling, and believing; • technologies for communicating, recording, creating, disseminating, retrieving, socializing, monitoring, and controlling; and • structures and surrogates that summarize, represent, and interpret information content, contexts, behaviors, and requirements. While similar discussions have also been occurring about the scope of LIS education and research [5–7], we argue that archival studies research is particularly well‐situated within multidisciplinary iSchools—especially iSchools with faculty and students who are drawn from the social and human sciences and who encourage rich thinking about human, bureaucratic, and cultural, as well as technological, aspects of information. In other words, iSchools have been good for archival studies, and the reverse is probably also the case. Archival research that has emanated largely out of iSchools over the past decade has moved well beyond the single‐authored historical, survey, or case studies that used to predominate, as it seeks to address relevant questions arising at these nexuses. Today, rapidly growing cohorts of faculty and doctoral students in archival studies are collaborating bidirectionally with increasing numbers of researchers drawn from other disciplines and are employing, repurposing, and adapting methods from an unusually diverse range of fields, including diplomatic science and legal theory (e.g., contemporary archival diplomatics, critical race theory), business administration and computer science (e.g., business process analysis and metadata modeling), and anthropology (e.g., record keeping and archival ethnography) as well as library and information science (e.g., bibliometrics, empirical instantiation) [8]. Issues of archival concern, such as the nature and role of the archive in a postmodern or postcolonial world, and effective and appropriate cyberinfrastructure mechanisms for identifying, validating, describing, preserving, declassifying, and curating digital documentation are also increasingly being investigated or theorized by scholars across many fields in the arts and humanities, science, and the social sciences, often working within large‐scale collaborations. The Need to Rethink the Archival Paradigm Even with this innovation in the scope of the research questions being examined under the rubric of archival studies, professional education in archival science is still constructed around a small set of traditional ideas and practices (with the possible exception of the growing influence of the Australian‐generated records continuum concept [9]). These ideas and practices are predominantly derived from those of eighteenth‐, nineteenth‐, and early twentieth‐century Europe [10]. Record keeping and archives during this period had evolved to provide essential bureaucratic support and legitimacy for emergent nation states, colonial administrations, mercantile and evangelical endeavors, and even war efforts around the world. When archival education began in the 1930s in the United States, it was to Europe that instructors looked for models. In the twentieth century, Western ideas and practices became further rationalized and institutionalized through the development of national and then international standards and best practices, especially in the areas of archival descriptive and educational guidelines. Professional education and training (in some cases, with state‐mandated curricula), located variously around the globe within government archives, state‐sponsored archival schools, professional associations, as well as universities, have promulgated the resulting professional paradigm of archival science into the twenty‐first century without any substantial critique. If archival studies, and indeed, any other area of information studies, is going to be a relevant, useful, and effective area of research and practice in a globalized, digital, postcolonial, and increasingly post‐Weberian world, we would argue that the paradigm that supports its assumptions, and fundamentally its identity as a field, must be subject to continuous critical reexamination, empirical testing, and consequent reshaping. In the case of the paradigm underlying traditional archival science, such activities will help to ensure that it can be sufficiently robust and expansive not only to grapple with the archival implications of pervasive digitality but also—and this is the particular focus of this article—to address other social and political changes that are occurring in the world. The paradigm needs to be critiqued and expanded to ensure that it is both aware of and responsive to the nature, needs, and perspectives of local and global communities that heretofore have not been centrally addressed and indeed have often been marginalized by archival ideas, theory, and practices historically developed in support of the administrative requirements of powerful bureaucracies. The most systematic and high‐profile calls to rethink and restate archival theory and practice, and to delineate how these might interact with the interests of other information and disciplinary communities, have come in recent years from those who have been investigating the archival implications of digital record keeping or designing and operating digital libraries and archives. Systems designers and software developers, legal and accountability experts, and archival researchers and archivists are all grappling with issues such as how to define the parameters of a digital record, how to identify the processes and guarantees by which users come to trust a digital record, how to fix and set aside a digital record for future preservation and access, and how to manage and exploit record‐keeping metadata [11–15]. Digital library and archive developers are striving to integrate different kinds of bibliographic and nonbibliographic materials within a single or federated digital resource, as well as to implement technical and curatorial regimes that can support user trust in, ongoing access to, and manipulation of those resources [10]. In both cases, questions have been raised about what is the same and what is different between diverse types of resources; in what ways digital resources and creator and user practices remain the same or take on different characteristics from analogous nondigital resources and creator and user practices (if any exist); and which professional principles remain applicable and which need to be rethought. On the other hand, calls to reconsider archival theory and practice and to challenge the inertia that seems to surround so much of the archival paradigm have also come from archival academics and practitioners influenced by postmodern and postcolonial scholarship [16]. Recognizing that we live in a world that is far different from the one that existed when archival ideas and practices were codified, Sue McKemmish, Anne Gilliland, and Eric Ketelaar write that archival literature increasingly points to the need to develop archival systems that can represent multiple recordkeeping realities, encompassing or at least accommodating the differing and temporally‐bound world views of all those involved in the activities the records document, and providing meaningful access paths to all stakeholders. Writers also suggest that there is a need to re‐think definitions of records and archives that exclude orality, literature, art, artefacts, the built environment, landscape, dance, ceremonies and rituals as archival forms. Postmodern ideas are opening up the possibility of “refiguring the archive”. For example, in societies like South Africa, archivists are exploring “the archive outside the archival inheritance of colonialism, and later, apartheid”—the oral record, literature, landscape, songs, dance, ritual, art, artefacts and so on. [17] This is a very different landscape in which to prepare archival practitioners than that to which much archival education caters. It is one to which iSchools, with their interdisciplinary inclinations and multimethodological capacities, may be particularly well disposed. As noted above, until the last fifteen years of the twentieth century, professional archival education in the United States took place primarily within graduate history programs. Professional historians, since the rise of modern scientific history in the nineteenth century, have used archives more or less consciously to promote Eurocentric ideas and shape national narratives. For example, as alluded to earlier, in the United States, the development of the National Archives; the foundation of a national professional association, the Society of American Archivists; and the associated drives to establish a robust body of archival theory and practice and professional archival education were very much tied in with the development of the field of professional academic history. This, in turn, was very bound up with the apparatus of state and notions of statehood. Ian Tyrrell writes As part of this legitimizing project, scientific history showed the nation evolving from “planted” European antecedents. Some of these, especially the Spanish and the French, atrophied or disappeared, leaving more vigorous English versions as the successful transplants, the germ from which the nation grew organically. … In forging this genealogy of the state, historians were mindful of their own changing and insecure position within the state structure. The rapid political and economic reordering of American power post–Civil War did not seem particularly hospitable to professors. Not only did academic freedom cases in the 1890s reveal their vulnerable position … [but also] newly professionalized historians increasingly came from lower social classes than either their own predecessors in the universities or the patrician ranks of the amateurs. These new historians lacked clout in mass parties and business, and they imagined that their counterparts in Europe had more influence over government, the civil service, and public life than they did. [18, pp. 8–9] American historians, therefore, wished to play a role in shaping national consciousnesses. Tyrell continues: What was the key to merging imperial, regional, and local experience into a national stream of history? Academic history sought to colonize the state historical societies and universities with “scientifically” trained people with doctorates from universities. As editor of the American Historical Review and director of the Carnegie‐funded Bureau of Historical Research, [J. Franklin] Jameson took the lead in coordinating the local groups to link their findings with the national story. Jameson consistently advocated the primacy of the national over the local, doing so partly out of a deep desire to exhibit history’s wider significance and public usefulness. Not only did Jameson assimilate older traditions of local inquiry involving genealogy, oral history, personal reminiscences, and antiquarian documentary collections into a national research program, privileging printed documents over popular memory in the process; he put reverse pressure on local history, insisting that it reflect national trends because “local history” was “American history locally exemplified.” [18] In other words, archives, like all institutions, are constructs. Until recently, those constructs, with the aid of an uncritiqued set of archival principles and practices, supported the perspectives, needs, and interests of large bureaucracies such as governments, businesses, and religious organizations, and historical and cultural interests and industries as represented by academic scholarship, publishing, and memory institutions. Today, however, circumstances have changed, with the preparation of professional archivists taking place in the United States predominantly within iSchools and library and information science (LIS) programs. The changed circumstances raise a number of questions about the goals and effects of such education. For example, to what extent do, or should, those information‐based, increasingly multidisciplinary environments challenge the historically and bureaucratically driven intellectual and professional premises of archival science? Can we assess what has been or will be the impact on the professional field of archival science of the new research in archival studies occurring within these programs? And what, if anything, is the influence of archival studies specializations upon the iSchool or LIS programs in which they are situated? Another important factor that should be considered in archival education is that communities, groups, and individuals once absent from or silent in the official record (e.g., immigrant and diasporic communities, Indigenous communities, survivors of traumatic or life‐altering events) now wish to do their own archival construction or production—to capture their own, often nontextual, record‐keeping processes (e.g., through dance, song, or recitation) and generate their own narratives or to take control of their archival heritage relating to their communities that may now be located within the holdings of archival and collecting institutions [1]. To do so, they are bypassing traditional archives and archival practices, which they do not see as supportive or relevant, and are employing new techniques and technologies, such as video histories, documentary filmmaking, blogging, and social networking. How might more broadly based archival studies, as taught within iSchools and LIS programs, better support these shifting documentary imperatives and community initiatives? Conversely, what might iSchools and LIS programs learn from the experiences and exigencies of archival studies that might help them to promote pluralization and critical reflection across the rest of their education and research activities? Research Projects Seeking to Pluralize Archival Education This section discusses two research projects that challenge the status quo with regard to the scope and nature of contemporary archival education and, potentially, of all education in LIS programs or iSchools. Pluralizing the Archival Paradigm through Education Pluralizing the Archival Paradigm through Education, which began in June 2005, is an international research collaboration led by researchers at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) in the United States and the Caulfield School of Information Technology at Monash University in Australia. Participants have included archival faculty and students, faculty from ancillary fields such as anthropology, museum studies, and ethnic studies, and members of Indigenous and other ethnic and racial communities and marginalized groups. The project was funded by the University of California’s Pacific Rim Program to identify the scope and extent of archival education in the Pacific Rim and then to encourage research and development activities that would promote (1) culturally sensitive education of archival professionals in and from Pacific Rim communities and (2) the incorporation of the interests, needs, and cultural beliefs of diverse Indigenous, ethnic, and marginalized communities into archival education and research programs in that region. The project has employed surveys, focus groups, and research workshops to explore the state of archival education in Pacific Rim regions of North and South America, Asia, Australia, and Pacific Island nations and to identify possible ways to develop culturally sensitive curricula and appropriate pedagogies and practices. Data gathered through project surveys suggest that archival education in the Pacific Rim can be broadly characterized in the following ways: • Archival education in the Pacific Rim currently focuses on teaching international standards and best practices while targeting national sector needs, particularly national strategies for economic development, both public and private; • Teaching the management of electronic/digital records appears to be a top priority for most programs, followed by the paradigmatic aspects of contemporary archival theory and practice as promoted by the International Council on Archives and other professional organizations; and, • While there is recognition that different record‐keeping traditions may exist, for example, within Indigenous communities, these programs do not identify with or promote such traditions or indeed, any specific local or community needs and perspectives beyond those related to local government and enterprise [19]. Invitational focus groups were organized in Melbourne and Los Angeles in 2007, and additional open discussion forums were held at the International Council on Archives Conference in Kuala Lumpur and the Society of American Archivists Conference in San Francisco in 2008 in order to engage in multiparty critical dialogue on issues relating to how archival education in the Pacific Rim has sustained and should further support pluralization in archival practice and scholarship. Several key questions and themes emerged from these dialogues that participants wished to see addressed in archival education, and, by extension, in research and practice: • Who is best qualified to work with diverse and marginalized communities to address their record‐keeping and archival needs? What kind of skill set and outlook would be most relevant? How can students acquire the skills and knowledge to work in the community in culturally sensitive ways? How can professionals and researchers be prepared to cope, and help community members cope, with the trauma that may be associated with records? • What should be the role of archives in reclaiming and recovering community identity, memory, and history? For example, should archivists be trained to be activists? Should they learn how to develop metadata and design social computing environments that might support the presentation of alternate interpretations of archival holdings? Should they advocate for communities with nontextual records or intervene in situations where groups are being disadvantaged by record‐keeping or archival practices? • How can the archival paradigm be extended to include other ways of keeping records, for example, through oral traditions, and additional, often non‐Western constructions of key concepts such as records, evidence, ownership, time space, authenticity, and preservation? • How can archival curricula and pedagogy be made more culturally sensitive and responsive to diverse community needs? [1] This dialogue also led to the development of an action agenda, which among other points called for (a) the development of a statement of principles for inclusive, transformative record keeping and archival education that could be adopted by professional associations and used to inform course recognition/accreditation; (b) reconfiguring educational programs to be more inclusive, culturally sensitive, and diverse; (c) establishing a databank of resources to support inclusive, culturally sensitive education and research programs; and (d) developing the research agenda relating to record keeping and archival education, training, and scholarship that addresses the needs of marginalized communities [1]. Race and Remembering in a “Color‐Blind” Society: A Case Study of Racial Paradigms and Archival Education in Mexico In 2008, White conducted a study that sought (1) to provide insight on how communities of African heritage became absent from Mexico’s official record, (2) to describe Mexico’s archival education infrastructure and identify the role that education of archival professionals might play in addressing or contributing to these absences, (3) using the case of Mexicans of African descent in the Costa Chica (home of the largest Mexican community of African descent) to delineate ways of remembering in non‐Indigenous ethnic communities, and (4) to generate recommendations for how underdocumentation and the resulting absences of these kinds of communities from the archival record might be partly remediated by changing how archivists are educated. The significance of this study lies in part with contemporary ideas of race in Mexico, which are dominated by the concept of mestizaje (racial and cultural mixture). As the dominant paradigm, mestizaje has allowed for a somewhat unified idea of what it means to be “Mexican.” Although Mexican anthropologist Gonzalo Beltrán estimated that enslaved Africans (or remnants thereof) were one of the largest population groups of Mexican society by the mid‐eighteenth century, little or no reference is included in the country’s grand narrative [20]. After gaining independence from Spain, Mexico engineered a new national identity—one that considered itself to be mestizo (racially and culturally mixed). Mestizaje ideology permitted a sympathetic investigation of and linkage to the new nation’s Indigenous past. In doing so, other minority groups, such as Mexicans of African descent, were silenced and “erased” from the official historical and contemporary narratives of Mexican nationhood and national identity. Despite strong historical evidence that indicates a large African population in colonial Mexico, the archetypical “Mexican” is even today represented to be mestizo—the product of an unproblematic cultural and racial “mixture” of Spanish and Indigenous people with no acknowledgment of the nation’s African heritage. This situation is reinforced by official record keeping, which provides no way for Mexicans of African descent to identify themselves as such, even though their communities continue to experience racial discrimination and marginalization. White hypothesized that archivists—if they were professionally educated within a more reflexive and culturally sensitive archival paradigm, might be better prepared to understand how professional frameworks for appraisal, arrangement and description, preservation, access, and exhibition—have the ability to compound or redress some of the underempowerment caused by mestizaje [21]. Similar to the research findings of the Pluralizing the Archival Paradigm project, the finding of this study indicated that archival educators and professionals in Mexico are not being educated to address memory keeping, which is traditional in ethnic or Indigenous communities. Instead, archival education curricula focuses on teaching to meet international standards and best practices predominantly based on European record‐keeping practices and juridical traditions. The curricula also privilege national sector needs, particularly those relating to enterprise (i.e., national strategies for economic development, both public and private). Based on the results of survey data of archival educators and practitioners, semistructured interviews of cultural gatekeepers in the Afro‐Mexican community, and ethnographic data of the ways of remembering in Afro‐Mexican communities (which included ritual dance, corridos or ballads, and even food ways), a framework was developed consisting of six elements that would support systematically incorporating the interests, needs, and cultural beliefs of diverse communities into Mexico’s archival education curriculum: 1. Conceptual expansion (e.g., incorporating different conceptualizations of the record by different communities, particularly those with non‐Western epistemologies); 2. Embeddedness (e.g., locating field and service learning experiences within communities to gain a richer understanding of community needs); 3. Collaboration (e.g., partnering with community‐based organizations in efforts to cultivate equitable, mutually beneficial, long‐term teaching, learning and research partnerships); 4. Leadership, activism, and ethics (e.g., expanding the archival role in promoting the visibility of underdocumented communities); 5. Sustainability (e.g., planning and program developments that are sensitive to the community’s resources and relevant to its cultural protocols); 6. Reflexivity (e.g., critical examination of the body of knowledge comprising archival theory and practice but also of the role and standpoint of the archival instructor, scholar, or professional). [21, 22] Advancing Reflexivity and Inclusivity through Archival Education So, practically speaking, what can be done within archival education programs to nudge them out of their traditional scope and make them more responsive to the kinds of concerns and needs being expressed by underrepresented or marginalized communities, as well as more closely aligned with the intellectual territory now occupied by archival studies research? To support a critical sensibility and more reflexive and inclusive archival research and practice, archival education should seek to juxtapose and discuss both traditional and counterconstructions of the archive as it exists in and across time. Basing curriculum around the records continuum, with its multidimensional and space‐time framework, will assist students in understanding the individual, institutional, and societal aspects of archives, records, and evidence. Archival education should also incorporate thorough discussion of the intellectual lineage of archival concepts and practices and discuss, in both theoretical terms and using real life cases, the power implications of these concepts and practices. Postcolonial ideas and examples of the colonial archival endeavor should be introduced. Jeanette Bastian, for example, in noting that “post‐colonial scholars find that colonial records offer the voices of the master narrative but do not reflect the voices of the oppressed and voiceless,” suggests remedying this by framing records within their social provenance and a “community of records” [23]. Again, with real‐life examples and taking its lead from definitional work done with digital records, archival education should approach concerns regarding the nature and role of the archive and the record functionally and procedurally, rather than ideologically. In other words, students should be taught to understand the purpose of record keeping and archives in societies and then how to identify those procedures, “texts,” and collecting activities (regardless of form or media) within those societies that serve those purposes. A persistent problem in archival practice is that very little practice‐based research is undertaken. Few tested benchmarks exist to aid in evaluating archival activities, and many archives operate on the basis of unchallenged assumptions and inherited wisdom. This poses special challenges in the digital environment, where it is unclear whether traditional assumptions and practices continue to be effective and where one of the most difficult issues is defining conceptually, procedurally, and technologically, the parameters of digital records. All students should have training in research methods so that they may be better able approach their work empirically as well as critically. The question, however, is what sort of methods training is likely to be most effective for the kinds of issues they are likely to face as professionals or as researchers. While students should obviously be encouraged to take methods courses in areas that are most relevant to their career goals, there is no doubt that availability of courses in ethnography and in video and oral history would be valuable to those seeking to work in community‐based archives or in culturally sensitive settings. Management and policy curricula also need to challenge the notion of the big archival institution to which all records and collections will flow. Curricula need to address how nontraditional archives such as, for example, personal, community‐based, or Internet‐based archives should be organized and managed. This might involve discussions of new organizational and economic models for digital or special media preservation cooperatives. The curriculum should also address relevant policy in different national and cultural contexts (e.g., ownership and other forms of property and moral rights, personal privacy and national security, transnational movement of artifacts, and Indigenous sovereignty concerns) [24]. Beyond the curricula, there are also questions about how to teach (e.g., employing more case‐based and service learning), where to teach (e.g., within communities such as Indigenous communities where there is emotional support and intellectual context, rather than requiring community members to come to the academic institutions), and who should teach. The latter question raises a number of difficult issues for the field of archival science and for iSchools. The Pluralizing the Archival Paradigm project, as well as the recent Society of American Archivists A*Census, both indicate that almost all faculty in all the countries involved are drawn from similar social, ethnic, and racial backgrounds. Within the iSchools, at least, there is progress being made in terms of the disciplinary diversity of the academic backgrounds of faculty teaching in archival studies (although the diminishing numbers of faculty with professional archival experience is causing some concern within the archival profession). Because faculty have very similar backgrounds and were themselves trained within the dominant archival paradigm, how well equipped are they to advance the reflexivity and cultural sensitivity of their programs? We are not suggesting that ethnic and/or experiential diversity alone will make things better but, rather, that those types of diversity along with a more diverse range of theoretical and cultural frameworks and perspectives will result in a richer educational environment. Adjunct faculty have always augmented ladder faculty and helped to integrate real‐life perspectives into professional education. Bringing in teachers from a more diverse range of community as well as institutional backgrounds would also help pluralize the educational environment. Moreover, educational programs could go much further toward recognizing and entering into partnerships with traditional teachers within communities, such as elders in Indigenous communities, who have a standing and knowledge that is likely to be quite different from that of most academics. Examples of Implementations This article concludes by citing examples of three different efforts that are underway to address some of the issues raised in the prior discussion. Implementation A The UCLA Department of Information Studies has implemented several strategies to support a more culturally sensitive and responsive curriculum for all its master's of library and information science (MLIS) students, including those in its archival studies specialization. The MLIS program includes six required core courses, each of which must include components addressing aspects of the three MLIS specializations areas—library studies, archival studies, and informatics. Students are also required to select one from a minimum of three different research methods courses offered each year. Both the core course, “Information and Society,” and the introductory course in American archives and manuscripts provide students with a review of the intellectual lineage of the information and, specifically in this case, the archival science fields, as well as media theory (an area that can be further explored in electives provided through the MA program in moving image archive studies). Five years ago, the program first implemented a required core course entitled “Diversity, Ethics, and Change,” which includes elements drawn from cultural and critical race theory, as well as a significant service‐learning component whereby students are placed in nontraditional information settings, often within different ethnic or racial communities, to carry out information organization or consulting activities. Building upon that experience within the archival studies specialization, two new electives have been developed—one with an academic special collections perspective, “Collecting Community Materials,” and one that approaches the issue of community documentation from the opposite perspective, “Community‐Based Archiving.” The latter course, which also has a significant service‐learning component, partners students with community groups who are working to document their own activities or retain their own archival materials, either physically or digitally. The course addresses issues of cultural and language barriers—including obtaining entrée and building trust, notions of how an archive might be alternately conceived within that community and designed to support those notions, how to develop a support base for the archival endeavor, and economic and collaborative mechanisms for sustaining the archive and ensuring its preservation over time. Implementation B At the University of Oklahoma School of Library and Information Studies, which is in the process of developing a new archival studies specialization that draws in particular on the state’s Native American heritage, the core course is designed to introduce students to historical/theoretical foundations and key practices/terms/concepts of the archival professions. This is covered in roughly the first half of the course. During the second half of the course, students are introduced to the ideas of postmodernism, postcolonialism, constructionism (especially in the context of how histories are constructed), cultural theory, and pluralism. Those concepts are further explored in an archival context and are then used to critique traditional archival theory by using Indigenous, Afro‐Mexican, and Asian‐Pacific communities as cases. Implementation C In July 2008, a collaboration of programs preparing doctoral students in archival studies at UCLA; the University of Michigan; the University of Pittsburgh; the University of Maryland; the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill; the University of Texas; and Simmons College was funded by the Institute of Library and Information Services to provide two sets of four‐year doctoral fellowships in successive years. The fellowships are designed to encourage the development of new, diverse cohorts of educators in archival studies who are versed in contemporary issues and research methodologies and to implement annual week‐long summer Archival Education and Research Institutes (AERI) for doctoral students and faculty from the United States and worldwide. The goals of the institutes are to 1. Create a network and community of faculty and students to help mentor doctoral students and junior faculty. 2. Advance curriculum and pedagogical development in archival studies. 3. Further current research development through presentations, posters, and workshop activities. 4. Foster interest in future collaborations both nationally and internationally. The first institute took place at UCLA with 75 faculty and doctoral attendees and drew upon local institutional and research expertise and experiences, especially those relating to moving image, sound, and other media; ethnic, Indigenous, diasporic, and other community‐based initiatives; conservation and preservation practices; and digital record keeping and curatorship. The second institute will be held in June 2010 at the University of Michigan. Conclusion Concomitant with the rapid expansion of archival studies as an interdisciplinary and multimethodological area of iSchool and LIS education and research, we have argued for the need to rethink, transform, and expand the traditional underlying archival paradigm so that it is more reflective of the shifting cultural, social, technological, and political demands and changes that are occurring in the twenty‐first century. Arguably, and at the risk of gross overgeneralization, such expansion would never have occurred if archival education had remained predominantly located within history programs because it would not have had the same exposure to disciplines, technologies, and methods, as well as empirical research infrastructure, training, and funding incentives. Moreover, it would likely have remained focused on the historical and artifactual aspects of records and archives, rather than on the human, bureaucratic, and cultural systems within which records and archives reside and perform. Without such a rethinking and transformation, there is little doubt that the field would continue to expand, but it would likely result in archival studies being a less relevant, useful, and effective area of research, practice, and, indeed, activism than it could be in an increasingly postcolonial, digital, globalized world. Reflexivity and inclusivity in archival education, practice, and research will help to create opportunities for educators, students, and practitioners to gain a richer understanding of diverse user communities and their interaction with all forms of records and archives, in and across space and time. Archival studies may also thereby provide encouragement for other iSchool and LIS educators and researchers to examine more critically and with more cultural sensitivity the lineage and impact of the paradigms that they are applying.