THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Volume 73 OCTOBER 2003 Number 4 TO REPOSITION A RESEARCH AGENDA: WHAT AMERICAN STUDIES CAN TEACH THE LIS COMMUNITY ABOUT THE LIBRARY IN THE LIFE OF THE USERI Wayne A. Wiegand2 American libraries do three things very well: (1) they make information ac- cessible to millions of people on many subjects; (2) they provide tens of thousands of places where patrons can meet formally as clubs or groups, or informally as citizens and students utilizing a civic institution and a cultural agency; and (3) they furnish billions of reading materials to millions of pa- trons. For generations, the Library and Information Studies (LIS) commu- nity has devoted most of its attention to the first, but currently it is poorly positioned to undertake research on the second and third. American Stud- ies, on the other hand, is well placed to address the second and third, but has largely overlooked American public, school, and academic libraries as subjects of study. This essay invites American Studies scholars to develop an LIS subspecialty in order to help the American library community better un- derstand its present, so that it can more prudently plan its future. Arnerican libraries are ubiquitous. As of this writing, there are 16,180 public library buildings (including branches) in the United States (that's more than McDonald's restaurants), 3,658 academic libraries 1. This article is a revised version of two presentations; one was presented as the Harry Ransom Lecture, University of Texas at Austin, April 18, 2002; the other at the Philadelphia confer- ence of the Association of Library and Informatioin Science Research on January 22, 2003. I am indebted to Trysh Travis, Christine Pawley, John Budd, Mary Jo Lynch, John Carlo Bertot, and Chuck McClure for critical readitngs of this manuscript in previous versions. 2. F. William Summers Professor of Library and Information Studies and Professor of Ameri- can Studies, Florida State University, 254 Louis Shores Building, Tallahassee, Florida 32306- 2100. Telephone 850-644-8123; Fax 850-644-6253; E-mail wwiegand?lis.fsu.edu. [Library Quarterly, vol. 73, no. 4, pp. 369-382] ? 2003 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-2519/2003/7304-0001$10.00 369
370 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY (hundreds of which have extensive systems with multiple libraries), nearly 100,000 school libraries (public and private), and 11,500 special, armed forces, and government libraries.3 To a great extent, Americans have always liked libraries, but because libraries have tended to operate in the shadows of the nation's cultural landscapes they haven't clearly articulated why. Surprisingly, in 2003 librarians themselves still struggle to clearly identify what roles libraries play in their host communities. My own study of American library history, however, suggests that American libraries have done three things exceptionally well in the past century. In no particular order of importance, they have (1) made information accessible to millions of people on a variety of subjects; (2) provided tens of thousands of places where patrons have been able to meet formally as clubs or groups, or informally as citizens or students utilizing a civic institution and cultural agency; and (3) furnished bil- lions of reading materials to billions of people. To demonstrate how often libraries make information accessible at the beginning of the twenty-first century one need cite only a few statis- tics. Every year for the past five, college and university librarians have answered over 100 million reference questions-more than three times the attendance at college football games. Public librarians annu- ally answer nearly 300 million reference questions, a number that has been growing in recent years. Almost all academic and public libraries now provide access to the Internet (more than half of the latter offer classes on its use); almost all also now provide electronic access to refer- ence databases and full text periodicals. Americans visit these ubiquitous civic institutions frequently. The Of- fice for Research & Statistics (ORS) of the American Library Associa- tion (ALA) estimates that last year, like the previous ten, two-thirds of this country's citizens visited at least one public library at least once per year. Grade and high school students frequented school library media centers 1.5 billion times-one and a half times the visits of all people to state and national parks. Add in visits annually made to pub- lic and academic libraries, and that numberjumps to 3.5 billion-more than twice the attendance at movie theaters in this country. More than 16 million patrons visit academic libraries weekly, and in the past de- cade, per capita annual visits to public libraries have increased from 3.1 to 4.2. 3. Unless otherwise indicated, these and other statistics cited in this essay can be found in http://cs.ala.orgyourlibrary.factsandfigures.cfm; http://www.ala.org/ord/ plstat_trends .html (both accessed last October 20, 2002); and ALA Office for Research and Statistics, American Library Association, "Quotable Facts about American Libraries," "1998-1999," "1999-2000," "2000-2001," and "2001-2002." The "Quotable Facts" are wallet-sized trifolds.
TO REPOSITION A RESEARCH AGENDA 371 Also, patrons use library spaces for many purposes. In 1993, for ex- ample, the ORS reported that 35,500,000 children attended public library programs set up for them; seven years later these numbers jumped to 49,300,000. Some have even estimated that as many children participate in summer reading programs at libraries as play Little League baseball. In a survey of 1,500 public libraries serving popula- tions of over 5,000 that ALA conducted in 1998, 99.6 percent reported they hosted reading programs like story-telling, summer reading, and book discussion groups; 82.6 percent said they provided cultural pro- gramming like author presentations and readings, musical and dra- matic performances, and creative writing workshops. "Reading" is reflected in circulation data. For academic libraries, circulation has increased steadily in the past decade to nearly 200,000,000 items per year. For public libraries, per capita circulation increased from 5.6 in 1990 to 6.7 in 2001 (and LibraryJournal notes that in 2001 circulation climbed nearly 3% from the previous year [1]). In 1993 children accounted for 463,000,000 items circulated; seven years later these numbers jumped to 625 million. Last year, the ORS estimates, 150,000,000 Americans went to a public library to check out a book, and a substantial fraction withdrew scores of books during the year. Statistics like these clearly demonstrate that not only is the Ameri- can library (academic, public, and school) a ubiquitous institution, it is now, and for the last decade has been, a very active civic agency. LIS and "Useful Knowledge" In the past century-and-a-half, the LIS research community has done extremely well in focusing on the traditional library activities of provid- ing access to information on a variety of subjects. At the same time, however, it has narrowly construed the words "information," "learn- ing," and "education" by constructing definitions largely based on rules set down in the seventeenth century. That's when, philosopher Michel Foucault argues, a new order we now call "modernity" sepa- rated people's daily life experiences into work and leisure [2]. Over time the LIS community came to regard as most important the kinds of information that address questions related to work, or help people become informed citizens, intelligent consumers, and educated peo- ple. And from the seventeenth century on these kinds of information were often labeled "useful knowledge." Acquiring, organizing, and making "useful knowledge" accessible is what American libraries of all types have most wanted to do for centuries. For example, the very first order of books that Benjamin Franklin sent
372 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY to London in 1731 to begin the Library Company of Philadelphia con- tained no novels, but instead concentrated on dictionaries, grammars, atlases, histories, and works on science and agriculture that were "4suited to the tastes and purposes of young tradesmen" [3]. And today, because so much of that "useful knowledge" is being manipulated by informa- tion technology, the technology itself now largely drives the definition of "information" in the LIS lexicon. This is an understandable outcome of a discourse grounded on a pro- fessional structure that traces its roots to a late nineteenth-century curric- ulum Melvil Dewey designed into the world's first library school at Co- lumbia. That curriculum concentrated on two things-how to manage the library, and what professional expertise it was deemed necessary to develop and exercise in order to help library users get to the "useful knowledge" they needed. In every LIS curriculum today, one sees these elements given priority attention in core course curricula, far above any course one might categorize as "library as place" or "reading." But failure to include analysis of "library as place" or "reading" questions in its research agenda or its educational curricula prevents the LIS community from adequately understanding the social and cul- tural preconditions that frame the library's present. An inability to see these deficiencies can be traced to a flawed perspective occasioned by generations of professional library practice where the focus of librari- anship (and especially its research focus) has been professionally self- centered and focused by constrained definitions of "information," "learning," and "education." These narrowed perspectives have inevi- tably led the LIS community to think primarily about the user in the life of the library. To understand values the larger public assigns to the library, however, it might be more illuminating to focus on the library in the life of the user,4 especially in the areas of "place" and "reading," both of which have already found comfortable homes in American Studies scholarship. A brief glance at place and reading in American Studies scholarship will demonstrate the rich potential the field has for repositioning an LIS research agenda to look more closely at the library in the life of the user. Place These days one cannot begin to think about "place" without consider- ing the ideasJurgen Habermas develops in The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere: An Inquiry into a Category of Bourgeois Society [5]. Dur- 4. Doug Zweizig first suggested this perspective in his dissertation [4, p. 15].
TO REPOSITION A RESEARCH AGENDA 373 ing the eighteenth century, Habermas argues, the growing bourgeoisie sought to influence government actions by assuming control of an emerging "public sphere" of deliberation that eventually found an in- fluential niche between forces exercised by governments and market- places. Within this public sphere members of the bourgeoisie devel- oped their own brand of reason, and over time they created a network of institutions and a series of sites (e.g., newspapers and periodicals, political parties, academic societies, and associations) in and through which they refined this rationalized discourse into an expression of the 'public interest' that governments and markets dared not ignore. Once Habermas's theory established the foundation for understand- ing how a series of social and cultural preconditions shaped the public sphere, other scholars began to analyze the institutions and sites in which this rationalized discourse has been practiced by multiple com- munities and groups that have not been primarily concerned either with political ideology or with marketplace activities. And it is out of analyses of these institutions and sites that a refined concept of the role of "place" as cultural space has emerged. While American Studies scholars have harnessed Habermasian thinking in much recent re- search (e.g., [6]), LIS has yet to apply his constructs about the "public sphere" to analyze in depth the community role of "library as place."5 Hints of the possibilities for exploring some of the values communi- ties may be attaching to library as place can perhaps be teased out of conclusions made by Robert D. Putnam in Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American Community [9]. Here Putnam hypothesizes that over the past quarter century Americans have become increasingly dis- connected from family, friends, neighbors, and clubs like the PTA, the Elks, even political parties, thus depriving themselves of opportunities to share the "social capital" so necessary to civic and personal health, and so essential for building strong community bonds. Since about 1970, he says, Americans have largely been "bowling alone." In the book, however, Putnam does not consider libraries. "Experimental social psychologists have uncovered striking evi- dence," he notes, "that even the most casual social interaction can 5. Gloria J. Leckie and Jeffrey Hopkins have explored the roles two large public libraries in urban Canada play as social space (see [7]), but their analysis relies mostly on the work of Sharon Zukin. Kathleen de la Pefna McCook is one of the few LIS educators to recognize that the library has a significant role to play in the construction of community. See her A Place at the Table: Participating in Community Building [8]. Although from a "user in the life of the library" perspective, see also http://www.imls.gov/closer/htl 11202.htm (accessed De- cember 3, 2002), which describes a workshop funded by the Institute of Museum and Library Services for whichJoan Durrance and Karen Fisher developed tools for librarians to evaluate "outcomes" of community-based services.
374 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY have a powerful effect on reciprocity" [9, p. 93]. Putnam says "reci- procity" is an essential thread connecting people. By it he means "I'll do this for you without expecting anything specific back from you, in the confident expectation that someone else will do something for me down the line." Although he argues that our turn-of-the-century world is characterized by less generalized reciprocity, for most of the twenti- eth century (and statistics cited earlier in this essay provide no evidence to suggest that this is changing at the beginning of the twenty-first) libraries have been places where these casual social interactions have not only occurred, they have been encouraged. In fact, American li- brary history shows that as place-be it public, school, or academic- the library puts community reciprocity on public display. Putnam also laments that Americans' tendency to "bowl alone" is robbing them of opportunities to foster community honesty and social trust. Although thousands of libraries annually encourage millions of users to withdraw and return community-owned reading materials (on time, of course), the LIS research community has never analyzed in depth how the li- brary as place influences community honesty and social trust from a library in the life of the user perspective. "Social capital at the neighborhood or community level clearly has an impact on child rearing" [9, p. 305]. Statistics cited earlier about school library use and public library summer reading programs speak to this issue, but other images familiar to readers will amplify the point. How many of us-as children, parents, grandparents-have partici- pated in the selection of children's reading, viewing, and listening ma- terials from the library? How many of us-as children, parents, grand- parents-have read, viewed, or listened to these materials in some sort of family setting that has helped to foster bonds lasting a lifetime? Just by looking at this one dynamic-which again is only made visible when we look at the library in the life of the user-it is not hard to under- stand why library as community place seems so important to local neighborhoods. Reading Statistics cited earlier in this essay prove conclusively that the American library, whether public, school, or academic, constitutes a major source and site for the act of reading. Although they're not exactly sure why, librarians have always been advocates for reading. Scan any ALA graph- ics catalog and one will find more than fifty posters with media darlings like Shaquille O'Neal, Britney Spears, Oprah Winfrey, Marion Jones, Yo Yo Ma, and Susan Sarandon, each holding a book with the word "READ" displayed in huge letters at the top. Tens of thousands of
TO REPOSITION A RESEARCH AGENDA 375 these posters adorn the walls of this nation's libraries. And there's plenty of evidence about reading to demonstrate what patrons expect from librarians. In answer to a question ALA piggybacked onto an om- nibus 2001 telephone survey of 1,000 adults about what skills librarians most needed, 76 percent (the highest percentage of any category) said "familiarity with a range of books and authors." The survey also asked what activities people do at public libraries; 92 percent (also the highest percentage of any category) responded: "borrow books" [10]. Not only do LIS researchers largely overlook the value library patrons attach to the act of reading, they also mostly ignore a type of reading not considered "useful knowledge." Because popular fiction is largely considered a leisure activity-and thus mostly falls outside the bound- aries of the definition of "useful knowledge," formal education, or the concept of "learning"-the LIS community has not valued it highly as a professional service, despite the fact that statistics show what librar- ies do most is facilitate the reading of stories. Every year for the past half-century millions of public and school library patrons have checked out billions of novels. In public libraries, fiction generally accounts for two-thirds of total circulation. Yet LIS's professional discourse has barely noticed a growing body of scholarship in American Studies and other traditional humanities disciplines-now a quarter century old- that studies the subject of reading stories from a variety of perspectives, including literacy studies, reader-response theory, ethnographies of reading, the social history of print, and cultural studies. Reading schol- ars analyze who reads what stories, and why, by focusing on the com- plex ways readers from gendered, race, class, and creed-based informa- tion cultures use what they read and how they apply that reading in their daily lives. One of the pioneering works in this field isJanice Radway's Reading the Romance: Women, Patriarchy, and Popular Literature [11], an ethno- graphic case study that describes the multiple ways in which romances function in the lives of a group of women who patronized a particular suburban mall bookstore in the late 1970s. For the past twenty years now, Reading the Romance has gone through two editions, sold tens of thousands of copies, and has been assigned as required reading in scores of English, history, print culture and American Studies courses across the country. No one doing research on the social nature and act of reading can afford to ignore it. Yet a recent book published by ALA on romances and libraries does not even cite this germinal Ameri- can Studies text.' 6. See [12]. In another guide to romance literature, Kristin Ramsdell briefly mentions Rad- way's book, but does not attempt to tap Radway's analysis of romance reading to understand the multiple reasons so many library patrons read romances [13, p. 315].
376 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Benedict Anderson's Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism [14] has been equally influential in the schol- arship on reading. In the book he argues that people organize them- selves into large and small "imagined communities" in order to orient and affiliate with each other. Cultural texts of all kinds function as agents to help forge imagined communities by providing common sets of experiences, including the reading of shared printed texts, and meeting as groups on public property and in cultural spaces. Although Anderson's work has been heavily cited by scholars across the disci- plines, no one in LIS has asked the question: What role have libraries played in the construction of "imagined communities"? More recently, Jeremy Rifkin explores another perspective on infor- mation and learning that directly relates to the act and social nature of reading. In The Age of Access: How the Shift from Ownership to Access Is Transforming Modern Life [15], he argues we are moving from an "age of information" to an "age of access" at the beginning of the twenty- first century, and specifically access to a set of shared "cultural experi- ences" (Rifkin calls them "webs of meaning" [p. 7]) that focus on play more than work. Today, he points out, entertainment represents the fastest growing industry in the United States, and as the nation moves from industrial to cultural capitalism a work ethos is slowing giving way to a play ethos. "Play is what people do when they create culture," Rifkin says. "It is the letting free of the human imagination to create shared meanings. Play is a fundamental category of human behavior without which civilization could not exist" [p. 260]. Statistics show that libraries lend a lot of people a lot of popular fiction. If Rifkin is right, one might suggest that some of the most important contributions American libraries make to their communities can be found in the access they provide to the materials and space for play (and the learn- ing derived from it). Perhaps by focusing more research attention on the play that leisure reading fosters among users, we might deepen our understanding of why Americans like libraries so much. In Book Clubs: Women and the Uses of Reading in Everyday Life [16], Elizabeth Long takes reading's capacity to stimulate imagination and construct community through shared meaning a giant step further. She argues that the modern construction of the solitary reader ignores the thoroughly social base for some kinds of reading. She says that this infrastructure includes shared interpretive frameworks, participation in a set of institutions, and social relations. She marries her findings to cultural studies research, which notes that in the free will act of social reading readers "move into and out of the text," and thus "appro- priate" (others have even used the word "poach") meaning relevant to their own lives. Thus, because readers can control it, the act of reading
TO REPOSITION A RESEARCH AGENDA 377 becomes pleasurable, empowering, intellectually stimulating, and so- cially bonding. Elsewhere Stephen Greenblatt has called parts of this process "self-fashioning" [17]; Barbara Sicherman has called it "self- authorization" [18]. Long argues that these processes do not occur in a vacuum, but within the boundaries of a social infrastructure where group members mediate their interpretations with each other, their cultures, and their society. This may help explain why millions of peo- ple belong to hundreds of thousands of reading groups and book clubs, many now meeting on the Internet [19]. It may also help explain the increasing number of book festivals begun in recent years across North America [20] and the popularity of "one book-one city" reading cam- paigns initiated by hundreds of public libraries in the past five years [21]. Connecting the many threads of this scholarship to the library in the life of the user holds much promise. One example will demonstrate. Last year I coedited with Tom Augst a special issue of American Studies entitled "The Library as an Agency of Culture" [22]. In our "call for papers," we asked authors to "evaluate in new ways the cultural agen- cies performed by libraries in American life." In other words, we wanted to find out more about how people actually used libraries in their daily lives, especially as it related to reading. In a paper we ulti- mately selected for publication entitled "The Sound of the Civic: Noise and Urban Subjectivity at the New York Public Library," (pp. 23-41) author Ari Kellman makes a strong case for an essential role NYPL plays as one of the few places in a noisy city where one can expect a "disciplined" kind of silence. When I initially read through the paper, I immediately recalled intel- lectually stimulating days doing research there, right next to people who were very different from me, but who pored over the reading mate- rials they had requested every bit as intensely as I did. And I remember feeling a sense of community with these people in this controlled space, a feeling of community that transcended class, gender, race, creed, even age. This act of silent reading in this one place bonded us into this temporary community, and none of us had to talk to each other about our reading in order to experience that sense of community. All of us welcomed and expected the silence that room demanded in a building located in a much larger and invariably much noisier environment. Cost to LIS of Ignoring "Place" and "Reading" I would argue the LIS community has paid a price for looking too much at the user in the life of the library, for mostly identifying the value of
378 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY librarianship with the learning that takes place inside formal educa- hon, and for allowing technology to drive the definition of the word "information." For example, in chapter 9 ("Once and Future Li- brary") of Patience and Fortitude: A Roving Chronicle of Book People, Book Places, and Book Culture [23, pp. 386-424], author Nicholas Basbanes recounts the embarrassing fiasco that secretly sent more than 100,000 books to a landfill in San Francisco in 1995. In designing a new library, he notes, planners badly miscalculated the amount of space needed to accommodate the collection being moved from the old building. How could this have happened? Was the perspective of the people in charge focused too much on the user in the life of the library (at least as they saw it), not enough on the library in the life of the user (as users might)? Was their planning based on a vision of the library's future in which play and leisure reading were undervalued or ignored, and where technology drove the definition of the word "information"? Per- haps both? If the LIS community had taken the subjects of reading and cultural space seriously in the last twenty years, would what happened at San Francisco have even been possible? Perhaps the LIS community has drawn the ire of high profile critics like Basbanes and Doublefold author Nicholson Baker [24] precisely because it has been so con- sumed with technology that it has not adequately recognized the values people associate with library as place and the reading materials it has been providing for centuries. Unfortunately, in the next decade I do not anticipate LIS studies will be able to grow a corps of scholars who question professional ortho- doxy by pursuing the kinds of research questions addressing space and reading. And without this research, the LIS community will continue to inadequately understand its present and, as a result, will stand at a distinct disadvantage in its efforts to plan a future where more San Franciscos will inevitably surface. In an October 1, 2002, story in the Tacoma News Tribune, for example, correspondent Peter Callaghan re- ports that local Councilman Kevin Phelps wanted to eliminate local public libraries because "as we see them today" they " are somewhat of a dinosaur. . . too intensive on bricks and mortar." Fellow council members complimented Phelps for thinking "outside the box." Cal- laghan disagreed, however. "Let's think inside the box for a moment," he argued, "because it is inside those brick-and-mortar boxes where community lives. Tacoma's 10 libraries are the living rooms of 10 neigh- borhoods. They are places where latchkey kids can feel safe in the after- noons, where people without Internet access at home go online, where parents give their children the gift of reading." The irony here is that ajournalist-not an LIS professional-is saying things about the values the community places on a set of cultural practices in one of America's
TO REPOSITION A RESEARCH AGENDA 379 most ubiquitous institutions that today are sometimes mentioned as anecdotes in LIS curricula, but are little understood and hardly ever analyzed in LIS research. Potential Solution How to address this problem-quickly? Because American Studies has defined itself by providing space for interaction among multiple aca- demic disciplines for more than half a century, because it has pros- pered as an institutional site where literature (including popular litera- ture) connects to history and where history considers the everyday life experiences of ordinary people important enough to study, I would like to issue an invitation to American Studies scholars. I ask them to make a major contribution to the future of this low profile yet highly valued civic institution by taking up the public, school, and academic library as new research sites, by developing a subspecialty in LIS studies, and by applying what it now knows about American culture, learning, and play to studying the cultural agencies and practices of the library from the perspective of the library in the life of the user. I also encour- age American Studies departments on campuses across the nation to approach campus LIS programs, and suggest the possibility of cross- listing courses on the subjects of cultural space and reading in order to address huge gaps in current LIS curricula. Finally, I implore the LIS community to welcome any such initiatives. Both communities can only benefit. The potential for cooperation is promising. It took Tom Augst and me only two years to put together "The Library as an Agency of Culture." I think our efforts demonstrate that as an agency of culture and a place where community gets constructed in multiple ways, the library consti- tutes a vast and relatively untapped site for the kinds of research com- mon in American Studies where investigations into reading and cultural space are taken seriously. The LIS community needs to know-and un- derstand-why the already huge numbers of library readers and visitors continue to climb at the beginning of the twenty-first century, a particu- lar historical moment when many evangelists of information technology and ill-informed politicians and university and school administrators can only see a diminished future for this ubiquitous institution. With this issue of Library Quarterly, John Bertot and I take over as co-editors. In an editorial published in July [25], we outlined our edi- torial scope for the next five years. In it we noted that we wanted to reinvigorate the word "Library" in Library Quarterly by focusing on two perspectives-user in the life of the library, and library in the life of
380 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY the user. Consistent with the latter, we particularly call for cutting-edge articles from the humanities that link the scholarship on reading with the library as a reading institution, that explore community and indi- vidual uses of the library as cultural space, and that analyze the multiple and complex appropriations diverse groups make of library services, collections, and spaces. By focusing on this ubiquitous civic institution, American Studies scholars can teach the LIS community much about the cultural agencies and practices of American libraries, and by con- centrating on the library in the life of the user, can help reposition a research agenda to focus much more attention on the library's publics, rather than on the public's libraries. Library Quarterly is eager to con- sider any and all of this cutting-edge research for future publication. List of Potential Research Questions from a "Library in the Life of the User" Perspective Place A. What roles do libraries play as cultural spaces in the lives of their users? Studies of the multiple ways library places are used to: 1. exchange social capital in its various and diverse forms; 2. foster reciprocity; 3. facilitate social honesty and trust; 4. develop relationships (personal and group); 5. learn civic lessons; 6. construct "imagined communities. B. What symbolic values do people attach (as groups or individuals; as users and non-users) to libraries as places? C. Are there gender, race, class, age, creed, sexual orientation (etc.) differences in how publics use library places? D. Are these differences accommodated or exacerbated by current library practices and service priorities? Reading A. What roles do libraries play in the lives of readers? Studies of the multiple ways library reading materials function in the lives of readers, including analyses of the: 7. social bases for reading (and especially the reading of popular fic- tion); 8. construction of "imagined communities"; 9. sharing of cultural experiences;
TO REPOSITION A RESEARCH AGENDA 381 10. creation of "webs of meaning"; 11. processes of "self-authorization" and "self-fashioning"; 12. values readers place on reading for pleasure, empowerment, intel- lectual stimulation, and social bonding (circulation will demon- strate what kinds of reading generate most interest). B. Are gender, race, class, age, creed, sexual orientation (etc.) differ- ences evident in how readers select and read library materials? C. Are these differences accommodated or exacerbated by current library collection and circulation practices and service priorities? REFERENCES 1. Hoffert, Barbara. "Book Report 2002: The Amazon Effect." LibraryJoumnal 127 (February 15, 2002): 38-40. 2. Foucault, Michel. Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison. New York: Vintage, 1977. 3. Harris, Michael. "Franklin, Benjamin (1706-1790)." In Dictionary ofAmerican Library Biog- raphy, edited by Bohdan Wynar, pp. 186-87. Littleton, Colo.: Libraries Unlimited, 1978. 4. Zweizig, Douglas L. "Predicting Amount of Library Use: An Empirical Study of the Public Library in the Life of the Adult Public." Ph.D. diss., Syracuse University, 1973. 5. Habermas, Jfirgen. The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere: An Inquiry into a Cate- gory of Bourgeois Society. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1989. 6. Henkin, David. City Reading: Written Words and Public Spaces in Antebellum Newv York. New York: Columbia University Press, 1998. 7. Leckie, GloriaJ., and Hopkins, Jeffrey. "The Public Place of Central Libraries: Findings from Toronto and Vancouver," Library Quarterly 72 (July 2002): 326-72. 8. McCook, Kathleen de la Pefia. A Place at the Table: Participating in Community Building. Chicago: American Library Association, 2000. 9. Putnam, Robert D. Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American Community. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2000. 10. Available at http://cs.ala.org@lyourlibrary/launchsurvey.cf (accessed April 10, 2001). 11. Radway, Janice. Reading the Romance: Women, Patriarchy, and Popular Literature. 2d ed. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1991. 12. Bouricius, Ann. The Romance Readers' Advisory: 'The Librarian's Guide to Love in the Stacks. Chicago: American Library Association, 2000. 13. Ramsdell, Kristin. Romance Fiction: .4 Guide to the Genre. Littleton, Colo.: Libraries Unlim- ited, 1999. 14. Anderson, Benedict. Imagined Communities: ReJlections on the Origin and Spread of National- ism. London: Verso, 1983. 15. Rifkin,Jeremy. TheAge of Access: Horv the Shiftfrom Owvnership to Access Is Transforming Modem Life. New York: Penguin, 2000. 16. Long, Elizabeth. Book Clubs: Women and the Uses of Reading. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003. 17. Greenblatt, Stephen. Renaissance Self-Fashioning: From More to Shakespeare. Chicago: Uni- versity of Chicago Press, 1980. 18. Sicherman, Barbara. "Sense and Sensibility: A Case Study of Women's Reading in Late- Victorian America." In Reading in Amenica: Literature and Social History, edited by Cathy Davidson, pp. 201-25. Baltimore: TheJohnis Hopkins University Press, 1989.
382 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 19. Max, D. J. "The Oprah Effect." New York Times Magazine (December 26, 1999), sec. 6, p. 8. 20. Kawaguchi, Karen. "Fall Book Festivals: Four New Festivals Join the Swelling Ranks of North American Book Fairs." Publisher's Weekly 248 (August 27, 2001): 18-21. 21. Kinzer, Stephen. "Quiet Please: Chicago Is Reading the Same Book at the Same Time." New Yor Times (August 28, 2001), sec. E, p. 1. 22. Wiegand, Wayne A., and Augst, Tom, eds. "Special Issue: The Library as an Agency of Culture," American Studies, vol. 42 (Fall 2001) (reprint: Libraries as Agencies of Culture, edited by Thomas Augst and Wayne A. Wiegand. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 2002). 23. Basbanes, Nicholas A. Patience and Fortitude: A Roting Chronicle of Book People, Book Places, and Book Culture. New York: Harper Collins, 2001. 24. Baker, Nicholson. DoubleFold: Libraries and the Assault on Paper. New York: Random House, 2001. 25. Bertot, John, and Wiegand, Wayne A. "Editorial." Library Quarterly 73 (July 2003): v-ix.