THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Volume V OCTOBER 1935 Number4 METHODS FOR MAKING KNOWN TO INEXPERI- ENCED READERS THE RESOURCES AND FACILITIES OFFERED BY AMERICAN PUBLIC LIBRARIESI O wUR instructions are to present a survey covering pri- marily American viewpoints and practices with regard to one of the large and important aspects of public library work, namely, how to help readers to get what they want! First, then, it is well to recognize that American public libraries have been undergoing a marked development in their more intensive and purposeful services. This is doubtless both a cause and an effect. The American public, regardless of its libraries, is unquestionably more serious minded and ambitious than ever in its study and reading interests-this despite the counter-attractions of radio, movies, automobiles, and jazz. It is evidenced by the market for substantial books, the constant- ly increasing number and circulation of subject magazines, the flood of useful pamphlets, bulletins, and reports from a myriad of organizations; rapidly increasing enrolment of students in high schools, colleges, and graduate schools; organization of leisure-time avocations or hobbies by groups and individuals of every type and in every subject; and finally, by the general tendency of the American people to prepare themselves more carefully in the knowledge of their daily vocations, to read more I From a paper presented at the Second International Congress of Libraries and Bibliography, held at Madrid, Spain, May, 1935. 371
372 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY widely for general culture, and to encourage research in the in- dustrial, civic, and economic problems which face each com- munity and the organizations within it. It doubtless could be proved that American libraries have definitely influenced the whole movement through their services and their publicity. The writer has the conviction that the long campaign in this direction, on the part of many American public libraries, large and small, has made America more and more book conscious, increased the number of readers, given the pub- lic new reading interests, notably raised the quality of books borrowed, still more notably increased the volume and personal helpfulness of reference work done, and built up between this public institution and its constituents an understanding that on both sides is most cordial, appreciative, and helpful. But someone else could just as easily prove that, because high-school education has become more nearly universal, be- cause colleges, high schools, and even grade schools have changed their methods of teaching and now advocate supple- mentary required reading, reading for honors, projects and re- ports, instead of the old single textbook, the heavy demnand for library books has resulted from such causes. Others could doubtless prove that it is the publishers, with their widespread "high-power" advertising, who have had the paramount influ- ence. It might be taken as a principle that public libraries have a constant definite obligation to influence public opinion toward reading and study. They should discover effective means to this end. Some of these methods to interest the public at large in books and reading will be reviewed in this paper before consider- ing the devices which libraries are using to develop intensive and scholarly work on the part of a larger and larger proportion of the public. Much could be said as to the need for a co-operative campaign by publishers, booksellers, and librarians to keep the idea of books and the pleasures of reading always before the public. The public library's obligation is not primarily in the one direction of intensive service to a selected few, but is equally in
METHODS FOR MAKING KNOWN LIBRARY RESOURCES 373 the direction of attracting, serving, and stimulating many thousands of men, women, and young people who have not yet come to "purposeful reading" but are still satisfied with recrea- tional reading, sometimes of a far from meritorious character. In the United States, social classes are not plainly demarked. Americans take pride in the fact that no matter how humble a man's birth, occupation, home, or economic status, he is fully as deserving of social and intellectual encouragement and reward as are his more fortunate brothers in what might be called the upper levels of society. So-called "workers' education" is an unfamiliar term; it has made little headway in the United States because with us (a) "workers" are not a separate and de- fensive type as they are abroad; (b) they have only an emotional and only a slight study interest in current economics and so- ciology. "Workers' classes" (i.e., non-clerical or non-profession- al workers), except where locally and temporarily stimulated, are a rare phenomenon.2 Charles Compton, assistant librarian at St. Louis, in his book Who reads what? explodes the theory that there is a "proletariat" as such in America, so far as intel- lectual interest is concerned, and shows that the humblest worker, even unskilled, may be reading some of the greatest books, even Greek and Roman classics. Abroad the same holds true, and American librarians find that immigrants are often the most appreciative readers of really substantial literature. As Mr. C. Seymour Thompson says,3 it is "undeniable evidence for one all-important conclusion: that we can safely predicate no probabilities whatever from a person's parentage, training, en- vironment, or occupation, and very few from his previous read- ing, as to what he will or will not read with pleasure and with profit. That is why librarianship, in its advisory service to read- ers, is an art, and not a science." At Syracuse, New York, the library has in addition to the I3,500 "student" borrowers, i,686 stenographers, 596 machin- 2 See Morse A. Cartwright, Ten years of adult education (Macnaillan, I935), pp. 198-202. 3 "Library books reviewed-Who reads what?" Library journal, LX (January i5, I935), 65.
374 THE LIBRARY tUARTERLY ists, 622 nurses, 796 bookkeepers, 155 carpenters, 8o locomotive engineers, as well as public officers, beauty-parlor employees, letter-carriers, evangelists, tree surgeons, X-ray technicians, food-checkers, window-trimmers, and glass-bevelers, among the army of miscellaneous workers. Similar facts are recorded from many libraries. The writer would protest against overemphasizing either of the two parallel major purposes of the public library. He would make it a part of the philosophy of this paper that the public li- brary's function is a dual one: (a) to attract and serve the upper intellectual group who may be doing purpbseful and intensive reading or scholarly research work; and (b) to attract and serve the average man or woman passing by, or visiting the ten-cent store, or living in mean streets, or the man in better circum- stances, at the window of his club, whose intellectual curiosity has been dulled, but who may yet be led to get some of the beauty and pleasure and inspiration from books, if librarians will only take heed. Library workers cannot justly concentrate their attentions and affections on either clientele or service to the exclusion of the other. In fact, it is essential that public libraries, supported largely by community taxes, give much more attention to looking over their fellow-citizens as a large group of individuals, and to analyzing and understanding the intellectual interests and needs of people who do not yet come to the libraries, than to devoting themselves exclusively to the needs of any one special group. Should not library service start and be constantly in touch with studies of prospective readers themselves, nothing less than ioo per cent of the population of the community? Of the two diagrams in Figure 2, the first was prepared by the writer in 19I3.4 At that time, for a typical city, about 20 per cent of the population (A) was registered as library borrowers. After deducting the five sections at the foot of the column, namely, the illiterate (G), and those too young (F), then all those who find it difficult to get at library books (E), or do not have a sufficiently driving desire to use books at all (D), or can- 4Ibid., XXXIX (I914), 260.
Photo by A. AubrIy Bodine FIG. 1.-FORGOTTEN MEN IN MEAN STREETS The public librarian's function is to get good books into these homes, as well as to encourage purposeful book use among professional and literary persons He will not spend too much time dandling the idol of scholarship on his knee, whispering fondly to it of his devotion, while people in mean streets who have an equal claim to the library's affection and attention are being neglected.
METHODS FOR MAKING KNOWN LIBRARY RESOURCES 375 not find the time to read (C), there were still 40 per cent of the people of a community who might be, but had not become, ac- tive library users, with their own borrowers' cards. It might well be argued, and is admitted, that these percent- ages were only estimates (except item A') and had little scien- tific basis. The segment, "No desire for books," for example, might be as large as anyone wished to make it; its definition is elastic and it would overlap to some extent the 40 per cent of prospective users. Miss Miriam Tompkinss estimates that "Per- haps half of our adult population have practically no book reading habits. They are non-readers so far as the library is aware. Their reading efficiency is too limited for the majority of the books on the Felsenthal list." Her article divides all read- ers into five ability groups, and the group (3) of medium ability represents those who can read books from Miss Emma Felsen- 1913 A 1934 A L9S6,DY 20* aLR6e aDY 30% R6GIST6R6D B R6G 1ST.R3D0B B P ROS PECTIVEl 40% PROSPfCTIVf- u sRS U S6RS 30% no TIme TO ReAD 10% FORn BoSF --% no DnesIReo De Re FOR 50K 10/ 0 OTIM6T k 0 HORD TO Cs6TD E O K S E10%6 ? BOS BOOKS l0%?J TOO YOUNo IF5% TOO YOUnf F 5% CannFOT RkAD C 5 ) cAnnOT ReqD C; 5" tii{Library and 100% of the Population FIG. 2 5 "What is a readable book?" Booklist (American Library Association), XXX (March, I934), 195-97.
376 THE LIBRARY 9UdRTERLY thal's very excellent list of Readable books in many subjects (American Library Association, I929). Librarians are not too well aware of this section of the popula- tion which is not reached: "Apparently," says Librarian Kaiser at Oakland, "we attract now largely these who belong to the higher reading levels and shall have to catch our lower grade readers before we can experiment with them." And Mrs. Jen- nings at St. Paul, Minnesota, says: "I do not think that we have done enough in this particular field to be worth mention- ing." Let us all be as frank. If only one-half the population can read library books, perhaps our total of 6o per cent actual and prospective users is miscalculated. But the point is that with the creation of a mass of much- needed, simple, attractive, high-grade literature, perhaps an- other I0 per cent could be weaned from the funnies, the sport page, and the squawking (not the sound, but the mental effect) radio to useful, consistent, pleasurable reading. That people can and will read something is shown by a table resulting from an intensive study in a congested section of New York City.' In it the reading habits of the population over fifteen years of age were estimated as follows: 8o per cent read newspapers; So per cent read cheap story magazines; io-2o per cent, novels from rental libraries; Io-is per cent, non-fiction magazines; 20 per cent read library books. Obviously the task is to provide better substitutes for poor reading and to have in our libraries material that is worthy, even though it may not take the usual form of bound trade books. In the last twenty years there have also been obvious changes in two other segments of the foregoing diagram. Here again it is possible only to estimate. The amount of leisure time avlailable has greatly increased for practically the whole population. The segment, "Hard to get books," has been decreased, because in these same typical communities which have public libraries, 6 D. Waples, "Community studies in reading: I. Reading in the Lower East Side," Library quarterly, III (1933), 1-20.
METHODS FOR MAKING KNOWN LIBRARY RESOURCES 377 twenty years have brought an increase of branches, stations, and other distributing points for library books. Nevertheless, the contrast between the diagrams of 19I3 and of I934 is most encouraging. It shows that in the aver- age of typical cities the figure has jumped from 20 to 30 per cent for average registration, while (as shown by the statistics following) per capita book use has doubled. American libraries may credit themselves with having extended their service to a fourth of those "candidates" whom they should have reached twenty years ago, but had not. Instead of being satisfied with this gain, they may well inquire just what is to be the program for the years ahead in reaching other possible users. For the modern public library has very definitely this function of con- tinually drawing more persons into the circle of book use. The figures of library registration and circulation are worth presenting (Table I): The cities and towns of various sizes (Table II) are only a few which have gone far beyond the average. They offer inspiring examples as to what can be done under certain conditions. And there are numerous smaller coherent residential communi- ties where the book use exceeds these examples. TABLE I PZICENTAGZ 0F POPULATIOx CIRacuLAToN PER CAPITA 1914 or 1915 1933 or 1934 1914 Or 1915 1933 Or 1934 Cities of 200,000 and upward .. .....1933-27.St I915-2.811 1933--6. ot Cities of 75,000-199,000 .... ............ 1933-30 St .. .1..... . I 933-6. 6 t Illinois cities ( ,0oo-i io,- ??) .I914-I4.2 i932-32.6 i914-3.2* 193 -8.21 Illinois cities (IS?,ooo-o,ooo) 1914 27.6* I932-39-91 1914.33* 1932-7.3? Ilinois State Library, Extension Commission, 19iS. t Bulk'is of de American Library Association, XXVIII (1934), 249. t American Library Association public library statistics. Cities with population between ioo,ooo-ii 199,000, 1933. Mimeographed report. I Illinois State Library. Extension Division, Staiirtics of thelibraries of Illinsois, rV32. II Public Library of the District of Columbia, Annual report, J9I6, p. z8.
378 THE LIBRARY tUARTERLY What community conditions, or library services, make possi- ble such high enrolment of the population in certain cities and towns? Some of them obviously have to do with the general in- tellectual status of the community, as, for example, the high proportion of intellectual workers concentrated in the national capital city of Washington; or the large groups of leisured per- sons, enjoying years of retirement, as in the Pacific coast cities of San Diego and Los Angeles; the high general cultural interest and background, in cities like Springfield, Massachusetts, stim- ulated by strong institutions and societies, and by the presence of a large proportion of skilled labor of the specialized craft type. Many small residential towns of unified population type (e.g., Fort Wayne, Ind.), are in contrast to communities with concentrated uncultured groups, foreign backgrounds, colored, etc., whose individuals have not had equal opportunities. We note that in every one of these cases of exceptional results the library itself has a long-standing reputation for consistent, zeal- ous, efficient service, and a policy of encouraging both the ex- tensive and intensive aspects of its work. This description fits the great Cleveland library system, operating in a city of hetero- TABLE II REGISTRLATION PERt POPULATION CIRCULATION PERt CAPITA (PERCENTAGE) CRUAINPRCPT SPECIAL CITIES .PERCENTAGE_ 1914 or 1915 1933 Or 1934 1914 or 1915 1933 or 1934 Springfield, Mass. 93...... I9I 53o 1934-42.7* I91 5-79* 1934-I6. 8? Providence, R.I ....... . I915SI3* 1933-4011 I 91S5I . 2* 1933- 6.811 Fort Wayne and Allen County ............ t 1933-46.7** 1915-2.3t 1933- 8. I** Cleveland, Ohio .. .... I5-26* 1933-3711 191 5-4 -49* I 933-10.911 Westfield, Mass. 1912I - 7t I934-43.8$ I9I0-3.6t I934-1 5. 6t Flint, Mich ........... . ............ I933-45-8 ............. I933-I0.4* American library annual, r915-r6. f Letter from Fort Wayne. (Registration in 1915 was for five-year period.) I Westfield Athenaeum, nnusual repors, r934. I Springfield city library, Annual report, 1p34. I Bulletin of tht American Library Auociation, XXVIII (1935), 249. * American Library Association, public library statistics. Cities with population between Ioo,ooo and 199,000, 1933. Mimeographed report.
METHODS FOR MAKING KNOWN LIBRARY RESOURCES 379 geneous population of which a large proportion has an uncul- tured background. The population background for library service is greatly in need of further study; little has been done, even after we include the highly valuable studies made at the Graduate Library School of the University of Chicago, and elsewhere. It is not to the credit of the profession that such studies have been some- what misunderstood and are not yet appreciated. True, at the beginning some were not soundly based on practical knowledge of library book stocks, or services, or administrative problems. The appended list (No. i) shows some of the accomplishments of the last ten years. The next aspect of the subject is of equal importance and has been equally ignored until recently. I refer to public dissatisfac- tion with library service. Thousands of men and women who have actually brought themselves to the decision to go to their library to borrow a book or to undertake some reading or study, cannot get what they wish in the form they wish at the time they need it. These dissatisfactions fall chiefly under the fol- lowing four heads: i. Most recreational, cultural, and informational books in li- braries are too difficult for the average reader. The length and size of the books are forbidding, words too long, illustrations lacking, typography and appearance uninviting. If one were to take the hundred most outstanding characters in history, for example, and assemble the most popular books about each, he would quickly discover that for half these characters there is no book at once authoritative, written with literary skill and interesting to the average person who enters the butcher shop or the ten-cent store, the man who works with his hands in a fac- tory or on the farm. Just why this should be so would warrant an interesting study in the psychology of authorship. Authors need not let themselves down to an uninspired state of mind in presenting an inspirational subject; this would defeat the pur- pose. In inspirational as well as in cultural and informational topics the author should try to express himself in words, terms, and ideas not too remote from the average man. Writers may
380 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY still have beauty, may charm and inspire; clarity and simplicity do not imply mediocrity. Distinction and atmosphere do not rule out definiteness and detail. The King James Bible and Lin- coln's writings outweigh Henry James and Gertrude Stein. Libraries feel so constrained to pamper the literati with James Joyce and the current poseurs, that they overlook the solid folks who still appreciate plain common sense and the sincere out- pouring of genius. The difficulty of finding the desired books of a cultural sort is illustrated by three typical cases: Pasteur, by Vallery-Radot, is too long, detailed, slow moving, too scientific for ordinary readers, whereas other attempts to popularize are amateurish and ineffective-not one meets the requirements. Among an assorted carload of biographies of Abraham Lin- coln, not one is exactly satisfactory. Sandburg's is too much em- broidered with his own ideas, its vocabulary too elaborate and complicated, the whole life not covered. Nicolay's is too solid and lengthy. Dale Carnegie's has plenty of action but little literary value and many of the impressions given are superficial. No one with real genius, sufficiently moved by the facts and the man Lincoln, has subordinated himself in the great task of nar- rating and revealing the Lincoln story in easily understood language and present-day concepts and with true charm and style. For general history we might discuss Wells's Outline which has sold so successfully. But this has been among the large group of readers on a level higher than that which we are con- sidering. Van Loon's Story of mankind is most successfully pre- sented-short words and sentences, units of time and progress of events emphasized by separating them. This book meets nearly every test, in spite of a certain self-conscious, annoying flippancy. Parsons' Stream of history is better sustained in treat- ment. Its defects are a certain overdetail and failure to show periods and developments distinctly enough. If read through with attention it leaves a truer and more coherent picture than Van Loon.
METHODS FOR MaKING KNOWN LIBRARY RESOURCES 38I In the field of informational books, also, there is great lack of adequate material on hundreds of even the most important subjects. In the field of technology, for example, books are like- ly to be expensive, too long and elaborate, full of mathematical formulas-written, in short, for advanced, trained specialists. In many occupational subjects there is no satisfactory book. The mail-order houses have set a good example in their instruc- tional pamphlets on plumbing and electric wiring. In fields where processes, machinery, and commodities are mentioned, American readers are misled and disappointed by having to read English books, or foreign books in translation. In other subjects, of course, such as the pure sciences, and certain hand crafts, the books published in other countries are no less useful and often much better than the American. In fact, as to format and style of presentation, America has nearly everything to learn about really worth-while books that will appeal to the uneducated adult. If one goes through a few pages of the list of occupations enumerated in the United States census, such as power laundry work, machine woodworking, or the needle trades, he will find that on a large majority there is no adequate specific instruction for operators, based on current practice. On the other hand, H. D. Burghardt's Machine tool operation (2d ed., McGraw-Hill, i9i9-22) and A. R. Bailey's Handbook .... for stationary, marine and Diesel engineers and firemen (Goodheart-Willcox 1932), are handbooks which the ordinary worker finds practical- ly helpful, possibly because these trades suppose a fairly high intelligence and concentration. So are the "Audel" manuals on electricity and the building trades. The workman and the foreman in the paint, ceramics, and general chemical industries, have to depend on such highly tech- nical studies as Maximilian Toch, Chemistry and technology of paints (Van Nostrand, 1925); A. B. Searle, Clayworkers' hand- book (Lippincott, 1929); E. R. Riegel, Industrial chemistry (Chemical Catalog Company, I 933). All are far over the heads of most men who work in overalls and even of the "white-collar" men who have had no technical
382 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY training, though Riegel is an especially excellent practical book for the next higher group of readers. In a number of American libraries highly trained "readers' advisers," with unusual book knowledge, are available for the individual reader to consult. They talk fully with the reader and find out his individual difficulties and the types of books needed. Readers' advisory work is so large a subject that we cannot discuss it in this present paper. The part it may play in readers' help is very definitely enumerated in such statements as those by Charles W. Mason,7 Marjory Doud,8 and Jennie M. Flexner and Sigrid A. Edge,9 and that from the readers' adviser's office of the Cleveland public library, where special record cards have been provided to note (i) their efforts to analyze and dis- tinguish various groups of readers, their education, race, age, interest, experience, etc., and (2) the type of books read and enjoyed by these readers, with their reactions to specific titles. Other cards record the efforts to analyze or distinguish reading ability of various groups. Both records bring out such difficul- ties as those in the mechanics of reading, lack of understanding, limited vocabularies, etc. To what point can a public library afford to go with this study of its individual patrons, except for occasional samples? The object, of course, is to provide more intelligently the correct type of reading, and ultimately to have new books and new types of material created. 2. Most library books are too long delayed in their arrival and availability. It is only within the last four or five years that many American public libraries have been making a concerted effort to come more promptly to their decisions on book selec- tion, to secure advance copies of the books themselves, or find competent advance opinions, and to try, as special libraries are attempting, to have their books within their buildings and ready for the public on the same day that the books are avail- able in the bookstores. Anything short of this service, at least as to books of timely importance or in popular demand, will be 7 Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, Thirty-eighth annual report, 1933, pp. I7-24. I The Readers' advisory service of the St. Louis public library, 1929. 9 Readers' advisory service (American Association for Adult Education, 1934).
METHODS FOR MAKING KNOWN LIBRARY RESOURCES 383 considered inexcusable at the end of another decade. Libraries will realize more and more that they are not holding their own with other agencies that dispense printed matter. In the annual reports of several libraries, beginning in 1929, mention has been made of the increasing attempt to speed up, a purpose which in no wise implies any lowering of standards. 3. There is the seemingly unavoidable lapse of time after books are actually received until they have been accessioned, classified, cataloged, etc. In many libraries a month or two passes before the books are on the shelves. Such delays are fatal to public satisfaction. Another decade will either stamp them out or place American libraries on the defensive. Inexpensive pamphlets, reports, bulletins, government documents on cur- rent economic, social, and civic problems, especially those which deal with some local question that interests the public at the moment, must be ordered, received, made ready, and pub- licized as though the library were competing with the newspaper or the bookstore. The American Library Association Commit- tee on Documents, under the leadership of Dr. Kuhlman of the University of Chicago, is now making a survey with recom- mendations to simplify and quicken this part of library work. It has already published two yearbooks of great value, and should translate its results into a practical illustrated handbook of methods for small libraries. 4. Libraries are also severely criticized because they can find no way to have available nearly enough copies of popular new books to meet the peak demand. This demand rises rapidly at first publication, stimulated by reviewers' acclaim and by pub- lisher's advertising. In three months it has subsided, generally, and in a year's time the curve is down close to zero. Just how to meet this sudden brief demand without a vast investment of public tax funds for short-lived books is a baffling question; pos. sibly there is simply no answer to it. At the present time failure to get recent books is the major source of annoyance to the public. If there is no solution, then at least a campaign of edu- cation is indicated, so that the public may understand and be at least partially satisfied.
384 THE LIBRARY tUARTERLY This problem of sufficient copies of worth-while fiction (and some non-fiction) goes along in the public mind with the more embarrassing one of refusing to supply what English librarians often refer to as "tripe." It raises the perennial question of the function of the American public library in supplying fiction of no earthly literary or cultural value. One way to settle it is to withdraw to an upper room, take out our little brass idol of "scholarship" and. warm and dandle it on our knees, hoping that the world will notice our erudition and culture. Does this settle it? Meanwhile the public at large betakes itself to increas- ing numbers of commercial circulating libraries. If we are to keep the mass of American readers within the helpful construc- tive influence of our public library service, we will continue to look upon our function as that of supplying all the book needs of the people. We will nevertheless draw a line at the "tripe," but will give such prompt, full, interested, and sympathetic service on good current fiction that the publir will depend on the public library. Public library rental collections are hardly any- where developed to their full scale of operation; too few libraries look upon them as "on the main line." We shall consider the growth, the existence, of commercial libraries with their indis- criminate stock (in morals as well as literary values) not with complaisance, nor as an excuse for us to abdicate our trust, but as a reflection upon our effectiveness, a proof that we have placed false literary and intellectual values above the great so- cial value of the public library. Our own library rejoices in hav- ing reduced the number of new fiction titles purchased to only two hundred and fifty a year. Perhaps we have gone too far. After traveling through England, large cities, and little villages, and seeing the appalling mass of "tripe" under the very nose of the whole nation in commercial "libranres," and the compara- tively small public-library use of worthy fiction and non-fiction, one prays that American libraries may solve this problem wisely. To these chief difficulties should be added many minor ones, such as those noted by Douglas Waples:I0 the perplexities and "Op. cit., p. 13.
METHODS FOR MAKING KNOWN LIBRARY RESOURCES 385 irritation of a card catalog, strangeness of subject headings, the inability to smoke, lack of reading privacy, distance to the libra- ry, time restrictions on loans, fines, inconvenience of library hours, distractions of the array of books on open shelves. These specific difficulties do not bulk so large, however, as the general inarticulateness of the readers and a lack of sympathetic imagination on the part of some library assistants in interpret- ing these readers' wants. In several large libraries assistants are given instruction (at circulation department staff meetings, for example) on how to help readers clarify their desires and express themselves exactly as to what they wish from the library. All of this suggests how essential is a comprehensive study of present and prospective library users, their backgrounds, atti- tudes, and desires, why they do and do not use the library and its books, and the difficulties they have in finding the types of material they need. What has been done and what specifically has not been done in this field? Studies to date have been concerned with the analysis of the population groups using the library (foreign-born, white, and colored), and with the sex, occupation, and age grouping of registrants; the character of the community (industrial or resi- dential; white-collar or professional population; good or bad housing; provisions for education and recreation); and with the area which a branch library serves. (See appended list, No. i). A self-survey of actual service in a library was made at Balti- more in April, I935, partly occasioned by the preparation of this paper, partly as a basis for creating certain "aids to readers," which was the original topic of this paper, and partly to assem- ble definite facts on which to base a more insistent demand for increased library funds. For five days adult readers in certain departments were asked to check a detailed questionnaire telling whether they did or did not get the desired material; if not, why; for what purpose they were going to use it; and whether or not they were familiar with the card catalog and such indexes as the Readers' guide. The 17,317 persons entering the central library included repeaters, so that only 8,430 questionnaires were returned. Of this number
386 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 68.4 per cent reported getting what they wanted, 26 per cent could not be satisfied, and 5.5 per cent found a satisfactory sub- stitute. Disregarding the substitutes, 3i.6 per cent could not get what they asked. Of these, 65.4 per cent found the book wanted was out, and 20.4 per cent found that the library did not have the book at all; i.e., practically 86 per cent of the 3I.6 per cent who were disappointed could charge it up to lack of mate- rial, leaving only 4.4 per cent of the total number of patrons who were disappointed because of some shortcoming in the service itself. Table III shows the general purposes which brought these 8,430 individuals to the central library and 2,007 individuals to five branches. TABLE III Central Branches High-school or college required reading . 24 4 27.9 To find out something about one's job.. . 10. 5 3.0 For other serious reading ..............1 i6.3 I4.8 For relaxation or entertainment ...... . 33 9 52.8 Incomplete or other reasons ............ I4-9 I .5 Approximately 7 per cent in the last group, judging from mis- cellaneous reasons given, would largely classify as serious read- ing. The rest did not report on this item. The total results show 50.2 per cent serious readers; 37.5 per cent seeking relaxation; and I2.3 per cent not reporting on this item. Though approximately three-fifths of our readers claimed to be able to use the card catalog, we suspect that the number who can effectively use it is much less. One-fifth said they did not know how to use it. Only 28 per cent were familiar with the Readers' guide. On the subject of "tools" our inquiries were somewhat superficial; much more study of this phase of the library's work is evidently worth while. Many adult readers made a definite request for talks and printed guides to help them find their way in the library collection, notwithstanding the fact that as large a stock of "live" books is as easily and
METHODS FOR MAKING KNOWN LIBRARY RESOURCES 387 simply available on the open shelves of this library as in any library in the country. The records of this survey are being studied further. While re- sults brought out strongly the need for many more duplicates in the book stock, both in technical and in recreational fields, they also show clearly the need for more individual help for the aver- age reader if he is to get the full benefit of the material which is actually in the library but which he can only reach through the barrier of a complicated catalog, a confusing classification sys- tem, and general inexperience in getting at information buried within the covers of a book. The true effectiveness of various departments in satisfying readers is, of course, not reflected by the superficial reading of the figures in Table IV. The popular library, for example, has the impossible task of meeting fiction demands. Its returns in Table IV are somewhat misleading, because readers who came with no specific titles in mind, or with several fiction titles of which they found none, but did find some novel they liked, were classed as getting what they asked. This procedure, adopted to reduce the task of the recorders, and on the theory that readers are not as intent on specific books for leisure reading as for "purposeful" reading, made these figures inconsistent with, and higher than, the rest. The Baltimore self-survey reveals a situation doubtless typical of that in many other libraries. To the writer it indicates that though American libraries have gone far beyond the mechanical handing-out of books, and in some cases have been criticized for giving readers too much individual help, we are still far from meeting actual needs for reader help and must have more assistants, highly educated and trained. Further, that much in- expensive reader training and help in printed form should be supplied by all libraries to all their patrons is evident. In many localities reader interests have been analyzed to de- termine the amount and character of the reading of different groups and the source of supply; the relation of reader interest to actual reading; the changing habits and tastes; subjects of greatest interest to certain groups; and the factors influencing
388 THE LIBRA1RY QUARTERLY the choice of reading. We still lack sufficient data in most of these fields to arrive at any final conclusions. Techniques are still needed for further studies. An attempt is now being made to find some way of determining scientifically the reading inter- ests of specific groups. TABLE IV BALTIMORE SERVICE SURVEY SUCCESS IN GErriNG WHAT OF THosE NOT READERS THEY CAME To GET SATISFIED DEPARTMENT Percent age Percentage Percentage Total Found ercentage Percentage Becaus Because Ttl What Satis- Not Boose Bcause Returns They factory Satisfied Were Not in Asked Substitute Out Library Popular library . 2,777 70.1 8.2 21.7 62.7 22 . 7 Industry and science. I 291 68.8 3.6 27.6 60.3 22.6 Business ..... .... 471 68.6 2.7 28 .7 79 7 13 S Civics ............ .. . 502 62. I 5.4 32.5 65.2 25 . 3 Education ..... . 486 65.4 8. 5 26. I 66.7 17.3 History, travel, and biog- raphy . 1,048 64.3 4.1 31.6 77.8 1.17 Literature .............. 736 6I.8 5.9 32.3 72.9 17.8 Art ......... ..... 436 62.6 3.2 34.2 55.3 26.9 Maryland .94 78.7 2.1 I 9.2 50 30 Reference .589 84.5 1.9 13.6 35.! 25.3 Total central 8,430 68.4 5.5 26. I 65.4 20.4 Branch 5 ..... .. . 3II 59.5 5.5 35 54 35.7 Branch 7 ..... ........ 498 78.3 5.4 I6.3 50 33.3 Branch i I .490 73.5 11.4 I5.1 50 43.8 Branch 12 ............. 275 6i.8 8 30.2 59.1 36.l2 Branch 13 ............... 433 6I.4 II.I 27.5 69.5 29.3 Total branch. 2,007 68.3 8. 5 23 .2 57.4 35.4 Grand total. IO,437 68.3 6.I 25.6 63.9 23 2 When all this is done, however, it will only emphasize, no doubt, the lack of suitable reading materials for many groups and types of mind now neglected. There are many librarians (the writer is one) who hope that further studies of this type, expensive of both time and money, will be planned only in con- sultation with librarians. The great educational foundations in America are interested
METHODS FOR MaKING KNOWN LIBRARY RESOURCES 389 in "the provision of printed materials for adult education." The term "adult education" in America means one thing to formal educators: they conceive it only in terms of group or class in- struction. To librarians it includes that indeed, but it means also the reading and study of books by individual men and women prompted largely by their own initiative and persever- ing without the aid of class or group stimulation. Charles W. Eliot, Harvard's famous president, has said, "Our youth should read, read, read. Science may facilitate the use of the senses in acquiring knowledge through motion pictures and the radio. But I do not believe these will supplant the surest process of instruction-reading." The bulk, the intensiveness, and the effectiveness of this self-education easily surpasses that of the comparatively small numbers herded into classrooms and counted. In this matter of "provision of printed materials" librarians as well as workers in the field of formal and informal adult edu- cation have long been concerned with the dearth of material. The Sub-Committee on Readable Books of the American Libra- ry Association is responsible for two commendable lists in the attempt to find books which can approximately be called read- able for the average reader (the "Hoit" and "Felsenthal" lists). (See list No. 2, appended.) But a glance through these makes even more evident the small number of really readable books available in many subjects. To define the problem more clearly the committee has prepared a list of references as to "Some specifications for readable books."", A recent conference on this subject, participated in by repre- sentatives of adult education, libraries, and publishers, brought out the fact that a small amount of material of the desired sort is now available in ten-cent stores and on newsstands, largely overlooked by librarians. It was also noted that on the conti- nent such literature is much more available. The American Li- brary Association Booklist for 1933 ("Seventy good ten-cent 1I See Booklist, XXXI, No. g (May, 1935), 281-82, and What makes a book readabk (University of Chicago Press, I935), by Dr. William S. Gray of the University of Chicago, who has studied the elements contributing to readability.
390 THE LIBRARY Q,UIRTERLY books," pp. 25-28) lists a long series of juvenile books in ten-, fifteen-, twenty-five-, and fifty-cent editions, some of them beau- tifully done in colors."2 The same development is due for sim- plified adult books. The encouragement of more good titles and of better typography and illustrations for the chosen texts would make a desirable program for some organization or foun- dation to foster. For adult literature the material ranges from dollar and other inexpensive reprints of more expensive fiction and non-fiction titles, down to five- and ten-cent titles too cheap in appearance and quality to warrant inclusion in any library, but having enormous sales. Two excellent collections of adult poetry can be bought in ten-cent stores. A series of hobby pamphlets, published by Leisure League of America, New York, at twenty-five cents each, partially meets our specification: not too long, simply and well written and illustrated. The English art-craft booklets published by Studio are similar in style and purpose. That a score of different booklets are selling so actively from newsstands and drug stores may justify the hope that we may rise some glorious morning and somehow see with astonished eyes: Attractively printed thin books on Soo subjects About I25 to I50 pages, 5X7 to 6X9 inches One-third of the space given to illustrations, well explained by long cap- tions Plenty of drawings and diagrams (if subject warrants) Written by authorities Simple vocabulary Short paragraphs Enthusiastic, active style and feeling Literary value and inspiring tone when subject warrants Vital enough to influence people's thoughts for years to come Bound or board covers designed to give dignity and appeal Sold everywhere for not over twenty-five cents Permanently financed to pay for adequate writing and illustrating, and for continuous promotion and revision 12 See also "The Ten-cent juvenile," Publishers' weekly CXXVI (1934), 1745; and "Rural schools in Alabama get ten-cent books," Bulletin of the American Library Association, XXIX, No. 3 (March, 1935), 153-54.
METHODS FOR MIKING KNOWN LIBRARY RESOURCES 391 A thorough search would discover little literature that meets the foregoing requirements. The "genius" who edits such a series must have a rare combination of abilities; specify them for yourself! That one public library appreciates the value of simplified material, not in bound book form, is shown by the excellent mimeographed list, "Readable pamphlets on subjects of general interest," Cleveland, 1934-twelve pages of titles on current economic issues and thirteen pages on self-education for voca- tions, for the home-maker, and in cultural fields. This list shows what can be done to call such material to public attention. One of the methods for better book service is the daily ad- ministrative problem of correlating book interests among vari- ous departments of a library so as to benefit the reader most completely. Under ideal conditions there is what one might call a "circle of interest," which links together the minds of all who have any- thing to do with the new library book, from the moment its title is discovered in some advance announcement or advertise- ment or review until it is in the reader's hands. At the first mo- ment a curiosity is aroused that continues until those responsi- ble have gathered, from reviews, advertisements, and other sources, sufficient knowledge to (a) compare it with other books on the same subject, (b) forecast the probable usefulness of the new volume, (c) decide before it has been seen whether to order the new book, at least on approval. If kept, it is then acces- sioned and added to the collection and passes through the process of classifying and cataloging, and at last reaches the public. We may well stop and look back over this series of processes and the number of different minds which have contributed their part. The question is, have they all been connected; has the knowledge cumulated and come intact and in full to the readers? Though one person may discover a title, several may gather the facts about it, make a comparison of quality and scope, and help to decide whether the book is worth having. At that point the order department routines intervene. Unless precaution is
392 THE LIBRdRY QUARTERLY taken the initiator may lose touch with the book and overlook in the pressure of other duties the volume he asked for. This recital suggests the value of placing the responsibility of book selection on those who are to use the books with the public. An administrative librarian who cannot possibly keep in touch with borrowers and students, or a group of book selectors detached from the public, can hardly carry on this work adequately, though in the writer's mind such a librarian must himself be a voluminous reader and student and be familiar with the new D ISCOV6A HmanD TO ReaDR tnFOkMATion RCAMDR'S comPA Ae ASSISTAnT// Ut \ LISTIno Afl/ CIRCiLE OF DEIMqT annfOTATIflCcu r- Dm4n CATALOG IN A NEW InFORmATjon \ lIBRARY CLASS IFY D O OK. 6C DID6 KC,..P w AMDETAI LS FORk GXAMInEF OR[)DPB ARRIVES5 FiG. 3 books, their announcements and reviews, their publishers and prices, and the response of readers to them-in short, a librarian must assuredly be acquainted with his own stock in trade, must set aside a certain portion of his time for books, and must keep the balance, correct eccentricities, prevent delays, and assure himself of economies. In this, as in all other parts of the li- brary's work, he must assure himself not only of mere economies in buying, but of the prompt availability of books and their full- est usefulness in the community. "The circle of interest" (Fig. 3) involved in all this is in most libraries only a theoretical one. But even in the order and cata- log departments the workers should have their imaginations trained to envision the possibilities of each new book, so that
METHODS FOR MAKING KNOWN LIBRARY RESOURCES 393 they may -understand the comparative need for promptness in getting the book through the process and call it to the attention of such assistants, other than the originating department head, as might have special interest in it. At the public catalog of the larger library, and at the general service desk in the smaller one, the person on duty must be cog- nizant of the arrival of the book ready for use, and the more he personally knows about it the greater is the appreciation and the wider the use of the book by readers. For this reason a number of libraries add to their catalog cards clipped or typed summaries or extracts from reviews. Every means of instruction for the reader on how to use the public catalog, and how to find the books and make the most of them, adds immeasurably to the satisfaction he gets from the library. For this reason many of the larger libraries in the United States have another contact point with the public, namely, their information desk. This, while usually combined with the functions of the catalog assistant, has the more specific duty of seeing that readers do not go out of the library without having been personally asked whether they found what they wished. It may be safely predicted that services of these types will be increasingly common; their absence is one of the weak- nesses in public library service in America and abroad. Even these services, however, are not the end. By the mere mechanics of listing new titles in weekly or monthly bulletins, posted in the library, or sent out in inexpensive mimeographed form, or printed in elaborate bulletins or in the newspapers, the great mass of readers have their attention called in a somewhat wholesale manner to new titles and new realms of knowledge. At several libraries, e.g., Cleveland, Los Angeles, Newark, Washington, and Boston, there is a constant production and distribution of carefully selected and appetizingly annotated book-lists on a diversity of subjects. Such lists, discriminating, more attractive, and on a far more extensive scale of production and distribution,v will become a regular part of American public library service within another decade. Why, for example, should the enormous investment of money, time, and book knowledge
394 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY that is hidden away in that great volume, The Standard catalog for public libraries, 1934, lie practically idle so far as the public is concerned, when it might be split into little two- or four-page lists on a thousand different subjects, and handed to tens ot thousands of readers who without such guidance stand in awe and confusion before the miscellaneous array of books on library shelves ? It is significant and surprising that the two persons best known to American readers for their "practical" book knowl- edge are not connected with libraries at all. Miss Bessie Gra- ham's Bookman's manual is used in most library schools and in the training of bookstore clerks. Mrs. May Lamberton Becker, who conducts the "Readers' guide" question column in the New York herald tribune books, gives sound advice every week to hundreds of inquirers as to the best books on the greatest vari- ety of topics. It is greatly to be hoped that within the near fu- ture such services may be looked upon as a primary function of public libraries. To recapitulate, the circle of knowledge and information and interest in books cannot be rounded out to full effectiveness un- less each of those persons who have had a part in the total transaction transmits her enthusiasm, her curiosity, her knowl- edge, her imagination as to the usefulness of a book, through de- partmental walls, to every other involved, and until finally this accumulation of knowledge, suggestion, and stimulation is passed on to the reader himself. For him everything has been created and operated, as the final recipient of all these materials and services, for which he pays. Up to this point this paper has brought out the fact that as yet less than half of America's potential book-using population is enrolled for library use, that prospective and actual readers are seriously handicapped by certain library attitudes, by de- lays in getting material promptly into use, by the impossibility of having sufficient copies of popular new books. It has also noted the systematic studies already made, of cultural back-
METHODS FOR MAKING KNOWN LIBRARY RESOURCES 395 grounds, capabilities, and attitudes of those who do and who do not use libraries, their individual needs as to services and mate- rial, their encouragement by the production of more appropriate material. Finally, it has called for organization within each li- brary of a continuous interest in each new book, shared by all who play any part in its preparation. It has suggested an equal- ly lively interest in individuals who compose the vast non-libra- ry using public. The title of the paper implied that the emphasis should be on a survey of the methods now actually followed by libraries in instructing their present inexperienced readers who ask for help as to the resources and facilities now actually available truly a fascinating subject. We shall review a large mass of material gathered from a request sent to libraries in cities of 200,000 and upward and selected smaller cities. In a sense it represents a typical cross-section of public library service and methods in the United States, except that in smaller communities smaller staffs make such devices and procedures less common. Here again one may imagine the excellent results from having the state com- missions or the national association (through permanent ade- quate funds) supply these thousands of smaller libraries with material such as we shall now review, in a simple and more general form. We are not attempting to cover what is called "general libra- ry publicity," the information issuing from American libraries to their newspapers or in the form of exhibits, circulars, or other- wise, the publicity that has to do with the finances, administra- tion, and problems of the library as an institution. That is an- other subject. It would take a goodly volume to summarize the effective de- vices which a number of American libraries are using that do come definitely under the title of this paper-devices to help readers in using the resources of the library after they get there. First of all there are library book-lists. Even these we shall not take up in detail, and it is essential to remember that dis- tribution to prospective users is juSt as important a function as the making of book-lists. The mass of lists published by Ameri-
396 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY can libraries within a single year on all manner of subjects is so great that one wonders why libraries do not combine on co- operative lists usable by all. Twenty years of correspondence with American librarians indicates that many are not interested in the distribution of book-lists, no matter how excellent, unless prepared in their own institutions-a strange attitude, truly, but gradually disappearing, while co-operative lists are becom- ing more and more common. While the preparation and distribution of such book-lists cer- tainly comes within the scope of this paper and may be con- sidered one of the primary functions of public libraries, the sub- ject is better studied through actual examples than by general- izations in a paper like the present.'3 Librarians can see that readers need guidance on book selection every day if we watch their struggles at the shelves, confronted by the vast array of old, uninteresting, or second-rate books which every library must perforce buy. A study of the lists produced each year leads inevitably to the conclusion that short lists, from ten to twenty-five titles, with inviting descriptive notes and attractive typography, are most effective. Further developments of sig- nificance in this field will doubtless be in the direction of cen- tralized preparation and publishing of lists on four or five hun- dred different subjects in greatest demand, both cultural and practical. Our survey confines itself to the intensive instruction given to present and prospective readers as to the materials they can find at the library, but of which they are not aware, or do not know how to make use of when found. All of this can be taken up under three headings: i. Instruction of young people, in and out of school, in the use of books and libraries 2. General instruction of adults in the same subjects 3. Publicity and instruction for adult students as to the library's book collec- tion and its reference services and tools. 's Three members of the Baltimore library staff are working on a manual on Booklists and bibliographies; their editing, annotation and typography.
METHODS FOR MAKING KNOWN LIBRARY RESOURCES 397 I. INSTRUCTION OF YOUNG PEOPLE IN THE USE OF BOOKS AND LIBRARIES A generation of school children well instructed in the use of books and libraries and instilled with the joy of reading will produce a future clientele of active adult library users. This statement, so often made by librarians, must be seriously quali- fied, for the fact is that a considerable proportion of young people, even in good library communities, do not get across the gulf of upper high school to resume public library use in adult years. The psychological reasons for this are still unexplored. During the last few years instruction in the use of libraries, giv- en to pupils in the public and private schools of America, has developed to an extent nothing short of surprising, and in gen- eral it is of high quality. In some cities the instruction is given by the board of education through its school libraries and Eng- lish teachers; in others by the public library, either through the school libraries which it may maintain, or by classes visiting at the neighboring branch libraries, or through material the public library provides for teachers in the junior and senior high schools to include in their regular English courses. The organi- zation of this instruction depends on the general relationship be- tween the public library and the public-school system, and espe- cially upon who operates and directs the school libraries. In several cities, where it has been initiated by the public library, it has eventually been taken over and made a part of the public- school course of instruction. With the spread of required stand- ards, and the supervision of school libraries by state units, it seems only a few years distant when the topic will be included as a college entrance requirement. It is highly desirable that libra- rians take active steps to bring about this result. It seems log- ical that those who have been taught in school how to read, should be instructed in the methods and materials that will help them to keep on reading and learning as long as they live. Universal instruction concerning books, children's literature, and the use of libraries is another goal to be won as soon as pos- sible in all teacher-training institutions.
398 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY A splendid example of this work is the twenty-three page pamphlet, Outline and instruction in the use of books and li- braries, in the Cleveland public schools, published by the pub- lic library for the board of education in I929. This is carefully arranged by grades, the material presented according to the ca- pacity of the children, working up from a second-grade pupil's first visit to the library, when he gets a borrower's card, through the parts of the book, title-page, index, the making of the book, the classification and arrangement of books and the library, the use of dictionary and card catalog, encyclopedias, the magazine and other indexes, the more advanced reference books, atlases, yearbooks, handbooks, and the like. The faculty of one of the Cleveland high schools has published a sizable book, Study mastery, and in this are several chapters on the use of reference books and reading habits. A scenario and film form a definite part of the instruction given. The Introduction reads, "This picture is designed to show you the resources of our school li- brary and to help you find material in preparing your daily work and to use books speedily and easily." A generation of instruction of this sort will make quite a different "book popula- tion" from which to draw adult library-users. Many cities are doing similar work. Newark was one of the pioneers, its classes of I904 giving rise to Marjorie Gilson's Course of study in 19IO, which was elaborated into the one hun- dred and thirty-five page How to use a library: a course of study by Louise Connolly, published in 19I7. This forms the basis for the courses still given in the Newark schools. Los Angeles has a "library hour" for every class above the second grade at least once a term; the primary aim is "to establfsh an association with books which will be life long." An extensive list"4 gives a partial idea of the great variety of material already in use in different localities; some prepared by the public library, some by the school library groups, some by committees of regu- lar classroom teachers. The subject is so elaborate that the ' Anna McCague, "References on teaching the use of books and libraries," Wilson bulletin, VIII, No. 2 (October, 1933), 96-ioi. A list of newer material is in preparation at the Teachers College Library, Columbia.
METHODS FOR MAKING KNOWN LIBRARY RESOURCES 399 School library year books of the American Library Association have included several articles on principles and methods of teaching the subject, and the placement of different subjects at proper grade levels. The German cartoon reproduced in the Bulletin of the Ameri- can Library Association for May, 1935 (P. 238), is typical of some excellent pictorial material which French, Russian, and Czechoslovakian libraries have developed to give their younger readers an enthusiastic interest in the use of books and libraries. Boston, Baltimore, and perhaps other American libraries have made a beginning in this direction (see Fig. 4). cAmE NCIA CNOW OWSi ILOWLEOOK WILL YU O FIG. 4.-One of Baltimore's picture strips (begun in I1933) for explaining the library and its services to young people. 2. GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS TO ADULTS IN LIBRARY USE The mass and effectiveness of this instruction for young peo- ple suggests the question as to what is being done similarly for adult readers. The answer is, very little. It is an error to think that instruction of juveniles will ever take the place of instruc- tion of adults. Even those who had the advantage of library instruction in their youth require additional explanation and aids in their more pressing adult book needs, and from an adult viewpoint. The lack of suitable material of instruction for them is widespread and keenly felt. No concerted effort has been made to meet it tlhrough national or state units. A splendid opportunity exists for a national organization, such as the American Library Association, or the General Federation of Women's Clubs, to prepare and publish a pamphlet or series of leaflets of instruction in library procedure as it directly concerns the adult borrower, especially women's civic and business men's
400 THE LIBRIRY QUARTERLY clubs. Such a pamphlet or series of leaflets would naturally ex- plain the Decimal Classification, the use of the card catalog, indexes, the leading reference works, and the reference tools common to the average library.'s How to use the card catalog is a less detailed but most use- ful leaflet, published by the Public Library of the District of Columbia. The general catalog is explained briefly, and the call numbers and their meaning as to location within the building, while the information on the cards is analyzed so as to bring out its value, and the significance of the special cases of entry; e.g., Bible, government documents, history and its subdivisions are all explained. In the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh a sign is placed over the card catalog, explaining its arrangement and giving instruction for its use. The desire to develop public abil- ity to use the card catalog is evident among American libraries in general, for the three leading library-supply companies sell printed placards of brief explanation to be placed on any li- brary's card cabinet. Several individual libraries have published leaflets of informa- tion for borrowers, giving the rules of the library, especially as it applies to the borrowing of books. St. Louis has a leaflet, In- formation for readers, which gives general rules as to borrow- ing; similar excellent pamphlets describe the functions, services, and location of the various departments, not as parts of a build- ing, but as the source of personal help to readers. The Boston Public Library's sixteen-page pamphlet How to find and pro- cure a book is exceedingly well done-a model of carefully worded instruction. At least one library has carried on a series of public lectures, well attended, on "Making the most of books," with competent college professors and library-staff members discussing how to develop reading skills, methods of study, and the most worth-while books in various fields. 1s The Junior Members' Round Table of the American Library Association is or- ganizing a large-scale project to prepare such materials for general use among library patrons.
METHODS FOR M1IKING KNOWN LIBRARY RESOURCES 401 3. PUBLICITY AND INSTRUCTION AS TO BOOK COLLECTIONS AND REFERENCE SERVICES AND TOOLS The general instruction for both young people and adults represents the worthy attempt of many American libraries to reach en masse the crowds of prospective or present patrons, helping them to become familiar with the library and its ways, and to make a first approach to really intensive book use. We now come to our final topic, in many ways the most inter- esting of all, namely, the attempt to encourage more real study and research work not only among professional and scholarly persons, but among a larger and larger portion of the general adult public. This high purpose of American libraries has been emphasized only during the last few years, and the methods fol- lowed are still in their early stages. Many librarians and library workers have overlooked the fact that out of the thousands of their present library borrowers, only a very few of even the best readers (college professors, for instance) know anything about library reference services and reference tools. Many of these tools, for example the I934 edi- tion of Webster's new international dictionary, or the Standard catalogfor public libraries in its complete edition, or the Diction- ary of American biography, or any one of a score of other refer. ence tools, have behind them stories of purpose, effort, and achievement nothing short of exciting and inspiring. The pub- lic at large would be interested in these accomplishments, so typical of modern organized co-operative scholarship. Libraries may well capitalize the publicity value of their reference services and tools to a greater extent. Until the huge mass of reference material now in public libraries is advertised, described, and made known to the general public, our reference work will by no means reach its possibli'.ties. Instruction of the public in reference aids begins with general publicity to attract and inform. Some of the large American lii braries have done outstanding work in this direction. Los An- geles maintains poster exhibits and bulletin boards in each ot
402 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY the central library departments and in the branches as well, dis- playing new reference aids and tools. A special study of refer- ence aids was made by the central library departments, result- ing in a series of exhibits to illustrate the most important tools, and, also, the reference materials which the public might other- wise overlook, such as pamphlets, government bulletins, and reports of public units and organizations. The Los Angeles ex- hibits had a dual purpose. They informed the public about this material, but they also helped to secure adequate special funds. and endowments for building up the collections in specialized fields. As a part of a "know your library" exhibit, held at the New- ark library in I934, a number of reference tools were displayed with beautifully printed placards of explanation. Those for the Oxford dictionary and the highly specialized "Engineering index service were especially effective. In a "know-our-city week," another city's chamber of com- merce arranged for demonstrations by manufacturers in store windows in the shopping section. Hearing of this, the library re- quested space to show its function as a "producer of ideas" and was granted two of the largest department-store windows. In one the library set up and operated its own printing press, turn- ing out book-lists and other library publicity, given to the cus- tomers of the store. The other window was devoted to an exhibit of the library's reference service. An assistant from the library was on duty at a desk equipped with telephone, surrounded by shelves of various reference books. As the imitation inquiry came in over the tele- phone-"What is the name and address of a straw hat manu- facturer in Corfu, Greece?"-a placard prepared beforehand was placed on the display rack so the sidewalk audience could see just what kind of questions come to the library. The assist- ant, after noting the question and looking over her stock of tools, tried two or three different books without success and then placed a copy of Kelly's directory of merchants, manufac- turers and shippers on the display rack, and above it a placard giving its title. She then ran her finger down the columns of the
METHODS FOR MAKING KNOWN LIBRARY RESOURCES 403 pages until she came to the correct name and address. A third placard gave the answer to the question. Other inquiries came in one after another over the telephone, and the assistant in the same manner looked up the information in the correct books. Each step was explained by carefully lettered placards made ready in advance. Thousands of persons who stopped for some moments to watch the exhibit were made aware for the first time that this type of service was rendered by the library from which many of them had been borrowing books for years, with- out ever using its reference department. In another library window exhibits were shown of vertical file material-pamphlets, documents, etc.-with colored ribbons running from the piece of printed matter in the vertical file down to the explanatory placards placed in the foreground of the window. There are many other devices to let the general public know about reference tools and the ability of the library to help stu- dents. Such are the circulars describing reference tools in de- tail. The Cleveland library has a pamphlet, Using the libra- ry, explaining what may be found in encyclopedias, diction- aries, and the specialized type of reference books, such as statis- tical handbooks, atlases, volumes of formulas, quotations, and brief biographies. This pamphlet explains also the use of maga- zine indexes. Cleveland issues a separate leaflet, How to find technical facts, explaining reference aids in the field of tech- nology and applied arts. The Public Library of the District of Columbia in its Guides to information enumerates similar refer- ence aids. After examining these samples we cannot escape the familiar question as to why a hundred or five hundred libraries do not join in producing an attractive illustrated handbook or series of leaflets on the use of the most common reference tools, and dis- tribute it free and freely.'s It is not difficult to predict some such outcome from the increasing interest in this aspect of American library work. Nor can we help imagining the many steps which remain to be taken in helping students of a more scholarly type in using library resources-the preparation of brief manuals for
404 THE LIBR4RY QUARTERLY technical, historical, social, and literary research and how to go about it; how to prepare bibliographies and how to use them. Most college professors are practically helpless in this respect, and the time and motion lost by their graduate students is ap- palling. A ten-day intensive course in bibliographic method would not be amiss in every graduate school. Systematic at- tempts to meet this national need will doubtless be made during our own generation, after the passage of these many years when libraries in the United States and abroad have largely contented themselves with encouraging mass circulation. Finally, we make definite a viewpoint implied throughout this paper: methods, devices, even the best library collections, are of little value without the great essential factor-carefully educated, selected, and trained personnel, with wide and deep book knowledge and a perennial devotion to the library's task of diffusing knowledge. A staff selected and promoted because of local residence or length of service, or recruited from half-edu- cated apprentices who may know all the clerical routines, can never attain the high purpose, the morale, and the cultural level which is essential to public satisfaction. The libraries of Ameri- ca are increasingly concerned with improving their personnel, on whom rests the whole structure of American book service. LIST No. I STUDIES OF COMMUNITY AND OCCUPATIONAL BACKGROUND AND READER INTEREST NOTE.-See first the bibliography in William S. Gray and Ruth Munroe, The Read- ing interests and habits of adults (New York: Macmillan, 1929), PP. 275-98. This re- views the several studies made up to that date. The article by Mrs. Helen T. Stein- barger, "Reading interest studies" (Booklist, XXX [19341, 33I-34), brings the material five years farther, with brief comment, and gives an excellent summary of some of the most important studies to date. For a list of earlier library surveys see Joseph L. Wheeler's, The Library and the community (American Library Association, 1924), PP. 112-24, 40I-3. The following added and more recent material should be noted. BEEM, VIDA, "Community interests survey," Illinois libraries, IX (1927), I I 8-2I. CARNOVSKY, LEON, "Community studies in reading. II. Hinsdale, a suburb of Chicago," Library quarterlv, V (January, I935), 1-30. COMPTON, CHARLES H., Who reads what? H. W. Wilson Co., 1934. PP. I17.
METHODS FOR MAKING KNOWN LIBRA,RY RESOURCES 405 GUERRIER, EDITH, "The mechanics of a library survey" [abstract], Library journal, LII (1927), 1077. ,"Surveying a community for its book needs," Bulletin of the American Library Association, XXI (I927), 385-87. HAUCK, CELIA R., "Sheboygan Public Library survey of borrowers," Wiscon- sin library bulletin, XXV (I929), 82. HOUKOM, ALF, "The reading interest of educated people." Unpublished mas- ter's thesis, University of Illinois, 1933. KELLEY, GRACE 0., Woodside does read: a survey of the reading interests and habits of a local community. Queens Borough Public Library, 1935. PP. 200. To be published. MORRIss, MRS. ELIZABETH (CLEVELAND), MORSE, M. V., and PHILLIPS, EDNA, Experimental reading study in the joint library-adult elementary educa- tionalfield. Teachers College, Columbia University, 1935. PP. 44. MOSHIER, L. MARION, "A Comparison of a selected group of adults in New York City and a similar group in a town in New York State." Unpub- lished master's thesis, Columbia University, I93I. RIDGWAY, HELEN A., "Reading habits of adult non-users of the public li brary of a metropolitan community." Unpublished master's thesis, Colum- bia University School of Library Service, I934. STONE, JOHN P., "Factors influencing reading choices." Unpublished master's thesis, University of Illinois, 1930. STUYVESANT, ELIZABETH, The Use of public library facilities in New York City: A study of changes in habits of borrowers." Unpublished master's thesis, University of Illinois, I930. THORNDIKE, EDWARD L., adult interests. Macmillan, 1935. Pp. 265. TOMPKINS, MIRIAM D., "Those who follow reading courses," Adult education and the library, III (I928), 35-43. WAPLES, DOUGLAS, "A Study of the relationship between reading interest and actual reading," Library quarterly, IV (January, I934), 76-i I2. "Who uses the Newark Public Library?" Newark Public Library, The Li- brary, V (December, 1932), 27-30. "Well-What did they read?" Ibid., PP. 31-32. WILSON, LOUIS R., "The Reader receives new consideration," Library journal, LVIII (1933), 353-58. LiST No. 2 LISTS OF READABLE BOOKS FOR THE LESS SKILLED READER AMERICAN LIBRARY AsSOCIATION, COMMITTEE ON INSTITUTION LIBRARIES, "Illustrated books for adult illiterates," Library journal, LX (March iS, I935), 26I-63-
406 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY CHANCELLOR, JOHN, "Available reading material for native-born adult illiter- ates and near-illiterates." United States Bureau of Prisons, 1932. PP. 35. Mimeo. FELSENTHAL, EMMA, Readable books in many subjects. American Library Asso- ciation, 1929. PP. 32. HOIT, DORIS L., Books of general interestfor today's readers. American Library Association, 1934. PP. 59. Is checked for three grades of reading difficulty. PHILLIPS, EDNA, Easy booksfor new Americans. American Library Associa- tion, 1927. PP. 8. JOSEPH L. WHEELER ENOCH PRATT FREE LIBRARY BALTIMORE, MARYLAND