Library School Alumni Publications SUSAN S. DIMATTIA COMMUNICATION is the prime reason for the existence of library school alumni publications. The editorial point of view tends to differ depending upon whether the publication is prepared solely by the library school administration or the alumni association, or is a joint effort of the two, however, the purpose remains the same. If graduates are to maintain close identity with their library school and to support it financially, they must be kept abreast of curriculum and faculty changes, the whereabouts of classmates, and continuing education efforts being carried on by the school. Although some of this information is reported in the general press of the library world, the most satisfactory vehicle is the direct mail, personal approach of an alumni newsletter. The Simmons Librarian originated in the spring of 1968 and has been published at least twice a year since that time. Its purpose is to provide a vehicle of communication for the Alumni Association and the administration with the alumni of the Simmons College School of Library Science. Although it has been nurtured by three successive editors and an assortment of faculty, alumni, and student writers during its short life, the Simmons Librarian has rarely strayed from its original purpose. Recent articles in the Simmons Librarian have been concerned with a wide variety of topics. The content of, attendance at, and responses DiMattia is editor of the Simmons Librarian, School of Library Science, Sim- mons College, Boston, MA 02115. 140
Library School Alumni Publications to Simmons' new series of continuing education seminars were reviewed. Since the Doctor of Arts program is relatively new, an article on sub- jects being researched by candidates for the degree helped our alumni better understand the aims and objectives of the program. The Annual Fund drive features a direct mailing and a follow-up mailing to all graduates each year. In addition, articles in the Simmons Librarian review the success of the previous year's campaign, cover the uses to which fund monies have been put and, in general, encourage readers to send a donation. Donations to the Annual Fund have increased substantially over the past three years, with this year's drive realizing $3,000 more than the goal amount. The success is due to a combina- tion of factors, such as cooperation from the school's Development Office and active dedication from the Annual Fund Committee, but also in large part because of the fund's increased exposure in the alumni newsletter. Changes in the curriculum are frequently covered in the Simmons Librarian primarily so that our older alumni will be aware of the skills and specialties with which the younger professional competition is equipped. Major student news, such as elections to Beta Phi Mu, is featured frequently. We honor the achievements of our graduates by including them in the Simmons Librarian. Some of our outstanding graduates will be recognized in the national library press in the course of their careers, but for those who are just starting up the ladder, or those who will spend their lives doing the essential but less spectacular jobs in libraries, we need a vehicle of recognition. The school's alumni newsletter says, we, your colleagues, take note of your contribution to the profession. Finally, whether anyone uses it or not, the alumni newsletter is a mode of complaining, venting frustrations, suggesting or reacting to, not the profession as a whole, but the library school education which gave them a start in the profession. Every post-secondary school, the author has known, has utilized some printed mode of communicating with its graduates. However, a search of Library Literature from 1958 to the present and Education Index from I960 to the present yielded only one article addressing itself to any aspect of library school or any other type of alumni publications. In the October 1967 issue of the Assistant Librarian (a British publica- tion), there appeared an article by M. Darvell entitled "Just look at them! library school magazines." Unfortunately, the article is not readily available, but it is assumed from the punctuation that M. Dar- vell and the author have reached the same basic conclusions nine years 141
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP and an ocean apart. The whole psychology of alumni publications would make an interesting topic for a master's thesis in communication or some related field. In the spring of 1975, Simmons College assumed responsibility for financing the publications and other expenses of the Library School Alumni Association, a group which had been struggling to be self- supporting since its inception in 1965. A transition in financing seemed to be the ideal time to increase the Simmons Librarians frequency. It had long been felt that once every six months was too infrequent to be worthwhile. Reader apathy was apparent. The one thing which seemed to spark reader interest and response was a special mid-year issue in February 1975 on the subject of international librarianship. Written entirely by alumni and faculty who are actively involved in the field, this issue did not include any of the usual news notes of alumni or fac- ulty. Response was so favorable that it was decided an annual subject issue, with a specialist guest editor, would be an excellent, albeit minor, vehicle of continuing education for Simmons' alumni. A survey was undertaken in order to determine where Simmons stood in relation to other library schools in the matter of alumni activities, but especially regarding alumni publications. A questionnaire was mailed to the Office of the Dean of the 61 li- brary schools in the United States and Canada which appeared on the February 1975 list of "Graduate Library Programs accredited by the American Library Association/' Forty-three schools responded, but two responses were rejected because of insufficient data. Adding Simmons' statistics, this report deals with a total of 42 schools. Of the 42 responding schools, 29 (69%) have alumni associations for the library school and one is in the process of being formed. Eighteen (62%) of the 29 associations collect dues, but most indicate that they send all publications to all alumni, whether dues-paying members of the association or not. Of those who do not solicit dues, seven say the association is supported by the library school (or its parent institution) , two receive money from the alumni association of the entire institution, one conducts an annual drive to support scholarships and association activities, and one gave an answer too vague to be interpreted. Thirty (71%) of the respondents say they have some type of pub- lication other than, or in addition to, the alumni publications which cover the entire college or university. Fourteen are issued by the library school alumni association and 16 by the library school administration. In 12 of the latter, there is an alumni association but the newsletter is 142
Library School Alumni Publications prepared by someone at the school, usually in the dean's office. Three deans mail regular letters to all alumni, but these have not been counted as alumni newsletters for the purposes of this survey, since they do not include news of individual alumni and alumni association activities. The University of Toronto Faculty of Library Science is unique in the sense that it issues four letters a year, two each from the dean's office and the alumni association. A translation problem arises in reporting the answer to questions on frequency. Some schools say their publication is "irregular" when it is obvious from sample issues that they mean it appears twice a year but not always at the same time during the year. Others say "irregular" and mean they have published only two issues in the past five years. The greatest number (15) have two issues a year; six have three issues; two are quarterly; five are annual and nine report themselves to be "irregular" with no explanation. To determine the total amount of information sent to alumni each year, one must look not just at frequency but at printing style and number of pages. A school which mimeographs 12 typewritten pages twice a year is not sending more words than a school which is using a composer or similar method and reducing 12 typed pages of informa- tion into a four page format twice a year. Of the schools which pro- vided information about frequency and printing method, there is the following breakdown: 15 issue two newsletters a year; of those, six use some sort of composition or type size reduction method; the average number of pages in this group is six per issue. The nine remaining schools, which either photocopy or mimeograph a typed format, average ten pages per issue. Columbia has the largest press run, with 7,500 copies of each issue; Simmons prints 4,500 and Drexel, 3,500; Indiana, Pratt, and Toronto, 3,000; Denver, 2,800, Iowa, 2,500, and the rest are 2,000 or less. Only 13 schools could provide budget figures, so the following table summarizes size, frequency, and cost figures for those thirteen. All schools use a bulk permit or third class mail except one which uses first class for its 500 copies once or twice a year. Some schools in- clude the words "address correction requested" on their mailing label. Over half of the editors come from alumni volunteers and the rest are deans, faculty, or someone in the administrative offices of the li- brary school. Some schools mention utilizing assistance from the place- ment, alumni, and public relations offices or faculty and students. In two of the cases where the editor is an alumnus, he is elected by the 143
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP TABLE 1. - Data for 13 Library School Alumni Publications Printing Copies School Budget Pages Method Frequency Printed UCLA $ 205/issue 6-10 composed 2/year 1,900 Columbia $1000/year 4 composed 3/year 7,500 Denver $1000/year 4-6 composed 3/year 2,800 Drexel $ 700/issue 4-6 composed 2/year 3,500 Emporia $2000/year 6-8 composed 2/year 1,500 Iowa $ 300/issue 4 composed 2/year 2,500 North Carolina $ 350/issue 6 composed 2/year 2,000 Pratt $ 900/issue ? ? 2/year 3,000 Rosary $ 400/issue 10 typed 2/year 1,500 Simmons $ 300/issue 4 composed 2/year 4,500 Syracuse $ 300/issue 15-20 typed 2-3/year 2,000 Tennessee $ 70/issue 8-10 typed 2/year 250 Western Michigan $ 300/year ? ? I/year 2,000 alumni association. In most cases, the president of the alumni associ- ation appoints the editor. The subject content of the newsletters is almost unanimous. All schools include news of alumni and faculty, and all but two carry a letter from the dean of the school either regularly or frequently. Only two or three carry minutes of alumni association board or membership meetings. Eight publications include occasional articles on a subject of current interest other than topics strictly related to the school. One school covers library association activities in its geographical area. From all reports, none of the publications is indexed. Most of the contents are ephemeral and considerably below Pulitzer journalistic standards. Given the preponderance of volunteer writers and editors, coupled with low budgets, the less than excellent quality is understand- able, although regrettable, especially, if one subscribes to P. D. Stan- hope's maxim that "Whatever is worth doing at all, is worth doing well." One might expect a superior product if the publication is pre- pared by someone at the individual library school who regards it as part of his or her job, rather than by a volunteer who must juggle the duty along with other responsibilities. It would be difficult to support or dispute that theory on the basis of the samples of library school alumni publications studied, primarily because very few of them clearly identified the name of the person responsible for preparation of the publication. However, it is essential that the editors and library school administrations enjoy a solid working relationship if a volunteer effort is to be successful. Given space restrictions on alumni publications and the time con- 144
Library School Alumni Publications straints for volunteer editors, it would seem that the University of Toronty Faculty of Library Science may have hit upon an excellent solution. The administration of the school issues two newsletters a year with news of faculty, courses, programs and other subjects directly re- lated to the school. The Alumni Association also issues two newsletters a year dealing exclusively with alumni news and activities. Several criteria were used in evaluating the sample copies of library school alumni publications received as the result of Simmons' survey. As mentioned earlier, the contents cover a wide variety of subjects, and with minor exceptions, all of the subject content is worthy of in- clusion. However, announcements of marriages, births, trips and other non-professional activities should not be included. This is purely a per- sonal opinion brought on by the necessity for cutting down the volume of potential listings in the Simmons Librarian every issue. Those pub- lications which were considered above average in content included arti- cles or news items on such topics as grants to professors, interviews with successful alumni, profiles of new faculty members, placement statistics, results of alumni opinion polls, and numerous other topics of interest and concern to alumni, students, and faculty. The style demonstrated in library school alumni publications fre- quently showed the lack of a strong editor. It is possible, even essential, to modify a writing style to fit the over-all style of a publication, with- out destroying the author's tone or intent. No article should be pub- lished exactly as received unless it is outstanding, and contributors should be notified in advance that their articles may be cut, corrected, or reworded. As librarians, we should be appalled at the lack of read- ing skills possessed by graduates of the United States' public education system. The reading problem has as a side effect the result that even those who can read, frequently cannot express themselves on paper. Even before assessing content, the visual approach is often what prompts one to read or discard a publication. Is there an attractive mast- head which identifies the name of the publication, the responsible or- ganization, editor's name, frequency of publication, date and volume number of this issue? The masthead need not be elaborate in design or color, but in some conspicuous spot, it is essential that all of the above information be provided. Pictures? Don't try to use them if you're using colored paper. The result is less than satisfactory. Never use Polaroid snapshots regardless of your budget and print method. They do not reproduce clearly. If your budget can support the use of color, more power to you, but 145
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP use it effectively. Lines of color used to delineate articles tends to make a page look choppy. Your eye does not flow over the page but jerks from one box to another. By all means box and/or color an article which should have maximum impact (the announcement of an im- portant date, special grant, election results, etc.) but if every article is in a box, impact will decrease. Are the articles well arranged in space and by content ? If the items are crowded, the reader's eye gets tired. There is a fine line between having enough "white space" (blank area) to appeal to the reader and having so much that it appears extravagant to someone familiar with printing costs. This is the one area where the Simmons Librarian is drastically at fault. We have so much copy left over after each issue is full that it breaks the author's heart to let even three lines go unused. The consistent arrangement of regular features is desirable. For ex- ample, in the Simmons Librarian, articles and special announcements begin on page one and are continued wherever possible. The editor's section always begins on page two column one, news notes of alumni and faculty occupy pages three and four. In memoriam always heads the appropriate news notes column when needed. Typography can play a big part in an attractive and readable pub- lication. Using too many type styles gives the newspaper the look of a printer's style manual. Stick to an easy to read type style and vary the size and density for headings and special effects. In all of the above criteria it has been assumed that a print shop product is being used rather than a Xeroxed or mimeographed process. The more polished approach is preferred. However, one or two samples were received which had been typed then duplicated, and were quite acceptable. One, however, was mailed with a two color, heavy card- board cover. This facade led one to expect outstanding things inside. You could not help but be disappointed with the typed format after the initial build up. One school, which obviously shall remain nameless, should have been ashamed to have its name attached to the smudged, uneven, sloppy, mimeographed sample which they sent. In this case, no newsletter at all would have been better for the school's image. If your school has a journalism, graphics, communications, or related department, student projects could be a gold mine of free advice for the library school publication. A good printer can work wonders for a publication. Sometimes, what may seem costly can be relatively inexpensive in the long run. The Sim- mons Librarian is taken to a commercial printer who sets it on an IBM 146
Library School Alumni Publications Composer, reduced size, then prints 4,500 copies, collates and folds it into mailer format, for approximately $300 per issue. An 11" by 17" sheet of colored paper, printed in colored ink, on both sides, is the equivalent of approximately ten typewritten sheets, using our method. Although no actual cost studies have been done for this paper, since regional price differentials would make generalized statistics invalid for specific schools, one would suspect that with rising salaries and cost of paper, photocopying, and postage, Simmons' method does not cost a great deal more than a mimeographed or photocopied publication. It certainly is more inviting, readable, and professional in appearance. One should always approach a printer with an open mind. Printers are usually delighted to offer suggestions on format, color, type face, and other matters which will result in a superior product while con- serving precious dollars. For instance, in its early years, the Simmons Librarian used color in the masthead and headlines. When costs be- came prohibitive, our printer suggested using goldenrod paper, brown ink and a variety of type faces to achieve an equally attractive end result at considerably less money. Another trick is to use the same type size throughout but to set the lines of type closer together in sections that do not require concentrated reading. For example, in all of our news articles "nine on ten" type is used while in the news notes of alumni and faculty sections, the lines are "nine on nine." This one small trick of the trade gives a bonus of several lines over a three column page, allowing brief mention of additional people in each issue. Once the product is finished, getting it into the hands of its potential audience can be even trickier than publishing a good newsletter. Mail- ing list up-dating is the bane of every alumni office's existence. A large number of newsletters are obviously finding their way to "dead letter" offices all over the country. Without the impossible cost of first class mail, what can be done? Do not ignore the possibility of sending third class mail on a bulk permit with just the words "address correction re- quested" written on the mailing label. If the piece is deliverable as ad- dressed, one pays only the bulk, third class rate. If, however, the addressee has moved and left a forwarding address, the piece will be forwarded and the sender will receive a card with the new address, at which time he pays a nominal fee. If the addressee left no forwarding address, the return card will so indicate. Library school alumni publications are not what they should be, but at least they exist to a fairly substantial degree. They are vehicles of mutual communication and awareness between alumni and school. In 147
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP the hierarchy of finances in a college or university, the few hundred dollars a year spent on library school alumni publications should return manifold benefits in support and good will. With a little more effort on the part of editors, increased awareness of and appreciation for the editor's efforts on the part of alumni, increased participation by alumni, and the expenditure of a few additional dollars on the part of the schools, library school alumni publications could reach a new plateau of excellence. 148