During the Progressive Era in the United States, roughly 1890–1920, murals created for the public sphere participated in a broad cultural construction of social cohesion and national identity and acted as an analgesic for neutralizing the striking heterogeneity that characterized America at the turn of the twentieth century. As if to counteract the centrifugal forces of a radically diverse population and to diminish the impact of dislocations and transformations brought about by vigorous immigration, industrialization, the rise of corporate capitalism, shifting roles of women, economic instability, urbanization, and labor disputes, among other things, murals articulated an idealized view and were designed to give tangible form to such vaguely defined but profoundly resonant concepts as citizenship, patriotism, democracy, progress, nationalism, and unity. Paralleling the Progressive Era’s mandate for social reform, optimistic belief in change through democratic cooperation, and often soaring rhetoric of civic idealism, murals from the period were considered, as playwright and pageant organizer Percy MacKaye noted in 1912, agents of civilization [1]. Although marked by profound and defining transformations, the Progressive Era embraced the notion of what Benedict Anderson has called an “imagined community,” in which racial, cultural, religious, and ideological, among other, differences were neutralized and reconstructed as the very fabric in which American identity was woven [2]. On a cultural level, the assumption of an imagined community called for the construction of public memory that would diminish discordant interests of diverse social groups and unite them into a conceptually cohesive body politic whose devotion to nation would prevail over familial, local, regional, ethnic, or class concerns. Emphasizing national consolidation and social cohesion over pluralism and competing vernacular interests, public performances of many kinds—from international exhibitions to May Day celebrations to mural cycles—were staged during the Progressive Era in which the topography and boundaries of public memory and the national body were inscribed and debated. This essay examines two mural cycles at the Library of Congress, The Evolution of the Book by John White Alexander and The Evolution of Civilization by Edwin Blashfield, as case studies of the public performance of this imagined community; as a nexus of intersecting discourses and assumptions about labor, masculinity, progress, and national identity; as expressive of the ideals of the American Renaissance that self‐confidently celebrated America as the rightful heir to the sum of human knowledge and accomplishments; and as coordinates for critical debates about the nature and function of municipal art in America. The male body was the subject of each cycle and addressed the idea of labor in transformative terms, functioning as a stabilizing rather than disruptive force. Paralleling the pedagogic imperative of the national public library—to transform, to civilize, to Americanize—the male body served as the map upon which the trajectory of current assumptions, anxieties, and debates about national identity was inscribed. It is not surprising that the Library of Congress would be defined by contemporary critic Royal Cortissoz as “our national monument of art” given the scale of the project, its federal sponsorship, its posture as a public library with access to all Americans, and its national profile [3, p. 1241]. Paralleling the assumption of the Library of Congress as “not merely a building for housing books, but a ritualistic center of civilization” [4, p. 25] and ascribing to the ideals of the American Renaissance, the grand and ambitious iconographic program celebrated Western civilization and, in particular, the evolution of culture through knowledge. As with other Progressive Era civic and reform initiatives that subscribed to evolutionary logic and Social Darwinian discourse to define the role of culture, the public library movement of the late nineteenth century believed in the transformative power of education and its pedagogic function as a civilizing and nationalizing agent. Given the posture of the Library of Congress as both our “national monument of art” and “our national library”—as a powerful cultural technology of “nationing” [5, p. 142]—it is no wonder that the murals, in general, constituted monumental tableaux of the hierarchical and evolutionary progress of culture, situating America as the true and rightful heir of the expansive sum of human knowledge. Moreover, paralleling the educational and reform imperatives that defined the early decades of the public library movement, the muralists at the Library of Congress ascribed to the pedagogical tenets of municipal art to enlighten, educate, and promote culture as a cohesive force. Edwin Blashfield effectively summarized the striking parallel between the civilizing potential, indeed obligation, of municipal art and the contemporary public library movement, when he declared: “Public art is the greatest educational force in the world. From the time the sun of history begins to throw its light on the progress of man’s culture we know there have always been men who recognized this fact and made the artist a schoolmaster with the public building as his academy” [6, p. 61]. John White Alexander’s selection of the theme The Evolution of the Book may have been inspired, in part, by its location in the east corridor of the first floor leading directly to the main reading room, and as such, its proximity to Blashfield’s evolutionary cycle inside the rotunda. Books were, of course, the principal occupants of the national library and served as potent vehicles of transformation. Indeed, one could imagine the parades of national readers who would walk through the east corridor and see the dress rehearsal, as it were, of the pageant of civilization and knowledge that awaited them in the main reading room. And the subject of Gutenberg’s invention of the printing press, the final lunette of Alexander’s six‐part series, was a particularly apt one for a national library whose mission was to make knowledge widely accessible.2 Indeed, the theme of Alexander’s cycle resonated with the ambitious iconographic program of the Library of Congress as a whole that celebrated the evolution of culture through knowledge. More important, Alexander defined this evolution within the context of masculinity and labor and, as such, offered a prelude, albeit on a modest scale, to the far more ambitious performance of progress and civilization in Blashfield’s mural, in which the principal actor is the male laborer/engineer, America. Alexander imposes an evolutionary logic on the development of the printed book. The trajectory of intellectual and cultural progress outlined in the six lunettes—The Cairn, Oral Tradition, Egyptian Hieroglyphics, Picture Writing, The Manuscript Book, and The Printing Press—is paralleled in the decorative disposition of the scenes themselves, which grow increasingly complex, three‐dimensional, and filled with visual incident as they approach the pinnacle of accomplishment with Gutenberg’s invention of the printing press in the final lunette. Alexander eschewed allegory in his lunettes in favor of historical accuracy and narrative clarity, paralleling the pictorial strategies he had developed as an illustrator in the 1880s. This illustrative approach may be attributed to Alexander’s lack of experience with mural painting; the Library of Congress commission represented his first excursion into large‐scale municipal work. Contemporary chronicler of American mural painting Pauline King drew a parallel between Alexander’s style and inexperience, calling it “a quite excusable limitation of a first endeavor” [7, p. 184]. Alexander’s historical approach, moreover, was the one of the three different modes proposed by Alexander that the Library Committee selected. The other two modes were the “Ideal” and the “Realistic” [8, p. 222]. Finally, Alexander’s selection of both the subject and the historical approach may be attributed to the influence of the contemporaneous mural cycle by Fernand Cormon at the Hôtel de Ville, Paris, one with which Alexander was surely familiar.3 The Cairn, located at the south end of the east corridor, is the first lunette in Alexander’s series.4 A group of men, whose primitive nature is suggested by their animal skin loincloths and rugged features, are assembling a mound of stones at the seashore. The cairn may be a memorial of some kind or perhaps a geographical marker. Within the context of Alexander’s evolutionary narrative, this crude monument created by a community of men imbues the geography with public meaning and marks a first step toward the creation of public knowledge and a vehicle for its dissemination. In Oral Tradition, a robed and hooded dark‐skinned storyteller stands before a semi‐circular group of seated men and gestures dramatically as he relates a tale. The landscape rises beyond the group of seated men, creating a visual barrier and suggesting an encampment, however rudimentary. The subject of this lunette parallels that of Olin Levi Warner’s bronze Tradition, which is located on the north door of the library’s main entrance, in which a seated mother and child are flanked by, as Thomas Somma has noted, representatives from four premodern races whose histories were maintained and disseminated through their oral traditions [13, p. 248]. A scaffold slung before the portal of an Egyptian temple occupies the foreground of the third lunette, Egyptian Hieroglyphics; in the far distance is a single pyramid. An Egyptian workman is seated on the scaffold with his back to the viewer and is cutting a hieroglyphic inscription. His muscular body is youthful and taut as he raises his hammer to the chisel. Seated beside him is a young woman, nude as is the male worker, except for a loincloth. Her gaze is not returned by the young man who is engaged in his labor. This episode in Evolution of the Book is the first to feature written records, in this case inscribed in a public space. Blashfield’s collar decoration likewise underscored Egypt’s defining contribution of written records. As the first of twelve figures in his mural cycle and strategically placed at the eastern cardinal point of the decorative cycle, Blashfield’s Egypt is associated with written records in a more complex manner than is Alexander’s figure and geographically and symbolically locates the east as the cradle of civilization. The former holds a tablet inscribed with hieroglyphics and is seated beside a case filled with papyrus manuscript rolls [12, p. 106]. Moving to the north end of Alexander’s east corridor lunettes, Picture Writing (fig. 1) employs a similar narrative strategy to the preceding one and features a young nude man—here a Native American—seen from the rear, engaged in the process of written expression. The low bowl of red paint rests next to the smoothed animal hide on which he is painting a picture story. Reclining behind him is a nude young woman whose gaze is turned to the pictorial narrative. In spite of the clear national resonance, the subject of the Native American was quite exceptional in the Library of Congress decorations—it appeared in Warner’s bronze entry door panel, Tradition, in which the Native American was one of four premodern figures associated with oral traditions—perhaps due to the cosmopolitan orientation of the muralists and their selected themes. In contrast to the thirty‐three ethnological heads on the first story pavilion of the main facade, which self‐consciously meld current ethnological assumptions with decorative considerations and which feature two Native Americans—a Pueblo and a Plains Indian—Alexander’s Native Americans express the American Renaissance assumption that “modern civilized institutions are rooted in the cultures of aboriginal peoples and that the entire human family has contributed to the general progress of civilization” [13, p. 248].5 Fig. 1.— John White Alexander, Picture Writing, 1895–96. Oil on canvas. One of six lunettes from The Evolution of the Book, east corridor, first floor, Library of Congress, Washington, DC. Courtesy of Library of Congress. The Manuscript Book physically and ideologically moves Alexander’s evolutionary narrative from premodern contributions—the nude Native Americans are embedded within a vaguely defined landscape—to the interior of a monastery cell where three monks are engaged in the illumination and examination of manuscript books. In the foreground, a young monk is seated beside a small window, which provides light for the illumination of a page of a grand folio on which he labors. Two older men at the far rear of the darkened chamber examine a folio. The movement of the folio, quite literally, from foreground to rear ground implies a hierarchy of labor and skill while proposing an enclosed, finite arena within which the knowledge contained by the manuscripts can circulate. The Printing Press (fig. 2), the final lunette in Alexander’s series, can be read as both a quasi‐realistic depiction of Gutenberg inspecting a proof sheet and as an allegory of labor, in which Alexander narrates work ethic assumptions of transformation and self‐improvement. The three men who fill the workroom suggest upward mobility and progress in relation to work: the youngest man to the right, dressed in a worker’s apron, labors at the press, harnessing his physical vigor and strength to transform the vernacular into the cosmopolitan in service, ultimately, of public culture and education. The slightly older worker to the left, bowing in subservient expectation, serves as the mediator between the physical laborer and the elderly Gutenberg; the latter’s clothing identifies him as the privileged elite whose labor is strictly cerebral and whose cultural hegemony is unquestioned. Gutenberg, the inventor, examines the proof sheet, visually recalling evidence of his invention and underscoring his possession of literacy. Fig. 2.— John White Alexander, The Printing Press, 1895–96. Oil on canvas. One of six lunettes from The Evolution of the Book, east corridor, first floor, Library of Congress, Washington, DC. Courtesy of Library of Congress. Paralleling the assumptions of Progressive Era reformists and cultural philanthropists of all kinds, Alexander’s cycle can be read as positing public culture as a tonic for social problems of all kinds and offering a case study of how exposure to western culture could serve as a self‐regulating impetus to individual and civic improvement, acquisition of English language skills, and assimilation, and, as such, function as a stabilizing force among the masses of immigrant laborers. The mediating figure between the young pressman and the elderly Gutenberg becomes the newly civilized reader through exposure to texts made accessible and meaningful to a broad public by Gutenberg’s invention, much like the national readers who would assemble under Blashfield’s collar decoration in the “public’s reading room,” in the words of Librarian of Congress A. R. Spofford [15, p. 683], of the Library of Congress to gain access the wealth of knowledge therein contained. Gutenberg’s invention of the printing press transformed knowledge into a technology of social meaning and proposed a vital connection between knowledge, progress, and social evolution. That the public library was originally conceived as a cultural institution for urban reform makes Alexander’s cycle all the more resonant with such Progressive‐Era assumptions.6 Cultural historian Alan Trachtenberg has addressed the ameliorative function of cultural and reform enterprises at the turn of the twentieth century, noting the prevailing assumption that culture could “disarm potential revolution, and embrace all classes” [17, p. 147]. Trachtenberg’s observations parallel the words of self‐styled cultural and public library philanthropist Andrew Carnegie, who noted in 1894: “The result of knowledge [gleaned from libraries] is to make men not violent revolutionaries, but cautious evolutionists, not destroyers, but careful improvers” [18, p. 2513]. Far more ambitious and complex an allegory of labor is Edwin Blashfield’s collar decoration for the main reading room. The sheer scale of the decoration is matched by the iconographic ambition and ideological assumptions of the work. The Evolution of Civilization (fig. 3) narrates the American Renaissance ideal of America as the culmination of history and the heir of the sum total of human knowledge, achievements, and culture, positioning America as the twelfth and final figure in this chronological and evolutionary trajectory of progress. Paralleling the mapping of civilization’s march from east to west in the Court of Honor at the World’s Columbian Exposition in 1893, Blashfield’s figures assume an evolutionary logic and directional flow of civilization: the first figure, Egypt, is associated with the east; America (fig. 4), the final figure, is aligned with the west. The decorative rhythm and continuity of motifs and poses throughout the collar decoration offer a striking visual continuity that reinforces the cycle’s narrative implication of the inevitability of progress. Fig. 3.— Edwin Blashfield, The Evolution of Civilization, 1895–96. Oil on canvas. Collar mural, interior of dome, reading room, Library of Congress, Washington, DC. Courtesy of Library of Congress. Fig. 4.— Edwin Blashfield, detail, America, Egypt, Judea, from The Evolution of Civilization (see fig. 3). The alignment of America with progress and the west served as a virtual history lesson of the nineteenth century in which westward expansion and its simultaneous industrialization would have been readily understood as evidence of national progress and social evolution. As historian David Nye notes, these narratives of evolution and progress were played out through sheer force of rugged individuals—“the physical conquest of space as directed by men” [19, p. 266]—and the assumption of national exceptionality and inevitable advancement. Given that Blashfield’s America was painted in an era of industrialization and pervasive technology when the autonomy of the individual was increasingly curtailed and the inevitability of expansion was circumscribed by the closing of the frontier, this evolution of progress was as much concerned with the perpetuation of national myths as the declaration of America as the rightful heir to the promise of civilization. If Blashfield’s America, placed at the western edge of human history and progress, looked to the past for national memories and cosmopolitan validation, it also glanced to the future of a nation poised to embark upon a geopolitical shift from continental expansion to overseas empire. As if to relieve the deep anxieties due to the closing of the frontier, the impending Spanish‐American War and its promise of imperial expansion offered, as historian Amy Kaplan argues, “a new frontier, where the essential American man could be reconstituted” [20, p. 99]. Frederick Jackson Turner, himself, proposed overseas expansion as a solution to “the problem of the west,” as he called it, invoking Bishop Berkeley’s often‐repeated declaration “Westward the course of empire takes its way”—of the 1720s as a foundational staple of American self‐conception by this time. Turner wrote: “For nearly three‐hundred years the dominant fact in American life has been expansion. With the settlement of the Pacific coast and the occupation of freelands, this movement has come to a check. That these energies of expansion will no longer operate would be a rash prediction; and the demands of a vigorous foreign policy, for an oceanic canal, for a revival of our power upon the seas, and for the extension of American influence to outlying islands and adjoining countries, are indications that the movement will come” [21, p. 296]. Blashfield’s America, then, posits masculinity, and by extension, nationhood, freed from national boundaries. America, as a nation, is both embodied in the robust masculinity of America and disembodied as a winged figure with the promise of extracontinental territorial expansion. Although Science is inscribed as the contribution of America, the figure is dressed in workman’s clothes—the “garb of the machine‐shop,” according to chronicler of the Library of Congress, Herbert Small [12, p. 75]—and he sits with an electric dynamo between his legs. He is brawny and muscular, one whose physical prowess suggests power, masculinity, and, as contemporary critic Charles Caffin noted, the “strenuous determination of the young giant, America” [22, p. 117]. At the same time, the figure is transformed into an engineer; his intellect is embedded in the book he grasps in one hand and alluded to by his posture of meditation, as if lost in thought regarding the potential of technology, represented by the dynamo. This conflation of worker/engineer acts as a visual performance of the transformative power of education and knowledge—worker becomes engineer—and privileges technology as the source of and site for American progress and national identity. Moreover, this liminal figure accommodates the physical prowess and strength of the worker with the intellect and abstract thinking of the engineer, effectively stabilizing the potential conflict between the working and dominant classes. Given the 1893 depression and the labor unrest of the past two decades, Blashfield’s America can be read as a soothing analgesic to assuage widespread fears of class warfare, labor violence, and economic collapse. The progression from laborer to engineer may be understood, as well, within the evolutionary paradigm articulated by Spencer in which culture functions as a civilizing agent. The laborer is civilized—educated—and transformed into an engineer, a modern hero whose rapport with technology, and its assumed corollary of increasing efficiency, ensure sustained progressive improvement and, indeed, unfettered optimism. As cultural historian Cecilia Tichi argues, the engineer is the representational man of the late nineteenth century, “a symbol of efficiency, stability, functionalism, and power. In the imaginative literature of industrialized America he figures as a new hero who enacts the values of civilization. He is at once visionary and pragmatic” [23, p. 98]. Much as America, the laborer‐cum‐engineer, civilizes the machine and offers an analgesic to assuage current uncertainties due to rapid change, he functions as social engineer, rehearsing the efficiency, amelioration, and stabilizing influence of social control as understood by the library movement and many Progressive Era reform initiatives at the turn of the twentieth century. All national readers in the Library of Congress were encouraged, effectively, to become their own engineers and to redeem themselves as part of the national body and the new social order through personal and social transformation. The Library of Congress artists, themselves, functioned as workers‐cum‐engineers whose artistic labors were transformed into publicly meaningful narratives of evolution and progress. As contemporary critic William A. Coffin noted, “The artists, like the workmen, were in overalls and the atmosphere of the place seemed impregnated with the spirit of art and labor” [24, p. 695]. Artist and critic Will Low noted that it was only with the completion of the Library of Congress decorations that the American artist was finally accorded the status of the civil engineer and understood as a “useful member of our social fabric” [25, p. 253]. That the chief supervisor of decorations at the Library of Congress, Edward Pearce Casey, was trained as a civil engineer and architect underscores the current conflation between public art, pedagogy, and national progress. The dynamo itself functioned as a multivalent symbol representing American progress and technological ingenuity. It was the literal engine of change that generated the industrial revolution of the late nineteenth century; and it was the source of power for the electric lights—some 8,000 of them—[26, p. 257] ventilating fans, elevators, and modern book‐carrying equipment that made the Library of Congress a model of efficiency and accessibility. Indeed, the Library’s emphasis on efficiency and accessibility paralleled both the conceptual shift in the late nineteenth century of the role of libraries from what John Cole has called “storehouses” to “workhouses” and a technological utopia espoused by reformers who believed machines were humanitarian devices that would relieve the burdens of labor, raise the standard of living for all, and promote harmony between labor and capital, effectively returning America to the imagined harmony of the preindustrial era.7 Indeed, Blashfield’s fusion of seemingly opposite visual codes—contemporary subject matter, the dynamo and the worker, with principles of classical art evoking a timeless past, the heroically scaled winged body—constructs a reassuring narrative of continuity with the past in a period of rapid social change. Removed from the exigencies of contemporary workers’ lives and the uncertainties of modernity, Blashfield’s winged America is both progressive and nostalgic in its social and aesthetic aims. The wings fix the memory of the individual body into a collective, timeless past, endowing the figure with, as art historian Janet Marstine has noted, the “moral weight of an ancient god” [26, p. 273], and serve as an antidote to the disruptive potential of the laboring body. Moreover, based on the aesthetics of beauty, order, and harmony, America embodies the cultural and reform agenda of the contemporary City Beautiful movement that was designed to improve urban existence and thereby “inculcate citizens and immigrants with moral values and civic pride” [28, p. 87]. Blashfield’s meta‐narrative of national progress reassures viewers of the efficacy of civic reform—immigrant laborer becomes patriotic member of the national body—as it urges all citizens of America to complete the ritual of civilization through the process of self‐regulation, assimilation, and desire for ascendancy. Blashfield’s America locates national progress and accomplishment within the contested sphere of masculinity.8 During the decades that bracketed the turn of the twentieth century, the definition of manhood experienced profound shifts in response to what was understood as threats to Anglo‐American male authority and power from, among others, the working class, immigrants, and freedom‐seeking women. Moreover, neurasthenia, the scourge of the “civilized,” threatened to emasculate an entire generation of American men. First identified in 1880 by New York neurologist George Beard, neurasthenia was defined as a disease of the most evolved societies—that is, Anglo‐American—whose vast accumulation of wealth and privilege had stripped them of vital nerve force, as Beard called it [35]. By the 1890s, such disruptive and diverse social phenomena as labor uprisings, the precipitous decline of urban Anglo‐American birthrates in contrast to that of immigrants, the seemingly increasing number of emasculated men and their dreaded counterpart, masculinized women, and the moral disintegration of the middle and upper classes, were attributed, in part, to the degrading social effects of the disease.9 As such, Blashfield’s manly yet contemplative America serves as both a model for a working class that is transformed and subdued by the work ethic and for the invigoration and masculinization of the embattled Anglo elite. Within the context of the growing mistrust of the so‐called feminization of American culture, as discussed by historian T. J. Jackson Lears, America offered a reassuring and clear‐cut definition of masculinity [38, p. 24]. Moreover, contemporary audiences would have readily understood America’s physical strength—his manliness—as expressive of his revitalized social authority rather than simply as his manual labor. Theodore Roosevelt’s contemporaneous discourse of the strenuous life, as he called it, implicated masculinity and imperialism in the service of continued national progress, and indeed, the progress of civilization, not unlike Blashfield’s Evolution of Civilization. Cultural historian Gail Bederman notes: “As he [Roosevelt] saw it, the United States was engaged in a millennial drama of manly racial advancement, in which American men enacted their superior manhood by asserting in imperialistic control over races of inferior manhood. To prove their virility, as a race and a nation, American men needed to take up the `strenuous life' and strive to advance civilization through imperialistic warfare and racial violence if necessary” [29, p. 171]. Only two years after Blashfield completed his Evolution of Civilization, Roosevelt and his entourage of Rough Riders carried out an assault on San Juan Hill in Cuba, driven by the tripartite alignment of nationalism, imperialism, and manliness. Considered within a pedagogic context, Blashfield’s Evolution of Civilization, in general, and America, in particular, can be read as a visual lesson in assimilation and as a pictorial paean to the so‐called melting pot theory. Resonating with contemporary assumptions about immigration and its impact on American national identity, America embodies the classical paradigm of assimilation that proposed a linear trajectory along which pluralistic immigrant culture and ethnic identity—that is the eleven epochs and/or nations that precede America in this evolutionary paradigm—are profoundly transformed [39]. What was a polyglot assemblage of immigrants with sundry local identities become a unified national body of American citizens who share a cohesive memory and a homogenous system of cultural and social practices and values. That this system was articulated by and constructed to validate and protect dominant Anglo‐American norms went without saying. The issue of national identity and the role of public art in its articulation dominated critical discussions of the murals at the Library of Congress, although the valuation of American art’s cosmopolitanism ranged widely. Blashfield spoke for his generation of European‐trained artists who defined nationalism within a cosmopolitan and historical context. Although the underlying issue of national expression in American art remained a primary concern, the concept of an art free from the “taint” of European influence was irrelevant if not meaningless. Indeed, following Blashfield’s argument, American arts’ very “universality,” which by definition denied any local grammar or topical reference, was unquestionable testimony of America’s national achievements, cosmopolitan profile, and confirmation of its cultural coming of age [40]. Blashfield’s The Evolution of Civilization is an example of his adept mingling of allegory and realism—in his words, the “modern and American” [40, p. 364]—while locating and legitimizing America’s contributions within the international evolutionary flow of culture. Kenyon Cox’s activities as a muralist and writer were second only to Blashfield’s in the 1890s and the turn of the twentieth century. Central to Cox’s critical agenda and pictorial practice was the adherence to tradition and the “classic spirit,” as he called it, which emphasized permanence, continuity, self‐control, and the search for the essential and eternal rather than the transient. As a critic, Cox gave high praise to the Library of Congress muralists—Blashfield, Vedder, and himself, among others—who depicted lofty and distinctly atemporal subjects unentangled by nationalist rhetoric. By contrast, he rejected the treatment of historically specific and nationally relevant themes, as, at best, parochial, and “imperfectly decorative.” Cox concluded, “Unfortunately, our history is short, our modern costumes formless and ugly, and American historical subjects particularly unfitted for pictorial treatment. … True monumental decoration … is always symbolical rather than real in [its] treatment of history” [41, p. 12]. Nationalist discourse defined the series of articles on the decorative work in progress at the Library of Congress for Harper’s Weekly by young draftsman turned art critic, Royal Cortissoz.10 Guided by the assumption that the Library of Congress represented a “national undertaking” and stood “at the very core of our national life, ” Cortissoz argued that the building’s greatest asset was its demonstration of the fertile relationship between artistic work and civic and national progress [3, p. 1240]. Unlike muralist‐critic Will Low, who characterized the cosmopolitan nature of the Library of Congress murals as “devoid of national expression” [53, p. 244], Cortissoz found the library’s decorative cycles a nationalist tonic in the evolution of American art. He argued: “The American school of mural decoration … is still in process of formation, yet more than in any other form of art we have escaped the trammels of convention, we have developed our own ideas without that constant allusion to alien examples which have so often vitiated our painters of easel pictures. From the start there seems to have been a healthy refusal to meddle with old precedents” [3, p. 1240]. Cortissoz’s celebratory discourse of American art’s vigor and healthy progress, as testified by the muralists at the Library of Congress, has striking parallels to Roosevelt’s invocation of millennial drama with the Spanish‐American war. Indeed, Cortissoz concluded that the Library of Congress “opens auspiciously as the century comes to a close and it promises immeasurable progress. For when art takes hold of public buildings it enters into the very life‐blood of the nation … Would the result seem very unlike the Millennium itself?” [3, p. 1240]. Other critics likewise invoked the rhetoric of the march of progress in their discussions, including William A. Coffin who insisted that the vitality of Library of Congress decorations’ “step in the onward march of art in the United States must be conceded without discussion” [24, p. 711]. Charles Caffin shared with Cortissoz the assumption of national relevance in municipal art and argued that the intelligent mingling of allegory and historical specificity would invigorate American mural painting and distinguish it as monumental, national, and democratic. Looking back at the decorations at the Library of Congress a decade after their completion, Caffin found much to praise and condemn [22, p. 324]. He concluded that the Library of Congress represented an auspicious opportunity for the articulation of a distinctly American school of mural painting but that regrettably few of the artists had risen to the opportunity, resorting instead to an allegorical style that eschewed national identity and the realities of modern life. What was mild disdain on the part of Caffin became virulent rejection on the part of Charles M. Shean of the National Society of Mural Painters. In reviewing the progress of American mural painting from the 1870s to the turn of the century, Shean regretted both the general lack of monumental decoration in public buildings throughout the United States and, when present, its failure to find inspiration in American themes, endeavors, and achievements. Insisting on mural painting’s public and therefore democratic nature, Shean bluntly dismissed the validity of allegorical contrivances whose subject matter and significance was neither contemporary nor widely accessible, and he urged muralists to seek inspiration in the history and tradition of their own land [54–56]. Moreover, Shean bitterly regretted the lost opportunity to articulate an American iconography at the Library of Congress and could not forgive its “foreign accent” and its unwillingness to serve as an “incentive to patriotism.” [54, p. 720] Critic Ada Cone, likewise, found American muralists’ foreign accent regrettable and argued, “Our art, to be truly ours, to be truly great, must be born out of the labor of the people” [57, p. 352]. The Library of Congress murals—in particular, the cycles by Blashfield and Alexander—and the critical discussion they engendered, were positioned within and mediated by contested contemporary debates regarding national identity, progress, labor, and masculinity. Both artists assumed knowledge, progress, and civilization to be evolutionary and used the male body as a scaffolding to sustain and stabilize these conflicting discourses. Through a focused attention on the body of laboring men, these murals invoked gendered discourse of physical and national fitness, the frontier, and labor, and were designed, pedagogically, to serve as models to improve urban existence and to inculcate citizens and immigrants with national values and civic pride: in short, to act as agents of civilization. Library of Congress muralists and critics alike participated in the construction of public memory and a common meaning—an imagined community—that could fix the precariously unstable boundaries of the national body at the turn of the twentieth century and provide rich evidence of the compelling and contested relationship between municipal art and national life. 2.  Gutenberg appeared in Blashfield’s collar decoration, representing Germany and the Art of Printing. He is shown seated next to a hand press and examines a proof sheet. The subject of printing appeared in other sites throughout the library, notably in Frederick MacMonnies's The Art of Printing, the central bronze door at the main entrance of the library. 3.  Parallels between the murals at the Library of Congress and those in the Hôtel de Ville, Paris, were noted by contemporary critics including Royal Cortissoz, “Painting and Sculpture in the New Congressional Library X: The Decorations of Messrs. Benson, Walker, van Ingen and Pearce” [9] and Will H. Low, “The Mural Paintings in the Pantheon and the Hôtel de Ville of Paris” [10]. It is reasonable to assume that American artists were familiar with the murals, given their contemporary importance, and many of the Hôtel de Ville muralists were colleagues of the Americans in the annual exhibitions in Paris. For a discussion of the Hôtel de Ville murals, see Thérèse Burollet, Folliot Frank, and Imbert Daniel, Le triomphe des mairies: Grands décors républicains à Paris, 1870–1914 [11]. 4.  For a description of each panel in Alexander’s Evolution of the Book, see Herbert Small, compiler, Handbook of the New Library of Congress [12]. See also Murray, “Painted Words” [8, pp. 222–23]. 5.  See also Thomas P. Somma, “The Myth of Bohemia and the Savage Other: Paul Wayland Bartlett’s Bear Tamer and Indian Ghost Dancer” [14]. 6.  The American Library Association was founded in 1876. For a study of the history of the public library movement in the United States, see Dee Garrison, Apostles of Culture: The Public Librarian and American Society, 1876–1920 [16]. 7.  For a discussion of this change, see John Y. Cole, “Storehouses and Workshops: American Libraries and the Uses of Knowledge” [27]. See also Marstine, “Working History” [26, pp. 138–50 and 273–78]. 8.  See Gail Bederman, Manliness and Civilization: A Cultural History of Gender and Race in the United States, 1880–1917 [29, pp. 77–87]. Related books on American manhood include, among others, Marc C. Carnes and Clyde Griffin, eds., Meanings for Manhood: Construction of Masculinity in Victorian America [30]; Elizabeth H. Pleck and Joseph H. Pleck, eds., The American Man [31], and E. Anthony Rotundo, American Manhood: Transformations in Masculinity from the Revolution to the Modern Era [32]. See also Bailey Van Hook, The Virgin and the Dynamo: Public Murals in American Architecture, 1893–1917 [33], and Sarah J. Moore, John White Alexander and the Construction of National Identity: Cosmopolitan American Art, 1880–1915 [34]. 9.  See, e.g., James Weir, “The Methods of Rioting Strikers as Evidence of Degradation,” [36], and William Lee Howard, “Effeminate Men and Masculine Women” [37]. For a discussion of the social implications of neurasthenia, see T. J. Jackson Lears, No Place of Grace: Antimodernism and the Transformation of American Culture, 1880–1920 [38]. Resonating with current fears about immigrants' threat to the hegemony of Anglo‐American culture and class dominance, Theodore Roosevelt referred to the dramatic decline in urban birthrates as “race suicide.” See Lears, No Place of Grace [38, pp. 28–30]. 10.  Cortissoz’s series “Painting and Sculpture in the New Congressional Library” in Harper’s Weekly was the most comprehensive discussion of the decorations in progress at the Library of Congress. See articles entitled “I: The Decoration of Edwin H. Blashfield”; “II: The Decoration of Mr. Elihu Vedder”; “III: The Decoration of Mr. Kenyon Cox; “IV: A Group of Bronzes for the Rotunda”; “V: The Decoration of Mr. George W. Maynard”; “VI: The Doors Modelled by Mr. Frederic Macmonnies”; “VII: The Decoration of Mr. Frederick Dielman”; “VIII: Works of Herbert Adams, Frederick W. Ruckstuhl and John J. Boyle”; “IX: The Decoration of Mr. John W. Alexander”; “X: The Decorations of Messrs. Benson, Walker, Melchers, van Ingen, and Pearce”; and “XI: Last Glance at the Rotunda and Entrance Hall” [42–51]. See also Sarah J. Moore, “In Search of an American Iconography: Critical Reaction to the Murals at the Library of Congress” [52].