A Service-Learning Framework to Support an MLIS Core Curriculum Dan Albertson and Maryann S. Whilaker School of Library and Information Studies, University of Alabama, 513 Gorgas Library, Box 870252, Tuscaloosa, AL 35487-0252. Email: dea@ua.edu, mswhitaker@crimson.ua.edu This paper identifies the core areas of the Master of Library and Information Studies (MLIS) curriculum at the School of Library and Information Studies (SLIS), University of Alabama, that informed student experiences during an ongoing service-learning project designed to provide basic technology literacy training to individuals with intellectual disabilities. This study was conducted to assess whether student participation comple- mented or expanded the knowledge and skills gained from the MLIS core through ap- plication in an external setting. The knowledge and skills acquired by the students are intended to raise consciousness of critical literacy issues that will enable students to participate in community engagement beyond their MLIS program. Through this study, the authors evaluate a project framework designed to connect student experiences in a training-based project with the core areas of the MLIS curriculum. Preliminary analysis demonstrates potential for the framework to serve as a practical generalization for de- veloping similar basic technology literacy projects that can complement what is taught in other MLIS programs. Keywords: service-learning, MLIS core, project frameworks, technology literacy, intel- lectual disabilities, information literacy Introduction In to 1999, utilize the students ALA in challenged working with educators com- to utilize students in working with com- munity residents to promote information literacy (Riddle, 2003). The underlying rationale is that service-learning proj- ects, when combined with LIS, create an awareness of issues related to community engagement beyond the program of study such that students will continue to partici- pate in similar activities as professionals. The subject of service-learning is not new and appears frequently in the lit- erature. Earlier cases of service-learning projects in LIS include the Library Ser- vices and Construction Act (LSCA) of 1964 and the High John Project at the University of Maryland in 1969 (Cuban & Hayes, 2001; Peterson, 2009). In addi- tion to the many studies that examine the historical roots of service-learning in this field and in higher education in general, multiple studies have described practical trends of service-learning in contemporary LIS education (Roy, Jensen & Meyers, 2009). The literature suggests that there is general agreement about the importance of developing and promoting standards for service-learning, but ALA's action to strengthen service-learning suggests a need in that its integral - even perhaps compulsory - inclusion in LIS education has yet to be systematically implemented. Requiring students to complete service- learning projects that prepare them for community engagement as professionals is increasingly significant for twenty-first century librarianship. This study explores the practicality of an experimental framework designed to examine how the core areas of a Master of Library and Information Studies (MLIS) degree program support hands-on training- based projects and vice versa. The type of training being offered and employed as J. of Education for Library and Information Science, Vol. 52, No. 2 - (Spring) April 201 1 1 52 ISSN: 0748-5786 © 201 1 Association for Library and Information Science Education
A Service-Learning Framework to Support an MLIS Core Curriculum 1 53 the context for this study is part of an on- going, award-winning service-learning project developed and administered at the School of Library and Information Studies (SL1S), University of Alabama, intended to increase the basic technology literacy of persons with intellectual disabilities. This training model has potential as a framework for service-learning within LIS programs for future library professionals to meet the needs of the communities that they serve. Objective The primary research goal of this study is to demonstrate how such projects can systematically complement the core of an MLIS curriculum and provide a general- izable project framework for the design and implementation of future projects that can benefit the MLIS program at the Uni- versity of Alabama and elsewhere. The perceived benefit of using a technology literacy or training-based service-learning context within LIS education is based on the potential for connecting and supple- menting a variety of lessons from core courses into a single outside experience, developing an ability to create direct links between theoretical knowledge and practi- cal application. This study strives to vali- date such potential along with the feasibil- ity of developing and testing frameworks for a specific type of service-learning proj- ect, providing a foundation for other simi- lar programs. Although this project is still rather na- scent, in terms of the training modules and analysis, it is important to examine and evaluate questions about service-learning and its progression to community engage- ment in LIS education (Kazmer, 2005). Furthermore, it is equally important to as- sess promptly the efficacy of the project framework to determine whether it is serv- ing as it was initially intended, as prepa- ration for emerging LIS professionals to integrate learning acquired from MLIS core courses in service-learning leading to community engagement beyond academe. Literature Review Critical Literacy Theory Central to the study of technology lit- eracy are the theoretical frames that in- form the perspectives of (dis)empower- ment of underrepresented groups who may be denied access. The depth and richness of these theories provide students with a foundational understanding that can in- form their eventual practice in engaging the populations they serve. Community engagement typically addresses inadequa- cies and/or inequalities existing in access to goods and services for certain groups. This lack of access translates into a deficit of skill sets necessary to enable members of those groups to succeed in the work- place and in society at large. Literacy is one of the most fundamental skill sets, and technology literacy is especially con- sequential to achievement and prosperity in the twenty-first century. Access to such literacy for non-dominant groups comes partially through service-learning projects and community engagement initiatives designed to address specific inadequacies. LIS students should have a heightened awareness of the needs of such groups and the ways those needs can be addressed. Critical literacy theory allows students to examine the hegemonic effects of lan- guage acquisition, fluency, and availabil- ity, which may provide barriers to those for whom culturally dominant literacy and language practices are rendered unattain- able. Hegemony is rooted in the linguistic dexterity and control of literacy practices of the dominant group, maintaining bias against language and cultural practices of those groups not in power (Siegel, 2006). As diverse populations increase, tradition- al materials and methods become less rele- vant for those whose heritage derives from other non-dominant cultures and groups, or whose cultural practices do not adhere to dominant cultural norms. The centrality of information literacy cannot be underestimated as a context for
1 54 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE theoretical development of LIS service- learning and community engagement pro- grams. An examination of literacy and lit- eracy practices includes narrative theory, which includes any form of literacy, es- pecially as relates to dialectic, linguistic, semiotic, and verbal dexterity such that it creates power structures through language and information fluency. Information lit- eracy allows the acquisition of knowledge through the ability to locate and internal- ize information, especially in cultural and social contexts (Montiel-Overall, 2007). Opportunities for technology literacy training decrease the insular environment of localized schools and communities by enabling interaction among groups that are geographically, socially, and economi- cally disparate. Therefore, technology lit- eracy provides a gateway for underrepre- sented populations to access knowledge and to expand choices for avenues to self- reliance and prosperity. Critical and Cultural Theory Co-cultural theory "derives from the perspectives of underrepresented group members, including people of color; wom- en; people with disabilities; those from a lower socioeconomic status; and gays, les- bian, and bisexuals" and provides an um- brella under which other theories can be examined (Orbe & Spellers, 2005, p. 1 73). Co-cultural theory employs five assump- tions to form its theoretical base: ( 1 ) privi- leged groups exist in a societal hierarchy; (2) levels of privilege dictate the relative power over communications, which rein- force hierarchical norms; (3) communica- tion norms of the privileged prohibit prog- ress by those not in possession of power; (4) non-privileged groups will be mar- ginalized within societal norms; and (S) marginalized groups develop co-cultural communication strategies, which allow them to operate within dominant struc- tures (Orbe & Spellers, 2005). Gaining an understanding of how co-cultural groups communicate and how this communica- tion enables them to maneuver within the dominant culture can provide insight into implementing effective pedagogies for achieving empowerment. Cultural anthropology views literacy as culturally situated such that culture is a de- terminant of literacy dexterity, which either creates or limits educational opportunity for non-dominant groups (Heath, 1983; Pur- cell-Gates, 1995). Heath (1983) and Pur- cell-Gates (1995) developed ethnographies of literacy practices in low socioeconomic groups, which revealed that socioeconomic status, regardless of race, hampered the de- velopment of higher order literacy. Such groups tend to have less access to skill sets, especially in the form of technology liter- acy, which form barriers to achievement. As a result, most inhabitants of the groups being studied were unable to effect a mean- ingful change in circumstances and repeat- ing cycles of poverty, and the powerless- ness of these individuals prohibited them from accessing culturally dominant groups. Library professionals, educators, and stu- dents assume the role of change agents to advance information literacy, especially through technology education and advoca- cy (Harada & Hughes-Hassell, 2007). One goal for library professionals is to teach non-dominant groups to utilize and exploit available cultural resources by becoming conscious users of libraries as sites of en- gagement for thinking and development of intellectual work (Moll & Gonzalez, 1994). Recognizing information literacy practic- es as a powerful tool of either acquisition of power or exercise of its oppression for non-dominant or marginalized groups can inform development of certain initiatives. Rather than viewing communities and populations as sites of experimentation, researchers become active community part- ners in engaging underserved populations (Mehra, 2005). Institutional control of literacy through media and educational systems has far- reaching implications for ways in which language promotes dominant interests over marginalized and co-cultural groups
A Service-Learning Framework to Support an MLIS Core Curriculum 1 55 (Siegel, 2006). White Eurocentric hege- mony plays out in traditional systemic barriers, which have been in place for so long that they are no longer viewed as dis- criminatory or biased (O'Halloran, n.d.). Faculty must invest fully in curricular re- form to ensure its success, but they need to perceive it as viable and congruent with personal values and goals as well (Harsh- barger, 1989; Mayhew & Grunwald, 2006). As such, educators may not see the need for service-learning to advance intentional literacy education. Parker and Stovall (2004) argue that critical theory and critical pedagogy are inextricably linked to issues of social justice and must be reinforced by classroom practice. Cre- ating a viable model for incorporation of service-learning projects into an LIS cur- riculum enables students to understand and internalize the progression from theo- ry to pedagogy to practice. Social Capital and Planning Theory attempts to marry theory with practice in linking networks of disparate groups around common social themes of cohe- sion, trust, and efficacy (Putnam, 2004). Originally intended as a framework for social planning, this theory carries broad implications for building communities, developing neighborhood and urban ini- tiatives, exploring international issues, and creating partnerships between universities and the communities they serve, especially those occupied by co-cultural groups. Col- leges and universities increasingly serve as catalysts to economic development, serving vital roles in the viability of sur- rounding communities (Bromley, 2006; Clubb, 2005). LIS students can advance their understanding of co-cultural groups by exploring ways in which social capital creates common bonds of cohesion, trust, and efficacy, especially as related to tech- nology literacy. Student participation in service-learning projects creates the con- nection between critical and co-cultural theories, and translates theoretical per- spectives into practical applications that can be utilized in pedagogy and practice. "Circuits of Theory" Umbrella Critical and cultural theory focuses on institutional structures that exist to perpetu- ate insularity and hegemony among domi- nant groups. At the institutional level, it is imperative to recognize that advancing the study of diversity issues plays an important role in providing empowerment to those who typically have been rendered invisible through hegemonic practices of dominant societal structures. Future LIS profession- als should be educated to recognize not only the theoretical implications of hege- mony, but also the importance of enabling underrepresented groups to overcome dis- criminate practices and take advantage of opportunities for advancement. Glazier and Graver's "Circuits of Theory" provides an umbrella under which to bring theoretical perspectives into contact with observed phenomena, providing library professionals with practical applications in the service of underrepresented populations. Glazier and Grover (2002) explained the theoretical underpinnings that support the service-rich environment of LIS. Their taxonomy, based on data derived from a study of city managers, a group that em- ploys Social Capital and Planning Theory, form a framework to serve as a hierarchi- cal model linking research and theory to phenomena in the realm of LIS. The tax- onomy led to a postmodern framework that they called "Circuits of Theory," which seeks to link various forms of knowledge formation with real phenomena. The rela- tionship between self, society, and knowl- edge informs the researcher's worldview, which, in turn, informs the researcher's attitude towards the phenomena studied in the real world. The ultimate role of this theoretical model is to allow researchers to control, predict, and explain behav- ioral phenomena and to guide research. Circuits of Theory recasts "grand theory" as a generalized set of working principles that operates across disciplines "to explain relationships among phenomena" (Glazier & Grover, 2002, p. 321). When applied
1 56 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE through a research paradigm, which car- ries basic values and assumptions, a world view is formed that filters the researcher's observations and judgments about the study of phenomena. It is the contexts, so- cial and psychological, in which both re- searcher and phenomena exist that enable the research process. Given the unique po- sitioning of LIS within the university and the community at large, this theoretical perspective casts a wide net over the dis- ciplines, subjects, and activities available to researchers. In addition, it positions the researcher as a participant in the real world of phenomena, straddling both subjectiv- ism and objectivism, yet operating within conventional research paradigms. Several pertinent examples illustrate the relevance of the theoretical frames that can inform the research effort. One study described the adaptation and application of a community inquiry model in LIS- oriented service-learning projects, which addressed limitations in the ability of tra- ditional service-learning projects to foster and complement learning and knowledge (Bishop, Bruce, & Jeong, 2009). An- other recent study describes the use of a "squaral" for the conceptual design of outside service-learning experiences (Ko- ran, 2009). (Squarals are generalized 2><2 matrices for illustrating the integration of theory, knowledge, practice, and service into service-learning projects.) An addi- tional study presents a framework referred to as a "road map" for associating specific stages of a core Information Representa- tion and Organization course with the activities of individual community-based research projects proposed and developed by students over the course of a semester (Mehra, 2005). Standardized grading ru- brics for evaluating student participation in service-learning projects also appear in the literature (Geisler & Yontz, 2009). Al- though each of these represents progress in critical pedagogy, there is still no stan- dard curricular or pedagogical framework for incorporation of service-learning into ALA-accredited programs. LIS programs are described as natural sites of planning, implementation, and research for service-learning due to their direct connection with all disciplines and their role as a nucleus of information lit- eracy (Brasley, 2008; Cuban & Hayes, 2001; Heiselt & Wolverton, 2009; Kaarst- Brown, et al, 2004; Mehra, 2005; Peter- son, 2009; Roy, Jensen, & Meyers, 2009; Yontz & McCook, 2003). This presents a paradigm shift that situates librarians and information literacy in a greater position of pedagogical relevance. Riddle (2003) suggests, "If service-learning envisions an important pedagogical shift in how, and why, students participate in learning ac- tivities, instruction librarians will want to ask themselves how information literacy fits into this paradigm" (p. 78). This new paradigm gives rise to the viability and importance of libraries and LIS programs in servicing and empowering a community client base. Project Framework This study is part of an ongoing, award- winning project undertaken in close part- nership with Resources for Independence (RFI), a local nonprofit agency in Tusca- loosa, AL, which offers personal support and training services to assist individuals with intellectual disabilities who are ca- pable of adaptive functioning in achieving a wide range of personal goals. This part- nership presented a way to engage gradu- ate students in outreach through the MLIS program, build a partnership with RFI, and implement a specialized technology literacy program for persons with intellec- tual disabilities. Working with this project within a specific context allows the explo- ration of the development of frameworks for mapping project-related activities with the MLIS core. The twofold objective of this project is to provide emerging LIS professionals with hands-on service-learn- ing experience while furnishing computer literacy instruction to individuals with in- tellectual disabilities. This is a crucial task
A Service-Learning Framework to Support an MLIS Core Curriculum 1 57 in LIS outreach, particularly, and society, in general. Funding for this project provided a modest amount of up-to-date technologi- cal equipment that allowed the training to be conducted using contemporary educa- tional resources. As part of the partnership, RFI provided the facilities, clients, and ex- tant assessment protocols and procedures, as well as guidance in working with the clients' instructional needs, all of which were invaluable to the success of this proj- ect. The actual hands-on training compo- nent takes place at the Day Habilitation Center, RFI's home office, in Tuscaloosa, AL. (A more thorough description of the project's development, organization, and training activities can be found in the com- panion paper, also published in this issue oiJELIS). The students participating on this proj- ect were/are current MLIS students at SLIS who elected to earn credit hours toward their degree by registering for a project-specific section of LS598 Directed Research. Since the inception of the proj- ect, eleven students have completed their primary responsibilities. The students serve as the project's staff responsible for planning, designing, delivering, evaluat- ing, and improving training modules to meet the needs of the clients. Figure 1 provides the framework that associates project-related tasks with the core areas of an MLIS program. This framework depicts a generalization of the project activities, or areas of student re- sponsibility, and demonstrates that there are general components that involve re- search and instruction, each considered interdependent with one another. It should be noted that this is an approximate, not exact, framework comprising various re- lationships among the different project areas. Examining the MLIS core courses at SLIS in conjunction with the specific ac- tivities of this service-learning training project demonstrated potential for devel- oping this general framework. Training activities and technology literacy projects are common across a variety of institu- tions, including different types of librar- ies and community organizations, and careers occupied by MLIS graduates fre- quently involve instructional components. This type of service-learning project can be especially applicable for generalizing student experiences that connect hands-on activities with the foundations of LIS. The core MLIS courses used as the context for this particular investigation are part of an ALA-accredited degree program. A list and summarized description (taken from Service-Learning Training Project r / ' , project- Research Instruction Related -J ^ / V ^ ^ 7 V ^ Activities ^ ^ ^ ^ LI Dissemination I Evaluation Modules) Computing SUS Core " us Socialization - Methods -Info sources -Information Areas and tools technologies - Project management Figure 1. Framework for a Service-learning Project that Associates Generalized Project Tasks and Activities with Core Areas of an MLIS Degree Program.
1 58 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE the University of Alabama course catalog) of these core courses include: • LS500 Organization of Information: In- troduce principles of organizing libraiy catalogs and collections; course objective is to enable the student to use search tools. • LS501 Introduction to Library and Infor- mation Studies: Course designed to pro- vide students with a broad background in library and information studies, so- cialization to LIS. • LS502 Research Methods: Introduce re- search design and statistical techniques; students should be able to design and carry out basic research projects. • LS507 Information Sources and Ser- vices: Course introducing printed and digital reference sources and reference services. • LS508 Administration and Management: Introduce theory and practice by study- ing communication, decision-making, delegation, personnel, budgeting, etc. • LS560 Information Technology: Plan- ning for and implementing an automated library system; the library of the future (under revision). • LS504 Media Production and Utilization (school media certification only): Train- ing modules for basic skills in preparing and utilizing educational media. These courses "on record" map to what is considered by this project to be the gen- eral core lessons of the MLIS degree at SLIS (Figure 1), which includes LIS So- cialization (LS501), Methods (LS502), Information Tools and Services (LS500, LS507), Technology (LS560), and Man- agement (LS508). In the project framework, research ac- tivities comprise project information dis- semination and evaluation, while instruc- tion includes module development and delivery and information technology. The framework reflects that these are interrelat- ed and while it does not depict any specific relationships between the different project areas, for illustration purposes, the SLIS faculty supervisor noted a few examples: • Those developing the training modules needed to coordinate with those respon- sible for information technology to cus- tomize training for a particular platform. • Those collecting data needed to coordi- nate with those developing the training modules to create the experimental tools. • Those disseminating project-related in- formation needed to collaborate with all other project areas to report accurate de- tails. The project framework also presents these general areas in conjunction with the related core competencies of the MLIS program that include professional social- ization, research methods, information tools and services, information technolo- gies, and management. A goal for this proj- ect was that students would directly apply lessons from the related core competency for participating on specific activities, all systematically mapped out beforehand. Methodology To conduct a preliminary evaluation, a series of data was collected from all stu- dent participants at the conclusion of their term to analyze if the project framework was serving its intended purpose from the standpoint of MLIS integration of core competencies for project participation. This round of data collection was con- ducted by (1) having students complete a survey table (Table 1) to freely associate general project activities with relevant or supportive core courses, along with any specific lessons or assignments, and (2) one-on-one interviews for follow-up dis- cussion on individual responses reported in the survey table. Table 1 presents the structure of the sur- vey table and a summarized set of results; the table provided to the students present- ed the far-left column outlining project responsibilities and the top row indicating the scope of the individual columns, but then asked the students to fill in the re- maining blank cells with relevant courses
A Service-Learning Framework to Support an MLIS Core Curriculum 1 59 Table 1 : General Responsibilities and Charges of this Service-Learning Project in Association with Core MLIS Courses and Relevant Lessons as Provided by the Student Participants. Supportive Core Course(s) General Charges of Project at SLIS Relevant Lessons from Core Courses Module Development and Organization of Info, Media Use and understanding of different types Instruction Production and Utilization, of information resources and tools Info Sources and Services Instructional module creation Information search and evaluation User and library instruction Guidelines and ethical issues for inter- acting with special populations Project Dissemination Intro to Library and Info Stud- Survey of literature in LIS ies, Info Technologies Annotated bibliography of LIS research Web presences and usability studies Evaluation, Experimental Research Methods Introduction to IRB and quantitative method Developing data collection instruments, problem statements, hypotheses, and methodologies Computing, Instructional Info Technologies Intro to basic hardware and software Web development Leadership on project tasks Management Component, Project management, budgeting, Info Technologies purchasing, team work, leadership, policy and assignments. This table was designed by the SLIS faculty supervisor to extract the core MLIS courses that complemented the project-related tasks and, more spe- cifically, certain assignments, which could validate and reinforce the data about the core MLIS courses being reported. This survey table was administered at the end of the term and asked that students return it within a week's time. To date, all students participating on this project have filled out their version of their respective table. The interviews were semi-structured in- tending only to allow further elaboration on responses or omissions in the survey ta- bles. Outputs or data from these interviews were not examined separately to generate any additional findings, but solely used to verify and flesh out the responses reported in the table, e.g. enable students to provide details that may have been forgotten at the time, further explain responses, etc. The interviews were informal, administered during a quick meeting lasting minutes where the SLIS faculty supervisor essen- tially asked the student to elaborate on the courses and activities deemed relevant to their primary responsibilities. Typically, if any data were missing from the table, such as blank cells, students would be asked if this was accurate, in that there were in fact no supportive courses for that particular area of the project. In the event that any new data or details were extracted from the interviews, students were encouraged to add to their table, as these would form the basis for the analysis in this paper. Results Preliminary results presented here (Table 1) demonstrate that student feed-
1 60 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE back concerning the relevant aspects of core MLIS courses mostly aligns with the original intent of the project framework. For example, based on students' feedback, the module development and instructional tasks are supported by the information tools and services core area. Also, the in- formation technologies area of the MLIS curriculum serves as a suitable foundation for the tasks that involve computing. The research components of the project vali- date the relevance of the methods course and its applicability to the tasks that in- volve basic data collection and analysis. Both the LIS socialization and information technology courses are particularly sup- portive of activities that involve project dissemination, supporting the importance of technology literacy in the training of LIS professionals. Moreover, information dissemination requires an understanding of basic web development and Web 2.0 technologies (covered in the information technology course); though not considered integral to the initial project framework, this association proves to be a positive unintended consequence of this basic re- search. In measuring the supportiveness of var- ious core areas for project management, students report an overall wider variety of core courses as being useful. Since stu- dents manage only one project task, but participate in multiple tasks, management courses are relevant to various phases of the project. This supports the notion that collaboration and managerial ability are significant to the development of LIS pro- fessionals (Brasley, 2008). In addition to the value of the management component in the SLIS core (if even reported as sup- portive), the course most relevant or close- ly aligned to a particular task is also asso- ciated with managing that particular area, e.g., the student in charge of dissemination reports that the management, information technology, and socialization courses are supportive for managing that general area. This supports the crucial management role of librarians in the 21st century (Mathe- son, 2007). Because only eleven students have completed a full round of service thus far, it is inappropriate to do much more in-depth statistical analysis across the collected data. However, preliminary evaluation was important following the organizational stage of the project and deemed worthy of being reported. The results of this project also pro- vide evidence consistent with postmodern theorists who link theory to practice such that LIS professionals adopt a worldview, which integrates self, society, and knowl- edge. This integrative approach develops students' critical consciousness as they move into the profession. As profession- als, they will be equipped with the tools to initiate, foster, and maintain community partnerships that will benefit communi- ties as a whole and non-dominant groups in particular. These results also facilitate university and community partnerships, which validate social capital and planning theory and information theory. Therefore, the marriage of the theoretical foundations with the practical application of technolo- gy literacy proves relevant to the 2 1 st cen- tury LIS profession as a potential hub of service-learning and community engage- ment activities and research. Positioning this service-learning framework as an inte- gral part of an MLIS curriculum provides students with the pedagogical outcomes of an LIS program in service of professional librarianship and a worldview inclusive of critical theory applied to community en- gagement. Discussion and Future Work This project strives to provide technol- ogy literacy training for a specific popu- lation of individuals with intellectual dis- abilities while applying critical pedagogy to an MLIS core curriculum. This is a crucial task in LIS engagement and soci- ety in general since every citizen should have the opportunity to reach his or her full potential and participate actively in the community. The community service
A Service-Learning Framework to Support an ML IS Core Curriculum 161 component for this project is designed to provide access to technology and training geared toward personal empowerment and success, while giving students a prac- tical experience in designing and imple- menting notable engagement services and research. The findings and observations from this round of analysis give confidence that the project framework can serve as a practi- cal generalization for developing similar technology literacy engagement projects in other LIS programs. Moreover, the re- sults collected from the survey tables cur- rently support the design of the original project framework and its intent to associ- ate general project tasks with relevant les- sons across the core of an MLIS curricu- lum. These results were further supported by informal semi-structured interviews, which enabled students to enrich and vali- date their responses. Training- and instruction-based projects are common in libraries, and it would be helpful for new efforts to have an evaluat- ed framework to assist in organizing, plan- ning, and developing their overall struc- ture and general tasks, without having to continuously recreate and flesh out these ideas from scratch. Having such a frame- work would enable the systematic design of projects that directly utilize knowledge that students gain from multiple courses in the MLIS core, not just one individual ser- vice-oriented course with specific objec- tives. Currently, no such framework exists that brings together multiple aspects of an LIS curriculum into one service-learning experience. Although this framework is intended specifically for basic technology literacy projects, its application is not limited to situations involving this particular popula- tion. This framework is intended for use in organizing projects that provide differ- ent types of training, of varying degrees of difficulty, to a number of different groups. The authors hope that this project can serve as a motivation for others to develop their own library engagement and service- learning projects that strive to bridge the digital divide for other co-cultural popula- tions. What was reported here is not the full extent of data being collected for, or as a result of, this service-learning project. As the project moves into more advanced stages of design, instruction, and evalua- tion, future studies will be conducted to report other findings. Additional data on student participation and assessments are currently being collected, which will make it possible to analyze and report on other experiences, not just those that pertain to the project framework and application of lessons from the MLIS core. This type of ongoing analysis involves collecting infor- mation being reported in reflection papers, blog posts, webpage updates, weekly re- search meeting, student journals, etc., in addition to continuation of the data collec- tion technique presented in Table 1. Ultimately, the objective for the theo- retical study of a particular project frame- work is to enable educators to provide stu- dents with the most effective and relevant learning situation and guidance for the development of community partnerships. It also provides a context for other edu- cators to further develop models that can serve as prototypes for additional course development and refinement in training LIS professionals. It is especially impera- tive for library professionals, as libraries serve entire communities, to be aware of best practices and their theoretical founda- tions to provide needed services and tools to empower non-dominant groups. This study provides a platform from which to launch additional research in community engagement, library centrality, and LIS education curriculum. Acknowledgements The authors of this paper wish to ac- knowledge the University of Alabama for providing financial support and all of the student participants whose dedication made this effort successful and beneficial
1 62 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE to so many. Also, thank you to the anony- mous JELIS reviewers for truly wonderful feedback and the JELIS Editors for pro- viding such a positive and encouraging experience. References Bishop, A., Bruce, B. C., & Jeong, S. (2009). Be- yond service-learning: Toward community schools and reflective community leaders. In L. Roy, K. Jensen, & A. H. Meyers (Eds.), Service- learning: Linking library education and practice (pp. 16-31). Chicago, IL: ALA. Brasley, S. (2008). Effective librarian and disci- pline faculty collaboration models for integrating information literacy into the fabric of an academ- ic institution. New Directions for Teaching & Learning, 2008( 114), 71-88. doi:10.1002/tl.318. Bromley, R. (2006). On and off campus: Col- leges and universities as local stakeholders. Planning Practice & Research , 2/(1), 1-24. doi : 1 0. 1 080/0269745060090 1 400. Clubb, B. (2005). Libraries Build Communities. Fe- liciter, 5/(6), 252. Cuban, S., & Hayes, E. (2001). Perspectives of five library and information studies students involved in service-learning at a community-based literacy program. Journal of Education for Library and Information Science , 42(2), 86-95. Geisler, G., & Yontz, E. (2009). Evaluation of field- based experiences and assessment of student learning. In L. Roy, K. Jensen, & A. H. Meyers (Eds.), Service-learning: Linking library educa- tion and practice (pp. 179-184). Chicago, IL: ALA. Glazier, J.D., & Grover, R. (2002). A multidisci- plinary framework for theory building. Library Trends, 50,317-329. Harada, V., & Hughes-Hassell, S. (2007). Fac- ing the reform challenge: Teacher-librarians as change agents. Teacher Librarian, 35(2), 8-13. Harshbarger, B. (1989). Faculty commitment to the university: Influences and issues. Review of Higher Education , /3(1), 29-45. Heath, S. B. (1983). Ways with words: Language, life, and work in communities and classrooms . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. Heiselt, A. K., and Wolverton, R. E. (2009). Librar- ies: Partners in linking college students and their communities through service-learning. Refer- ences & User Services Quarterly, 49(') 83-90. Kaarst-Brown, M., Nicholson, S., Von Dran, G., & Stanton, J. (2004). Organizational Cultures of Li- braries as a Strategic Resource. Library Trends, 55(1), 33-53. Kazmer, M. M. (2005). Community-embedded learning. Library Quarterly, 75 , 190-212. Koren, J. (2009). The school library media practi- cum as service education. In L. Roy, K. Jensen, & A. H. Meyers (Eds.), Service-learning: Link- ing library education and practice (pp. 55-65). Chicago, IL: ALA. Matheson, H. (2007). Promoting (for) change: New academic librarians in managerial roles. Feliciter, 53(2), 70-72. Mayhew, M., & Grunwald, H. (2006). Factors con- tributing to faculty incorporation of diversity- related course content. Journal of Higher Educa- tion, 77(1), 148-168. Mehra, B. (2005). Library and information science (LIS) and community development: The use of information and communication (ICT) towards a social equity agenda. COMMUNITY DEVELOP- MENT: Journal of the Community Development Society, 36( 1), 28-40. Moll, L. C., & Gonzalez, N. (1994). Lessons from research with language-minority children. Journal of Reading Behavior, 26 , 439-456. In E. Cushman, et al (Eds.), Literacy: A critical sourcebook (2001). (pp. 156-171). Boston, MA: Bedford St. Martin's. Montiel-Overall, P. (2007). Information literacy: Toward a cultural model. The Canadian Jour- nal of Information and Library Science, 3/(1), 43-68. O'Halloran, S. (n.d.). What do we mean by systemic or institutional change? Retrieved from http:// www.libraiydiversity.info/HO_Sessionl D_1 .pdf Orbe, M. P., & Spellers, R. E. (2005). From the mar- gins to the center: Utilizing co-cultural theory in diverse contexts. In W.B. Gudykunst (Ed.), The- orizing about intercultural communication (pp. 173-191). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Parker, L., & Stovall, D. (2004). Actions Follow- ing Words: Critical race theory connects to critical pedagogy. Educational Philosophy & Theory, 36(2), 167-182. doi:10.1 1 1 l/j.1469- 5812.2004.00059.x. Peterson, L. (2009). A brief histoiy of service-learn- ing in LIS. In L. Roy, K. Jensen, & A. H. Meyers (Eds.), Service-learning: Linking library educa- tion and practice (pp. 1-4). Chicago, IL: ALA. Purcell-Gates, V. (1995). Other people's words: The cycle of low literacy. Cambridge, MA: Har- vard University Press. Putnam, R.D. (2004). Preface. In J. Hutchinson & A.C. Vidal (Eds.) Using social capital to help in- tegrate planning, theory, research and practice, Journal of American Planning Association, 70, 142-192. Pymm, B., & Hider, P. (2008). Research literature and its perceived relevance to university librar-
A Service-Learning Framework to Support an MLIS Core Curriculum 1 63 ians. Australian Academic & Research Libraries , 39(2), 92-105. Riddle, J. (2003). Where's the Library in Service- learning?: Models for Engaged Library Instruc- tion. Journal of Academic Librarianship, 29(2), 71 . Roy, L., Jensen, K., & Meyers, A. H. (Eds.). (2009). Service-learning: Linking library education and practice. Chicago, IL: ALA. Siegel, J. (2006). Keeping Creoles and dialects out of the classroom: Is it justified? In S. J. Nero (Ed.), Dialects, Englishes , Creoles, and Educa- tion. (pp. 39-67). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erl- baum Associates. Yontz, E., & McCook, K. P. (2003). Service-learn- ing and LIS education. Journal of Education for Library and Information Science, 44( 1 ), 58-68.