THE COLLECTION AND USE OF INFORMATION BY SOME AMERICAN HISTORIANS: A STUDY OF MOTIVES AND METHODS Donald Owen Case' Previous literature on the information needs and uses of historians has tended to focus on the use of libraries and specific types of materials, rather than on the motivations for, and results of, such use. Yet understanding this prior process of historical inquiry might help us to develop improved services and facilities for scholars. A study of twenty American historians was conducted in order to better understand the nature of research in history. Respondents were asked about their choice of research topics, specific projects in progress, use of archives, categorization of materials collected, writing habits, and use of computers. Inter- views were tape-recorded, transcribed, and analyzed using standard, qualitative techniques. The results are discussed in the light of previous investigations of historians and the published statements of classification experts regarding the organization of historical knowledge. Suggestions for future study of historians are offered, and implications for libraries are explored. Throughout the many hundreds of published articles and books that have described the "information needs and uses" of various occupa- tional, social or economic groups, relatively few (notably [1-8]) have focused on the historian. Perhaps another twenty studies (among them [9-141) have considered the broad category of "humanists" that may also include historians. A few of the many studies of "social scientists" have also included historians. Besides the sheer lack of studies, those that exist have focused on somewhat different activities: use of archives and libraries, attitudes to- ward libraries and librarians, use of specific types of literature and tools, citation patterns, and, in a few cases, work habits. History remains an area in which actual behavior-rather than artifacts of behavior, such 1. Graduate School of Library and Information Science, University of California, Los Angeles, 405 Hilgard Avenue, Los Angeles, California 90024-1520. [Library Quarterly, vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 61-821 ? 1991 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-2519/9 1/6101-0003$0 1.00 61
62 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY as is revealed by citations-has not been well studied. Shepherd [7, p. 25] notes that there has been "little investigation on any large scale and in any depth of the methodology of historical research employed by academics." By far the most common focus for studies of historians has been the kinds of literature they use. The earliest studies, by McAnally [1] and Alston [2], investigated the use of materials and citations to them, docu- menting the heavy use of monographs and unpublished material that seems characteristic of historical research. Rundell's study [3] examined the way in which historians carry out their search for information, not- ing the importance of sources in general and archives in particular. Jones, Chapman, and Woods [4] also focused on the use of literature. Stieg's work [6] dealt with historians' use of periodicals and bibliographi- cal tools. Thus far, only Uva [51 and Orbach [8] have examined aspects of what historians actually do in their research, for example, the choice of topics, the motivations for their studies, the stages of their projects, the collection of evidence, and their writing processes. Unfortunately, Uva and Orbach have not published their studies. In order to serve scholars better, we must focus our attention more closely on the actual behaviors of scholars. Most studies of historians tell us little about the nature of inquiry in the field of history but, rather, tell us only about aggregated uses of libraries and types of materials. Building on our knowledge of historians' use of archives, libraries, and the materials therein, we can now address the nature of their needs in a deeper fashion. To that end, the present investigation examines the practices and thinking of twenty academic historians of the United States by eliciting from them detailed descriptions of their work. The results of extensive interviews with twenty historians are described and analyzed with the intention of reaching a better understanding of their use of information for research. Several conclusions are drawn regard- ing future studies of historians and potential implications for libraries. I begin by reviewing what historians themselves have said about the nature of their enterprise, and then consider relevant literature in li- brary and information science. The Structure of History According to Historians What do historians say that they do? The nature of historical methodolo- gies has been examined by many historians (for example, [15-22]) and so will be explored here only briefly. Regarding the scope of their enter- prise, historians usually speak in abstract terms, as when Asa Briggs de- scribes historians as concerned with "the whole range of human experi-
USE OF INFORMATION BY HISTORIANS 63 ence and activity, stretching back to the beginnings of recorded time and pressing forward beyond what can be read in today's newspapers ... discussing not only 'facts' or 'events' but explanations, interpreta- tions, values and perspectives" [ 17, p. 35]. Tilly comes closest to specify- ing, in behavioral terms, what historians do. They "specialize in recon- structing past human behavior . . . use written residues of the past: texts . . . emphasize the grouping and glossing of texts as the means of reconstructing past events . . . [and] consider where and, especially, when an event occurred to be an integral part of its meaning, explana- tion and impact. Historians are people who do these four things" [21, p. 14]. Historians, then, are people who read, condense, collect, assimilate, transform, and synthesize written records of past times. They scan the environment for stimuli that match certain characteristics-a landscape that consists of texts: books, periodicals, and original source documents (such as letters, diaries, and archival material)-supplemented by non- textual materials, such as pictures, photographs, and films. Stone identified five steps that scholars go through in their studies: (1) thinking and talking to people about the topic; (2) reading what has already been written on it; (3) studying original sources of information and making observations and notes; (4) drafting a document on what is found, and (5) revising the draft into a final document [11, p. 16]. Stone and others have found, however, that the research process is rarely so linear; these steps may be done in parallel, or the scholar may shift back and forth between stages. While historical research is certainly not a lock-step process, at some point historians must decide what they are going to study in order to effectively "conduct research." However vague the initial question or theme, as inquiry proceeds it must become gradually more focused. It seems logical that historians must, at later times, decide which subtopics are relevant to their investigation and which fall outside of it. The deter- mination of relevancy implies that scholars must develop categories re- flecting the subtopics of concern to them, and assign appropriate labels to them. Such categories become repositories for bits of evidence and narrative-the way-stations between the collection of facts, their inter- pretation, and the production of a written document. In this process, categories are transformed, via a complex process we call "writing," into an original work of history. Categorization has been a topic of great interest to both philosophers (for example, [23]) and psychologists (for example, [24]) who have long noted its role in thinking. Bruner, Goodnow, and Austin believe catego- rization to be fundamental to human reasoning, and they provide a historical example of what they mean: "Categorization of 'conceptual
64 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY objects' also involves the fit of a set of objects or instances to the specifi- cations of a category. We categorize, say, Whig and Tory statesmen of the first half of the 19th century in terms of whether each instance of the class had certain characteristics of allegiance, belief, etc." [25, p. 91. Methodologists of history, too, have commented on the ways in which historians divide their field and label relevant concepts. Tilly says that "the basic differentiation is three-dimensional: 1. Place (Africa, Asia, Brazil, etc.) 2. Time (Medieval, Renaissance .. .) [and] 3. Subject matter (political, intellectual, diplomatic, social, etc.)" [21, p. 19]. Stanford's discussion of historical knowledge approaches a finer level of detail: "First, certain chronological conventions divide historical time by dynasties, reigns, centuries or periods. Then, equally convenient, there are spatial divisions of history, such as histories of Europe. ... Much orthodox historiography ... divides history into nations.... From this it has not been difficult to write histories of institutions, organiza- tions, and more recently, social groupings [such as] trade unions, the working class, churches and sects" [22, p. 211. In these statements, historians are seen as progressively identifying the basic structure of historical thought: from very broad characteriza- tions (Asia, medieval times) to narrower, researchable concepts (trade unions, mobility). Of course Tilly and Stanford are speaking of major dimensions and gross categories. While a scholar might identify herself as a social historian, or say that she studies family relations in the nine- teenth century, such statements are typically orientational and may also be tied to specific teaching assignments; her actual scholarship might take place at a much finer level of granularity, for example, distinctions between male and female roles in the antebellum South. While place is rather an obvious (although sometimes vague) way to classify knowledge, the other two dimensions deserve further explana- tion: subject (or topical categories) and time (or chronological catego- ries). Briggs, speaking of his colleagues, notes that "we use labels like 'Renaissance' or 'feudalism,' each with a history of its own. We also use concepts borrowed from other social sciences, like 'class' or 'mobility.' Increasingly historians think not so much in terms of 'periods' as in terms of 'problems'" [17, p. 35]. Stanford points out the importance of "collectivities-especially gov- ernments . . . race, class, party, religion or nation" [22, pp. 30-311 in the thinking of some historians. Potentially, historians may adopt any category used by other researchers in the humanities or social sciences. Thus, the bulk of work in history is also to be found in the traditional concerns of the social sciences. Of particular interest in history is the dimension of time; were it not for the temporal dimension, most topics in history would be the same as
USE OF INFORMATION BY HISTORIANS 65 those covered by other fields within the social sciences and humanities. Adding a time dimension to the normal range of possible subject head- ings poses special problems for historians. Leff, for instance, describes his view of "how periods are formed. As [sic] its simplest, we can say that a period is the outcome of the need to relate generic continuity to temporal discontinuity.... Period, as we have said, provides that con- text, but it can only do so according to some organizing principle which must be the work of the historian" [20, p. 1511. Periods, then, are not merely convenient collections of years. They are thematic categories of time that require substantiation by the histo- rian. Smith says that nineteenth century institutions carried the creation of periods to an extreme: "History at that time had been divided chrono- logically and geographically. The chronological arrangement prevailed in ancient and medieval history; thereafter . . . it became primarily geographical ... these segments were further divided into periods (early modern, late modern) and sometimes into centuries and even genera- tions [for example] the Age of Jackson, the Civil War, Reconstruction, the Progressive Era, the New Deal" [16, pp. 141-421. Nevins decried this use, by historians and others, of shorthand labels for periods: "A quite false idea of history is inculcated by such mislead- ing labels as the Jacksonian Era, or the Age of Theodore Roosevelt" [26, p. 8] since they wrongly associate one person's personality with the nature of an entire era. Many other historiographers have denounced the use of labels for periods, yet they continue to be commonly used by both historical texts and the general public. (Note, for example, the popular American obsession with recent decades-"the Fifties," "the Sixties"-despite the arbitrary nature of these chronological boundaries in terms of the social and political events with which they are associated.) Noting the received view that historians should concentrate on prob- lems and not on periods, Spitz nonetheless does not believe that "period- ization is itself a problem, for historians know full well that any division of time into carefully defined periods is merely a convenient device for conceptualization" [27, p. 189]. Spitz goes on to say that: Braudel ... observed that historians first create concepts, then glue labels on their precious bottles, and end up giving the labels authority over their con- tents.... [But] it is not true of the major periods that historians have arbitrarily concocted labels.... A certain notion of the meaning of an age is born usually in the minds of the elite of the time or of the time immediately succeeding. The meaning is discussed, argued, simplified, reduced to a formula, a phrase, a term, and is then adopted by the historians, canonized in their books and institutional- ized in university curricula. [27, p. 190] We may conclude from this discussion that we would expect the fol- lowing kinds of categories in the work of historians: chronological (divi-
66 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY sions by centuries, decades, periods, eras, and specific ranges of years), topical (persons, events, and themes), and geographical (continents, re- gions, countries, states, provinces, cities, and so on). The first two of these categories will receive more attention in the pages to follow. (Geo- graphical categories will not be featured because their variation has al- ready been restricted in this investigation through choice of subjects: twenty American historians, few of whom incorporated a regional focus. It is recognized, nonetheless, that both geographical focus and lan- guages read are also determinants of the behavior of historians.) The Structure of History According to Classification Theorists How do we approach the classification of history in our own profession? Several classification theorists have discussed problems of subject classi- fications in general and of areas related to history in particular. Classifi- cation schemes have always had problems in mapping out the fields of knowledge, especially as they grow and change. One classification theorist, D. W. Langridge, states that "it is often loosely claimed that in history place and time become the leading catego- ries. This analysis is correct in respect of time, but wrong about place.... The real question is 'What are the units of historical study?' and unfortu- nately there is no consensus of opinion. Historians themselves are spe- cialists and do not offer us a total pattern of history" [28, p. 49]. In speaking of other classification theorists, Foskett believes that "it is here that traditional schemes fail. Nearly all of them are based on 'classifica- tion' as it is known in the classificatory sciences; they assume that any particular field of study may be considered as a 'genus,' and that it can be logically divided into a number of species" [29, p. 30]. One of the few direct approaches to dealing with the chronological element in literature was advocated by Lund and Taube in 1937 in their attempt to create a "nonexpansive" classification system: "It is proposed that chronological division precede subject division; by this is meant division of books into the periods in which they were written and classi- fying by subjects within each period. Each period is to be a definite cultural epoch . . . a span of years within which knowledge presents a unified structure which can be expressed in a system of classes and subclasses" [30, pp. 381-82]. It was their belief that "a chronological classification is just as essential as a pure subject classification" [30, p. 3861 and that such periods could then be divided into subject categories. Based upon this notion, Lund and Taube suggested their own "list of periods," intended primarily for books, which include such period labels as the "Age of transition," the
USE OF INFORMATION BY HISTORIANS 67 "17th century," the "Age of physical science," and the "Age of progress" [30, p. 382]. Their scheme suffered from Western ethnocentrism but does at least indicate that some information scientists have been thinking about chronological classification. Langridge claims that "the commonest unit of historical study is the national state" and complains about the difficulty with which depen- dency relationships are defined: "In history, for example, we cannot say that the country depends on the period or that the period depends on the country" [28, pp. 50, 22]. This makes it difficult to construct any kind of hierarchy of historical knowledge-a problem described by one intellectual historian, Rubanowice, in this way: "No viable classification scheme (or library) can remain in permanent stasis but must corre- spondingly grow and change. The structure of this body of accumulat- ing knowledge is probably not really dendritic and hierarchic" [31, p. 267]. Especially where history is concerned, there is no "natural order" in reality that can be duplicated in a classification scheme. Rather, the order is a cognitive one that is imposed by the historian. Matthew Gilmore [32] has described the Journal of American History's efforts to assemble bibliographies of recent articles and dissertations under a few basic headings. To an original list of four geographical headings and one general class, theJournal of American History has fitfully added topical categories over the years. The classifications now number thirty-six and include such nonparallel headings as mass communica- tions, environment, and social history along with older designations like "the West." Gilmore discusses the problems faced when one tries to index history: "The categories used can be abstracted, with difficulty, to a higher level. The problem arises from the broadness of the subjects and the lack of obvious connections between categories" [32, p. 161]. Historians are not always pleased with classificatory efforts by librari- ans and indexers. Rubanowice [31] believes that Dewey, Cutter, Bliss, and the Library of Congress have chopped up knowledge into artificial fragments of little use to historians. As an example he offers Cutter's notion that history included numismatics and knighthood but not the social sciences and philosophy. The very worst idea, according to Ru- banowice, is that history is a category separate from the rest of knowl- edge. History may overlap any category of knowledge. We have reviewed a number of writings regarding the structure of historical knowledge and the manner in which historians pursue it. Do individual historians share these views of the scope, structure, and meth- ods of history? Interviews with twenty historians explored their views on several related research questions: What do historians study? How do historians decide what to study? What do historians actually do when they "study history"? How do historians categorize and label the evi-
68 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY dence they collect? How do historians transform their knowledge into new, original works? That is, how do historians go about wnrting books and journal articles? A Study of American Historians Methodology This topic was investigated through a variety of means, primarily through interviews, reading, and examination of the products of histori- ans (such as their books). The investigation was based on extensive inter- views with twenty historians, conducted during 1988. Respondents were from eight universities (two private, six public) in the states of California and Arizona. Twelve of the respondents were primarily devoted to teaching. For purposes of comparability (in terms of geography and chronology), the sample was restricted to historians of the United States. Lists of full-time faculty at each university, taken from the Guide to Departments of History, 1987-88 [331, were used to identify ninety-four potential respondents; these persons were contacted by telephone or visits to their departments. Four of the twenty-four historians who agreed to participate were unable to be scheduled for an interview, leaving twenty respondents. Nineteen of the faculty interviewed were male; eleven were full pro- fessors, three were associate professors, and six were assistant profes- sors. All respondents had several publications to their credit. Fifteen had written at least one book, and one had written seven books. The group included six interested in social history, three in intellectual his- tory, three who specialized in chronological periods, two in political history, two in economic history, two in cultural history, one historian of the western regions of the United States, and one historian of archi- tecture. Compared to the distribution of the 767 respondents to Stieg's mail survey [6], the present group probably oversampled scholars of what Stieg calls "topical" history. No claims are made that this sample accurately reflects a representative distribution of American historians. The interviews with these historians covered the following subjects: research and teaching interests; current research projects and publica- tions; methodologies used in research; source and circumstance of inter- est in topic; the nature of historical knowledge; nature and location of materials used in research; personal filing and indexing methods (for books, articles, notes, and so on); and use of computers and other infor- mation technologies. Citations to the published work of the respondents also were collected in order to better understand the topics and methods of each respondent through an examination of sample articles and
USE OF INFORMATION BY HISTORIANS 69 books. These were complemented by published descriptions of historical methods by noted historians. Interviews were both tape-recorded and noted on an interview schedule devised for this purpose. The recordings and notes were later merged to form a selective transcript. The tran- scripts and other relevant texts were analyzed using qualitative tech- niques, such as described by Turner [34]. Briefly, these techniques in- volved the aggregation of respondent comments into categories and the comparison and relation of those categories to one another. What Do Histoians Study? The historical research specialties of these historians were many. As examples of recent topics, the twenty historians each offered one of the following: Relations between males and females, and blacks and whites, during the nine- teenth century. Social history of rural communities, families, and economic structures. Anglo-American diplomatic relations in the 1930s. Indian-White relations in nineteenth-century California. Social reform, especially the conflict over capital punishment during the period before 1830. Criminal justice in the period 1850-1950. Modern legal history, as revealed through biographies of Supreme Court jus- tices. Causes of the Great Depression, especially the role of family spending and saving. Labor as depicted in mass culture, and histories of other non-elite groups. "Popular history": what the middle classes think about the history and culture of their nation. The economy during the interwar period, as revealed by documents and per- sonal memoirs. The Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo and subsequent relations between the United States and Mexico. Local history (of the city of San Diego). How the Marshall Supreme Court handled land title cases affecting Native Americans. History of buildings and architecture in the American West. The evolution of the concept of "liberalism" in American life. The political activities of ethnic minorities in colonial times. American moral and political philosophy, from the mid-nineteenth century to the Civil War. Utopian communities in the western United States. The role of myth in the ideology of black Americans. These topics represent varying levels of generality: some are geo- graphic (San Diego), and some reflect events (the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo) or topics (liberalism). It is difficult to generalize from such a varied collection of topic descriptions, but they do reflect the sorts of
70 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY approaches discussed by both classification theorists and historical meth- odologists. How Do Historians Decide What to Study? Historical research has been described as a dialogue between the scholar and the sources. Fabian believes that we can assume that the library "allows the scholar to bring together highly complex configurations of texts" but otherwise believes that "very little is known about the ways in which research in the humanities is carried out" [35, pp. 79, 83]. Line [361 takes a similar view. He says that the origins of research projects, as well as the research activities that follow, are often serendipi- tous. Humanists often give vague answers to the question "Why do you study what you study?" Researchers, Line says, are often hazy about how they go about their work. Uva [5] noted that his respondents tended to provide answers like "previous research" or "thinking about historical problems" when describing what led them into particular research projects. Kaplan [37] also stresses the individualized and subjective processes that make up "research," in which intuition and imagination play impor- tant roles. Researchers do not proceed in a lock-step fashion from topic development, through background reading, searches of indexes and catalogs, then reading articles and books they find in this way. Rather, they have a great deal of background knowledge of both literature and people, monitor a continuous flow of information from various sources, and have developed their owm large bibliographic files based on footnotes and bibliographies in the primary literature. The logic of their work is reconstructed afterward, in an idealized fashion, reflecting a highly rationalized process that may not have actually taken place. The same pattern has been found in studies of laboratory scientists (for example, [M8]), in which the actual behaviors seen by observers differ significantly from the "textbook" descriptions of research that scientists usually pro- vide when interviewed. Only a few historians in this study were very specific about their choice of topics. Most traced their choices to their "continuing interests" or to "reading" while others cited instances in which an exchange with a colleague led them to explore a topic. For example, one respondent described the choice of a topic as a response to reading something that appeared suspicious in some way: "You look at something, you read it, then you say... 'Now wait a minute. This can't possibly be true. Where did you get those assumptions?'" He advocated history as a series of challenges to existing points of view about past events and to a dialogue with other historians. Another historian criticized his colleagues for be- ing both narrow and too bounded by time in their focus: "Many of them
USE OF INFORMATION BY HISTORIANS 71 find their problem in the Age of Jackson and burrow into it," never looking at other topics or periods as a way of gaining perspective on their own specialty. Several respondents in this study claimed that there are two different kinds of approaches in historical work: first there is a broad level at which the historian looks at a problem in a new way, what one respon- dent described as "pathbreaking." Whether the historian is right or wrong about his thesis is a separate issue, but the key thing is that it encourages further study and promotes responses from other histori- ans; an example might be the controversial work of Stanley Elkins on the effects of slavery. The second type of approach is narrower, as when historians conduct a "solid" study of a particular community, document- ing a problem in some depth. This sort of "micro" history often follows up on the more theoretical type of scholarship described above. This kind of macrolevel versus microlevel characterization of historical re- search is also found in many of the works of historical methodology mentioned above, as when Page Smith [16] discusses "symbolic history" as something that exists at a higher level than actual events and the sources in which they are recorded. One respondent in this study argued that the microlevel of history had proceeded too far, under the influence of the social sciences. He emphasized "the value of the old narrative history" over the more recent approaches that have produced "microcosms" of knowledge "that no one seems willing to put together." The social sciences, according to this historian, encouraged the type of research question that "could be answered by common sense." As an example he described the work of a colleague who investigated the fate of artisans during the industrial revolution. Following much investigation of work records, family histo- ries, and demographic data, he found the "obvious" answer that many artisans had gone to work in the newly built factories. Among the questions asked were how historians choose particular topics and how they pursued them. Described here are contrasting case studies of three respondents. (In the interests of maintaining the ano- nymity of the respondents, some details of their projects-such as the names of the persons whose biographies they have written-are not supplied here.) The first historian, a senior professor, has been writing a biography of an early black civil rights leader and other "nineteenth-century black people." His project represents two decades of research that began when he was encouraged to choose a "Civil War topic" for his dissertation but "didn't like what [he] saw." His doctoral advisor then suggested that he take a look at "this Negro who was once a congressman from Virginia." Personal involvement with the civil rights movement added fuel to his
72 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY efforts to show a predominately white audience what black lives were like-to "reinterpret black lives," in his words. Since then, he and his wife (also a historian) have written the first volume of a biography that covers the first thirty-six years of the subject's life and examines the lives of other historical figures associated with the subject as well. Their work has taken fifteen years to reach publication. They describe the project as a "life-and-times" biography that uses "the methods of social and political history as well as historical biography." This historian's writing is based on "a staggering amount of re- search. . . I live in the archives." At home and in the office he has "hundreds of thousands" of five-by-seven-inch cards, held together with rubber bands and placed in metal file boxes. The cards serve to record chronologies of events in the lives of the subjects and are typically orga- nized first by year and month, then by personal name, then by event (for example, "Harper's Ferry") or topic (for example, "social life"). He also uses spiral bound "copy books" to record references and facts. So, in historian number one we find a "traditional" mix of sources (letters, diaries, news accounts, and so on), methods (the reading and interpreta- tion of archival materials), and genre (biography). The second historian is writing a book on relationships between "sex, gender and culture throughout the West . . . miscegenation, cross- cultural sexual relations or lack of same ... [and] Federal Indian policy." His interest in this topic stemmed from his dissertation, when he looked into rape and prostitution during the California Gold Rush. "Why do men rape? Why do women become prostitutes? That led me into a whole area I hadn't considered before.... I started looking at families: the Indian family as compared to Anglo and Hispanic families." This historian uses a variety of qualitative and quantitative approaches in his work: "I was trained as a traditional historian. After I left graduate school I discovered the wonderful world of numbers and learned that I could learn some things from that. I've gotten into what might be called some 'softcore statistics.' . . . I'm open to just about any sort of source and method of analysis that can give me insight.... I use anthropology, sociology, geography, criminology in analyzing the past." He also uses archive documents "to flesh out the statistical material that I find. I tend to read a lot of letters and diaries." Those documents are found in the California Archives, the special collections of the Ban- croft Library, and the Federal Records Archive Centers. On National Archives microfilm he studies records of the Office of Indian Affairs and the U.S. Army. In addition, he uses published primary sources, such as records of the early missions of San Francisco. "I can't think of a classification of materials that I don't use in my work.. .. I cast my net
USE OF INFORMATION BY HISTORIANS 73 very very widely," he says, but complains that "no one is indexing rec- ords with my project[s] in mind." Scholar number two does not rely completely on the "traditional" methods and sources of the historian. His topic (which is stated as a research question), his sources, and his varied methods reflect the in- creasing influence of the social sciences in the historian's craft. The third historian describes his specialty as "late nineteenth cen- tury . . . but more topically than chronologically." He is working on a biography of a popular nineteenth-century writer of history, whose book jackets proclaimed him as "America's greatest historian." This project grew out of his doctoral dissertation, which came to me because I love junk shops and old book stores and flea markets and auctions and I kept seeing [his] books showing up in these shops, and clearly someone paid a lot of money in the late-nineteenth century to purchase those volumes, and yet when you began to look around in academic libraries you didn't see much [of that author]. And that led me to thinking ... there must be a whole field of what was important to people at one time that for a variety of reasons didn't get into academic libraries in the late nineteenth century. Because of his interests, he spends a lot of time looking for evidence of popular tastes and ideology in the objects and documents of the time. He continues to "prowl" in museums and second-hand shops, collecting the many old volumes, toys, and household objects that decorate his crowded office. This historian feels that popular culture is often over- looked by historians and that his colleagues ought to pay more attention to "pulp fiction," museums, and "folk collections" of objects common to the period under study. He advocates the use of instinct as a guide to finding a study topic: "Your best [research] questions are probably formulated by your life experiences." This scholar may be an example of Rundell's claim [3] that historians tend to proceed from sources to topics. Yet what was available in the archives did not seem to dictate a topic for most of these respondents: they claimed to be following ques- tions that led them to sources, rather than the other way around. What Do Historians Do When They Study History? Stoan [39] has made the point that what is secondary and tertiary to the scholar is primary to the librarian. That is, the books, bibliographic databases, and reference tools that we painstakingly provide are not the source materials that scholars most often seek. Reliance upon original evidence is especially important to historians, who make a strong distinc- tion between primary and secondary material. For the historian, the primary material is to be found in the archives. Just about every con-
74 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY ceivable type of material was mentioned by these respondents: books, articles, manuscripts, magazines, newspapers, statistical reports, wills, deeds, diaries, letters, films, photographs, portraits, architectural draw- ings, buildings, toys, and so on. The scholars interviewed here were asked to describe the types and locations of material important to their work. Several respondents described their use of primary sources as the heart of what they do. Arranging the time and circumstances for access to sources was critical: "Part of it is that primary source access is more difficult than secondary source access. So if I get a microfilm I've got 'x' number of weeks to [return it] and it is a pain in the butt to get it back again, so I try to be very thorough the first time around." One respondent noted that "reading articles involves less writing, in many ways, than reading primary sources" because it is easier for him to keep a copy to examine at his leisure. Another historian said that he would "take down quoted material as it strikes me, given the variety of questions and ideas that are swimming in my head. That's the easy part. The hard part comes later sitting down with all these things and trying to figure out all that I've got there." The respondents mentioned a bewildering number of libraries and archives that contained materials of interest to them. The most com- monly mentioned was the Library of Congress, but virtually all of the major academic libraries were mentioned by one historian or another. Several of them also used libraries outside of the country, primarily in England, such as the diplomatic historian who spent an entire academic year visiting British libraries. Interlibrary loan (ILL) was mentioned by a few as one way of obtaining source materials. The ILL policies and procedures were of particular import to these historians. One respon- dent described an ILL request (for newspapers from the 1830s) that he thought would bring him a few pages of microfiche; to his surprise it arrived in the form of many boxes of actual newspapers. Historians typically expressed a preference for working with original copies of materials but seemed resigned to using microform copies of most things. Once they had made their notes and photocopies, historians returned to their offices to organize them. Fifteen of these historians organized their documents and notes primarily by topic. Of those fifteen histori- ans, ten chose to arrange or index their material by period or event, either in combination with topical categories or as a secondary level. Two historians said they organized their material strictly chronologi- cally, and another one by topic within periods. The remaining two histo- rians said they organized their materials solely by author's name. Twelve of the historians maintained an index of their books and arti- cles but typically only for those materials that were relevant to a current
USE OF INFORMATION BY HISTORIANS 75 writing project. Several reported having tried to keep a record of all their materials but giving up after it proved to involve too much effort. One has used computers to collect citations to thousands of documents over a period of years, but changed software several times in the process as he found better packages and computers; this strategy led to having citations in several incompatible formats, rather than in one centralized collection. (A further discussion of the organization of these historians' files, and the implications for design of computerized systems, can be found in Case [40].) Although they often mentioned periods (especially centuries and de- cades), none of these historians claimed to organize their files in this manner. As is seen elsewhere in this article, however, several did use chronology (date or year, but rarely a chronology of years) in their filing and writing. The use of technological aids to research was also discussed in the interviews. While it is a common point of view that "scholars fear com- puters," this attitude was not evident among the respondents in this study. All but three of the twenty historians used a computer in some aspect of their work. The average years of computer usage was about 3.3 years at the time of the survey. That is, most of the respondents had started using computers about 1984 or 1985. But at least one respon- dent had been using a microcomputer for as long as eight years, begin- ning with a now ancient Radio Shack TRS-80 Model One. The type of application common to all of the historians was word processing, but respondents varied in the degree to which computers were integrated into their writing habits. Virtually all continued to edit manuscripts primarily on paper, and several still produced initial drafts by hand. Some used their personal computer only for certain tasks. For example, one historian who was new to computers used his only for shorter documents, such as letters; he continued to use a typewriter for documents of more than three pages. Historians are beginning to change the ways in which they record notes. Some respondents reported transcribing their hand-written notes into their personal computer, often adding further notes in the process. One respondent reported using a portable ("laptop") computer, and several others expressed interest in using such devices in the future to avoid unnecessary transcriptions that might introduce errors. In addition to word processing, five historians reported using a per- sonal computer for database applications (such as bibliographical or sta- tistical records) or to perform statistical analyses. These tended to be the social and economic historians. None of these historians reported the use of any bibliographic databases, even indirectly. Unexpectedly, another technical innovation is credited with signifi-
76 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY cantly changing the way that historians operate. It is not databases or information retrieval or even computers in general. Those means of creating, storing, and retrieving electronic copies of text have just begun to affect the way historians work. Rather it is the photocopier-a means of creating physical copies of documents-that has most affected the work of the historian. The influence of the photocopier was a development first noted by Rundell two decades ago [3]. Yet the appearance of this technical inno- vation is still fresh in the minds of older historians. Unprompted by the investigator, a quarter of the respondents in this study mentioned the role of photocopiers in their research. Before copiers became common in archives and libraries, historians spent hours taking notes and tran- scribing materials by hand. Now they tend to photocopy all but the briefest portions of primary material in archives. The ability to photocopy depends upon the project and place in- volved. For example, one historian felt that the Library of Congress makes copying difficult. At some sites, it is simply very expensive. Fabian has characterized the lack of adequate reprographic facilities as a barrier to historical research: "There is hardly any library which supplies photo- graphic work within a reasonable period of time, so that in many cases the researcher is thrown back on simple note taking" [35, p. 92]. In a way, photocopying has increased the difficulties that historians encoun- ter in processing relevant materials, since it makes it easy to collect docu- ments without necessarily "absorbing" them through close reading and note-taking. How Do Historians Write? Historians reported a variety of individualistic methods of turning their notes and other materials into a draft of an original work. For example, one historian described how he would "literally physically organize these notes . . . here's for the introduction and there's for section one and here's for section two. That could be done in a variety of ways: either by hand or in a computer file.... The hard part is just that moment of reading through the material and thinking 'What can I use?' of all the things you've written down but where? The big step . . . is to come up with a final outline and to organize things on the basis of that outline. And the outline is continually changing, sort of like a back-and-forth act." Writing the first drafts of a document may be the first point at which a scholar reaches a holistic understanding of the topic. For example, one historian described the process by which he organizes his material in this fashion: "I'm not necessarily sure of what the categories are until I see the lay of the land on the project itself. So I [may] start off by
USE OF INFORMATION BY HISTORIANS 77 saying that I want to do something on labor and the movies. But what exactly? I'm not absolutely sure. So the easiest thing to do when you start off . . . is to put things chronologically. Usually it is when I have to write, either a grant proposal or an article, that I . . . go through all the cards and create the categories, as I'm going along." A few historians described elaborate rituals that they carry out in the preparation of manuscripts. One uses a box of index cards for writing, in which each card lists a book citation, the library call number, and an (arbitrarily assigned) sequence number that can substitute for author- and-year. He later uses these to make lists of references. Relevant con- tent in these books he notes in a small notebook while reading the mate- rial, then he later "collapses" his list of relevant materials onto paper, using the sequence numbers as references to the original sources: Let's say I'm writing a chapter ... I'll take out a piece of paper and write down those subjects that seem to be related along with the source numbers. Then I'll go to the box of sources and pull out all the sources that I need for that chapter. Then I'll read through all the sources and maybe refine the subject content of the sources. Then I'll start to sequence it. . . in what kind of order I'll be putting this material, then I'll just start writing. Sometimes I'll get carried away and maybe hit on some good scheme and not really follow the sequence.... After I've read through all the source material again, I can make another sheet that is more refined [with] more topics and page numbers.... Sometimes I'll find out, in writing, that I just don't have the information that I need to develop some topics and I'll go back and do some more research to find it. The latter comment is a good illustration of the back-and-forth nature of this kind of scholarship. A laboratory scientist, once she begins to write up the findings of an experiment, would not generally go back and run the experiment again. But the historian, in writing, will often find that expression of what is known brings into focus that which is not known, prompting a trip back to the source material. Another historian used cards in a similar fashion in writing: "Then when I get ready to write, I go through the cards and I reorganize them into categories . . . I don't start to write until I see what it looks like. [Then] it's easy for me to go through the cards and put them in what I can see are going to be the sections of either a book or an article." James Axtell [41] has written an essay "History as Imagination," in which he declares that much of historical work involves imagining peo- ple and situations. One of these respondents agreed, saying that imagi- nation "permits an historian to better intuit behavior. . .. Seeing actors as having some volition, rather than as passive objects." Another histo- rian described his writings on working-class life in Cincinnati with the comment "I had to give life to those times. . . a sense of passion" because otherwise he would feel that his work was false. "There is no such thing
78 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY as empirical truth," he continued, "There is no such thing as empirical reality. It is all a construction in a dialogue between what the author has gotten out of his primary sources and what he or she does to reconceive or reconceptualize it. And that is an act of imagination." On the role of literary style, one historian made this observation: "Despite all my forays into social science, I still think of myself as a humanist. I still admire historians who have a literary flair, not for its own sake but because it is a better way to communicate.... It is the principal advantage that historians have in communicating with a wider audience." Another historian said, simply, "In my field the subject and the expression are so inextricably intertwined that they cannot really be separated." Summary and Conclusions Historians, librarians, and even psychologists have written about the ways in which historical knowledge is organized and used. Since few scholars have written about how historical knowledge is created, the present investigation was undertaken. The purpose was to understand how a sample of historians chose their topics, proceeded with their re- search, and went about their writing. Historians in this study pursued a variety of research topics. While sometimes vague about their motivations, these historians said that they chose their topics based largely on past interests, often pertaining to their graduate education and sometimes also to their personal circum- stances or interpersonal contacts. Their investigations were guided less by sources and more by questions or problems that led them to particu- lar sources. In investigating their topics, the historians interviewed here were guided by conceptualizations of their topic that were expressed in sets of categories-semihierarchical labels for certain phenomena that served to organize their notes and manuscripts. Virtually all respon- dents used computers in some aspects of their writing. Habits of compo- sition were idiosyncratic but typically featured the sequencing of topics and notes into a linear and/or hierarchical order appropriate for the type of document being composed. The present investigation has some commonalities with earlier studies of historians' work habits, especially the unpublished works by Uva [5] and Orbach [8]. Uva's "critical incident" study of twenty-two historians found the majority of historians to be in either "data collection" or "writing-rewriting" stages at the time of contact. Yet the present investi- gation suggest that "stages" are illusory; choosing and refining topics, planning and conducting studies, gathering and interpreting evidence,
USE OF INFORMATION BY HISTORIANS 79 and writing and revising manuscripts can go on concurrently, both within and across individual projects, as Uva eventually admits. The present investigation does not support Uva's conclusion that historians' research procedures are largely serendipitous, a finding also suggested by Steig [61 and Stone [11]. This study found historians to be well- organized and methodical in their research. Also not supported is Uva's notion that historians' choice of research topic is unrelated to interper- sonal sources of information; several respondents in the present investi- gation reported that colleagues had played key roles in the formulation of research questions, especially earlier in their careers. As Orbach [8] notes, there is an "invisible college" at work among historians, particu- larly for exchanging knowledge of archival sources. Implications for Libraries and for Further Research History may be less well served by classification and indexing than any other academic field. Libraries and bibliographk tools are designed for those who are unfamiliar, or only partly familiar, with the knowledge they seek. The accomplished scholar-and particularly the historian-is not often aided by the disciplinary boundaries that library classification schemes enforce. The needs of historians present a dilemma to the librarian. Karl Weintraub has said that, in buying and cataloging materi- als, the librarian "cannot neglect the fact that many of his users are subject oriented and that disciplines exist as organized bodies of knowl- edge. But when the librarian struggles with . . . how his library is being used, and how it could be used more effectively, then the problem- oriented model of knowledge may be the much more significant one to hold to" [10, p. 29]. It is this "problem-oriented model" that we must consider in devising tools and services for historians, not the disciplinary model of a body of knowledge, subdivided by place and period. While we cannot easily re- order our archives and library collections, we may be able to bridge them through special services and tools for the scholar. Studies of terminology used in academic specialties might result in guides to "translate" the terms of one specialist (for example, a symbolic anthropologist) into words and examples familiar to another kind of specialist (for example, a social historian); Wiberley [12] gives us the example of "Realism" as a term that can vary widely in meaning and may require such treatment. Future research might develop ways to index the aspect of literature called "comment" by Bella Hass Weinberg in her essay "Why Indexing Fails the Researcher" [42]. That is, how can an index reflect the "point of view" or "'context" that is so often the central concern in discussions
80 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY of historical problems? Relatedly, Tibbo [43] offers empirical evidence in favor of a new style of abstract for reporting historical research. Her research suggests that historical abstracts need to describe not only elements of time, geographic/political units, and topic but also names of individuals and social groups, descriptions of the author's thesis and arguments, and the primary sources used in the investigation. Finally, electronic mail and computer bulletin boards might be ex- ploited to facilitate the exchange of information among historians, archi- vists, and librarians about the location and use of source materials. The formation of "invisible colleges" could in this way be encouraged, and librarians and archivists could more easily become part of them. To employ a problem-oriented model of information services we must focus our studies of information needs and uses more closely on the behaviors of specific communities of scholars. Most studies of the infor- mation behavior of historians, for example, tell us only about the use of libraries and specific types of materials-and they inform us using our own jargon, not that of the scholar. If we are to serve scholars better, we could benefit from a deeper understanding of their work than can be gained by questions about the use of books, journals, and indexes-questions that are often biased in the direction of current practices. The present study attempted to elicit from scholars descriptions of their work that will aid us in understanding their use of information. The key to understanding scholarly information needs-and their use of libraries, archives, databases, and indexes-lies in further probing of their specific activities. We need in-depth studies of particular groups of scholars-much narrower than the vague collections of "humanists" studied elsewhere, and narrower even than the varied "American histo- rians" examined here. A more manageable focus would be something on the order of "social historians of the United States." An in-depth approach to understanding information needs and uses presents difficult methodological hurdles, however. Interviews are time- consuming and are based on unreliable self-reports of thought, motiva- tion, and action. While thought and motivation are difficult to study outside of personal interaction with the scholar, actions may be studied in a variety of ways. It is therefore advisable to couple interviews with examinations of artifacts of behavior (such as notes, files, publications, and citations) and, where possible, actual observation of scholars at work. The study by Tibbo [43], for example, merges interview and ques- tionnaire data with an analysis of samples of historical abstracts to arrive at specific recommendations for optimal abstracting of historical work. It is by bringing a variety of research methods to bear on a particular
USE OF INFORMATION BY HISTORIANS 81 community of scholars that we can further our understanding of the work of scholars and, hence, serve them better. REFERENCES 1. McAnally, A. M. "Characteristics of Materials Used in Research in United States History." Ph.D. diss., University of Chicago, 1951. 2. Alston, Annie M. "Characteristics of Materials Used by a Selected Group of Historians in Their Research in United States History." M.A. thesis, University of Chicago, 1952. 3. Rundell, Walter. In Pursuit of Amercan History. Norman: University of Oklahoma, 1970. 4. Jones, Clyve; Chapman, Michael; and Woods, Pamela. "The Characteristics of the Literature Used by Historians." Journal of Librarianship 4 (1972): 137-52. 5. Uva, Peter A. "Information-gathering Habits of Academic Historians: Report of the Pilot Study." SUNY Upstate Medical Center, Syracuse, N.Y., March 1977. 6. Stieg, Margaret F. "The Information of [sic] Needs of Historians." Collge & Research Libraries 42, no. 6 (1981): 549-60. 7. Shepherd, John. "The Information Needs and Information Seeking Behaviour of Polytechnic Lecturers in the Subject Area of History." British Library Research and Development Department Report, no. 5743. British Library, London, 1983. 8. Orbach, Barbara. "Historians: Information Needs, Information Seeking and the Re- search Process." Specialization Paper, Graduate School of Library and Information Science, University of California, Los Angeles, 1984. 9. Corkill, Cynthia, and Mann, Margaret. "Information Needs in the Humanities: Two Postal Surveys." CRUS Occasional Paper no. 2. British Library Research and Develop- ment Department Report, no. 5455. Centre for Research on User Studies, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, 1978. 10. Weintraub, Karl J. "The Humanistic Scholar and the Library." Library Quarterly 50 (Winter 1980): 22-39. 11. Stone, S. "Humanities Scholars: Information Needs and Uses."Journal of Documenta- tion 38, no. 4 (1982): 292-313. 12. Wiberley, Stephen E. "Subject Access in the Humanities and the Precision of the Humanist's Vocabulary." Library Quarterly 53 (1983): 420-33. 13. Case, Donald. "Collection and Organization of Written Information by Social Scien- tists and Humanists: A Review and Exploratory Study."Journal of Information Science 12 (1986): 97-104. 14. Wiberly, S. E., and Jones, William G. "Patterns of Information Seeking in the Humani- ties." College & Research Libraries 50 (November 1989): 638-45. 15. Barzun, Jacques, and Graff, Henry. The Modern Researcher. Rev. ed. New York: Har- court, Brace & World, 1970. 16. Smith, Page. The Historian and History. New York: Random House, 1960. 17. Briggs, Asa. "History and Society." In A Guide to the Social Sciences, ed. Norman Mac- Kenzie. New York: Mentor, 1966. 18. Gottschalk, Louis. Understanding History: A Primer of Historical Method. 2d ed. New York: Knopf, 1969. 19. Fischer, David H. Historians' Fallacies: Toward a Logic of Historical Thought. New York: Harper & Row, 1970.
82 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 20. Leff, Gordon. "Models Inherent in History." In The Ruks of the Game: Cross-disciplinary Essays on Models in Scholarly Thought, ed. Teodor Shanin. London: Tavistock, 1972. 21. Tilly, Charles. As Sociology Meets History. New York: Academic Press, 1981. 22. Stanford, Michael. The Nature of Historical Knowkdge. Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1986. 23. Wittgenstein, Ludwig. Philosophical Investigations. New York: Macmillan, 1953. 24. Rosch, E., and Lloyd, Barbara B. Cognition and Categorization. Hillsdale, NJ.: Lawrence Erlbaum, 1978. 25. Bruner, Jerome S.; Goodnow, Jacqueline J.; and Austin, George A. A Study of Think- ing. New York: Wiley, 1956. 26. Nevins, Allan. "The Old History and the New." In his The Art of Histor: Two Lectures. Washington, D.C.: Library of Congress, 1967. 27. Spitz, Lewis. "Periodization in History: Renaissance and Reformation." In The Future of History: Essays in the Vanderbilt University Centennial Symposium, ed. Charles F. Delzell. Nashville, Tenn.: Vanderbilt University Press, 1977. 28. Langridge, D. W. Classification and Indexing in the Humanities. London: Butterworths, 1976. 29. Foskett, D. J. Classification and Indexing in the Social Sciences. 2d ed. London: Butter- worths, 1974. 30. Lund, John J., and Taube, Mortimer. "A Nonexpansive Classification System: An Introduction to Period Classification." Library Quarterly 7, no. 3 (1937): 373-94. 31. Rubanowice, Robert J. "Of Librarians and Historians: Intellectual History and the Organization of Knowledge." Journal of Library Histor 10 Uuly 1975): 264-72. 32. Gilmore, Matthew B. "Observations on the Indexing of History: The Example of the Journal of American Histor." Indexer 16 (April 1989): 159-62. 33. Vincent-Morgan, Maureen. Guide to Departments of History, 1987-88. Washington, D.C.: American Historical Association, 1987. 34. Turner, Barry A. "Some Practical Aspects of Qualitative Data Analysis: One Way of Organising the Cognitive Processes Associated with the Generation of Grounded Theory." Quality and Quantity 15 (1981): 225-47. 35. Fabian, Bernhard. "Libraries and Humanistic Scholarship."Journal of Librarianship 18 (April 1986): 79-92. 36. Line, Maurice B. "Investigation into Information Requirements of the Social Sci- ences," Research Report no. 5. Bath University of Technology, Bath, 1971. 37. Kaplan, Abraham. The Conduct of Inquiry. San Francisco: Chandler, 1964. 38. Latour, Bruno, and Woolgar, Steve. Laboratory Lice: The Social Construction of Scientific Facts. London: Sage, 1979. 39. Stoan, Stephen K. "Research and Library Skills: An Analysis and Interpretation." Colkge & Research Libraries 45 (March 1984): 99-109. 40. Case, Donald. "Conceptual Organization and Retrieval of Text by Historians: The Role of Memory and Metaphor." 1990. Typescript. 41. Axtell, James. "History as Imagination." Historian 49 (August 1987): 451-62. 42. Weinberg, Bella Hass. "Why Indexing Fails the Researcher." Proceedings of the 50th ASIS Annual Meeting 24 (October 1987): 241-44. 43. Tibbo, Helen R. "Abstracts, Online Searching, and the Humanities: An Analysis of the Structure and Content of Abstracts of Historical Discourse." Ph.D. diss., University of Maryland, College Park, 1989.