PUBLIC LIBRARY SERVICE IN THE MIDDLE WEST' G. FLINT PURDY TIBRARIANS have long recognized the prevalence of ex- treme inequality in library service among different areas. They have deplored a condition in which forty- five million Americans are without access to any sort of local public library, while other millions are but meagerly served. They are firmly convinced that greater equality in access to books is an end worthy of strenuous individual and collective effort. They believe that this end may be more conveniently and economically furthered through the medium of the public library than by any other apparent means. It is not the purpose of the present analysis to examine the validity of the convictions thus stated, although some evidence which bears upon their reasonableness will be presented. Nor is it assumed that the convictions are necessarily correct. The investigation upon which the present article is based represents an objective analysis of variations in public library facilities, support, and use among 622 counties of seven middle western states. Its purposes are: (i) to describe variations in public library resources and service among the 622 counties; (2) to ascertain some of the causes of the variations thus described and to measure their relative and combined importance; (3) to measure the degree to which public library development is spatially associated with the distribution of reading materials from other sources; (4) to measure the association between library development and the distribution of radios, telephones, automobiles, and the status of secondary education; and (5) to interpret in terms of their social and library implications the facts thus described. It is hoped that the considerations de- I Part of unpublished Doctor's thesis, Graduate Library School, University of Chi- cago, 1936. 346
PUBLIC LIBRARY SERVICE IN THE MIDDLE WEST 347 fined may serve in some measure to clarify thinking with re- spect to the status of the public library in American society, to the end that future development may be more intelligent, better co-ordinated, and more effective. In the words of Isaiah Bowman: We are not to suppose that measurement alone provides dependability in argument and conclusion. Unmeasurable conditions-many forms of com- mitment being intangible-are as often as not the decisive elements. How- ever, a scientific treatment requires that we measure all the measurable things that are found important and thus attain progressively higher de- grees of precision in handling the data of a problem, and expressing a meaning. We strive by measurement to reduce the number of variables in our thinking.2 THE MIDDLE WEST DEFINED Woofter has defined a region as "an area within which the combination of environmental and demographic factors have created a homogeneity of economic and social structure."3 There is no doubt that the Middle West constitutes such a region, although there is little agreement among students of regionalism as to the exact area to which the name applies. Strictly speaking, its boundaries are zones rather than definite lines. In this study the area defined as the Middle West em- braces the states of Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Michigan, Min- nesota, Ohio, and Wisconsin. The region thus delineated rep- resents a compromise between social and economic homogenei- ty, areal unity, and political boundaries. METHOD After the scope of the analysis to be undertaken was defined and the area to be studied was fixed, the procedure was as fol- lows: First, the facts concerning (i) population served, (2) total expenditure, (3) volumes owned, (4.) number of registrants, and (5) number of volumes loaned, for I,44I free, tax-supported ' Geography in reation to the social sciences (New York: Scribner's, 1934), p. 67. 3 National Rcsources Committce, Regionalfactors in national planning and develop- ment (Washington, I935), p. 142.
348 THE LIBRdRY tUdRTERLY public libraries in the seven middle western states were sum- marized by county. Second, the library data were converted into per capita or percentage figures, using the entire population of each couinty as the base. Thus (i) and (4) were expressed as per cents of the total population, while the other three factors were stated in per capita terms. Third, the status of each county with respect to each of the five factors representing library resources and service was ex- pressed as an index number, in the form of the percentage which the given figure for the county was of the corresponding figure for the seven states considered as a unit. Thus, the per capita public library expenditure of each county was divided by and expressed as a percentage of the per capita public library ex- penditure of the region as a whole.4 Fourth, the five index numbers were combined in various ways in an attempt to secure a useful composite "index of li- brary service." That finally accepted as reasonably satisfactory is a composite of four of the factors enumerated above (per cent of population served being omitted). Fifth, a study was made of the spatial association between public library development (as measured by the county com- pilation of library data) and the distribution of general maga- zines, farm journals, daily newspapers, weekly newspapers, radio receiving sets, residence telephones, passenger automo- biles, school enrolment, urbanization, and wealth. For this pur- pose a sample of I54 counties was used, 22 selected at random from each state. This sample will be subsequently referred to as the "general" sample. The relative status of the various counties with respect to library development was compared with their status according to each of the other variables, by means of conventional techniques of statistical correlation. Sixth, two samples of iOO counties each were selected for further study. One consisted of counties in which more than So per cent of the residents resided in incorporated places of 2,500 population or more in 1930. This group will be referred to 4 See p. 350, for more complete explanation of the indices.
PUBLIC LIBRdRY SERVICE IN THE MIDDLE WEST 349 as the "urban" sample. The other consisted of counties in which less than 25 per cent of the population was urban. The latter will be called the "rural" sample. Each of these samples was used as the basis for a brief analysis of spatial association similar to that based on the general sample. Finally, a summary and synthesis of the findings of the study was attempted with a view to pointing out their probable sig- nificance in relation to the future development of public library service in the region. PUBLIC LIBRARIES IN THE MIDDLE WEST5 The 1,441 free, tax-supported libraries included in this study were distributed among the seven states as follows: Illinois, 274; Indiana, 222; Iowa, 179; Michigan, 196; Minnesota, 130; Ohio, 2Il; Wisconsin, 229. The approximate location of each city and town in which a public library was situated is shown in Figure i. Forty-five counties, or 7.2 per cent of the 622 in the region, had no public library within their borders in 1933. Nine of the forty-five were in Illinois, one in Indiana, one in Iowa, ten in Michigan, thirteen in Minnesota, seven in Ohio, and four in Wisconsin. Since some counties are more efficiently served by one li- brary than are others by several, the number of public libraries in a given county, as shown in the figure, is of questionable significance. However, the distribution of dots is roughly in- dicative of the relative proximity of public libraries to the resi- dents of different areas. Hence, the figure affords some indica- tion of the relative accessibility of library materials. s The sources of the data analyzed in this section were as follows: Illinois State Li- brary, Report of the Library Extension Divisionfor 7anuary r, r932 to December3J, 1933 (Springfield, 1934); Indiana State Library, "Public library statistics for the year ending Dec. 31, 1933," Library occurrent, XI (I934), i9s-9; Iowa Library Commission, Seventeenth report of the Iowa Library Commission . . . for the biennial period .7uly 1, 1932 to 7une 30, 1934 (Des Moines, 1934); Michigan State Library, Statistics of public libraries, '933-'934 (Lansing, 1935); Minnesota Department of Education, Library Division, "Statistics of public libraries, 1933," Library notes and news, XI (1934), I-6; Wisconsin Free Library Commission, Twentieth biennial report-Public library sta- tistics, r934 (Madison, 1934). Data for the public libraries of Ohio were consulted in the State Library in Columbus. Population data are from the Fifteenth census of the United States: 1930.
350 THE LIBRARY QUAdRTERLY T he index of library service for each county is a composite, abstract figure based on the status of the county with respect to each of four factors: per capita expenditure, per capita volumes, per cent of population registered, and per capita circulation. The nature of the index may perhaps best be explained by means of an illustration. Table i shows how the index for Black Hawk County, Iowa, was computed. Column i presents the status of Black Hawk County with respect to each of the four factors. It shows that in 1933 the public libraries of the county spent $0.492 per county inhabitant, loaned 7.21 volumes per PULCLIBRARIES OF THE >t MDDLE WIEST. 1933 FIG. I.-Public libraries of the Middle West)1 1933
PUBLIC LIBRARY SERVICE IN THE MIDDLE WEST 351 capita, etc. Column 2 shows the status of the Middle West as a whole. In 1933 the public libraries of the region spent $o.409 per inhabitant of the region, loaned 4.83 volumes per capita, etc. Each index in Column 3 is the quotient of the two cor- responding figures in Columns i and 2. Thus the per capita expenditure of the libraries of Black Hawk County was 120.3 per cent of the per capita expenditure of the libraries of the *entire region, etc. The index of library service for Black Hawk County (130.4) is the average of the four percentage figures thus derived. It is apparent that the index is purely "relative," since it presents a composite picture of the relative status of the various counties with respect to public library support, re- sources, and use. The index has been justified empirically. As is true of the separate data which it combines, it does not necessarily provide a reliable basis for comparison of library service in individual areas. Within the region as a whole, how- ever, the general pattern presented is reasonably representative of the relative status of public library service among the several counties. The distribution of 6i6 counties according to their respective indices of library service is presented in Figure 2. The figure is read as follows: Of the 6i6 counties for which reasonably com- plete data were available, 49 had indices of less than 5; of the 49, 45 were entirely without public library service; 12 counties TABLE 1 DERIVATION OF INDEX OF LIBRARY SERViCE I 2 3 FACTORS CONSIDERED County Middle West Index Per capita expenditure* ............ 49.20 40.90 120.3 Volumes per capita ............... I .02 0.91 112.3 Per cent of population registered. . . 33.30 23.90 139.3 Per capita circulation ...... ....... 7.21 4.83 149. S Average (Index) ......... .............. I30.4 In cents.
352 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY had indices between 5 and I5; 24 between iS and 25, etc. The index for the region as a whole was, of course, ioO. The median or middle county of the 6i6 had an index of 66.5. Thus half of the 6i6 counties had indices smaller than 66.5. The "skew" of the figure, i.e., its divergence from symmetry, shows most of the counties in the lower half of the range and comparatively few in the upper half. That is, the status of most of the coun- ties was low in comparison with that of a few. More concrete evidence of the extent of the disparity is afforded by considera- tion of some of the original data. Table 2 shows the median county of each state and of the whole region with respect to each of the five factors representing library service. It is evident that 6o 50 40 30 20 10 60 r 0Q%0 CI c " 0 -OO I%0 FIG. 2.-Distribution of 6i6 middle western counties according to their respective indices of library service, 1933.
PUBLIC LIBRARY SERVICE IN THE MIDDLE WEST 353 the seven states vary widely in the degree of public library service which they maintain. Thus in per capita expenditure a range of from $o.iii in the median county of Minnesota to $o.297 in the median county of Indiana is shown. In circula- tion the range is from less than a volume and a half per capita in Minnesota to more than five volumes per inhabitant in Indi- ana. In half of the counties in the region less than 36.3 per cent of the population resided in library districts in 1933, less than $o.i8 per county inhabitant was spent for public library service, and less than three volumes per capita were loaned by public libraries. In only 45 counties, 7.2 per cent of the 622 in the region, did public library expenditures aggregate as much as $o.So per capita. The public libraries of approximately one-fourth of the counties in the region spent $0.25 per capita or more. The libraries of a similar number of counties loaned as many as five volumes per inhabitant. The approximate index of library service for each county in the Middle West is presented in Figure 3. Interpretations of this map must be made with caution. In counties having indices of less than 33.4, public library development is roughly less than one-third as great (quantitatively) as library development in the region as a whole. In the second group of counties, those having indices between 33.4 and 66.6, library development is TABLE 2 PUBLIC LIBRARY SERVICE IN SEVEN MIDDLE WESTERN STATES, I933 (As represented by the median county of each state with respect to each factor) Per Cent of Per Capita Volumes Per Cent of Circulation State Po3pulation Expenditure er loo of Population per ioo of Sereed in Cents P?opulation Registered Population Illinois ................. 36 .3 19. 8 62. 8 17 .7 300.0 Indiana ................ 60.4 29 7 1 I 3 . I 30.0 502.8 Iowa ................. 28 .4 17.8 78.6 I6.2 294.4 Michigan ............... 39 3 I6.o 67 . 5 17.0 263 .9 Minnesota .............. 20. 5 11 .1 38 . 2 12.1 144 . 5 Ohio................. 38 . I I S 3 62 . 7 18.1 I 228. 1 Wisconsin .............. 35 0 21 .4 76.4 23 5 384.4 Midwest ............... 36.3 17 . 9 72 . 8 18 .4 291 .8
354 THE LIBRA4RY QUARTERLY from one-third to two-thirds that of the region as a whole, etc. If an index of IOO were regarded as a very tentative standard, it would probably be fair to say that public library service was definitely inadequate in the counties which are white in Figure 3, that it was decidedly substandard in counties of the 33.4-66.6 group, and that only in the two highest groups did it compare favorably with that of the region as a whole. Clearly there is little semblance of equality in access to public library service among the counties of the Middle West. The next step in the MINDEX 100-133 3 _INDEX 133.4- OR OVER + NO LIBRARIES ; O DATA TOO INCOMPLETE TO JUSTIFY INDEX FIG. 3.-Index of library service of each county in seven middle western states, '933.
PUBLIC LIBRARY SERVICE IN THE MIDDLE WEST 355 analysis is an examination of some of the possible causes of the disparity thus defined. Of the many factors which have been suggested as probable causes of variation in library development, several are approxi- mately constant among the counties of the Middle West, and hence not directly pertinent to the present study. In this cate- gory are such factors as topography, climate, race, and age dis- tribution of the population. Other factors which have been sug- gested are not now amenable to quantitative analysis. It is the purpose of this section to "strive by measurement to reduce the number of variables in our thinking." Factors which lend themselves to quantitative treatment and which may be im- portant in relation to public library development include; (i) economic ability, (2) urbanization, (3) the status of reading as a source of ideas and recreation, (4) the educational level of the population, (5) recent trends with respect to growth of population, and (6) nativity of the population. The extent to which each of the six factors tends to vary among the 622 counties, in relation to variations in library development, is indicated by the coefficients of correlation6 summarized in Table 3. It is assumed for the present purpose that the data presented are more or less representative of the factors enumer- ated above, in the same order. The economic index is a composite figure based on (i) ratio of federal personal income tax returns to population (incomes of I932),7 and (2) per capita retail sales, I930.8 The two factors 6 According to L. L. Thurstone, "The correlation coefficient is a pure number, a constant which indicates the degree of relation between two variables. It varies from + to - I. When the relation is perfect and positive, the correlation coefficient is + i. When the relation is perfect but inverse, the correlation coefficient is - i. When there is no relation whatever between the two variables, the coefficient is zero. Other values of the coefficient indicate intermediate degrees of relation." (The fundamentals of statistics [New York: Macmillan, 19351, p. 205.) For complete definitions and explana- tions of the statistical constants employed see Karl Holzinger, Statistical methods for students of education (New York: Ginn, i928), pp. 14I-89 and 256-3I6, and Mordecai Ezekiel, Methods of correlation analysis (New York: John Wiley, 1930). 7 Income tax data from Rand McNally Commercial Atlas (66th ed.; New York: Rand McNally, 1934); population data from the Fifteenth census of the United States: 1930. 8 Retail sales data from U.S. Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Commerce (Depart- ment of Commerce), General consumer market statistics ("Domestic Commerce Scries," No. 56; Washington, I932).
356 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY were combined in the same way as that in which the four library factors were combined in computing the index of library service. The table is read as follows: The degree of linear association be- tween the library index and the economic index is indicated by a Pearson product-moment coefficient of correlation of .733 ? .o38, etc. Each of the first five factors is significantly associated with library development. However, since the "causal" factors are undoubtedly interrelated, it is desirable that an attempt be made to ascertain the separate influence of each. Since an ex- amination of Table 3 indicates that economic ability and urban- rural distribution (as measured by factors i and 2 of the table) are more closely associated with library development than any of the other factors enumerated, consideration of their relative and combined importance is in order. Table 4 presents a sum- mary of some of the more important partial and multiple co- efficients. The first partial coefficient (+.410) is an index rep- resenting the degree of relationship between library develop- ment and wealth (as measured by the economic index), in counties having the same percentage of their population rural farm. The second (-.183) is an index of the association be- tween library development and the per cent of population which is rural farm in counties of similar economic ability. Among the TABLE 3 ZERO ORDER COEFFICIENTS OF CORRELATION REPRESENTING THE DEGREE OF ASSOCIATION BETWEEN THE LIBRARY INDEX AND SIX FACTORS OF POSSIBLE CAUSAL SIGNIFICANCE Factor Correlated Coefficient of with the Library Correlation* Index i. Economic index .................................... +.733 ? .038 2. Per cent population rural farmt.- . 68o ? .044 3. Combined circulation of I,927 daily newspaperst. + .567 E .055 4. Per cent population I4-I7 years of age in school, 1930t + .442 + .o65 S. Per cent change in population i92-30t. . . 597 + .o52 6. Per cent native white of native parentst. -.o026 + .o8i 0 Based on the general sample. t Adapted from data reported in the Fift4ext.h census of the United States: 1930. S Adapted from U.S. Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Commerce (Department of Commerce), Market data handbook of the United States ("Domestic Commerce Series," No. 30; Washington, i929).
PUBLIC LIBRARY SERVICE IN THE MIDDLE WEST 357 154 counties of the sample, it is apparent that library develop- ment is more closely (or more directly) associated with the economic index than with urbanization. The other two partial coefficients (+.538 and -.II2) confirm this conclusion. Be- cause of the size of the sample, the slight difference between the zero order coefficients, and the questionable degree to which the quantitative indices represent library development, wealth, and urbanization, the relative importance of the two causal factors as indicated in the table must be regarded as suggestive, not final. However, subsequent analysis tends to confirm the evi- dence of Table 4. TABLE 4 PARTIAL AND MULTIPLE COEFFICIENTS OF CORRELATION INDICATIVE OF THE RELATIVE AND COMBINED INFLUENCE OF URBANIZATION AND WEALTH ON LIBRARY DEVELOPMENT* Factors Correlated Factor Held Constant Partial r R Library index ..... Economic index Per cent rural farm + .4I0 .744 Library index ...... Per cent rural farm Economic index - . I83 .744 Library expenditure Economic index Per cent rural farm + .538 . Boo Library expenditure Per cent rural farm Economic index -. I 12 . 800 Based on the general sample of 154 counties. A coefficient between +.i58 and -.158 is less than twice itu standard error. The first multiple coefficient (.744) represents the degree of association between library development and the two causal factors combined. The square of the multiple coefficient indi- cates the approximate per cent of the variation in the library index which is associated with variations in the two causal variables. Thus (.744)2 or approximately 55 per cent of the variation in the library index, is associated with variations in the economic index and the per cent of population which is rural farm. Similarly, 64 per cent of the variation in public library expenditure among the 154 counties is associated with variations in wealth and urbanization, as measured. The coefficients of part correlation are worthy of somewhat more confidence than are the partial coefficients, since the former involve a less complete attempt to separate wealth and
358 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY urbanization. Letting X. represent the library index, X. the economic index, X3 the per cent of population which is rural farm, the part coefficients representing the degree of association between the library index and wealth and urbanization, re- spectively, with the influence of the third factor upon the li- brary index held constant are: .2r3 = .632 and 13r2 = .320. The partial regression equation for predicting the library index from the economic index and per cent of population which is rural farm is: Xx = 50.97 + .494X2 -S.8X3 ? 28.o3. The beta coefficients are AI2.3 = + .545 and I3.2 =-.226. A similar analysis based on the sample of Ioo urban counties yields results almost identical with those reported above. In case of the rural sample, however, the zero order coefficients are too small to justify more refined analysis. Apparently wealth and urbanization are less significant in relation to li- brary development in the rural counties of the region than in their urban neighbors or in the region as a whole. It is probable that the necessity of excluding counties with no public library service resulted in an artificial situation which would invalidate conclusions based on a correlation analysis of the rural sample. Figure 4 presents the approximate status of each county in the region according to its economic index. Comparing Figure 4 with Figure 3 (the library index map), 97 counties (iS.6 per cent of 622) are seen to vary two or more intervals. If only chance association operated, approximately half of the counties would vary at least two intervals. A similar comparison of Fig- ure 4 with a map portraying library expenditure (not repro- duced here) reveals a significantly different status with respect to the two factors in case of 53 counties, or 8.5 per cent of the total. A comparison of the library index and library expendi- ture maps with a map of urbanization shows that ios and io8 counties, respectively, vary two or more intervals. It should be remembered in comparing the maps that their primary purpose is descriptive. Comparisons based upon them are admittedly crude, but nevertheless serve to illuminate the statistical con- stants describing the relationships. The foregoing paragraphs have served only partially to clarify
PUBLIC LIBRARY SERVICE IN THE MIDDLE WEST 359 the relative importance of wealth and urbanization as causes of variation in library development. There can be little doubt that urbanization is a potent factor, particularly when its total influence, direct and indirect, is considered. The statistical anal- ysis has suggested, however, that rural areas lack library service not primarily because of difficulties involved in establishing contacts between books and rural readers, but because the rural areas generally lack economic resources for the support of li- braries. Other studies have shown that farm incomes average considerably lower than those of city dwellers, thus leaving a .rn. INDEX 334-66ROE ~ INDEX 6I6999 INDEX 100.0-133-3 INDEX 133-4- OR OVER ~. -.ic. FIG. 4.-Economic status of each county in seven middle western states according to an index of economic ability.
360 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY smaller margin above a subsistence level for the purchase of "cultural things," including newspapers, magazines, and books, and for the support of schools, libraries, churches, etc.9 Thus far the analysis has considered the influence of only two of the causal factors enumerated on page 355. Second order partial coefficients representing the degree of association be- tween the library index and the other causal factors, while wealth and urbanization are held constant, indicate no signifi- cant relationship between library development and percentage change in population, I920-30, or between library service and nativity of population. Table 5 presents the statistical con- stants indicating the relative and combined influence of the other four variables upon library development. The data of the table indicate that for the I54 counties of the general sample the library index is most closely associated with the economic index and least closely associated with the per cent of popula- tion which is rural farm. The two smallest partial coefficients are less than twice their standard errors. From the fact that R2345 = 59, we conclude that approximately 59 per cent of the variation among the 154 counties in library development is associated with variations in the four causal factors. Since r12 = .733 and r2 = -.537, it is clear that the factors measured by the economic index alone account for almost as much of the TABLE 5 PARTIAL CORRELATION CONSTANTS REPRESENTING THE RELATIVE AND COMBINED INFLUENCE OF FoUR FACTORS UPON LIBRARY DEVELOPMENT Factor Correlated wvith Library Index Factors Held Partial r Part r P R Economic index .................... X3} X4, X5 +.40o .653 +.5I2 .768 Per cent of population rural farm, , X2, X4, Xs - . o80 153 - 099 .768 Newspapers ................... X2, X3, X5 + 191 . 254 +. i68 .768 Per cent of population, 14-17 years of age, in school ................... X2, X3, X4 + . I47 . I75 +.114 .768 *X. -library index; X, =economic index; X =per cent rural farm; X4=ratio of daily newspapers to families; X= per cent of population, 14-17 years of age, in school. 9 See J. H. Kolb and Edmund Brunner, A study of rural society, its organization and changes (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, I935).
PUBLIC LIBRARY SERVICE IN THE MIDDLE WEST 36I variation in the library index as do the factors measured by all four variables of Table S. This fact is also shown by the simi- larity of S1.234 , which is 26.8 and SI.2, which is 28.5. Figure 5 shows in graphic form the apparent influence of the factors measured by the economic index upon library develop- ment as measured by the library index. Each dot represents the status of one of the I 54 counties of the general sample in library development compared with its status with respect to the eco- nomic index. Obviously, the counties which rank relatively high in economic ability tend to rank high in library develop- ment, while counties that rank low in wealth also rank low in library service. This relationship is represented in generalized graphic form by the solid line in the figure. The regression equa- tion represented by the solid line is: X= 11.983 + .6648X2 175 " ' t" ' 15 115 95~ 75 5 5 0i . . . . 0 . . , 0- 4 l Cl i V C4 Economic Index FIG. 5.-Scattergram and regression line illustrating the association between the economic index and the library index.
362 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY ? 28.5. The dotted lines are one S above and below the re- gression line. Their distance from the regression line indicates the extent to which the generalized empirical description con- forms to the actual data, i.e., the reliability of predictions of the library index based on known values of the economic index. The counties encircled in the figure were used as a basis for a study of the importance of other factors. It was concluded that the following factors appeared to be of possible causal significance in accounting for the extreme deviation of the six counties from the norm: (i) questionable validity of the eco- nomic index as applied to specific counties, (2) the presence of nonpublic libraries in the county, (3) sparsity of population, (4) the unit of library service, (5) the number of towns in the county, and (6) the educational status of the population. Obviously many factors which condition library development in specific areas have not been examined. It has been the pur- pose of this analysis to "reduce the number of variables in our thinking," not to attempt an exhaustive enumeration and evaluation of all elements which affect variations in library serv- ice. Since approximately 6o per cent of the variation in the library index is accounted for, the analysis may be considered to have achieved its purpose. DISTRIBUTION OF BOOKSTORES The study so far has been concerned with the spatial dis- tribution of public library facilities and service in the Middle West and with factors which appear to be partly responsible for the inequality described. Consideration of the distribution of nonlibrary phenomena which may conceivably supplement library service is now in order. Strictly speaking, the library is not a disseminator of ideas. It is one of many purveyors of print. Print, in turn, is one of many vehicles of ideas. In order to view the status of library service in perspective it is desirable that some consideration be given other agencies and media in- strumental in the dissemination of ideas. According to the American booktrade directorylo there are ap- 0 New York: Bowker, I935.
PUBLIC LIBRARY SERVICE IN THE MIDDLE WEST 363 proximately 1,400 bookstores in 430 middle western cities and towns. Public libraries are found in more than three times as many towns as are bookstores. Exactly half of the counties of the region contain at least one book outlet, while 93 per cent have at least one public library. Over two-thirds of the towns that have one or more bookstores are places of over 5,ooo popu- lation. It is thus evident that the commercial book outlets are concentrated in urban areas. Figure 6 shows the approximate location of each town in which is located at least one of the bookstores listed in the American booktrade directory. Clearly the book marketing industry has devised no satisfactory system FIG. 6.-Towns having bookstores listed in the American booktrade directory, I935
364 THE LIBRIRY QUIRTERLY of outlets for rural areas. A comparison of Figure 6 with the urban-rural data shows that the mean per cent of population which is rural farm for the 3I1 counties having book outlets is 33.7, and for those without bookstores, Si.6 per cent. The mean economic index of the 311 counties with book outlets is 73, compared with a mean of 47 for the counties without bookstores. Public libraries in the median county of the 3II having book- stores loaned 4-I volumes per capita in I933, while 2.2 volumes per inhabitant were loaned in the median county of those without bookstores. Obviously the same areas which are rela- tively lacking in public library service are correspondingly lack- ing in sources from which books may be conveniently purchased. DISTRIBUTION OF PERIODICALS Table 6 shows the degree to which the circulation of periodi- cals is associated with wealth, urbanization, the library index, and library circulation. It is apparent that the circulation of general periodicals tends to coincide with public library develop- TABLE 6 COEFFICIENTS OF CORRELATION INDICATING THE DEGREE OF ASSOCIATION BETWEEN THE CIRCULATION OF PERIODICALS AND WEALTH, URBANIZATION, AND LIBRARY DEVELOPMENT Per Cent Class of Periodical Economic of Popula- R* Library Library Index tion Rural Index Circulation Farm I5 general magazinest. + 827 -. 297 .844 +.684 +.678 Curtis and Crowell magazine . +.440 - .274 .47I + 315 +.299 Daily newspaperst ................ +.548 - .600 .6o6, +567 +.556 Weekly newspaperst ............-.... .590 +.689 .690 - .551 - .573 Farm magazines? ................. -.627 + . 804 .654 -. 498 -.5I8 Multiple coefficient representing the combined influence of wealth and urbanization upon the circula- tion of the periodicals. t Ratio of circulation to families. Circulation data from U.S. Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Com- merce, Market data handbook of the United States. R Ratio of combined circulation of Curtis and Crowell maqazines to number of families. Circulation data from Crowell circulatiois, i934 (New York: Crowell Publishing Co., 934) and Sales opportunitise. 934-1q935 (Philadelphia: Curtis Publishing Co., 1934). Families from the Fifteenth census of t Unit States: 1930. I Ratio of combined circulation of forty-two farm journals to families. Circulation data from Meredith Publishing Company, Circulation of farm publications, p929 (Washington: Government Printing Office, 1929).
PUBLIC LIBRdRY SERVICE IN THE MIDDLE WEST 365 ment and service. Counties with relatively well-developed pub- lic libraries buy more general magazines and daily newspapers than do counties of lower library status. Weekly newspapers and farm journals, on the other hand, tend to supplement public library service, in a spatial sense. Further analysis of the rela- tionships shows that most of the association between library development and the circulation of periodicals is due to varia- tions in wealth and urbanization. That is, library development tends to coincide with the circulation of periodicals largely be- cause both are functions of wealth and urbanization. When the economic index and per cent of population which is rural farm are held constant, the resulting second order partial coefficients are: + .I58 between the library index and the I5 general maga- zines; + .048 between the library index and the Curtis and Crowell magazines; + .250 between the library index and the I,927 daily newspapers; - .153 between the library index and the weekly newspapers; and +.o64 between the 42 farm journals and the library index. NONREADING PHENOMENA INSTRUMENTAL IN THE DISSEMINATION OF IDEAS A similar analysis of the distribution of four nonreading vari- ables resulted in the data reported in Table 7. According to the first order coefficients, wealth appears to be significantly associated with the first three variables, while urbanization is associated with the last three. The distribution of radio re- ceiving sets and of the percentage of population of high school age attending school tends to coincide with library development. There is a slight tendency for counties ranking high in library status to rank relatively high in ratio of residence telephones to families. No significant association appears to exist between library development and the distribution of passenger automo- biles. The second order coefficients recorded in the final column of the table reveal significant relationship between library de- velopment and only one of the four nonreading variables (per cent of popujation I4-17 years of age, in school) in counties of similar wealth and urbanization.
366 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS Reading is one social medium of education and recreation. Books constitute one important means by which society pre- serves the intellectual heritage of the race and renders it avail- able to contemporary and future generations. The public library is one social agency whose primary function is to make books available to society. This study has attempted to determine the relative success of the public library in making books available to the inhabitants of 622 middle western counties, why it fails to dispense an equal degree of service in all the counties, wheth- er or not certain nonlibrary agencies and media tend to supple- ment public library service in a spatial sense, and what factors appear to be pertinent in planning more equitable public li- brary service. The nature of the study thus defined has necessitated the use of data representing quantitative aspects of library service. The limitations of available records are evident to anyone who has attempted to use them. Evidence not presented in this arti- cle justified the conclusion that the existing library data, im- TABLE 7 ASSOCIATION BETWEEN FoUR NONREADINO PHENOMENA, THE ECONOMiC INDEX, URBANIZATION, AND THE LIBRARY INDEX ECONOMIC INDEX PER CENT RUL LIBRARY INDEX NONREADING VARIABLES ~~~~~~~~~Economic NolgJtEADINC. VARIABLES Per Cent E Index and Zero Order Rural Zero Order ndmlc Zero Order Per Cent r Farm 1 Condtan r Rural CosatConstant Farm Constant Radios ................. +*542 + 374 -.426 +.oS6 + 444 + 097 Telephonest . . .................. + .152 + *412 + .089 + *396 + I44 + * I33 Automobilest ........... + .060 + 309 + . 131 + *329 -.038 -.o68 Per cent of population, 14-17 years of age, in school $ ................ + 383 + 009 -454 - .264 + 442 + 220 * Ratio of radio receiving sets to families. Data from the FifsSik (tanus of ikt Unied States: z930. t Ratio to families. Data from U.S. Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Commerce (Department of Com- merce), Geneal consumer markesrnaissics ("Domestic Commerce Series," No. 56; Washington, 1932). t Adapted from data reported in the Fifteenth cesss of s e Uxited Saes: J930.
PUBLIC LIBRARY SERVICE IN THE MIDDLE WEST 367 perfect as they are, are more accurately representative of the relative development of public library service in different areas than is commonly assumed." The five indices of public library development and service were found to be highly consistent. Since all five told practically the same story, it seems reasonable to assume that the story must be an approximation of the ac- tual relative status of the various counties with respect to li- brary service, in so far as that service is measurable. The cir- culation data most closely approximate a composite index. In fact, correlation analyses based on the circulation figures yield results almost identical with those derived from similar analyses based on a composite index which combines four factors. This fact suggests that future studies making use of correlation tech- niques may well use circulation figures as a quantitative index of public library service, thus obviating the necessity of labori- ous computation. The description of variations in library service among the counties of the region revealed a range from no service to com- plete coverage accompanied by service of a high type, judged by contemporary standards. The amount of service rendered in the majority of the counties is small in comparison with that rendered in a few areas. Intercounty variations in public library development were compared with corresponding variations in fourteen nonlibrary factors assumed to be relevant. It was found, in general, that counties ranking relatively high with respect to library develop- ment ranked correspondingly high in wealth, radios, general magazines, daily newspapers, and "extent of popularization of education.""Z There was some tendency for counties of high library status to have more residence telephones in proportion to families than counties of low library status. The former tended to be more urban than the latter. There were fewer bookstores in the latter than in the former. The comparatively U" G. F. Purdy, "Public Library Service in the Middle West" (unpublished Doctor's thesis, Graduate Library School, University of Chicago, I936). 2 See G. N. Kefauver and James Rusk, "Variation in popularization of secondary education," School reoiew, XLIII (1935), i i-i8, for similar use of enrolment data.
368 THE LIBRARY QUARRTERLY poor, rural counties which ranked low in library development bought larger numbers of farm journals and weekly newspapers than did their wealthier urban neighbors. Table 8 summarizes some of the more important zero order coefficients of correlation indicating the degree of concomitant variation between the non- library factors and the data representing public library develop- ment. The positive coefficient representing the association be- tween the library index and the economic index indicates that a relatively wealthy county usually has better developed li- brary service than has a poorer county. The negative coefficient between the library index and the per cent of the population living on farms indicates that a county in which a large propor- tion of the population are farm dwellers tends to have less "adequate" library service than has a more urban county. The more nearly the coefficient approaches i.o or- i.o, the more accurately the generalized statement that one variable increases or decreases as the other increases applies, and the more nearly a given increase in one is accompanied by a regular change in the other. It has been shown that in proportion to population, nearly TABLE 8 COEFFICIENTS OF CORRELATION REPRESENTING THE DEGREE OF ASSOCIATION BETWEEN LIBRARY DEVELOPMENT AND ELEVEN NONLIBRARY VARIABLES Nonlibrary Variables Library Library Library Index Expenditure Circulation Economic index .............................. + 733 + 797 + . 728 Per cent of population rural farm ............. . 68o - .702 -. 688 I 5 magazines .... .. +.684 +.649 +.678 Curtis-Crowell magazines ................ .. + .3I5 + .284 + .299 Daily newspapers ............................+ .567 ....... . + . 556 Weekly papers ............................... - .551 . . . .573 Farm journals ............................... - .498 ..........- .518 Radios .................................. + 444 . . + 433 Telephones .................................. + I144 . . +.134 Per cent of population, 14-17 years of age, in school .................................. + 442 . ......... + 447 Autom obiles ................................. .038 .......... - 5 - 5S
PUBLIC LIBRARY SERVICE IN THE MIDDLE WEST 369 twice as many library books are loaned in counties which have bookstores as in counties without them. The facts summarized above furnish evidence that the provi- sion of the facilities for education and recreation which were considered tend to follow the same pattern. A county of low library status is usually also relatively lacking in general reading materials, radios, and telephones, and has a comparatively small proportion of its residents in the 14-17 year age group enrolled in school. These facts suggest.that public library serv- ice is at least no less desirable in the areas now ranking low in library development than in those which rank high. If the equalization of opportunity to read is socially desirable in Cleveland, it seems reasonable to assume that it is equally de- sirable in Johnson County, Illinois. This assumption, however, necessitates two previous premises, namely, (i) that the equali- zation of reading opportunity is a legitimate social function, and (2) that the public library is the most effective and economical means of achieving that end. Obviously, the evidence examined in this study neither proves nor disproves these premises. The librarian, by the very nature of his position, accepts them as valid. A broad social consideration of the question, however, would necessitate an attempt to view the "place" and cost of public library service in perspective. Much study is needed before the librarian can avoid basing his philosophy upon un- proved assumptions. The present study contributes toward an ultimate solution (i) evidence that other agencies of recreation and education do not, in general, supplement public library service among the counties of the Middle West, and (2) sugges- tions as to causal factors which must be considered in any plan proposing to render public library service more equitable. The analysis of the relationships of selected quantitative fac- tors to public library service confirms the importance of urbani- zation as a conditioner of "cultural" development, including the development of public libraries. It suggests, however, that urbanization is more important as a cause of variation in wealth than as a direct cause of inequality in library service. The interrelations among the data examined suggest wealth
370 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY as the most important condition of community access to public library service. It is thus pertinent to ask how well the factor of wealth represents the total group of conditions, both meas- urable and unmeasurable, which may be expected to encourage communities to establish and support libraries. The data ana- lyzed in the foregoing pages suggest that wealth is not only one of the most tangible and measurable of the conditions examined but a factor of major importance in itself. The values with which the American community, at least in the Middle West, is most concerned are largely associated with financial prosperi- ty. Wealth is regarded not merely as a token of vocational suc- cess but as combining important benefits in social prestige, security, and opportunities for wider horizons-cultivation of the arts and the like. The services offered by the public library represent the latter type of use of money: the enrichment of personal and community life. Wealth is almost invariably first, cultivation after, although experience has shown that the prin- ciple is not immutable. Its application to services which society deems essential to the common good has been greatly modified. Formal education, being regarded as a matter of social concern, is subsidized by county, state, and federal governments; thus, in effect, wealth is confiscated from areas of greater economic ability for the support of schools in poorer communities. The same principle applied to the protection of health, the construc- tion of highways, etc., has materially modified spatial inequali- ties in such facilities. The growth of public library service under a traditional sys- tem of local autonomy has resulted in the wide disparity ex- emplified by the distribution of library facilities among the counties of the Middle West. This study has suggested the probability that any plan of equalization must aim at control of the principal causal factor which can be in some measure controlled, namely, inequality in wealth. The possibility of pre- dicting library development from the economic index alone, within a relatively small error of estimate and nearly as ac- curately as from four factors combined, suggests the potential
PUBLIC LIBRARY SERVICE IN THE MIDDLE WEST 37I value of economic data as a convenient and tangible basis for distributing subsidies. The influence of wealth upon library service emphasizes the importance of adequate areas of support. Thousands of towns, townships, and even counties lack the wealth necessary to sup- port effective library service. In many areas the unit could be adjusted to permit a workable balance between an adequate basis of support and a practicable area of service. In others no adjustment of local units can provide adequate support. While wealth appears, in general, to be the most important direct condition of library development, it accounts for only a little more than half of the variation among the 622 counties in library service. There is need for studies of the influence of other factors, particularly of nonquantitative factors, under specific conditions. Undoubtedly, economic resources have been relatively unimportant in some counties, while historical and personal factors have played a vital part in many. In some communities topography is a primary consideration, in others, local government or politics. Legislation plays an important role, particularly in some states. Units of service are of vital importance in many areas-witness the influence of the town organization in New England and of the adoption of the county unit for library service in California and New Jersey. The avail- ability of reading materials from other sources affects the need for public library service in specific localities. Clubs, churches, traditions, conventions, and leadership-all have been and will continue to be influential in determining the degree of library service maintained in given communities. Careful scrutiny of the action and interaction of these influences could hardly fail to yield much information of practical value to planners of future library development. PROBLEMS SUGGESTED FOR FURTHER INVESTIGATION Numerous questions, some of which are amenable to fruitful investigation, have been raised in the course of the study here summarized. Among those most closely related to this study, the following are perhaps worthy of enumeration:
372 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY i. The application of techniques of statistical correlation analysis to the local units of other relatively homogeneous re- gions is suggested. Probably no region is quite as well suited to county analysis as is the Middle West. No other equally homogeneous area combines reasonably complete quantitative records, a sufficient number of counties, and a minimum of counties entirely without public library service. For this reason the use of other units, particularly of library districts and munic- ipalities, offers promise of more fruitful study in other regions. Similar analyses of samples, random and selected, of counties, library districts, and cities, from the country as a whole should yield valuable information. A similar study of counties served by county libraries would be useful in defining the factors asso- ciated with varying degrees of county library service and should yield highly important information on minimal population, economic, and other requirements of satisfactory county library service. 2. Careful and detailed historical studies, planned to define and evaluate the historical factors which have significantly in- fluenced the development of library service in the country as a whole and in various states and regions, are needed. 3. Intensive case studies of selected communities, combining the historical approach with statistical and other techniques in an attempt to define factors of causation, are suggested. 4. Fundamental to an ultimate library philosophy which places public library service in its proper social relationships are studies of the status of reading as a social means of transmitting ideas, of providing recreation, and of promoting social stability. In the same category fall studies of the relative cost and effec- tiveness of supplying society with reading materials from differ- ent sources and by means of different agencies. There is definite need of more extensive and intensive study of the accessibility of reading materials in various areas and under different sets of conditions. Such studies may well approach the question from the point of view of the various sources and also from that of the reader. Intensive analyses of relatively limited areas com- bining the two points of view appear to offer particular promise.