IV Out of Sight Out of Mind: Why Don't We Have Any Schools of Library and Reading Studies? Wayne A. Wiegand This article argues that current library and information science (LIS) thinking has drawn definitional boundaries around the word "information" so tightly as to exclude research on reading, a major means by which Americans obtain information, whether it comes off the printed page or the computer screen. This paper is intended to: (1) bring the dimensions of contemporary research on reading to the attention of the LIS community; (2) encourage LIS educators to consider the relevance of this research to a future they are preparing for the LIS professions; (3) ask provocative questions exploring race, age, gender, and especially socioeconomic class issues that, at this point, reside largely on the margins of our current professional discourse; and (4) suggest a "price" the LIS profession will pay if it continues to ignore reading research. Most of you probably remember press coverage of the opening of San Fran- cisco's new central public library (SFPL) nearly a year ago. American Libraries called it "a triumph of community sup- port." Library Journal had then-Director Ken Dowlin pose with Mayor Willie Brown in front of the new building for the cover of its April 15 issue. That same day the New York Times ran an entire column on the event.1 Little-noticed amidst all the hoopla, however, was a letter nine-year-old Thea Bosselmann wrote to the San Francisco Chronicle after visiting the new library. She could find no Nancy Drew books there, she told the Chronicle. "They are a mystery series about a girl detective . . . She is brave, smart and never gives up. I love these books, and hope to read them all some day. . . . My mom and lots of other people read them when they were little." Thea had asked SFPL librarians where the Nancy Drew books were, but librarians "said they didn't have them there or at any other library in San Fran- cisco! They don't think it's good litera- ture." When the Chronicle asked the library about this omission after running Thea's letter on May 6, the system's head of children's services replied, "Money is placed into materials that meet children's informational needs, expand their mul- ticultural awareness and experiences, and that are of a higher literary quality."2 People in this audience with some knowledge of American library history know that Thea's experience is not unique. In fact, in librarianship we have a heritage of slighting certain kinds of reading, in part because we have never bothered to investigate seriously why people want to read them, in part because the academy has never supplied us with 3 1 4 Volume 38, Number 4
Why Don't We Have Any Schools of Library and Reading Studies? 315 About the Author Wayne A. Wiegand is Professor, School of Library and Information Stud- ies, University of Wisconsin, Madison. This paper was presented at the 1997 ALISE conference. an intellectually plausible rationale identifying the values readers attach to these kinds of reading. But recently, things have changed in certain sectors of the academy, and these changes come pre- cisely at a time when LIS educators are talking about reinventing their profes- sion. But I'm worried. It appears to me that, as we transition into the next cen- tury, we are constructing a professional discourse that ignores and excludes re- cent research on reading, a major means by which Americans obtain information. What do I mean by "discourse"? A lot of scholars using the term these days agree that, to a large extent, people con- struct their own reality, that over time this perceived reality evolves its own "language," and that, in both form and function, the language used to describe this reality constitutes discourse. These scholars also agree that different groups of people have different definitions of reality, and within these different groups people develop a use of their language in which particular words and phrases become coded with deep mean- ing. These meanings are generally un- derstood best by the group members heavily invested in using them;3 coded words and phrases also function to bond group members and exclude out- siders. (Urban street talk or youthful slang constitute two relatively transpar- ent examples.) These scholars also note that by its very nature discourse is not only enabling, it is confining because it imposes limits upon the realm of possi- bilities perceived by group leaders. Scholars who analyze the way in which discourse functions also recognize that professions create their own dis- courses, and that professional schools generally reflect these discourses in their curricula, where value systems are identified by what is included and what is excluded from the profession's self- perceived jurisdiction. There the value systems are further refined and priori- tized by the construction of core and elective courses, a construction that im- mediately imparts a clear set of priori- ties to students desiring admission to the profession. Of course our own pro- fession is no exception, and I want to direct my attention today to what I per- ceive as the confining limits of our evolving professional discourse.4 I start with a useful distinction Atkinson draws between the value of the content of information and the value of access to that information. In a 1996 Library Quarterly article, Atkinson notes that the information services libraries provide are (and traditionally have been) much more concerned with infor- mation access than information con- tent.5 I agree. My own study of American library history validates his hypothesis, and I have argued else- where that the origins of this emphasis can be traced to the late nineteenth cen- tury, when Melvil Dewey defined a structure for librarianship that has changed very little since, despite the frequent introduction of new informa- tion technologies into our professional practice.6 But this emphasis on access, I con- tend, has not always served us well be- cause it has led us to treat information primarily as an object. And because our Fall 1997
316 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science professional structure requires us to concentrate on access to information ob- jects, we have overlooked - indeed largely ignored - growing bodies of scholarship on information content that clearly reveal systemic preferences in that finite "universe" of information to which our profession seeks to provide access. That "universe" has boundaries directly affecting, among many other is- sues, matters of race, gender, age, class, and sexuality. I contend further that the curricula we are now designing reflects systemic preferences primarily because they ignore, overlook, and marginalize the value certain groups of people place on the content of certain information objects. To illustrate what I mean, I will focus on just one of these new literatures for the purposes of this essay. For the next few minutes let me take you outside our own world of LIS and introduce you to another that is seldom referred to in our literature, professional education, or pro- fessional practice. In the past decade or so the scholar- ship on reading - authored by some of the best minds in the humanities and social sciences, and published by some of the world's most prestigious presses - has de- veloped and coexisted in a very healthy interdisciplinary mix. At this point in its history it falls into four broad categories: (1) literacy studies; (2) a social history of books and reading or "print culture his- tory"; (3) reader-response theory; and (4) an ethnography of reading. To these four categories I want to add the scholarship on genre fiction emanating from cultural studies, another rapidly growing world of scholarship that, to my way of thinking, provides an important key to under- standing many of the socioculturally based information needs that libraries have been serving for generations, but without knowing why.7 More on cultural studies later, however. A scholarship on reading. Why now? Probably several reasons, one of which may be an inevitable reaction to the growth of nonprint forms of communi- cation that, at this point, preoccupies our own world of LIS. If we will be processing information differently in the future, this line of logic rational- izes, then how have we been process- ing information up to now? Other reasons for a new scholarship on read- ing include the recent development of a series of theoretical frames in the humanities and the social sciences that suggest the realities we have come to know are at least, in part, a product of our own making. These include post- modernism, neo-Marxism, feminist the- ory, Foucauldian archeology, and new historicism. Our first category - literacy stud- ies - was largely inaugurated by two books published in 1979. In The Literacy Myth,8 author Graff examines the evolu- tion of literacy in nineteenth-century urban America through multiple lenses, including social class, the relationship of power between groups, and efforts of some groups to use literacy to control others. While the subject wasn't neces- sarily new, Graff's perspective certainly was, and it got people thinking. In The Printing Press as an Agent of Change,9 Eisenstein argues that the West was transformed not so much by an ability to read and write as by the capacity of a printing process recently invented to reproduce that writing. Technical work was much more rapidly duplicated, she notes, and research was much more eas- ily preserved and circulated. The ver- nacular became celebrated and homogenized, modern criticism was in- troduced, and a set of market circum- stances evolved in which authors became celebrities. Our second category is print culture history, which is the history of the pro- duction, distribution, and consumption of print. The field of print culture his- tory was launched at mid-century by Volume 38# Number 4
Why Don 't We Have Any Schools of Library and Reading Studies? 3 1 7 French cultural historians Febvre and Martin in their Coming of the Book;10 it was later amplified in the scholarship of Darnton, who wrote The Great Cat Massacre and Other Episodes in French Cultural History11 and Chartier, who more recently wrote Forms and Mean- ings: Texts, Performances, and Audi- ences from Codex to Computer12 This field of studies contends that the culture of print that emerged after the invention of moveable type gave rise to new interpretive strategies. Darnton, for example, argues that our contemporary practice of reading for moral and spiritual guidance is a learned behavior passed down from the seventeenth century. Chartier takes a social approach to the question of read- ing. By focusing not on textual objects but on the act of reading itself as a form of behavior or social activity, he ana- lyzes how people used print for their own purposes and ends. Chartier argues that textual decoding is not a uniform process, but that differing reading prac- tices create different ways of processing and interacting with the same texts. Much of this scholarship made its way to the United States in the Program for the History of the Book in American Culture at the American Antiquarian Society, which nurtured such works as Davidson's Revolution and Word: The Rise of the Novel in America13 and Zboray's A Fictive People: Antebellum Economic Development and the Ameri- can Reading Public14 How does print culture history differ from literacy studies? Where literacy scholars show that the temporal, spatial, and so- ciopolitical context in which literacy was and is practiced is at least as im- portant as understanding the uses to which it is put, print culture historians show that reading has always been a complex process, that throughout his- tory different groups and individuals have used reading differently for differ- ent purposes and to different ends. This brings us to our third category, reader-response theory, much of which grows out of the works of Rosenblatt, Iser, and Jauss.15 Their approach is rela- tively simple. Most of us here success- fully completed a set of literature courses in secondary and higher educa- tion that required us to ask the question, "What did the author mean in the text?" Much of our in-class discussion cen- tered around that question, but often, we all recognized, our grade largely de- pended on our ability to parrot the tex- tual interpretation of our instructor. But for reader-response theorists, meaning in the text becomes not an ob- ject to be described but an effect to be experienced. Basic to this approach is a conviction that a universally valid in- terpretation of any text is untenable. Readers search for meaning in the text, and the search is heavily influenced by their own contemporary situations, contemporary norms, and historical norms, all of which vary from socioeco- nomic group to socioeconomic group and over time. As this literature says, the act of reading links readers to the text, and at the same time induces them to create the conditions that are neces- sary for the text to be effective. Part of this creative process in- volves what Iser and Jauss call the "moving" or "wandering viewpoint." They argue that the meaning of a text is heavily influenced by the consistency of attention to reading. The object of the text is imagined through different con- secutive phases of reading that require a participant to situate her/himself in- side the text. Scholars who have studied this phenomenon argue that the act of reading thus becomes a continual inter- play between modified expectations and transferred memories, and con- struction of the connections between Fall 1997
318 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science these expectations and memories is al- most entirely the province of the reader. So what does the "wandering view- point" produce? The mind, in its never- ending quest to make sense of the world around it, builds a consistency out of the process of selection that then forms a basis for comprehension. The text, in part, becomes an event in which the reader reacts to what she or he has pro- duced. Involvement is a condition of the experience. But the interaction be- tween the text and the reader is asym- metrical, forced by the necessary conditions of interaction. Because there is no face-to-face contact between author and reader, the reader has no way to test for accuracy of author inten- tion. As a result, for the reader a text contains blanks and negations which she or he must fill in or resolve. These uncertain and indefinite qualities of a text then serve to stimulate. Blanks function as potential connections be- cause they designate vacancies in the overall system of the text. They force a need to combine and connect, and in connecting blanks, scholars have found, the reader's mind is triggered into acts of ideation - a highly creative activity with potential for much satisfaction. In this country reader-response the- ory has been taken up most persuasively by Fish, author of the widely influential Is There a Text in This Class? Fish ar- gues that most readers don't read like literary critics; instead, some of his col- leagues point out, they "poach" - raid a text for their own purposes. Much of that poaching is driven by an individ- ual's needs. Texts are actually sites at which readers activate particular signi- fiers and follow strategic patterns that are not necessarily intentionally or con- sciously manipulated. In fact, investiga- tors have observed that readers function as members of particular interpretive communities - groups of people whose textual mediations tend to follow gen- der, race, creed, age, sexual orientation, or class lines, and thus their "poaching" follows patterns common to the group.16 Our fourth category - "ethnography of reading" - is probably best illustrated in a recently published collection of essays bearing that title.17 Essayists in- cluded come from departments of his- tory, classics, literature, and sociology (notice no LIS faculty here). Although they address diverse subjects ranging from the ancient rabbinical readings of Hebrew scriptures to the scribes and storytellers of pre-modern Japan, what binds all these investigations together are attempts to define the contexts of actual reading practices exercised in particular groups at particular times. For example, in "Textual Interpre- tation as Collective Action" - in my opinion the most relevant essay in the book for LIS educators - Long suggests that the modern construction of the soli- tary reader ignores the thoroughly so- cial base for some kinds of reading. Long combines historical research into turn-of-the-century literary societies and reading clubs with an analysis of sixty groups of Houston readers in the 1980s to discover among them all what she calls a "social infrastructure." She says that this infrastructure includes shared interpretive frameworks, par- ticipation in a set of institutions, social relations, and economic activities, and then demonstrates how group members mediate their interpretations with each other, their cultures, and their society. At this point let me summarize our four categories. Literacy studies have shown that understanding the context in which literacy is practiced is vitally important. Print culture historians have shown that reading is a multilayered, highly complex process. Reader-re- sponse theorists have shown that in the reading process the reader is an active agent who exercises a great deal of crea- tivity in making sense of texts. Ethnog- Volume38, Number 4
Why Don 't We Hove Any Schools of Librory ond Reoding Studies? 3 1 9 graphers of reading have shown that reading can be viewed as a communal activity based in a social infrastruc- ture grounded on shared interpretive frameworks and practiced in shared institutions. Now we come to cultural studies, which encompasses the entirety of popular culture, of which reading printed texts is only a part. Cultural studies scholars argue that, for purposes of analysis, it is important to resist the inclination to judge the quality of cul- tural products with standards estab- lished over the centuries by privileged elites, especially those in the academy whose discourse marks this kind of reading with words like "trash," "low- brow,"18 and "mind candy." Instead, cultural studies scholars suggest it might be more profitable to focus on emotions like happiness, satisfaction, fulfillment, and pleasure - which are basic to all human beings - as a founda- tion for comparison. Much of the philo- sophical underpinnings for this approach, by the way, can be gleaned from Herrnstein Smith's widely read Contingencies of Value: Alternative Per- spectives for Critical Theory.19 Perhaps the best way I can illustrate this approach is to ask two questions: Is it possible that my seventy-six-year-old mother can get as much pleasure from reading a Christian romance written by Janette Oke as I get from reading Victor Hugo's Les Miserables? And if it is pos- sible for each of us to get equal pleasure from the act of reading these two sepa- rate texts, is it not also possible that the texts can be said to have equal value for each of us, despite the fact that our lives are so different? Herrnstein Smith argues that, by their very nature, all values are highly contingent on a variety of socioeco- nomic factors. If she's right, cannot her line of logic be extended to values we assign to the act of reading? And would the values be especially contingent on factors that separate me and my mother like gender, age, education, and socioeco - nomic class? If you can accept the possi - bilities inherent in these kinds of questions for the moment, the importance of cultural studies scholarship for LIS education will immediately become evi - dent. If you can't, what I am about to say will probably make no sense. But before you dismiss the possibility from your mind entirely, before you decide to ex- clude it from your professional discourse, let me remind you of Thea Bosselmann's information need. She wanted to read about a young iidult female who was "brave, smart and never gives up"; the SFPL system head of children's services, on the other hand, worried more about "higher literary quality." To explain cultural studies, I start with Fiske's Understanding Popular Culture.20 There Fiske talks about "ex- corporation," a process, he explains, by which people "make their own culture out of the resources and commodities provided" them. To study popular cul- ture, one must not only study "the cul- tural commodities out of which it is made, but also the ways that people use them. The latter," he continues, "are far more creative and varied than the for- mer." Shades of reader-response theory here, but painted across a broader can- vas of popular culture. In a chapter en- titled "Popular Texts," Fiske taps Barthes' distinctions between the read- erly and writerly text. The readerly text, Barthes argues, "is a relatively closed text easy to read and undemanding of its read- ers" - perhaps a story in The National Enquirer. The writerly text, on the other hand, "challenges the reader constantly to rewrite it, to make sense out of it" - per- haps James Joyce's Ulysses. To these two categories of texts Fiske adds a third, the "producerly text," which "has the accessibility of a readerly one . . . but the openness of the Fall 1997
320 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science writerly." The producerly text, loaded with what you and I might call excessive sentimentality and formulaic predict- ability, invites, indeed expects, readers to "move into and out of the text," and thus to "appropriate" meaning relevant to their own lives. The act of reading, thus, becomes pleasurable, because the reader can control it. Greenblatt and Sicherman have coined useful terms to describe what happens when people encounter such cultural forms. Greenblatt calls this proc- ess "self-fashioning"; Sicherman calls it "self-authorization."21 Fiske argues that "producerly" texts "are to be used, con- sumed, and discarded, for they function only as agents in the social circulation of meaning and pleasure; as objects they are impoverished." Here I remind you of our tradition in LIS education to em- phasize "information" as object. "Pro- ducerly" texts do not fit that role. Tompkins' book, West of Every- thing: The Inner Life of Westerns,22 is a fascinating read. "People think of West- erns as light entertainment, adolescent and escapist," she writes, "but there is nothing trivial about the needs they an- swer." She argues that "Westerns satisfy a hunger not for adventure but for mean- ing" and that, like the spy novel, detec- tive story, and science fiction adventure, the world of the Western "is packed with messages. There is never a moment when you aren't being pro- grammed to believe, act, or feel a certain way. The feelings that reading or seeing a Western excites are related to the prin- cipal messages it sends. Intended for men primarily, they are messages about what it means to be a successful adult in our society." Equally fascinating is Radway's Reading the Romance23 originally pub- lished in 1984 but reissued in 1991 with a new introduction. Here Radway de- scribes a group of women who patronized a suburban mall bookstore in order to purchase their romances from a part-time clerk Radway fictitiously names Dot Evans. Over the years this group of ro- mance readers came to rely heavily on Dot's recommendations. In the parlance of our own professional discourse, Dot had become their "reader's advisor." Let me read a few quotes from the book to give you an indication of how romance reading fits the category of "producerly text." What [my] book gradually became . . . was less an account of the way romances as texts were interpreted than of the way romance reading as a form of behavior operated as a complex intervention in the ongoing social life of actual social sub- jects, women who saw themselves first as wives and mothers. Whatever the theoretical possibilities of an infinite number of readings, in fact, there are patterns or regularities to what viewers and readers bring to texts in large part because they acquire specific cultural competencies as a consequence of their particular social location. Simi- lar readings are produced . . . because similarly located readers learn a similar set of reading strategies and interpretive codes that they bring to bear upon the texts they encounter. But let me personalize the point about "producerly texts" with two more examples. As a child I would frequently walk three blocks to the Custerdale branch of the Manitowoc (Wisconsin) Public Library in the 1950s to spend sev- eral hours in the collections. At age twelve I remember immersing myself in the autobiography of Warren Spahn, star left-hander for the Milwaukee Braves, who in his book recalled look- ing into a mirror one day and deciding he'd better work hard at what he did best because he surely wasn't going to make it in Hollywood. For reasons obvi- ous to this audience, I identified with Spahn's sentiments, but his words did Volume 38, Number 4
Why Don 7 We Hove Any Schools of Librory ond Reoding Studies? 32 1 much more for me. They reinforced a blue-collar kid's commitment to the work ethic. Does Warren Spahn's auto- biography qualify as good literature? Of course not, but for me - in that time, in that place - it carried a powerful mes- sage that has stuck with me ever since. I can't tell you how many mornings I've recalled those sentiments in front of a mirror as I combed through the few hairs left on my head before departing for school. Or let me tell you about Amy Shep- herd. In a term paper entitled "I Prefer Girls: A Cultural History of the Lesbian Romance Novel," which she wrote for my "Reading Interests of Adults" class in May 1996, she concludes: Lesbian romance novels offer positive images of lesbians, alternatives to the many images in our society of lesbians as sick, immoral, and unnatural. The novels are deeply affirming, not only of the transforming love between two women, but also of the transforming na- ture of lesbianism. They provide fanta- sies of lesbians overcoming homophobia in our society and within themselves to claim their identities proudly; they offer fantasies of lesbians loving each other and building communities despite their differences. These are fantasies that les- bian readers cling to and return to again and again for reassurance, to restore their faith in themselves and others. In these books, lesbians can find a home and even sometimes a community that provides safety and security. They know that their desires will be honored, re- spected, and celebrated in these books, even if they are not elsewhere." When reading this paragraph, I was struck at how closely Amy's conclu- sions echoed Radway's research find- ings. I am grateful to Amy - and I admire her courage - for granting me permission to quote from her paper. The lessons of literacy studies, print culture history, reader-response theory, and the ethnography of reading echo throughout these quotes. I highly recommend Fiske, Tompkins, and Radway to your reading, in large part because all three try to shed the rules and regulations by which we have pre- viously judged genre texts in order to look at and understand the contents of those texts through the eyes of the peo- ple who read them most - indeed a very democratic standpoint for analysis. So what does this all have to do with the contemporary world of LIS education? Well, if literacy scholars are right about the necessity to understand the context in which literacy is prac- ticed, if print culture historians are right about the act of reading being a multilayered complex process, if reader-response theorists are right about readers being active agents who, in the reading process, creatively re- structure texts to make sense of their worlds, if ethnographers of reading are right about the act of reading being a communal activity based on a social infrastructure with shared interpretive frameworks, then - based on my own understanding of American library his- tory - I would argue the ubiquitous pub- lic library (to cite but one type of library) has historically played a major role as one of society's most important sites in which this activity has taken place. How major? This year, again, the ALA's Office of Research and Statistics noted that there were more public li- braries in this country than McDonald's restaurants, and that more children en- rolled in public library summer reading programs than Little League baseball. If the scholarship I've cited in this paper is addressing relevant and impor- tant questions about the act of reading, the public library - by its very existence as a site where the act of reading takes place and where reading materials are provided - has for generations fostered Fall 1997
322 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science multiple interactions with texts and functioned as a liberating, empowering, creative force. Because its readers have not been policed for "correct" interpretations of the texts they have borrowed, they have been able to fantasize and indulge, trans- gress and subvert, appropriate and poach. Looked at from this perspective, the "give 'em what they want" philosophy of collec- tion development takes on a whole new meaning. Instead of considering patrons merely as "consumers," this alternative perspective of a traditional library service not only respects the readers' right to as- sign value to their reading, it also honors their ability to make reasoned decisions based on their own sociocultural circum- stances. Yet here's the irony. Although we in the LIS education community are well- placed to study complexities inherent in the act of reading in order to increase our understanding of the public li- brary's role in its host community, with very few exceptions we have so far ig- nored the subject. For example, as near as I can tell the scholarship on reading was not a part of the dialog that took place in Washington a year ago when Kellogg grantees met to discuss the fu- ture of libraries. Yet among the data grantees considered was a Benton Foun- dation report of a focus group that iden- tified as its top two library services (1) "providing reading hours and other pro- grams for children" and (2) "purchasing new books and other printed materials." As a student of the scholarship on reading, am I not justified in sensing the possibility that focus group members are here bearing witness to the value they place on the informing, satisfying, "self- fashioning," self-authorizing po- tential reading releases to them in a "producerly" text? Without a knowl- edge of reading scholarship, however, I suspect the Benton Foundation was un- able to tease this possibility out, and as a result, I suspect Kellogg grantees were unable to fathom a potentially broader significance of these priorities as they contemplated librarianship's future. Or let me give you another example drawn from the same focus group activity. In it one participant actually criticized li- braries for not stocking enough popular titles. "If you want to get the book that everybody is reading right now, it is just not in," she or he complained. Although reading scholars who know Long's re- search might recognize this as a plea for increased access to a community-based information-sharing activity, such a possibility seems never to have oc- curred to focus group organizers or Kel- logg grantees. Both, I suspect, entirely overlooked what might be a message hidden away in the coded language of a different discourse.24 As all this takes place before my eyes in the profession I have grown to love; I find myself frustrated by what I see as an evolving agenda that provides little room for discussing the subject of reading. As I scan the evolution of LIS education over the past decade I find myself wondering why the parameters we draw around the word "informa- tion" do not include research on the act of reading, a major means by which Americans obtain information, whether it comes off the page or the computer screen.25 I find myself wondering whether the way we are defining the word "information" allows us to avoid complexities involving matters of race, class, sexual orientation, age, and gen- der distinctions that reading scholars are discovering about people who pur- sue information in particular ways at particular times and for their own par- ticular purposes.26 Ultimately, I find myself wondering why we have a lot of schools of library and information stud- ies, but no schools of library and read- ing studies. A U.S.News/CNN poll conducted October 13-16, 1995, re- vealed that 67 percent of Americans Volume 38, Number 4
Why Don 't We Hove Any Schools of Librory ond Reoding Studies? 323 used public libraries in 1994, and of that number 80 percent went to borrow a book. What do these numbers suggest to you about the value 140 million library patrons place on the act of reading? I have a hypothesis about how we arrived at the current status of our pro- fessional discourse. In the absence of an adequate understanding of the role reading plays in library services, I think we gradually evolved a consensus by the 1970s that the kind of information transfer evident in, for example, con- ventional reference services constitutes the primary "center" and thus the most valuable of our professional responsi- bilities. Then, in the early 1980s, I think we panicked when an important frac- tion of the library's traditional clien- tele - generally white middle-class professionals who, in part, used library collections for reference purposes and who could be traditionally counted on as powerful voices to support librar- ies - began to use computers for some of their information needs and (with the help of substantial inducements from corporate America) began to bypass li- braries more and more. Ever since, LIS education has aimed the vast majority of its curricular changes at catching up. And to a large extent, justifiably so. I will be the last person to recommend that we try to turn back the clock and ignore the tremendous opportunities presented by new information tech- nologies. At the same time, however, I think it was so easy to shift our focus on "print as object" to "information as object" that we lost sight of the library's rich tradition as a reading institution, in large part because the liberal arts cur- riculum to which most of us were ex- posed in college had not grounded us in a philosophically defensible rationale to justify the consumption of popular reading materials except as "recrea- tion." And in 1997, 1 fear, as LIS educa- tion seeks to reinvent the profession, we are turning away from this traditional focus precisely at a time when multicul- tural interdisciplinary forces are pro- viding reader-centered explanations to help us unlock the secrets of multiple reading behaviors that have been hid- den from previous generations of LIS students, our own included. Next year Long will publish a book entitled Reading Together: Women's Book Groups and American Culture. How many of us will read it? How many of us will recommend or assign it to our students, if only to introduce to these future professionals the possibility that it might help them better understand the information needs of millions of people in this country who belong to hundreds of thousands of reading groups, many of which are now meeting on the Internet?27 How many of us will incorporate information on reading scholarship into LIS core courses in general, or in "Information Behavior" courses in particular? How many of us - and here I especially appeal to our LIS deans and directors - how many of us will return home from this confer- ence to investigate whether any schol- ars of reading in departments of English, history, education, or journal- ism - or in area units like American or Cultural Studies - might be interested in exploring low-cost interdisciplinary arrangements such as cross-listed courses or joint programs that could benefit LIS students and faculty, and ultimately the library institutions LIS education professes to serve? How many years before we see any LIS school ad- vertise at an ALISE conference for inter- viewees whose primary area of research addresses reading scholarship? I contend that if we do not begin to move in these directions, if we do not expand the boundaries of our profes- sional discourse, if we do not begin to embrace the scholarship that analyzes Fail 1997
324 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science multiple values people attach to read- ing in particular, and the scholarship that analyzes multiple values people at- tach to the content of information in general, we will not only be missing a golden opportunity, we will also be cre- ating a significantly blindered and limited future for our profession. And if we continue to ignore these literatures, if we fail to include them in our professional discourse, we will turn our backs on many groups of people we have been faithfully serving for generations, and we will do so without knowing why. That, I would argue at this moment in our history, is professionally irresponsible, ethically in- defensible, and no way to plan a future. Acknowledgments The author would like to thank John Budd, Andy and Shirley Wiegand, and Doug Zweizig for commenting on pre- vious drafts of this article. A condensed version of this article appeared in the June 15, 1997 issue oí Library Journal. References 1. "A Triumph of Community Support," American Libraries 27 (April, 1996): 44; Library Journal 121 (April 15, 1996). John Berry's interview with Dowlin is on pages 32-34. See also New York Times, April 15, 1996. 2. San Francisco Chronicle, May 6, 1996; May 7, 1996. Enough public pressure was brought on the system that Ameri- can Libraries reported in subsequent weeks that "The library has given up the 'literary merit' fight, and Nancy is in." See American Libraries 27 (August, 1996): 12. 3 . Social theorists frequently cited who stress the functional aspects of discourse in their work include: Michel Foucault, The Ar- chaeology of Knowledge and the Discourse of Language (New York: Pantheon Books, 1972); Jurgen Habermas, The Theory of Communication Action, Volume 1, Rea- son and the Rationalization of Society (Boston: Beacon, 1984); and Stanley Aronowitz, Science as Power: Discourse and Ideology in Modern Society (Minnea- polis: Univ. of Minnesota Pr., 1988). 4. For useful discussions of discourse analy- sis specific to our profession, see Bernd Frohmann, "The Power of Images: A Dis- course Analysis of the Cognitive View- point," Journal of Documentation 48, (1992): 365-68; and John M. Budd and Douglas Raber, "Discourse Analysis: Method and Application in the Study of Information," Information Processing & Management 32 (1996): 217-36. 5. Ross Atkinson, "Library Functions, Scholarly Communication, and the Foundation of the Digital Library: Lay- ing Claim to the Control Zone," Library Quarterly 66 (July 1996): 239-65. See especially p. 241. 6. See Wayne A. Wiegand, Irrepressible Re- former: A Riography of Melvil Dewey (Chicago: ALA, 1996). 7. I take the four categorizations from Janice Radway's "Beyond Mary Bailey and Old Maid Librarians: Reimaging Readers and Rethinking Reading," Journal of Educa- tion for Library and Information Science 35 (Fall 1994): 275-96. More recently, some have combined cultural studies with these four categories to create "print culture studies." See, for example, Julie Bates Dock, ed., The Press of Ideas: Read- ings for Writers on Print Culture and the Information Age (Boston: Bedford Books of St. Martin's, 1996). 8. Harvey Graff, The Literacy Myth: Liter- acy and Social Structure in the Nine- teenth Century City (New York: Academic, 1979). For a more recent as- sessment, see Carl Kaestle and others, Literacy in the United States: Readers and Reading since 1880 (New Haven, Conn.: Yale Univ. Pr., 1991). 9. Elizabeth Eisenstein, The Printing Press as an Agent of Change: Communica- tions and Cultural Transformation in Early-Modern Europe (New York: Cam- bridge Univ. Pr., 1979). 10. Lucien Febvre and Henri-Jean Martin, The Coming of the Rook: The Impact of Volume 38, Number 4
Why Don't We Have Any Schools of Librory and Reading Studies? 325 Printing, 1450-1800, trans. David Ger- ard (London: N.L.B., 1976). 11. Robert Darnton, The Great Cat Massacre and Other Episodes in French Cultural History (New York: Basic Books, 1984). 12. Roger Chartier, Forms and Meanings: Texts, Performances, and Audiences from Codex to Computer (Philadelphia: Univ. of Pennsylvania Pr., 1995). 13. Cathy Davidson, Revolution and the Word: The Rise of the Novel in America (New York: Oxford Univ. Pr., 1984). 14. Ronald Zboray, A Fictive People: Ante- bellum Economic Development and the American Reading Public (New York: Ox- ford Univ. Pr.. 1993). 15. See, for example, Louise Rosenblatt, Lit- erature as Exploration (New York: Apple- ton-Century, 1938); Wolfgang Iser, The Act of Reading: A Theory of Aesthetic Response (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Univ. Pr., 1978). See also Susan R. Suleiman and Inge Crosman, The Reader in the Text: Essays on Audience and Interpreta- tion (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton Univ. Pr., 1980); and Jane P. Tompkins, ed., Reader- Response Criticism: From Formalism to Post-Structuralism (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Univ. Pr., 1980). 16. Stanley Fish, Is There a Text in This Class? The Authority of Interpretive Com- munities (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Pr., 1980). The concept of "poach- ing" is developed more fully in Henry Jenkins, Textual Poachers: Television Fans & Participatory Culture (New York: Routledge, 1992). 17. Jonathan Boyarín, ed., The Ethnography of Reading (Berkeley: Univ. of California Pr., 1993). 1 8 . Lawrence Levine notes that the origins of the term "lowbrow" derive from a race-based 19th-century "science" called "phrenology" that sought to determine racial types and potential for intelligence by measuring cra- nial capacities. See Lawrence Levine, High- brow/Lowbrow: The Emergence of Cultural Hierarchy in America (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Pr., 1988), 222. 19. Barbara Herrnstein Smith, Contingencies of Value: Alternative Perspectives for Critical Theory (Cambridge, Mass.: Har- vard Univ. Pr., 1988). 20. John Fiske, Understanding Popular Cul- ture (Boston: Unwin Hyman, 1989). Quo- tations taken from pp. 15, 103-04, 119, and 123. See also Pierre Bourdieu, Dis- tinction: A Social Critique of the Judge- ment of Taste, trans. Richard Nice (London: Routledge, 1986) for a fasci- nating discussion of the connections be- tween social class and cultural taste; and Michel de Certeau, The Practice of Everyday Life, trans. Steven Rendali (Berkeley: Univ. of California Pr., 1984), for a close look at how, in everyday life, different people "appropriate" differ- ently the cultural products and activi- ties surrounding them. 21. Greenblatt argues that "in our culture to abandon self-fashioning is to abandon the craving for freedom, and to let go of one's stubborn hold upon selfhood, even selfhood conceived as fiction, is to die." See Stephen Greenblatt, Renaissance Self-Fashioning: From More to Shake- speare (Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Pr., 1980), 257. Sicherman notes that "the scarcity in life of models for nontradi- tional womanhood has prompted women more often than men to turn to fiction for self-authorization." See Barbara Sicher- man, "Reading Little Women: The Many Lives of a Text," in U.S. History as Women's History: New Feminist Essays, Linda Kerber and others (Chapel Hill, N.C.: Univ. of North Carolina Pr., 1995), 245-66, reprinted in Dock, The Press of Ideas, quotation on p. 75. See also Mary Kelley, "Reading Women/Women Read- ing: The Making of Learned Women in Antebellum America," Journal of Ameri- can History 83 (Sept. 1996): 401-24. 22. Jane Tompkins, West of Everything: The Inner Life of Westerns (New York: Oxford Univ. Pr., 1993). Quotations taken from pp. 10, 15, and 210-11. 23. Janice A. Radway, Reading the Romance: Women, Patriarchy, and Popular Litera- ture, 2d ed. (Chapel Hill, N.C.: Univ. of North Carolina Pr., 1991). Quotations taken from pp. 7, 8, and 11. See also Jayne Ann Krentz, ed., Dangerous Men and Ad- venturous Women: Romance Writers on the Appeal of the Romance (Philadel- phia: Univ. of Pennsylvania Pr., 1992). Fall 1997
326 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 24. "Benton Study: Libraries Need to Work on Message to Public," Library Journal 121 (September 1, 1996): 112. See also Benton Foundation, Buildings, Books, and Bytes: Libraries and Communities in the Digital Age (Washington: Benton Foundation, 1996), pp. 27, 30. For some examples of LIS research based in the scholarship on reading, see Catherine Sheldon Ross's award-winning "'If They Read Nancy Drew, So What?' Series Book Readers Talk Back," Library and Informa- tion Science Research 17 (1995): 201-36; and Anne Lundin's "Kate Greenaway's Critical and Commercial Reception," Princeton University Library Chronicle 62 (Autumn 1995): 127-46. Steven Karetzky, Reading Research and Librari- anship: A History and Analysis (West- port, Conn.: Greenwood, 1982), Stephen Krashin, The Power of Reading: Insights from the Research (Englewood, Colo.: Li- braries Unlimited, 1993), and Diana Trixler Herald, Genreflecting: A Guide to Read- ing Interests in Genrefiction (Englewood, Colo.: Libraries Unlimited, 1995), make no reference to the reading research cited in the footnotes of this paper. 25. Electronic journal editors readily ac- knowledge different reading behaviors occasioned by interaction with screen or page. Michael Kingsley, editor of Mi- crosoft's new Web magazine Slate and former editor of the New Republic, argues that "people just won't read more than eight hundred, or, at most, a thousand, words on a screen." David Weber, manag- ing director of programming for HotWired, Web site offspring of Wired, notes: "This is an environment that fosters the quick, current, impulsive and irreverent . . . whereas a book is a chance to thought- fully organize a great deal of informa- tion." See "Web Nuts Disdain Books, Yet Write Them," The Capital Times (Madi- son, Wis.), January 17, 1997. 26. Even works that debunk these narrowed parameters miss the scholarship on read- ing. See, for example, Michael H. Harris and Stan A. Hannah, Into the Future: The Foundations of Libraries and Informa- tion Services in the Post-Industrial Era (Norwood, N.J.: Ablex, 1993). 27. See Robert Dahlin, "This '90s Group Activ- ity Is All the Rage," Publishers Weekly (No- vember 18, 1996): 42-45; Bridget Kinsella, "Book Groups Get Wired," Publishers Weekly (November 18, 1996): 46-47. Volume 38, Number 4