Visible College Building Support Services for African-American Students: Part II Ling Hweyjeng, Editor Howard F. McGinn Part I of this article was published in JELIS 42(3), Summer, 2001 Support Services for Student Life New students, especially those coining to an institution from another city or another part of the country, face the daunting task of adapting to their new community and to graduate studies. More than likely graduate school is the more feared of the new experi- ences. Like all students, African- American students share these concerns. Their con- cerns will be magnified, however, by the societal situations discussed in the Summer 2001 issue of the journal and by a very strong desire to succeed. For African- American students who attended a historic black college, the adjustment to a predomi- nately white academic setting may be a lit- tle more difficult. Here are some strategies for easing students into academic life. Super Strategy I The Minority Student Concerns Committee Most universities will tend to have a suffi- cient number of African- American under- graduate and graduate students for the es- tablishment of a minority student concerns council or similar organization. The estab- lishment of a close working relationship by faculty with such a group will be essential in recruiting and retaining students. Student committees bring much value to daily life. They offer opportunities to meet new people, provide a forum for the discus- sion of problems, provide a mechanism for creating informal advising and mentoring, and serve as a means of distributing news. A formal committee permits Black students to make their concerns known to faculty and to the administration. In most cases, when officers of the committee present concerns to faculty or the administration in the name of the group, the individual is protected. The Minority Concerns Council at the School of Information Sciences at the Uni- versity of Pittsburgh provides an excellent model. Information can be found at http://www.sis.pitt.edii/~mcc/. Super Strategy II Hire an African- American "Grandmother" This person, of course, does not have to ac- tually be a grandmother. The person should have deep roots in the community and be ac- knowledged in the community as influential and important. The grandmother will coun- sel, mentor, and help with many of the stu- dents' adjustments to daily life. The grand- mother will help provide a sense of home, especially during bouts of homesickness the student may experience upon arrival. Fall 2002
224 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science About the Author Howard E McGinn is Dean of Libraries, Clarion University, Clarion, Pennsylvania. In southern United States there is a large rural African-American population. The chances of rural institutions identifying a "grandmother" to work with the students should be very good. Institutions that are rural but located fairly close to an urban area may experience some difficulty in hir- ing a grandmother because of the cost of commuting. This minor barrier can be over- come by increasing her salary to reflect the cost of commuting or by building a travel reimbursement clause into any agreement with the person. Institutions that are rural and not near an urban center may have to resort to other strategies. Major Considerations Acceptance. Gaining acceptance in a new environment is difficult for most people re- gardless of race. African-American stu- dents, however, will be very sensitive to in- dications of prejudice by white faculty and students. Though African- American stu- dents are expert in "ignoring" most of these incidents, it is not uncommon for things to be said or done by white faculty or students that will display a lack of understanding. Aggressive steps must be taken to create an atmosphere where the administration makes clear that there is a "zero tolerance" policy for faculty and/or student racial discrimina- tion and harassment of minority students. Strategies 1. Enforcement. Post the school's policies regarding racial discrimination and ha- rassment. During orientation, make sure every student (new and returning), and every faculty member receives a copy of the policy. Discuss the policy in orienta- tion meetings and in faculty meetings. If an incident occurs, enforce the policy and take action. It will set a no-nonsense tone, build credibility, and help avoid a lawsuit. 2. Awareness. Faculty and students who choose to discriminate and harass are of- ten very creative in their efforts. Many harassment practices are done blatantly, especially if there is a commonly shared feeling that there will be no disciplinary action taken by the administration. Initi- ate a procedure for the confidential re- porting of racial harassment practices. It is common to think that incidents of racial harassment by faculty/students do not occur. Unfortunately reports of faculty and student racial harassment reported by African- American library science graduate students to the Recruiting and Retention Committee of the Black Caucus of the American Library Association (BCALA) in academic year 2000-2001 indicate other- wise. Here are some examples of harass- ment reported to the committee: • A student was told that she would need to rewrite an exam in the professor's presence. The professor felt that the stu- dent had cheated because "her answers were too good and her language use (writing style) was exceptionally good." The student submitted answers to new questions given her by the professor while the professor was present. She again did exceptionally well. The pro- fessor admitted that the student deserved an A. When grades were released the student was given a B. The professor's reason: the student was too Afro-centric in her dress. • Common incidents reported to the com- mittee were racial slurs posted on hall- way bulletin boards, racial slurs uttered in class by faculty under the guise of Volume 43, Number 3
Building Support Services for African-American Students: Part li 225 "Freedom of Academic Expression," and shunning of African- American students by white students. (White students simply refused to speak to the black students.) • There were several reports of African- American students being told by faculty that the university's administration "forced" the graduate school to grant the students admittance to the program be- cause of their color. You get the picture. This could happen in your university. Be aware that many inci- dents go unreported by African- American students because they fear retaliation by white faculty, students, and administration. 3. Get to Know Each Other. Many times discrimination is a group process. Peo- ple will do things as part of a group that they would not do individually. Help black and white students get to know each other as persons. Assign them joint projects, have social events, ask a return- ing African- American student to mentor a new white student, and vice versa. Mentoring/Advising. African- American students tend to be extremely focused and hard working. They have a passion for learning and achievement that is unusual in its intensity because they know from expe- rience that they must produce at a higher level than white students in order to receive a good grade. Strategies 1. Special Faculty Advisors. Because of the uniqueness of African- American cul- ture, attention should be given to the de- velopment of a faculty advisory group dedicated to advising African- American students. This group will have been given special training in working with black students. If there are no African- American faculty in the library school, consider recruiting faculty from other departments. 2. Special Mentors. Mentoring is not al- ways a planned event. Sometimes it has to "happen." Develop a pool of faculty, especially African-American faculty, from across the university and from the professional community. Create events where students can informally meet with the faculty members and community leaders. It is probable that a mentoring relationship will occur. Assign incoming students an African-American "Big Brother or Big Sister" from the older students. Financial Advising. African-American graduate students, like most graduate stu- dents, will experience financial difficulties while in graduate school. It is not unusual for an African- American student to have in- curred higher levels of debt than white stu- dents while obtaining an undergraduate de- gree. In many cases the African-American student will be the first member of his or her family to graduate from college and family resources may not be present. Finan- cial counseling will aid in retention and recruiting. Strategies 1. Financial Advisors. In addition to fi- nancial counseling offered by the uni- versity's financial aid office, provide general financial counseling services and debt management advice. Seek con- tributions of professional time from financial advisors in the community. So- licit advice from the university's busi- ness school faculty and graduate students. 2. Graduate Assistantships. "Earmark" a number of graduate assistantships for African-American students. If the stu- dent is a Spectrum Scholar, work with him or her to obtain other scholarship funds made possible through the Spec- trum program. 3. Grow Spectrum Scholars. Identify un- dergraduates in your institutions or stu- dents in other institutions who have ap- plied for admission to your program or have expressed interest in your program. Work with them in applying for Spec- trum Scholarships. (It is this writer's Fall 2002
226 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science impression that many Spectrum Scholar- ships have been awarded to international students because of a low number of American citizens applying.) Final Thoughts African- American students are not perfect. Don't expect perfection. Do expect talent, a passion for learning, and a deep love of the profession. You might be tempted to think that the concerns discussed in these two arti- cles are unsolvable or insurmountable. Some will be, but the unsolvable problems have been around forever. Many problems can be solved. Don't think of the recruitment of African-American students as a "problem." Recruitment of African- American students will bring an intellectual and an interper- sonal richness to your community that can stimulate learning, infuse joy, and make all students better equipped to face the real world. Educators and library school students who would like to write about teaching method- ology, abstract articles, or comment on specific teaching methods are invited to send their contributions to Ling Hwey Jeng, Associate Professor, School of Library and In- formation Science, University of Kentucky, 502 King Library South, Lexington, KY 40506-0309; e-mail: lhjeng00@ukcc.uky.edu. Volume 43, Number 3