THE BODLEIAN CATALOGS OF 1674 AND 1738: AN EXAMINATION IN THE LIGHT OF MODERN CATALOGING THEORY' Carolyn 0. Frost The Bodleian catalogs of 1674 and 1738 had a significant influence upon cataloging practice in their own day and subsequently. The preface to the 1674 catalog and the structure of both catalogs show an awareness of an important question now being raised in modern cataloging theory: the distinction between "book" and "work." The catalogs were also able to fulfill functions later enun- ciated in the Paris Principles of 1961. Through a complex system of cross- references and ascriptive notes, the catalogs showed themselves attentive to the needs of scholars of the time. We learn much of the way in which decisions were made from a detailed journal kept by a compiler of the 1738 catalog. The first two printed catalogs of the Bodleian Library have secured a special place in the history of cataloging. The 1605 catalog is the first general catalog to be printed in Europe, and that of 1620 is the first alphabetical author-title catalog. After 1620, it becomes more difficult to pinpoint features in the Bodleian catalogs which are distinctively innova- tive. The third, printed in 1674, is renowned primarily for its preface, which contained the first detailed statement of cataloging guidelines, but the catalog itself has not received great attention in current discussions of cataloging; even less recognition is given to its successors of 1738 and 1843. Nevertheless, in their own time, the catalogs of 1674 and 1738 particularly exercised a considerable influence on cataloging practice in libraries in England, Switzerland, Germany, and Italy [1, pp. 297-306]. At Harvard and other libraries in colonial America, the Bodleian catalogs were a predominant influence [2, pp. 2, 3, 11]. A large printing of the 1674 and 1738 catalogs made possible their wide distribution, and they often served as models or ready-made substitutes elsewhere. A closer look at these two neglected Bodleian catalogs can increase our knowledge of early cataloging practice and give some indication of the kinds of bibliographic assistance provided to scholars at the time they were published. Certain fundamental concepts in modern cataloging theory can be used as a framework from which to consider earlier catalogs. While it 1. I wish to thank Kenneth Northcott for his critical reading of the manuscript and assistance with the Latin translation. I am also indebted to Ralph Franklin, whose teaching generated my interest in this topic and provided the framework for its study. [Library Quarterly, vol. 46, no. 3, pp. 248-70] i 1976 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 248
BODLEIAN CATALOGS 249 would be difficult to say that the Bodleian catalogs of 1674 and 1738 contain an explicit recognition of principles expressed in the twentieth century, a study of the preface of the 1674 catalog does suggest concern for some of the matters implicit in modern principles. The construction of both catalogs is often compatible with these principles, although the means by which the principles are carried out are at times markedly different from modern practice. The Bodleian Printed Catalogs The printed catalogs of the Bodleian Library precede most of the de- velopments which mark the beginnings of modern cataloging theory and thus provide examples of early catalogs at a time in cataloging history when acceptable practice rather than the formulation of principle was being attempted. The library, which opened its doors to students in 1602, was founded by Sir Thomas Bodley, who kept up an extensive correspondence with the librarian, Thomas James, while the latter was compiling the library's catalogs [3]. Manuscript versions were prepared in 1602 and 1603-4, and the printed catalog was issued one year later [4]. This catalog reflected the organization of the library's books and manuscripts. Entries were divided first according to the divisions ("faculties") of the university-Arts, Theology, Medicine, and Law. These four divisions were further subdivided by volume size, and then alphabetically by author's name for works of known authorship; pseudonymous and anonymous works were entered under the key words of their titles. An index at the back gathered all entry words into one sequence.2 James's next printed catalog, that of 1620 [6], provides the most significant innovation yet in Bodleian tradition: the arrangement of a library catalog by alphabetical sequence of authors' surnames rather than by subject. A step in this direction had been taken in the 1603-4 manuscript catalog, which was arranged in a rough alphabetical order subdivided according to the faculties. The 1620 catalog had been pre- ceded by an unprinted version in 1613, which had been completed in the year of Bodley's death. Bodley, an advocate of systematic organization by subject, had exercised considerable control over the making of the first catalog. In the preface to the 1620 catalog, James defends his depar- ture from the precedent of the 1605 catalog, pointing out that a single alphabetical sequence has the advantage of grouping together works by the same author. The catalog's construction suggests an implicit distinc- tion between the distribution of the physical volumes in the actual library and the organization of the catalog. James did not eschew the idea of 2. This account of the early Bodleian catalogs is based on the extensive study done by Wheeler [5].
250 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY locating books according to subject, but felt that such access was best achieved for different subjects through separate catalogs, which he con- tinued to prepare for the entire collection even after poor health forced him to retire in 1620. These extensive and intricately constructed bib- liographic tools employed a subject classification far more complex and sophisticated than Bodley's four divisions by faculty. The catalogs of 1674 [7] and 1738 [8] can be considered almost as one unit, since the 1738 catalog represents an extension and refinement of the practices introduced in 1674. Thomas Hyde, Bodley's Librarian from 1665 to 1701, compiled the catalog published in 1674 and showed him- self defensive of and sensitive to the delay that had occurred in its production. He devoted no small part of his preface to explaining why the catalog had taken nine years to complete. It had been an immense labor, he said, and he lauded his own persistence in carrying out the task of compilation in the face of a variety of obstacles [7, p. 1].3 Thomas Hearne, who worked on the 1738 catalog and was one of Hyde's detrac- tors, claimed that the actual work of examining the volumes and writing out the 1674 catalog was done not by Hyde but by Emmanuel Prichard, the janitor,4 and that Hyde "did not do much in the work besides writing the dedication and the preface" [9, p. 140]. Even if this is true, Hyde should nevertheless be credited with recognizing the problems and stat- ing the principles underlying the construction of the catalog entries. Some of the principles expressed reflect practices already in use in the two earlier catalogs of 1605 and 1620, although Hyde could not resist taking a few snipes at his predecessor [7, p. ii]. The 1674 catalog is a large folio volume, more extensive and complex than the 1620 quarto, and introduced a number of improvements some of which are men- tioned in the preface, some of which are not. Prichard, the indefatigable janitor, kept up an interleaved copy of the 1674 catalog, and around the year 1686 prepared an appendix of new material for it [10, p. 85]. Soon after his election to the post of Bodley's Librarian in 1701, John Hudson assigned his assistant, Thomas Hearne, the task of making corrections and additions to the catalog. Hearne hoped to issue these changes as his own appendix to Hyde's catalog [1 1, vol. 6, p. 8] but the work, which was continued by several others, eventu- ally resulted in the two folio volumes of the 1738 catalog. The handsome format of the catalog is almost exactly that of the 1674 version. The development of an elaborate system of cross-references and ascriptive notes, innovations of the 1674 catalog, is even more noticeable in the new version. Robert Fysher, who was Librarian at the time and had transcribed the catalog for the press, reprinted Hyde's preface and added a brief preface of his own. 3. [7, p. i] The preface is written in Latin and I have therefore paraphrased those sections which I use for my argument. There is no pagination for the preface; the page numbers given are my own. 4. Probably more akin to a library assistant.
BODLEIAN CATALOGS 251 Three clergymen were assignecl different sections in the preparation of the next catalog, wvhich appearecl in 1843, though work had begun on it thirty years earlier. A supplement was added in 1851, bringing the completed work to four folio volumes [12]. In format and structure, some changes were made from previous editions; cross-references are fewer and more limited in function, and authors' names are listed with surname first. This catalog, which is mentioneA here for the sake of completeness and is not further considered, did not enjoy as high a reputation as the earlier Bodleian catalogs. No further printed catalogs were issued. The decline of the Bodleian in cataloging history occurred roughly at the time when the cataloging policies of the British Museum and of its energetic and controversial director, Antony Panizzi, were to make cataloging a subject of public debate at hearings of a Royal Com- mission [ 13] and to usher in the beginning of modern cataloging theory. Method of Examination With a view to ascertaining general cataloging method at a time when the formulation of principles was often no more than a documentation of particular practices, this paper will make use of modern cataloging theory, as reflected in the Statement of Principles adopted at the Interna- tional Conference on Cataloguing Principles at Paris in 1961 (the Paris Principles). Of particular interest is the Statement's view of the functions of the catalog [14, p. xiii]. One must be cautious in applying modern theory to catalogs of an earlier period. Students of cataloging history have been aware of this. "We must take care not to approach catalogues belonging to past centuries with the principles of modern cataloguing theory," Verona has said, indicating that, "at the time when [old printed] catalogues were compiled, there did not yet exist any theory of catalogu- ing. . ." [ 15, p. 23J.5 I do not, of course, suggest that the compilers of the early Bodleian catalogs went about their work under the guidance of a clearly formulated theory of cataloging based on principles similar to modern ones. Rather, it seem-ns to me that Thomas Hyde's statement of his objectives in compiling his 1674 catalog as expressed in its preface and the patterns of practice evident in both of the Bodleian catalogs of 1674 and 1738 often presage modern practices and objectives for which a theoretical basis has been formulated. Discussions of Hyde's 1674 pre- face frequently focus on the most obvious points of his cataloging "code," but one important aspect of the preface appears to have been overlooked: he goes beyond the mere provision of a list of rules and provides us with a rationale which shows the purpose of the rules and how the rules are intended to assist the reader. This paper will indicate, 5. This comment occurs in a discussion of corporate entries, a concept more peculiarly modern than those to be treated in this paper.
252 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY by means of example, bibliographic patterns in the two catalogs and the guidelines underlying their construction. It will be seen that Hyde's stated objectives and his cataloging practices produced a catalog which in many respects conforms to the principles expressed by the cataloging theorists Charles Cutter in 1876 [16, p. 10], Seymour Lubetzky in 1960 [17, p. ix], and the formulators of the Paris Principles in 1961. The Finding Function of the Catalog The functions of the catalog as formulated by the Paris Principles are indicated in the statement: "The catalogue should be an efficient in- strument for ascertaining whether the library contains a particular book specified by (a) its author and title, or (b) if the author is not named in the book, its title alone, or (c) if author and title are inappropriate or insufficient for identification, a suitable substitute for the title . . . [14, p. xiii]." The catalog's role as a finding device-that is, one which ascertains whether the library has a particular book already known to the reader6-was well established by the time of the Bodleian catalogs of 1674 and 1738. James's manuscript catalog of 1613, with its entries ordered alphabetically by author's name, had begun a development which facilitated the finding function to a considerable degree. The alphabetical index of authors' names in the 1605 catalog can be consid- ered as a precursor of this development. However, in the Bodleian catalogs of 1674 and 1738 the two bibliographic elements, author and title, which uniquely identify a particular book, did not receive the same emphasis. Only authors' names are identified precisely, titles are not. In the catalogs for 1674 and 1738, access points for authors' names are provided by entry headings and by cross-references. As in the 1620 catalog, both catalogs have a single alphabetical listing and authors ap- pear in the sequence according to surname, unless the person is better known by a forename. The surname is not entered first in the heading, but it is the element which determines the place in the alphabetical sequence. It is printed in capital letters if it appears in the alphabetical sequence, and in italics if it is referred to in a cross-reference; for exam- ple: Claude FRANCIS FRANCISCUS Crenmensis FRANC ISCUS Feri-ariensis. v. Th. Aquinas. The vogue of latinizing names, the use of pseudoniyms, and the lack of orthographical standardization all contributed to problems of identify- ing an author's name. The 1620 catalog had introduced cross-references 6. (;utter [ 16, p. 10] and Lubetzky ( 17, p. ixj formulated essentially the same objeclives.
BODLEIAN CATALOGS 253 from one form of name to the form chosen for the main entry; for example, from lo. Amatus to lean Aimes, and Alex. Aphrodiseus to Alexan- der, and from known pseudonyms to the real name, for example, from Felinus to Martinus Bucerus. The code of rules given in Hyde's 1674 preface notes the provision of cross-references for pseudonyms and for initials [7, p. iii]. Thus the reader is able to locate authors writing under assumed names or under initials, as well as those whose names appear with a less familiar spelling, for example, Philotheus PHYSIOLOGUS, i.e. Tho. Tryon, q. vid.; W.O. i.e. Will. Oughtred, q. vid.; SIMONDS. v. Symonds. A further refinement of identification is achieved by the use of de- scriptive title to distinguish authors with the same name: John SMITH, Fellow of St John's Coll. Oxon and afterwards Minister at Reading. John SMITH, sometime Fellow of St John's in Oxford, afterwards Minister of Clavering in Essex. John SMITH, Captain. John SMITH, M.D. formerly of Brazen-Nose Coll. Oxon. John SMITH, Rector of St Marie's in Colchester. John SMITH, Philomath. [173817 This practice and the provision of a number of access points for names at which entries may be found imply the recognition that a catalog has a finding function for authors' names. Bibliographic identification by title, however, was consistently ac- corded a lower priority in these Bodleian catalogs. Titles are transcribed with considerable paraphrasing and abbreviation; description, rather than transcription, is very often the case. Some titles, however, are unac- countably represented without regard to economy of space: IRELAND. Strange and terrible News from Ireland, or a full and true relation of a Maid at Dublin, who, being charged with a thing, solemnly wished the Devil might burn her, if she had it, which happened accordingly. - - - - 40 E. 6. Jur. [1738] When possible, a short paraphrase relates a title to a preceding title or heading: Simon BIRCKBECK. The Protestant's Evidence, shewing, [hat for fifteen hulndlled Years next after Christ, the Weightv points of ReligiOn 7. This is only a partial listing of the Johni Smiths. Fo facilitate illustration, English examples have been preferred throughout this paper, although English works consti- tute a minority. Citations are frequently made from the 1738 catalog, which, though in all essentials the same as the 1674 catalog, contains more English language titles.
254 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY have by God's Church been held and taught as the Church of England now doth. Loand. 1634 ... The Same- shewing, That for sixteen hundlred Years &c. Lond. 1657 . . .H TOLERATION (Considerations inovinlg toward a Toleration, &c. Lond. 1685 Aniswer to the same. Ibid. Titles are sometimes augmented or actually supplied: BIBLIA SACRA ... ANGLICANAE. [The Byble, but the Tit. is absent] In the Last Leaf- The Ende (f the Nezt'e Testament and of the whole Byble fv inshed in November. Anno in .c. .c .c .c.x.1.i. [1738] Titles in Hebrew are given in the original, with a Latin translation-. Though less precise than author identification, titles are expressed with sufficient clarity to allow identification if combined with the author's name. However, if the author is not known, title alone does not serve as a reliable means of identification, since anonymous works are usually entered not by their full title but under key words in the title: Manl in the MOON. A Letter from the Man in the Moon to Mr Anodyne Necklace ... BREASTS. Of niaked Breasts aind Shoulders, translated by Edw. Cooke, with a Preface by Mr Baxter .. [1738] This system allows a number of titles with the same key word to be grouped together under a single heading which can then serve as a substitute subject heading; in addition, the heading may have cross- references to authors of other titles with the same key word. James in the 1620 catalog generally, but not invariably, entered anonymous titles under the first main word; thus, "The Mirrour of policie" occurs under the heading "Mirrour," but "The summe of the Conference" is under "Conference." Hyde explained in the 1674 catalog that the entry of anonymous works would be primarily "sub Titulo subjectae Materiae" [7, p. iii]. Thus, "A Warning for Tabacconists against the pernicious use of Tabacco" is entered by James under "Warning," and by Hyde under "Tabacco." 8. In this paper '. . ." inidicates that the entry or heading is inot cited in its entirety; other punctuation, italics, and spelling are as in the catalogs.
BODLEIAN CATALOGS 255 Works may also be found under form headings and corporate entries:9 LETTERS. Five Love-Letters from a Nun to a Cavalier A Letter from Some-body, in answer to No-bodies Letter, in Vindication of Some-body OXONIUM ... Literae D. THOMAE BODLEIO missae MDCXII ... Reasons of the University againist the Covenant, &c [17381 The Gathering Function The Paris Principles state that the second function of the catalog is "ascertaining . . . (a) which works by a particular author and (b) which editions of a particular work are in the library."'0 This function of gathering and displaying the works of a given author, and the editions of a given work, is performed with surprising vitality in the 1674 and 1738 catalogs. In order to show which works the library has by a given author, the catalog assembles the author's works in one place under a uniform heading. If a name appears in a variant form on the title page, it is made accessible through cross-references, as we have seen. Works published anonymously but with known authors appear under the author's name, with the designation "anonymous" added in brackets. Authors writing under pseudonyms have their works entered under their real names if known, as showvn in the first of the examples below; otherwise, as illus- trated in the second example, the entry occurs under the pseudonym. Authorship may thus be ascribed from a source other than the title page in order to identify and keep the works of an author together: Tho. TRYON. The Way to Health, long Life, and Happiness, or a Disc. of Temperance, &c. to which is added a Treatise of most sorts of English Herbs. [Anonym.] Lond. 1683 ... Moonthly Observations for the preserving of Health, &c. [by Philotheus Physiologus.] Lond. 1688 ... A new Art of brewing Beer, Ale, and other Sorts of Liquors, also the Art of making Mault, &c. Lond. 1691 ... The good House-Wife made a Doctor, or Health's choice anld sure Friend, &c. Lond. 1692 . 9. See Eva Verona's extensive studies of the development of form headings [I] and corporate entries [ 15]. 10. The second of Cutter's objectives of catalogs would lead to the display of works of an author but not, as in Lubetzky and the Paris Principles, the editions of a work.
256 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Aminadab BLOWER, a devout Bellowse-mender of PIMLICO. Some Small and Simple Reasons delivered in a Hollow-Tree, in Waltham Forrest, in a Lecture on the 33 of March last (1648;) shewing the Causes in general and particular, wher-efore they doe, might, would, or ought, except against, and quite Refuse the Liturgy, or Booke of Common-Prayer. Printed, Aini(o Milliino, Quillimo, Trillimo [1738] Hyde is particularly concerned that the reader does not fail to recog- nize an author or title appearing under a different name. For the less attentive, he cautions, many titles and names which are actually the same would appear to be different. This can easily become a trap for the unwary, but he claims the use of his catalog will avoid such errors [7, pp. iii, iv]. In addition to displaying under an author's name as a uniform head- ing those works for which he is primarily responsible, the catalog also indicates to the reader those works for which the author has a lesser responsibility. Adjacent to the main entry heading for the author's name, and preceding the fuller entries, is a list of cross-references which link the author's name to headings for works in which the author has a minor role. These cross-references occur in many cases of shared or mixed authorship for which some modern cataloging rules would pro- vide an added entry and sometimes link his name to works which he has translated or collected, works for which he has provided notes or a preface, musical works for which he has provided the text or melody, and original works which have been adapted by other authors. Theoph. LAVENDER. v. Biddlulph. Will. & Pet. BIDDULPH. Travells into the East by Biddulph and others, collected by Th. Lavender... Gul. TWISSUS. v. J. Cottoun. John COTTON... The clearing of some doubts concerning Predestination, with an Examination thereof by W. Twisse ... [1674] { Nic. Ridley. Henry W H ARTON J. Usserius. Jac. USSERIUS ... Historia Dogmatica de Scripturis & sacr-is Vernaculis, cum Notis & Auctario H. Whartoni . . .
BODLEIAN CATALOGS 257 Nich. RIDLEY ... A Treatise against the errour of Transubstantiation ... And with a Preface by Henr. Wharton ... Will. SHAKESPEAR. {J. Flyete. {J. Fletcher. John DRYDEN. The Tempest or the inchanted Island, a Comedy altered from Shakespear ... John FLETCHER. The 2 Noble Kinsmen, by Fletcher and Shakespear . Tho. STANLEY, Esq. v. J. Gamble. John GAMBLE. Songs and Dialogues by Tho. Stanley set to Musick ... [1738] John COPRARIO v. Campion. Thomas CAMPION. Songs bewailing the untimely death of Prince Henry, pricked out to the Lute or Violl by John Coprario ... [1674] The cross-references indicate a number of kinds of relationships, but the nature of the connection is never indicated by the reference itself; hence the reader must track down each reference in order to determine its relationship to the main heading. Despite its inconvenience, this method does provide the catalog with a mechanism for showing, in addition to the works "by" an author-that is, works for which he is primarily responsible-other works to which he has contributed to a smaller degree. All too frequently, the question arises as to whether a work is actually "by" an author or has been falsely ascribed to him. Here, the cross- references assist in indicating works attributed to an author, but entered under another heading: Obad. WALKER Master of Univ. Coll. v. Abr. Woodhead. Abr. WOODHEAD M.A. sometime Fell. of University Coll. in Oxon. A brief Account of antient Church-Government, with a Reflection on several modern Writings of the Presby- terians &c. in iv Parts. [Anonym.] Lond. 1662 ... [It is attributed by the R. Catholicks to 0. Walker; and by Others to R. Holden.] [1738]
258 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY The catalog, however, is not always consistent in choice of entry for such cases: Mrs. MANLEY v. Eginhardus. EGINHARDUS ... Memoirs of Europe, translated from Eginhardus; Vol. ii. [The true Author is Mrs. Manley] ... [1738] The function of the catalog which is expressed in the Paris Principles as "ascertaining . . . which editions of a particular work are in the li- brary" reflects a prominent concern of modern cataloging theory: the distinction between the terms "book" and "work." Seymour Lubetzky has observed: . . . the question that must then be faced at the outset ... is whether the objective of the catalog should be merely to tell an inquirer whether or not the library has the particular book he is looking for, or whether it should go beyond that and tell him also what other editions and translations-or other representations-of the work the library has so as to help him more effectively to determine whether the library has what he needs and to select what might best serve his purposes. [ 18, p. 12] To assist in the function of assembling the various editions of a work, modern catalogs may make use of added entries or uniform title head- ings which gather the individual books, or "bibliographical units" (that is, the different editions or translations of a work), under a single head- ing chosen to represent the work, or "literary unit.""1 1 Such added entries and uniform headings assume a standard mode of representing a title. Since, however, the Bodleian catalogs provided for title transcription only to a limited degree, and title heading even less so, we would not expect to find literary units gathered under title added entries or uni- form title headings. Eva Verona, in discussing Hyde's rules, says, ". . . it has to be pointed out that Hyde did not provide for a real identification of literary units but only for the assembling of works by a given author (with the exception of works published under a pseudonym) under a uniform heading. Under such a heading titles were as a rule arranged in a chronological sequence" [19, p. 82]. It is true that we do not find in Hyde's preface any formulation of a rule for assembling literary units under a single heading.'2 However, he does express a concern for the problem which occurs when different editions of a work appear under different titles and, accordingly, he attempted to place together all the editions in different forms so that there is the least possibility of error on 11. The terms "bibliographical unit" and "literary unit" are used by Verona in her discus- sion of these concepts [18]. 12. That Hyde had formulated such a principle was suggested by Pettee [20, p. 278]; Verona points out the error of this theory.
BODLEIAN CATALOGS 259 the part of the reader: ". . . omnes illas Editiones diversisformis enuntiata, Lectoris ob oculus simulposui...." He illustrates this point with an example of a work which is entitled in one edition Paratitlorum libri tres, but which in subsequent editions is called more correctly Collectionem Constitutionum Ecclesiasticarum [7, p. iii]. In the catalog, this appears as: Theodorus BALSAMON ... Collectio Constitutionum Ecclesiasticarum, Gr. Lat. e Cod. Dig. & Novellis Justiniani, (a Leunclavio olim edita sub nomine Paratitlorum,) cum Notis Leunclavii & Fabroti . . . Another example which Hyde mentions is the dissertations of Maximus Tyrius which are sometimes called Sermones and sometimes Disputationes. In studying examples from the catalogs, we can observe that, although there is no uniform heading to identify the different versions of a work, the concept of a literary unit is still recognizable in the arrangement of the titles. Chronological order is apparently not the prime determinant as Verona suggested. The following example is from the catalog of 1674: Rob. BELLARMINUS... Doctrina Christiana ... 1613. Et Graece ... 1637. Same in English, out of Italian by R. Hadock ... Same with Pictures ... 1614. A more extended example from the 1738 catalog gives an idea of the catalog's ability to enable the reader to select from different editions and translations of the same work. Sixteen versions of Ovid's Metamorphoses are grouped together. Among them we find, in the following order: Publius OVIDUS ... Metamorphoses: ex recognitione Jo. An. Episcopi Alerien in Cyrno ... 1471 ... Les Metamorphoses en Latin & Francois: avec de nouvelles Explications Historiques &c. sur toutes les Fables; de la Traduction de Mr Pierre du Ryer ... 1677 ... Le Metamorfosi ridotte da Gio Andr. dall Anguillara; con l'Annota- tioni di M. Gioseppe Horologgi ... 1589 ... Las Transformaciones en Lengua Espanola, con las Allegorias al fin dellos, y sus figuras, &c.... 1595 ... The fyrst fower Bookes of the Metamorphosis oute of Latin into English Meter by Ar. Golding Gent .. . 1565 ... Metamorphosis Englished, Mythologiz'd, and Represented in Figures by G. Sandys . . . 1632 ... Same Translation (without the Figures and Notes) ... 1669 . . . The groupings of titles under an author's name as a heading assemble the different editions and translations of a work into recognizable liter-
260 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY ary units. In the 1738 catalog, the original work is represented by its title (or as close to it as the casual title transcriptions will allow) and transla- tions and other editions are assembled below the original title, with subgroups according to language. One may also observe that in the 1738 catalog chronological order is imposed upon the different works of an author, and upon the versions of that work in the same language. This represents a departure from the 1674 catalog in two respects, and these two changes are noted in the preface of the 1738 catalog. In the 1674 catalog, Hyde did not show as great a concern for chronological order, or for listing the title of a work in the original language first, as was the case of the 1738 catalog. In the following example we can see a line of development from 1620 to 1738: lean Bede Exposition sur la Messe. Gen. 1610 ... The right and prerogative of Kings translated by Rob. Sherwood. Lond. 1612 ... lus Regum. 1612 ... Le droict des Roys. A Franckenthall . . . The Masse displayed. translated by Edw. Chaloner, Oxon. 1619 ... [1620] Joh. BEDAEUS ... De Jure Regum, contra Bellarminum, & alios Jesuitas p. 806 Franc. 1613 . .. Et p. 806. Franc. 1621 ... Et Franc. ad M. 1612 Idem Gallice. Franckenthal 1611 ... Idem Anglic6. Lond. 1612 ... The Mass displayed. Oxon. 1619 ... Idem Gallice. Geneva 1610 ... [1674] Joh. BEDAEUS ... La Messe en Francois exposee. A Geneve 1610 ... The Same in English. Oxon. 1619 ... Le Droit des Roys contre le Cardinal Bellarmin & autres Jesuites. A Franckenthal 1611 ... The Same in English. Lond. 1612 Et Latine. Franc ad Moen. 1612 ... Et p. 806 Tom 3 Monarch Imper. Roman. per Goldastum. Franc. 1613 ... Et p. 806 Franc. 1621 ...1 3 [1738] The functions of gathering the works of an author and the editions of a work have been aided, as indicated in the previous example, by analyti- cal entries for works bound together with others or anthologized. Hyde states in his preface that, when several books are bound together, he notes them separately, giving the page number indicating where a par- 13. Note the use of analytical entries here and in 1674. The page numbers refer to a larger work entered in the catalogs under the heading of Goldastus.
BODLEIAN CATALOGS 261 ticular work is to be found in the physical volume. Such a practice was necessary, Hyde thought, because he had discovered that binding one among a number of works in a volume posed a problem to scholars who often rejected a book laid before them if the title page did not present the desired title: " . . . saepe enimfit, ut, cum primafronte non statim se offerat quaesitus Author Titulusve, porrectum sibi librum mox rejiciant." [7, p. iv]. The provision of analytics was further developed in the 1738 catalog: Rich. BROUGHTON, alias Br-azuyghton. Of the Division of England into Shires. [A little Scrap in the 45th page of Discourses, writtenl by Antiquaries, anc published by Th. Hearne.] Oxon. 1720. 8? D. 48.Jur. ANTIQUARI ES. Collection- of Curious (liscourses written by eminenit Anti- quaries, published by Mr Hearne. Oxon. 1720. 8? D. 48.Jur. The Importance of the Catalog's Role The physical arrangement of the Bodleian library made it of particular importance that the catalog should fulfill the finding and gathering functions.14 The 1605 catalog was essentially a shelflist; in it we can see the general scheme of the library's organization: the volumes were ar- ranged first according to their place among the four divisions of the university, then by the three divisions of size (folio, quarto, and octavo), and last, by the alphabetical order of the authors' surnames. But the integrity of an order on these three bases could not be maintained over a period of time. Systematic arrangement by author's name was precluded early on when some of an author's works were placed under the initial of his forename, others under his surname. Often, the initials of the editor determined the placing if there was no space left on the shelf allotted to the author's initials. In 1721, a monumental relocation in the interests of space saving, called the "General Removal," resulted in the shelf letter- ing of A-Z being replaced with a new series of A-M only. This elimi- nated altogether the shelf letter as an indication of the author's name.' " Arrangement by size was eventually compromised by the inclusion of quarto volumes with the folios. This compromise was made for the convenience of the readers. Folio volumes, which were chained to the desks, were directly accessible to the readers, but the quartos and octavos were kept locked in shelves and had to be ordered from the librarian. An account of 1613 reveals that the readers "for modesty sake doe many times abstaine from callinge for such bookes for feare of ouertroublinge 14. Much of the following description is taken froml the (letailed account giveni by Wheeler [21]. 15. Briggs [22] gives a description of the confusion occasioned by this relocation.
262 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY ye Underkeeper." It was for this reason that "Ye Visiters [i.e. trustees] haue of late well ordered, that as many bookes in 40 in ye galleries as could conueniently be done should be ... bound in pastboorde, and chayned belowe . . ." [20, quoted p. 286]. Hyde noted that his catalog indicated whether a chained volume was actually a folio volume or merely located among the large volumes "sive revera sint majores, sive tantum inter majcores locati . ." [7, p. iii]. Bodley's rough subject arrangement of medicine, law, theology, and art was at first applied to all books. After about 1659 separate locations were provided for large donations, and Hyde made a point of saying that his catalog indicated which books were shelved in these locations and therefore apart from the main collection. In this way, he claimed, scholars were spared the necessity of a double labor: with one act they were able to find any book that they sought [7, p. iii]. As space became more and more of a problem, the medicine and law shelves were used to accommodate new books in the faculties of art (encompassing history, philosophy, mathematics, literature, and lan- guage) and theology, which from the outset had outnumbered those of the other two faculties. We find the following titles in the law faculty: CATALoGUS. Cat. Librorum in Bibliotheca Bodleiania peI Tho. Jamiies . . . 1615 . .. Jur. Et, cum Appetidice per Eundemii ... 1620 . ..Jur. Appendix ad eundemn Cattaloguin per Joh. Rouse . . 1635. Ibid. Will. SHAKESPEAR. C omnedies, Histor-ies, and Tragedies . . . Jur. Ed w. MA Y. Relation of a str-ange Monster or Serpent founid in the left Vcnitricle of the Heart of John Penniiant. Louid. 1639 ... Art. Et Lond. 1689 .. Jur. [1738] The last example makes it clear that different editions of the same work could be shelved in different parts of the library. It seems reason- able to conclude that the reader was almost totally dependent upon the catalog or the librarian to discover what works the library had by a given author and which editions of a given title. Special Features of the 1674 and 1738 Catalogs If there is any general cataloging philosophy evident in the preface to the 1674 catalog, it is that the catalog should serve the needs of the scholars who use it. There are two interesting features of Hyde's catalog that reflect scholarly interests which were probably more peculiar to his time than our own. Much of the scholarship of the time was disputatious
BODLEIAN CATFALOGS 263 in method, and a large portion of the works listed in the catalog were parts of debates, or replies to other written arguments. The first work of a controversy appears under the heading of its author as a main entry, with cross-references given for the titles written in reply. The latter appear under their authors, or under the first author who provoked the controversy, if the author replying is anonymous. An added entry may be made as well under the subject. Will. SHERLOCK ... The Case of Allegiance (lue to Sovereign Powers, &c. A Vindication of Dr Sherlock's Case of Allegiance, &c.... An Answer to it by Th. Wagstaffe, ql.v. A Vindication of the Case of Allegiance in Reply to the foregoing Answer ... Observations upon Mr Johnson's Remarks upon Dr Sherlock's Book of Non-Resistanice ... The Trimming Court-Divine: or the Reflections on his Book of the Lawvfulness of Swearing Allegiance to the pr-esent Government .. . Tho. WAGSTAFF. An Answer to Dr Sherlock's Vindication of the Case of Allegiance. [Anonym.] ... [1738] As Hyde explained, the author of an anonymous work was entered under the name of the antagonist so that the original and the reply may be related, and more easily compared with one another: "sub Antagonistae Nomen saepius adduxi; ud hoc modo juxta positi (cum sint sibi inviwem relati,) alter cum altero facilius conferatur" [7, p. iii]. Cross-references served a similar function, and related an author's works to responses to them, doubtless to the great assistance of the read- ers following the course of the controversies of the time: Tho. THOROWGOOD, B.D. Jews in Amnerica, or Probabilities that the Americans are Jews . . . H. L'Est -range. Hamon L'ESTRANGE. Americans no Jews, or Impossibilities that the Americans are of that Race ... In the listing below from Hyde's catalog, all references are to authors who have commented upon works of Perkins. v. Higgins, v. TWLtise, v. Broxolme. Will. PERKINS. iv. Ant. Wotton, v. Arminius. Nv. W. B. & D. B. P.
264 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY For example: D. B. P. i.e. Will. Bishop. Reformation of a Catholick deforme(d by W. Perkins . . . Charles BROXOLME. Per-kins improved; or ani Exp. of those Depths of Divinity comprized in his 6 Principles ... Anthony WoT)'TON B.D. Defense of William Perkins's book called,4 Refomned Catholick, against the Cavills of W. B. in his Defoirmed Refor-mation ... The provision of ascriptive notes is one of the most remarkable fea- tures of the Bodleian catalogs of 1674 and 1738.16 The notes appear in cases in which the choice of entry might be assumed to be unclear: Franc. OSBORN. Translation into English of Ochinus's Dialogue of Polig- amy and Divorce ... [This Treatise is dedicated to Osborn, and therefore He may seem not to be the Author thereof; but it has been ascribed to him by such as both knew himn, and were men of Credit.] Sr Thom. ELYOT. The Image of Governaunce compiled of the Actes and Sen- tences notable of the most noble Emperour Alex. Severus, translated from the Greek of Eucolpius ... [Elyot is thought to be the Author and not the Trans- lator of this Peice. v. Bayle Dict. Hist. & Crit.] [1738] There are also cases in which the main entry has been made under a name which appears on the title page but is believed by the cataloger to be falsely ascribed. John SMITH, Captain. The Seaman's Grammar and Dictionary, explain-ing all the difficult Terms in Navigation, and the practical Navigator and Gunner in 2 Parts . . . [He is called Capt. Smith in the Bottom of the Title-Page; which is false: for it was written by Sr John Smith; the Captain's Writings being all of another Nature.] Will. PRYNNE. A terrible Out-Cry against the loytering exalted Pre- lates: shewing the Danger and Unfitness of Con- ferring them in any Temporal Office or Dignity. [A. Wood in his Athenae Oxon. p. 443 says this Piece is not Prynne's.] Lond. . . [17381 16. The use of ascriptive notes is contained in the catalog of 1843.
BODLEIAN CATALOGS 265 The ascriptive comments are verified by references to authorities such as Anthony Wood, who wrote an extensive chronicle of Oxford. Similar notes, with authoritative references, are provided for cross-references indicating pseudonyms or initials. Tho. SWINERTON v. J. Roberts. John ROBERTS. A Mustre of Schismatyke Bysshoppes of Rome, by Way of Pro- logue to his Translation of Benno's Lyfe of Hyldebrande, and Hen. IV Emperor ... [The Author's true Name is Tho. Swinerton. v. Wood's Athenae Oxon. Tom. I. p. 91.] John RAWLINSON . . . v. J. R. J. R. Rector of Lezant in Cornwall. Explication of the Creed, x Commandments, and Lord's Prayer, with the Addition of some Forms of Prayer . .. [This seems to be the Piece which A. Wood in his Athenae Oxon. Tom. I. p. 55. says was publish'd under the Name of J. Rawlinson. ] [1738] Wood himself almost became involved in the compilation of a Bod- leian catalog. The research for his history of Oxford required the exten- sive use of manuscripts in the Bodleian. To avoid having to request each item, he sought permission from Librarian Hyde for free access to the manuscript collection. Hyde agreed, but on the condition, which he later abandoned, that Wood assist him in a compilation of a catalog of the manuscripts [23, vol. 2, p. 71]. The frequent use of ascriptive notes in the Bodleian catalogs of 1674 and 1738 is particularly striking because these are usually the only notes provided. They may, of course, reflect the interest in pseudonyma and anonyma of the time, an interest shared not only by librarians but by other scholars. The systematic study of anonymous and pseudonymous writings had its beginnings in Renaissance theological scholarship.' 7 Where a religious claim was based on the authority of a text, that text was closely investigated as to its authenticity. Falsely ascribed religious writings used for the purpose of advancing doctrine were called pseudepigrapha and occuped religious scholars like Thomas James, who prepared an elaborately constructed reference list of 187 pseudepi- graphic treatises called "Bastardie of the False Fathers." The critical methods employed in detecting spurious religious writings later served as a basis for students of secular anonyma and pseudonyma. Archer Taylor writes that "in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, the Gold- en Age of pseudonyms, almost every writer used a pseudonym at some 17. My treatment of the subject of pseudonyma and anonyma is based on Taylor and Mosher [24].
266 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY time during his career" [24, p. 85], and that "by the middle of the seventeenth century many scholars had dealt in one way or another with the problems of anonyma and pseudonyma" [24, p. 100]. A work of particular assistance to scholars of pseudonyma and anonyma was the 1674 Syntagma of Vincent Placcius, which contained approximately 1,500 ascriptions and identifications, followed by his Theatrum, published posthumously in 1708, which extended the list to 2,797 anonymous and 2,930 pseudonymous entries. Placcius's works are cited again and again with exact page numbers in the ascriptive notes to the Bodleian catalog of 1738. But it should also be noted that the 1674 catalog had in turn been of assistance to Placcius, and that Hyde had alerted Placcius to the existence of anonyma and pseudonyma from Jesuit sources. Hyde claimed that he himself was preparing a list of ascriptions, but it never appeared in print. The compilation of the Bodleian catalogs involved men of learning who had some awareness of the problems of attribution.'8 James's scholarly efforts along this line had been directed to the compilation of a specific theological catalog and were not reflected in his catalogs of the Bodleian libraries. From Hyde's contact with Placcius, probable work on a list of pseudonyms, and remarks in his preface, it may be conjectured that he too recognized the problems of ascription and was equipped to deal with them. Hyde cautioned in his preface that it is all too easy to make the mistake of ascribing a book by one author to the name of another. Scholars should note that, in investigating books, they might diligently consider that the authors' names may be written in different ways or that an author may have two completely different names. He gave the example of Roman popes who always took a different name after election to the pontificate [7, p. iv]. In the case of the 1738 catalog, some of the decisions which led to ascriptive cross-references and notes are documented in the diaries of Thomas Hearne, who had been requested by Librarian John Hudson to assist with the catalog. I took Dr. Hyde's Catalogue in two volumes, interleaved, & went round the whole Library, & compared every Book, by which means I corrected many mistakes made by Dr. Hyde, & supplied all the Defects, by cataloguing such Books as had been put up and not entered. This done, I consulted many Books in order to recover anonymous Authors. By this means I retriev'd the Names of many Writers that were before entered either under the Titles only of the several Books, or else under the Initial Letters of the Authors.... [11, vol. 6, p. 8] Hearne's part in the compilation of the 1738 catalog, and especially those aspects which reflect a striking attention to detail, can be seen in 18. James, Hyde, and Hearne were all noted scholars: James wrote extensively in theol- ogy, Hyde was Regius Professor of Hebrew and Laudian Professor of Arabic, and Hearne was renowned for his historical writings.
BODLEIAN CATALOGS 267 the diaries, which are also filled with news of the nation, the university, and the library, upon all of which Hearne comments indiscriminately and at length: "Dr. Kennett has been married thrice. His present Wife wears the Breeches, and manages him as his Haughty, insolent Temper deserves . . ." [1 1, vol. 2, p. 9]. "Sr Basil Fire-Brass a noted old Sinner of London has shot himself, but 'tis thought twill not prove mortal, as some perhaps could wish, whom he has cheated by odd tricks and shams . . . " [11, vol. 2, p. 18]. "Last night the Vice-Chanc. catch'd Mrs Gratiana Crook's black Wench in a Gentleman-Commoner's Chamber in Queen's Coll. & broke open ye Door upon them. . . " [1 1, vol. 2, p. 47]. Included among such gossip are discourses on the contents of books which have newly appeared or are in progress. Hearne's diaries are filled with memoranda to remind himself to ask his readers for information of interest, or to provide them with information which would assist them in their work: "Remember to tell Dr. Smith of this [the existence of a book in the library], who has not taken notice of it in his life of Dee." -Mr. Humph. Smith, formerly of Queen's College. . . is writing the Life of Dr. Pocock ... 'twill be ready for the Press by Midsommer next. ... He wants the Name of his Tutor whilst he was of Corpus Christi. None of that House can tell it. He should consult Ant. 'a Wood's 3d vol. in Mr. Tanner's Hands . . . [1 1, vol. 2, p. 4]. Commonly found in the memoranda are matters involving corrections of the 1674 catalog: "Aug. 3 (Sun.) [1707] Memorand. yt Dr. Hyde's Catalogue should be mended, where he says Joannes Nicius Rossius; it should be Joannes Victor Roscius. And give a Note at Janus Nicius Erythraeus yt 'tis a feign'd Nanme for Joannes Victor Roscius [ 1 1, vol. 2, p. 31]." The 1738 catalog reflects this correction. There was disappoint- ing news in the entry for August 14: the lucky holder of the winning lottery ticket for a thousand pounds a year for thirty-two years was not the daughter of the deserving Reverend Dr Cave, as Hearne had de- lightedly reported on August 12, but instead the "stinking Whigg" Lord Harvey. This is accompanied by the observation that "D . Wallis writ large Remarks upon Thomas Salmon's Proposal to perform Musick &c. Lond. 1688" [11, vol. 3, pp. 40, 41], and results in a cross-reference which links the author's name to a wvork in which he has a minor part. Joannes WALLISIUS ... v. Tho. Salmnon. Thomas SALMON ... A proposal to perform Musick in perfect and Mathematical proportions, with lar-ge r emiiarks by Dr Wallis. Lond. 1688 ... The origin of an ascriptive note is found in the entry for September 12, 1710: sr. Wm. Dugdale pag. 4. of the Antient Usage of Bearing Arms ... tells us that Mr. Erdswicke was the true Author of The t1(ue use of Arms publish'd by Mr. Wm.
268 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Wyrley as his own Book. sr. Wi. there calls Mr. Erdswicke's Antiquities of Staf- fordshire a brief but elaborate Work. 'Twill be worth printing. We have it in Bodley. (One Curle a vile Bookseller in London hath since printed these Antiq- uities, but not for the credit of Mr. Erdswicke. .. .)I[1 1, vol. 3, p. 48] Sam pson ERDSWICKE v. W. Wy leyv. William WYRLEY. The true Use of Armorie. Lond. byJ. Jackson 1592. 4? A. 33. Art. [The true Author of this was Sampson Erdswicke Esq. v. W. Dugdale, p. 4. 8? W. 41. Art.I The entry for June 27, 1711, results in a decision which will keep to- gether two editions of the same work: Sir Philip Sydenham being in Town he lent me (having brought it out of ye Country for y' purpose) John Higin's Miror for Magistrates printed at London in Fleet-Streete by Henry Marsh 1587. 4"'. 'Tis the same with that we have in Bodley. .. . This Book of John Higgins's is the same almost (excepting some Additions, the Change of the Order, & some other small Alterations) with another Book that was publish'd with the same Title several Years before in two Parts, the Collector of weh was Wm. Baldwyn, of whom Mr. Wood spakes Vol. I. Ath. Oxon. col. 1 14. The first Part of wch Mr. Wood says came out in 1559.... I look upon Higgins's as only a new Edition of Baldwin's.... [11, vol. 3, pp. 180, 1811 John HIGINS. v. W. Baldwyn. Will. BALDWYN. The last [or second] Part of the Miror for Magistrates, (being a continuation of Bochas's Book, intit. The Fall of Princes.) Lond. 1574. 40 D. 20. Th. And, enlarged by John Higgins. Louid. 1587. 40 F. 19. Art. The tradition started by Hyde was in this way extended and developed in the decades after his death. The catalogs were ambitious in what they tried to achieve, and the complexity of structure and detail was often marked by inconsistencies and errors. We find double main entries, blind cross-references, and cross-references lacking where they would be expected. The principles of according main entry are at times elusive or compromised. There are departures from the guidelines laid down by Hyde in his preface. A contemporary critic complained of the 1674 catalog's "many faults of ludgement, . . . Carelessness & Neglect and went on to enumerate some of its faults: . .. Authors are mistaken, & confounded one with another ... the Titles of books (in the modern Laniguages especially) misrepresented . . . when one man puts forth a niew Edition of some Classic &c., with a version of a nother person, & notes of a 3d Or 4th perhaps the Classical Author shal have his name in the Cat. and perhaps the Translator too, perhaps not, without mentioning any others.
BODLEIAN CATALOGS 269 Sometimes indeed you shall have the Commentator in his place, which may be denyed to the principal Author. This Neglect, together with the not mentiong [sic] every Author in his place when many are printed in a body, and carelessness in the dates, &c is the reason that the book sold no better, and that the University had no more Credit & Profit by it. [10, quoted p. 91] It should be noted that the critic, Humphrey Wanley, was at the time aspiring to Hyde's post; also, judging from its widespread acceptance and imitation, the catalog did indeed win considerable esteem. Although imperfect in the accuracy and consistency with which they carry out their objectives, the catalogs of 1674 and 1738 contain a recognizable pattern which develops a cardinal feature of modern theory. The distinction between "work" and "book" is recognized by the cataloging of books not as single independent entities, with information to be taken solely from the title page, but in relation to other works, or editions of the same work. As a result, the catalog is able to inform the reader, as Lubetzky says, "not only whether the library has the particular book he wants, but also what related materials it has that might well serve his purpose . ." [18, p. 11]. The elaborate system of cross-references provides a mech- anism, however imperfectly carried out, by which this function can be achieved. Both the cross-references and ascriptive notes indicate an attention to detail which goes far beyond the book itself. The relevant information has been searched out in reference works and a remarkably thorough knowledge of the contents of the collection and its inter- relatedness is demonstrated in the catalog. Hyde, at the beginning of his preface, somewhat bitterly places the following question into the mouth of his critics: "What," they say, "could be easier than inspecting the front of books and copying down their titles?" [7, p. i]. His catalog shows how far this was from the truth. REFERENCES 1. Verona, Eva. "Form Headings in Catalogues of the Past and Present." Library Resources and Techniwal Services 6 (Fall 1962): 295-317. 2. Ranz, Jim. The Printed Book Catalogue in American Libraries, 1723-1900. Chicago: American Library Association, 1964. 3. Bodley, Sir Thomas. Letters of Sir Thomas Bodley to Thomas James, First Keeper of the Bodleian Library, edited by George W. Wheeler. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1926. 4. Catalogus librorum bibliothecae publicae . . . Auctlo-e Thloma James. Oxoniae, apud Josephum Barnesium, 1605. 5. Wheeler, G[eorgel W. The Earliest Catalogus of the Bodleian Library. Oxford: University Press, 1928. 6. Catalogus universalis librorum in bibliotheca Bodleiana ... Auctore Thoma James.. Oxoniae, excudebant lohannes Lichfield, & lacobus Short, 1620. 7. Catalogus impressorum librorum Bibliothecae Bodleiatnae in Aca(emia Oxoniensi. Cura & Opera Thomae Hyde.... Oxonii, e Theatro Sheldoniano, 1674. 8. Catalogus imnpressorum librorum Bibliothecae Bodleianae in Academia Oxoniensi.... Oxonii, e Theatro Sheldoniano, 1738. 2 vols.
270 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 9. Macray, William Dunn. Annals of the Bodleian Library, Oxford, A.D. 1598-A.D. 1867. London: Rivingtons, 1868. 10. Gilliam, S. G., and Hunt, R. W. "The Curators of the Library and Humphrey Wanley." Bodlejan Library Record 5 (October 1954): 85-98. 11. Hearne, Thomas. Remarks and Collections of Thomas Hearne. Oxford: Printed for the Oxford Historical Society at the Clarendon Press, 1885-192 1. 11 vols. 12. Catalogus librorum impressorum Bibliothecae Bodleiantae in Academia Oxoniensi. Oxonii: e typographeo Academica, 1843-51. 4 vols. 13. Great Britain. Commissioners Appointed to Inquire into the Constitution and Government of the British Museum; with Minutes of Evidence. London: H.M. Stationers Office, 1850. 14. Statement of Pnrnciples adopted at the International Conference on Cataloguing Principles, Pan's, October, 1961. Annotated edition with commentary and examples by Eva Vero- na. London: International Federation of Library Associations, 1971. 15. Verona, Eva. "A Historical Approach to Corporate Entries." Librn 7 (1956): 1-40. 16. Cutter, Charles A. Rules for a Pnrnted Dictionary Catalogue. Washington, D.C.: Govern- ment Printing Office, 1876. 17. Lubetzky, Seymour. Code of Cataloging Rules, Author and Title Entry: An Unfinished Draft. Chicago: American Library Association, 1960. 18. Lubetzky, Seymour. Principles of Cataloging: Final Report, Phase 1: Descriptive Cataloging. Los Angeles: Institute of Library Research, University of California, 1969. 19. Verona, Eva. "Literary Unit Versus Bibliographical Unit." Libri 9 (1959): 79-104. 20. Pettee, Julia. "The Development of Authorship Entry and the Formulation of Author- ship Rules as Found in the Anglo-American Code." Library Quarterly 6 (July 1936): 270-90. 21. W[heeler], G[eorge] W. "Bodleian Press-marks in Relation to Classification." Bodleian Quarterly Record 1 (1916): 280-92, 311-22. 22. Briggs, G. M. " 'The General Removal 1723.' " Bodleian Library Record 3 (August 1951): 2 13-22. 23. Wood. Anthony. The Life and Times of Anthony Wood, Antiquary, of Oxford, 1632-1695, Described by Himself, collected from his diaries and other papers by Andrew Clark. Vol. 2: 1664-1681. Oxford: Printed for the Oxford Historical Society at the Clarendon Press, 1892. 24. Taylor, Archer, and Mosher, Fredric J. The Bibliographical History of Anonyma and Pseudonyma. Chicago: Published by the Newberry Library for the University of Chicago Press, 1951.