PV Using Focus Groups to Gather Information for LIS Curriculum Review Charles Curraa Stephen Bajjaly, Patricia Feehan, and Ann L. O'Neill This article presents a general description of focus group activity designed to generate information for use in making decisions about core and elective courses in a library and information science (LIS) curriculum. While the results reported may be specific to the environment studied, the process can be useful in a variety of settings. Faculty who wish to teach well may benefit from knowing what their constituents expect from new graduates of LIS programs. Moreover, successfully managed focus groups enable employers to experience involvement with LIS program review. This can produce valuable good will. Introduction What should readers expect from an article on the use of focus groups con- vened to give employers a chance to discuss curriculum with LIS educa- tors? They should expect to learn how focus group activities fit into a pro- gram review process, what questions were asked, how the groups were se- lected and managed, what the respon- dents said, and how their responses were analyzed and fed into the fac- ulty's decision apparatus. How Focus Group Activity Fits with US Program Review The issues of what to teach and how to teach well are closely related. Although most of this journal issue is devoted to teaching well, this report focuses upon one way to discover what to teach well. Many factors - healthy curiosity, faculty interest and commitment, an in- volved dean, a visiting regional accred- iting agency, or even a curious ALA Committee on Accreditation - may en- courage an LIS faculty to engage in systematic review of program and cur- riculum. This systematic review might include reviewing courses, inspecting the variety of available competencies lists, gathering information from the market place, and listening to the pro- fessionals who hire and supervise LIS graduates. Providers have unique and interesting perspectives. They man- age in the trenches and deal daily with serious problems. They try to meet the demands of the present and plan for the unknown challenges of the future, and they have much to tell LIS educators about what they expect new hires to be able to accom- plish. A systematic review might also involve an LIS faculty in looking at curriculum - core and elective - and at the sequence in which the courses are delivered. Summer 1998 175
1 76 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science About the Authors Charles Curran is Professor, Stephen Bajjaly, Patricia Feehan, and Ann L. O'Neill are Assistant Professors, College of Library and Information Science, University of South Carolina (USC). At the University of South Caro- lina, the faculty of the College of Library and Information Science undertook a curriculum review and decided to look first at the six core courses and then use focus groups to obtain information to help them further explore curriculum issues uncovered during the inspection of the core. The next step was to apply what was learned in the core review and the focus groups to an analysis of elec- tive courses. The Core Review The curriculum committee (CC) under- took the job of managing the review of the core courses. The core consists of six required courses in professional issues and opportunities, bibliographic organization and control, reference services, management, research meth- ods, and technological applications. At a special faculty meeting devoted to core review, each instructor who teaches a core course made a half-hour presentation. These instructors had met in groups of two or three to prepare a report containing ■ An overview of course content ■ A description of course assignments ■ How, if at all, one faculty member's version of the course differed from a colleague's ■ How one's version complies with the faculty's previously (1991) estab- lished and agreed-upon general goals and objectives for each core course. While each faculty member regu- larly teaches at least one core course, most teach two. The review exercise reacquainted the veteran faculty with the entire core and helped new faculty see the larger picture and, specifically, how each course contributes to the fac- ulty's notion of "coreness," or of what it is they believe to be basic to an under- standing of the information professions. The faculty then turned to its external constituency - employers of LIS pro- gram graduates - for assistance in re- viewing both core and elective courses. The review session also provided an opportunity to question content and delivery and to challenge either. There were many questions, but few overt challenges, probably because the fac- ulty had heard and dealt with chal- lenges during the previous review in 1991. The CC believed that the biggest challenge to the core content would be delivered by the focus groups. Why Focus Groups? LIS faculties try to craft elastic and re- sponsive curricula which produce graduates who hit the ground running and provide their employers with the enlightened, up-to-date approaches so necessary in the challenging work places of today. Creating such a curricu- lum is an on-going process, not a one- step procedure. The process has to be hospitable to change, to weeding as well as to seeding, and it has to consider Volume 39, Number 3
Using Focus Groups to Gather Information for US Curriculum Review 1 11 clients - students and employers. Run- ning focus groups is one way to get very useful information from students and employers. These groups can contribute mightily to ongoing inspection of an LIS curriculum. When people in business or organi- zations want to know more about what their clients and customers think, focus groups can supply this information. Fo- cus group methodology has been em- ployed in business, industry, and gov- ernment since the 1970s. Though it has come more recently to the LIS field, the LIS literature on focus groups is rich in encouraging words, methodology, dos and don'ts and other caveats, and rec- ommendations on what to do with data retrieved. Focus group methodology is an- chored in the premise that an organiza- tion can learn from its constituents when it listens to what constituents have to say. Focus groups provide a structured way for people who share similar interests to talk about them and for the organizations which sponsor the groups to review and consider the con- versations. The groups are composed of people specifically chosen because their opinions are valued, and the fo- cus group environment encourages exchanges between and among par- ticipants. Well-run focus groups can provide excellent intelligence for decision mak- ing. They supply a snapshot of current thinking. They are systematically exe- cuted, but they are directed conversa- tions; not experiments, not even sur- veys. They produce opinion. In addition, focus groups enfran- chise an LIS school's constituents. They enjoy the chance to meet and greet, to eat together, and to be heard. Many of them sincerely appreciate the opportu- nity to influence curricular decisions. Most of them have very useful opinions to offer. When assembled in "mixed" groups, they provide hosts and partici- pants an opportunity to observe how the same issues impact their environ- ments in different ways. To a person, they thank their hosts for the chance to contribute. This can result in consider- able good will for the LIS school. Ideally, a focus group consists of six to eight people invited to participate in a discussion of some issues common to the invitees and to those who invite them. Once a group assembles, a mod- erator welcomes them, provides some hospitality, explains why they have been invited, outlines the procedure that will be observed, tells what will be done with responses to questions, con- ducts the session, and concludes the session by debriefing the group. Only three of the six members of the CC had more than a nodding acquain- tance with focus groups, and no one on the faculty was trained in this tech- nique. So the CC selected veteran trainer Peter Topping of the College of Business Administration to provide a workshop, and the entire faculty par- ticipated in this tutorial, which in- cluded "hands-on" experience with running a sample focus group. The CC also reviewed the abun- dant literature on focus groups, and discovered several excellent work- books that provide step-by-step pro- cedures. The CC recommends A Focus Group Interview Manual by Wagner and Mahmoodi.1 Collectively, the faculty accepted these important focus group principles: ■ Decide what you want to know. ■ Decide whom you want to ask. ■ Conduct a focus group in a business- like but pleasant manner. ■ Realize you are gathering opinions, not doing science. ■ Feed those opinions into a decision apparatus; these opinions are opin- ions, not the decisions. Summer 1998
1 78 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science ■ Acknowledge that there are other ways to learn; focus groups are but one. While all the faculty participated in the training, only the authors of this paper conducted the focus groups. Hav- ing taken the training, and having estab- lished an investment in the process, the full faculty was educated about the process. They were "won over," recep- tive, and prepared to be informed con- sumers of the information gathered from the groups. A serendipitous plus developed also. The CC, because of faculty sched- ule limitations, had to enlist the aid of students as recorders. This turned out to be a great opportunity for seven lucky students to meet prospective employers and listen to their concerns. The whole process contributed to their learning about the information professions, and happily it reinforced substantial chunks of what they were hearing from their professors. In one focus group ses- sion, knowing the recorder was a stu- dent and wanting her opinion, group members insisted on hearing what she thought about the issue under discus- sion. The conversation which followed was eye-opening for the group and ex- citing for the student. What Questions? Decide What You Want to Know The CC and the faculty wanted to know what people who manage information agencies within a three-state area think LIS faculty ought to be teaching and emphasizing. The faculty wanted to hear from several kinds of agencies and from middle and upper management. They wanted to learn whether some deci- sions they had made and were contem- plating fit with the respondents' descrip- tions of the information market place. Decide What Questions to Ask The CC and the full faculty agreed to make a list of questions for use with focus groups. The basic guideline was: What do we need to learn from our constituents that could affect what we teach and how we teach? The following questions/re- quests were selected after considerable back-and-forth discussion: 1. In your organization, what major concerns and issues are you facing today? 2. What trends and likely future devel- opments should we keep in mind as we plan our LIS curriculum? 3. What is your laundry list of basic managerial skills? 4. Insofar as your organization is con- cerned, what do you expect a new hire to bring from his/her LIS edu- cation? 5. How much on-the-job training (OJT) do you expect to provide? 6. What are the key skills and attitudes you believe beginning information professionals should possess? 7. What gaps in LIS education have you noticed? 8. In your job or organization, what has caught you by surprise? The CC anticipated that some ques- tions might draw similar kinds of re- sponses and prepared to manage and record in a way that would provide both the opportunity to elicit needed re- sponses and a way to avoid duplication. Decide Whom to Select and How to Manage the Focus Groups Selecting For purposes of examining the curricu- lum, the CC had already convinced the faculty to work in teams. There was an administration/management team, a materials team, a school library media team, a technology team, a technical Volume 39, Number 3
Using Focus Groups to Gather Information for US Curriculum Review 1 79 services team, and a public services team. The obvious overlap of interests was dealt with in an arbitrary yet very friendly and productive way. Every- body acknowledged the blurring of lines but agreed not to let this interfere with examining the total curriculum in a rigorous fashion. Of course, manage- ment is part of children's services; cer- tainly, technology is basic to core and elective service courses; and, yes, school library media specialists need to know about cataloging and classifica- tion, and management, too. At the request of the CC, the teams were asked to submit names of people they knew who would have some useful responses to the eight questions. They submitted ninety names, and the CC invited each of these persons to attend one of three proposed focus group days in April and May 1996. Fifty invitees accepted and attended seven focus group sessions. Managing Conduct a focus group in a business- like but pleasant manner. The teams submitted a list that pro- vided a good cross-section of types of information agencies and job titles. Having already determined that they wanted to mix the participants, not as- semble only catalogers, for example, in one group, the CC decided to invite par- ticipants to choose one of the three sug- gested dates and to group them in a way that would mix types of agencies and types of employment responsibilities. The CC planned for the sessions to last a maximum of two hours, arranged for a communal lunch for all the partici- pants and facilitators, and established a methodology to be employed at each focus group session. Some of the major ingredients of that methodology follow: ■ Establish an on-site sign-in station where participants may register, ob- tain a name tag, and enjoy a pre-fo- cus-group cup of coffee. ■ Appoint a moderator who will ask the questions of each focus group member, listen to responses and en- courage all to participate, and gen- erally manage the session. ■ Appoint a recorder who will record the essence of each response and the identity of the respondent, and help the moderator watch the time, in- clude all participants, and maintain a friendly atmosphere. The CC determined that the mod- erators and the recorders should work as a team and observe recommended roles. The moderator would meet and greet, explain his or her role and that of the recorder, ask all the specific ques- tions of each participant, listen to their answers, and check with the recorder periodically to make sure the pacing and recording were in synch. When dis- cussion developed within the group, the moderator would encourage such exchanges when they were on-topic. The moderator's job is to ask, probe, listen, and move on to the next ques- tion. The moderator's job is not to par- ticipate in discussion, add opinions, de- bate, or answer "You teach here; what do you think?" questions. This takes skill and discipline, for the temptation to join in is great, especially when the moderator is asked for an opinion. The recorder works with the mod- erator to watch the time, makes sure all questions get asked, assures that all par- ticipants have the chance to respond, prepares the record of responses, ad- dresses only the moderator (not the par- ticipants) with comment or question, and helps the moderator with debriefing. After the session is over and the participants have been dismissed, the moderator and the recorder debrief each other by reviewing responses and checking impressions gathered. Summer 1998
180 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science You are gathering opinions, not do- ing science.. What can result from an efficiently conducted focus group is a useful as- sortment of opinions which decision makers may factor into their delibera- tions about LIS curricula. It is a mistake to generalize from these few responses to an entire population without testing more widely for corroborati on, or to confuse focus groups with survey tech- niques. What the Respondents Said In response to question one about major concerns and issues, and in order of frequency of mention, here is what the respondents reported: ■ Adopting and welcoming new tech- nology ■ Dealing with change ■ Finding alternative sources of in- come/budgeting ■ Marketing and public relations ■ Practicing effective interpersonal skills ■ Meeting expectations of clients ■ Obtaining access to information re- sources ■ Training (importance of internships emphasized) ■ Dealing with political concerns af- fecting the organization. Readers should note the predomi- nance of technological and interper- sonal communication issues. The dual focus is very clear. In response to question two, the groups reported several trends. Note, again, the emphasis upon communica- tion skills: ■ Increasing need for people skills ■ Greater responsibility for managers to both find and act as mentors, to direct and evaluate computer opera- tions, and to set and meet customer satisfaction goals ■ Expanding role of information pro- fessionals as teachers; in school en- vironments, they will be teachers of teachers The groups named several basic managerial skills in response to ques- tion three: ■ Personal skills and attributes, like ambition, patience, and flexibility; they hold the LIS school responsible for instilling these ■ Communication skills ■ Directing ■ Budgeting (not the figuring but the convincing and winning) ■ Planning Question four asked respondents to tell what they wanted new hires to bring to their organizations. The ma- jority of responses fell into three cate- gories: technical skills, personal at- tributes, and interpretive skills. Over and over again respondents repeated that they look to new graduates, whom they believe and expect to be armed with all the latest know-how, to apply and teach the latest technology in the organization. With respect to personal attributes, most often the respondents named maturity, self-confidence, and the willingness to take risks. Moreover they want new hires with enthusiasm, vision, people-friendliness, flexibility, and the ability to respond when pres- sured. The interpretive skills most often mentioned were the ability to make presentations, instruct clients, understand priorities, deal with the corporate culture, and "make people feel good." How much OJT do employers ex- pect to provide? Question five drew a wide range of responses. Some re- sponded, "None." Others said, "Lots." Some systems' employers expect their Volume 39, Number 3
Using Focus Groups to Gather Information for US Curriculum Review 1 8 1 new hires to hit the ground running, while others, in the schools, for exam- ple, expect and intend to provide con- siderable amounts of training. Attitudes about OJT vary according to corporate culture, type of agency, and the type of work performed. So the CC heard, "Af- ter the first few weeks, I want produc- tion" at the next to none end, and "OJT never ends" at the lots end. Question six asked about key skills and attitudes beginners should possess. Interpersonal communication headed the skills list. Others suggested were cataloging, leadership, management, and technological know-how - most were repeats of responses to the "basic managerial skills" sought in question three. In the attitude category, enthusi- asm, flexibility, and adaptability consti- tuted 40 percent of the responses. LIS education gaps were addressed in question seven. A technology gap was mentioned most often. Group mem- bers defined the gap as the distance between what they know about technol- ogy and what they think they should know. Several respondents made it clear that they have definite expecta- tions of new hires. They want new hires to report to the job armed with know- how about the latest technology and fully able to pass this knowledge to oth- ers on the staff. What caught you by surprise? In truth, question eight caught many in the focus groups by surprise. But they really liked this question and responded en- thusiastically. Here is their list: ■ Rapid change! ■ The need to plan ■ The politics of the work place ■ The ever-present need for staff training ■ The need to make "house calls;" our customers are out there, not always in the building. Feed those Opinions into a Decision Apparatus Upon examining the responses of the fo- cus groups, the CC and the faculty noted a great deal of consistency across groups even though days and times for the groups differed, various types of information agencies and management hierarchies had been represented, and different teams of moderators and recorders worked with the seven groups. Each question was open-ended, and a grand variety could have resulted. Yet the questions drew strikingly similar responses with respect to the patterns that emerged. Issues of change, the race to keep up with technol- ogy, interpersonal communication, and management predominated. So how does a CC and a faculty feed this kind of information into a decision apparatus about program and curricu- lum? In this case they waited for all the responses to be tallied and categorized. Then at a special faculty meeting the CC recommended superimposing the focus group information over core and elec- tive offerings, and then asking, "How should what we have learned from our focus groups affect what we do - what we teach, how we teach, and in what kind of curricular structure?" These focus group responses re- minded the faculty that they must not "sit on" a curriculum. Studying the re- sponses and noting which segments of a community submitted them can lead LIS educators to rethink notions about an identifiable core of must-know LIS con- tent; and if there is a core, what should be included in an existing core program, what should be dropped, and what, if any, sequence should be observed? Technology and Communication Issues to Consider In the wake of this focus group activity, the CC has decided that the procedure Summer 1998
1 82 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science used by the faculty to inspect the core accomplished two useful purposes. First, the communication about content was solid and direct. Second, the re- sponses were re-affirming. The faculty appears to be "doing the right thing" in that they have infused the core with heavy doses of technology and commu- nication, the major areas of interest reported by the fifty respondents. The faculty will increase the effort to incor- porate these skills even more - in both core and elective offerings. The "attitudes" issue uncovered by responses to question six will continue to be a difficult one to address. Leading by example may be the best tactic, ac- cording to the "Superior LIS Teachers" whose responses to the question "What do you do that causes people to identify you as a superior teacher?" appear else- where in this issue. After reviewing the focus group comments, the USC CLIS faculty has decided to recommission the study teams (materials, technology, technical services, etc.), this time to examine elective offerings provided by the team members. Now they have the benefit of the opinions collected from their em- ployer client group to add to their own storehouses of observations, opinions, and attitudes. The CC will probably employ fo- cus groups again and has already be- gun to teach focus group techniques to students in administration courses. There are sound political reasons for doing focus groups, too. Focus group methodology can democratize the con- versation process by providing partici- pants built-in provisions for gate-keep- ing which let everybody, not just the big shots, talk directly to LIS program hosts. Again, focus groups let people speak up about issues which affect them and for which there is a very interested and receptive audience - an LIS faculty. Things change. Needs develop. Opinions vary. So an LIS faculty must continue to monitor conditions. The fo- cus group "snapshot" is one very useful aid in the process. References 1. Mary Wagner and Suzanne Mahmoodi, A Focus Group Interview Manual (Chicago: ALA, 1994). Volume 39, Number 3