In 1965, educator Nancy Larrick brought national attention to the need for multicultural literature with her landmark article “The All-White World of Children’s Books” (Larrick 1965). The impetus for that article was as follows. One day when Larrick was visiting a preschool in New York City, a five-year-old African American girl, who was looking at a picture book, asked her, “Why are they always white?” (Larrick 1965, 84). Larrick’s subsequent examination of the 5,206 children’s books published between 1962 and 1964 revealed that this young girl’s perceptions were right—the characters in children’s books were almost always white. Only 6.7 percent of the books Larrick examined included one or more black characters, and less than 1 percent featured contemporary African Americans. Most of the books were either historical fiction or were set outside the United States. Larrick identified two consequences of the omission of African Americans from books for children. First, across the country 6 million nonwhite children were learning to read and to understand the American way of life in books that either omitted them entirely or scarcely mentioned them at all (63). Second, 39 million white children were learning from their books that they were “the kingfish” (63). Larrick concluded: “There seems to be little chance of developing the humility so urgently needed for world cooperation … as long as children are brought up on gentle doses of racism through their books” (63). Larrick’s study, combined with the growing awareness of diversity issues spawned by the Civil Rights movement, led to the beginning of the multicultural publishing movement in youth literature. The need for multicultural literature is even greater today than it was in 1965. According to an analysis of the 2010 US Census data completed by the Annie E. Casey Foundation, there are currently 74.2 million children under the age of eighteen in the United States; 46 percent of them are children of color and indigenous children (O’Hare 2011). All of the growth in the child population since 2000 has been among groups other than non-Hispanic whites. Three major groups experienced significant increases between 2000 and 2010 (O’Hare 2011): • Children of mixed race grew at a faster rate than any other group over the past decade, increasing by 46 percent. • The number of Hispanic children grew by 39 percent. • The number of non-Hispanic Asian and Pacific Islander children grew by 31 percent. Today, more than one-fifth of America’s children are immigrants or children of immigrants (O’Hare 2011). If these trends continue, demographers conclude that “soon there will be no majority racial or ethnic group in the United States—no one group that makes up more than fifty percent of the total population” (Crouch, Zakariya, and Jiandani 2012). Given the demographic landscape of the United States, one would expect the number of multicultural books for youth published each year to be significant. Unfortunately, this is not the case. Since 1985, the Cooperative Children’s Book Center (CCBC) at the University of Wisconsin—Madison has been documenting the numbers of books published in the United States for children and young adults each year that are written and/or illustrated by people of color.1 In 2011, the CCBC received approximately 3,400 books; of those, only 8.8 percent were multicultural (Horning, Lindgren, and Schliesman 2012, 4): • 123 books had significant African or African American content; • twenty-eight books had American Indian themes, topics, or characters; • ninety-one books had significant Asian/Pacific or Asian/Pacific American content; and • fifty-eight books had significant Latino content. Clearly the books published for children and young adults do not reflect the world youth inhabit and the lives they live (Horning et al. 2012). Why is the continued lack of multicultural literature problematic? Why is the race or ethnicity of the people portrayed in books so important? “Why,” as I had a white student ask me once, “can’t minority teens just imagine the characters to be their race or ethnicity? My cultural perspective doesn’t affect my reading. I just feel like I am reading about people.” Numerous scholars have addressed this question, but I would like to share with you the reasons given by, respectively, a teen, a teacher, and an author. An African American teen reported this: “When my eighth-grade teacher … shared Mildred Taylor’s Roll of Thunder, Hear My Cry with the class and added several pieces of black literature to the classroom library, it was a pivotal moment for me. For the first time in my life, I realized that I was not alone in the world. There were other black girls having experiences similar to mine, and some had grown up and written them down. I began to write mine down too, with hopes of becoming a writer” (Hinton and Berry 2005, 284). Greg Michie, a teacher in Chicago, talking about his students’ reactions to The House on Mango Street, said this: “Chanclas” was the title of the story, and that’s as far as Alejandra got. As soon as she read that word aloud, the girls all burst out laughing. I looked up from my book, puzzled as to what had amused them. “What’s so funny?” “I don’t know,” Nancy said. … “That’s just not the kind of word you expect to see in a book.” … “It’s like a nickname or something. I’ve just never seen that word printed up in a book before. It’s not that it’s funny—it’s like an inside word, you know? Like a word nobody outside knows. You get me?” Nancy had described it perfectly. An “inside” word. The more we read, the clearer it became to me that every story in the book was filled with such elements, little details and nuances that only an insider—a Mexican American—would know. Inside words, inside phrases, inside sights and sounds—peeks into a world Nancy and the others knew well, but had never before seen within a book’s pages. Mango Street was unlike anything they had ever read, and the girls absolutely loved it. (Michie 1999, 58) Sharon Flake, an author, observes: “Black boys will read. But to get them off to a flying start, we’ve got to give them books that remind them of home—who they are. When this happens, they fly through books—even the most challenged readers. They hunger for the work like a homeless man finally getting a meal that’s weeks overdue” (Flake 2007, 14). As these statements demonstrate, we cannot overestimate the power of seeing (or not seeing) oneself in literature. Culturally relevant literature allows teens to establish personal connections with characters, increasing the likelihood that reading will become an appealing activity (Heflin and Barksdale-Ladd 2001, 818). It helps them identify with their own culture, and it engenders an appreciation for the diversity that occurs both within and across racial and cultural groups (Bishop 1997, 6). But I believe multicultural literature can do even more. As an integral part of the social and academic context, I believe multicultural literature can act as a counter-story to the dominant narrative about people of color and indigenous peoples. Counter-Storytelling Daniel Solórzano and Tara Yosso define counter-storytelling as “a method of telling the stories of those people whose experiences are not often told,” including people of color, women, gays, and the poor (2002, 26). Counter-stories aim “to cast doubt on the validity of accepted premises or myths, especially ones held by the majority” (Delgado and Stefancic 1995, 144). They offer a perspective that both “help[s] us understand what life is like for others, and invite[s] the reader into a new and unfamiliar world” (41). Richard Delgado, who introduced the concept, argues that counter-stories “can quicken and engage the conscience,” stirring the “imagination in ways in which discourse that is more conventional cannot” (Delagado 1989, 2415). Counter-stories can show us that what we believe is inaccurate or false; they can highlight exclusionary practices and policies. Delgado believes that they can even “help us understand when it is time to reallocate power” (2415). Delgado (1989, 2437) outlines a number of ways that counter-storytelling benefits groups that have traditionally been marginalized and oppressed in the United States. By telling (and hearing) counter-stories, members of marginalized groups: • gain healing from becoming familiar with their own historic oppression and victimization; • realize that they are not alone; that others have the same thoughts and experiences; • stop blaming themselves for their marginal position; and • construct additional counter-stories to challenge the dominant story. Members of the majority culture too benefit from hearing counter-stories. Delgado argues that counter-stories can help them overcome their “ethnocentrism and the unthinking conviction that [their] way of seeing the world is the only one—that the way things are is inevitable, natural, just, and best” (1989, 2439). As a counter-storytelling tool, I believe multicultural literature for young adults serves a number of similar purposes. 1. It gives voice to teens whose voices have gone unheard and whose lives are at best underrepresented, but more often misrepresented, in the mainstream discourse. 2. It challenges the single story, providing “a powerful space of affirmation” and validation (Buehler 2010, 43). 3. It presents the complexity of racial and ethnic identity formation. 4. It challenges readers whose lives have been shaped by race and privilege to consider how the world looks to groups of people that have traditionally been marginalized and oppressed, raising awareness of the inequalities those individuals face on a daily basis. Challenging the Single Story Despite the demographic diversity of the United States, many Americans still live in segregated communities, where they are unlikely to encounter individuals who are racially, ethnically, and socioeconomically different from themselves (Fry and Taylor 2012). Multicultural literature bridges the racial and class-based isolation that prevents the sharing of diverse experiences across racial, ethnic, class, and cultural lines. A counter-story can help disrupt what Nigerian writer Chimamanda Adichie refers to as “the single story” (2009). Teenagers of color as well as indigenous people are often victims of a single story. Latino teens are routinely depicted in the mainstream discourse as “low achievers, high school dropouts, teen parents, or violent gang members, all stereotypes that paint a picture of an unassimilated population marked primarily by exclusion and difference” (Foxen 2010, 1). The dominant narrative regularly portrays young African American males as criminals, crime victims, and predators (Sanders 2012) and African American girls as having one asset—their sexuality (National Campaign to Prevent Teen and Unplanned Pregnancy 2012). Asian Pacific Americans as a rule are depicted as “star students (especially in math and science), supported by industrious, entrepreneurial, and upwardly mobile parents” (Tatum 1997, 160). And American Indians are “typically portrayed as people of the past, not of the present or the future” (Tatum 1997, 150). Adichie argues that the single story is dangerous. She explains: “The single story creates stereotypes, and the problem with stereotypes is not that they are untrue, but that they are incomplete. They make one story become the only story”—the definitive story of a people (Adichie 2009). And in most cases the single story reinforces a deficit-oriented stance toward teens of color and indigenous peoples—a stance that represents their race, ethnicity, culture, and/or language as limitations. Sharon Flake’s poem “You Don’t Even Know Me” provides an example of the single story (Flake 2010). More importantly, it demonstrates how multicultural literature can challenge the single story.2 As this section of the poem shows, teachers, neighbors, the media, and even their friends try to use a single story to define the young man in the poem. I live next door to you, You see me on the bus. Sometimes you even tell me just be quiet, child-hush. Then I’m out with my boys— Two, five, or even ten— It’s funny when that happens, you don’t seem to know me then. I’m just another black boy, A threatening, scary sight. (Flake 2010, 4–5) The young man uses his voice to fight back, declaring that he is a scholar, a musician, a neighbor, a builder, and a dreamer. At the end of the poem he declares: Only I define me And The brightness of my destiny. (Flake 2010, 7) A novel that challenges the single story is The First Part Last by Angela Johnson (2004). In this novel, sixteen-year-old Bobby becomes a single father when his girlfriend, Nia, lapses into a permanent coma during childbirth. How does this book challenge the single story? • Bobby and Nia are both from upper-middle-class homes and plan to attend college; their parents are professionals, and they provide nourishing home environments. • Bobby and Nia take sex seriously and are shown valuing their relationship. • Despite pressure from his and Nia’s parents to give the baby up for adoption, Bobby takes responsibility for raising Feather while continuing to go to school. Is Bobby perfect? No, that would make the story unbelievable. He skips school. He gets arrested for spray-painting graffiti art on a wall. He even forgets to pick Feather up from the babysitter’s house one day. However, his story, the story of a middle-class, caring, responsible, and committed sixteen-year-old black male teen, defies the distorted image of black males represented in the media. Multicultural literature can not only challenge the single story, as Johnson’s novel does, but also encourage and empower teens of color and indigenous peoples to take action in their own lives and in the world around them. It does this not by denying the hardship and prejudice that many of them face but by showing that, despite the disadvantages that correlate with their skin color, culture, and/or social class, they can overcome the constraints placed on them by the dominant culture as represented by the single story. One book that does this is We Beat the Street (Davis et al. 2005). This nonfiction text chronicles the journey of three friends, Sampson, George, and Rameck, from a tough neighborhood in Newark, NJ, to college and then to medical school. Their journey is not trouble free. Along the way, they make mistakes, face disappointments, and nearly fail. In order to succeed, they must resist buying into the single story themselves and avoid allowing others to use the single story to define them. Not long after arriving at Seton Hall, Rameck severely injures another student who dares to challenge him in front of his cousins. Rameck explains: “I had to learn control. By no means did I want to forget where I came from or lose my culture; I just needed to modify my behavior. I had to learn to face a challenge without a violent reaction. … I had never been exposed to anything else. I gradually learned to discipline myself so that I could deal with challenges with my mind instead of my fists” (Davis et al. 2005, 145). At another point, Rameck’s dreams are again almost ended, this time by a justice system that adheres to the single story of young black men as perpetrators of crime. As Rameck and his friend Dax, a law student, are driving home from a professional prizefight they are followed by the police. “Why they sweatin’ us, man,” Dax said, “We ain’t done nothing wrong. Not one thing.” “It’s not about being wrong. It’s about being black,” Rameck said, anger, and regret in his voice. “Why do they assume we’re up to no good?” Dax asked bleakly. “Who knows?” Rameck answered as the three police cars followed their every turn and stop. “DWB—Driving While Black—is the newest crime, don’t you know.” (Davis et al. 2005, 163) The two young men are stopped, frisked, and their car is searched. When one of the officers finds a small fishing knife in the glove compartment, Rameck is arrested and charged with interfering with a police officer and possession of a deadly weapon. Rameck is cleared of the charges only because the police lose the knife. These two books and Flake’s poem are examples of how multicultural literature can challenge the single story. They feature young black men who value education, have aspirations, have a sense of personal responsibility, and are self-reliant and resilient. They feature protagonists who never give up despite the difficulties they face—who hold hope of achieving success and take steps toward getting there (Buehler 2010). Racial and Ethnic Identity Development For teens of color and for indigenous teens, coming of age is integrally tied to the process of racial and ethnic identity formation. Although identity formation is a critical task for all, adolescence researchers have found that adolescents of color and indigenous teens are more likely to be actively engaged in exploring their racial and ethnic identity than are white adolescents (Tatum 1997). As Beverly Tatum explains, teens of color, indigenous teens, and biracial teens think of themselves in terms of race or ethnicity because that is how the rest of the world sees them (Tatum 1997; Moule 2010). On a daily basis, they must navigate a world where other people are making assumptions about who they are and what they can achieve based on their skin color. Psychologist William Cross has proposed a theory of racial identity development that contains five stages: pre-encounter, encounter, immersion/emersion, internalization, and internalization-commitment (Cross 1991). The first two stages are pertinent to this article. In the pre-encounter stage, children of color and indigenous children absorb many of the beliefs and values of the dominant white culture, including the belief that it is better to be white (Cross 1991). Stereotypes, omissions, and distortions, combined with an image of white superiority, to some degree socialize children of color and indigenous children to value the role models, lifestyles, and images of beauty of white culture over those of their own cultural group (Tatum 1997). In the encounter stage, children of color and indigenous children become aware of the impact of racism. This stage usually occurs during late adolescence, but it may begin as early as middle school. In this stage, children of color and indigenous children begin to wrestle with what it means to be a member of a group that is targeted by racism (Cross 1991). Often this awakening is precipitated by an event or a series of events. Examples include seeing a Hispanic parent asked to provide proof of citizenship when he is leaving his place of employment, being followed around by security guards at the mall, or viewing media images of police brutality against persons of color. As Tatum points out, “To find one’s racial or ethnic identity, one must deal with [these] negative stereotypes, resist internalizing negative self-perceptions, and affirm the meaning of ethnicity for oneself” (1997, 165–66). This entails answering questions like these: What does it mean to be a black (Hispanic, Asian, or American Indian) person? How should I act? What should I do? For biracial teens, this process is further complicated by the question, What am I? As teens struggle with these questions, they often seek support from other teens who belong to the same racial, ethnic, or cultural group—others who understand their perspective and who have experienced similar stereotypes or prejudices. And this is where multicultural literature can play a powerful role. One of the key goals of counter-storytelling is to give voice to the lived experiences of groups that have traditionally been marginalized and oppressed in the United States (Matsuda 1993). By reading multicultural literature, teens of color and indigenous teens gain insight into how other teens who share their racial, ethnic, or cultural background have affirmed their own identities. Born Confused (Hidier 2002) tells the story of Dimple Lala, a seventeen-year-old first-generation Indian American growing up in New Jersey. The end of her junior year in high school marks the beginning of a journey of self-discovery for Dimple when she realizes that she is an ABCD—an American Born Confused Desi. So I was an ABCD. Why hadn’t anyone told me? Why didn’t they put this in those spots where they say race doesn’t matter but please check one of the following? Growing up, I was always exing Asian/Pacific Islander, even though I didn’t understand why they were treated as the same thing. It would have been so much easier to check ABCD. … I wondered if I’d ever be an ABD. … But for now I was an ABCD. I didn’t really know what that meant. But I suppose that was the point. (Hidier 2002, 108–9) That summer Dimple immerses herself in the vibrant South Asian club culture in New York City, attends a student conference at New York University on South Asian identity, and begins dating a young man who is also Indian American. Throughout the novel she deals not only with the stereotypes others have of Indian Americans, like Julian who believes that all Indians are gifted in the art of sex, but with her own stereotypes of Indian Americans. Readers of the book watch Dimple embrace her Indian culture as a positive part of her identity and find a way to fit the two cultures together. Taunuja Hidlier explains her motivation for writing the novel: I hadn’t read any books I could recall with a South Asian American teen protagonist. To the best of my knowledge Born Confused was the first book with a US female teen desi heroine; that was one of the reasons my publisher wanted it, and it is certainly one of the reasons I wrote it. … It was, and is, important to me that a young South Asian American have a voice, and that it be heard and read by people of all backgrounds and ages. And it is just as important that other South Asian American voices be heard; the more out there the more we can begin to approximate expressing the richness and diversity of this culture … a culture that is as diverse as the number of people who make it up. (Hidier 2006) In Mexican WhiteBoy, Matt De la Peña provides insight into the challenges that biracial teens face as they try to forge their identity (2008). Danny Lopez yearns to be accepted by both of the two worlds he is caught between, that of his white mother and classmates and that of his Mexican father. De la Peña writes: And Danny’s brown. Half-Mexican brown. A shade darker than all the white kids at his private high school, Leucadia Prep. Up there, Mexican people do under-the-table yard work and hide out in the hills because they’re in San Diego illegally. Only other people on Leucadia’s campus who share his shade are the lunch-line ladies, the gardeners, the custodians. But whenever Danny comes down here, to National City—where his dad grew up, where all his aunts and uncles and cousins still live, he feels pale. A full shade lighter. Albino almost. Less than. (De la Peña 2008, 2) When Danny decides to spend the summer with his father’s relatives in an attempt to reforge his identity, he finds that “he can’t simply flip some Mexican switch and fit right in with the extended family: he’s lighter skinned and better educated, he speaks poor Spanish, and he knows nothing of the teen culture in which his cousins live” (Bush 2008, 68). His frustration with not fitting in leads him to stop talking and to engage in self-mutilation. Danny’s experiences mirror those observed by researchers who study biracial identity formation. According to Walker Poston, biracial teens often experience guilt at not being able to identify with all aspects of their heritage, and this guilt frequently leads to anger, shame, or self-hatred (1999). Resolving the guilt and anger is necessary for achieving a multicultural existence in which teens value all of their ethnic or racial identities (Poston 1999). By the end of Mexican WhiteBoy, after a summer spent playing baseball and getting to understand his Mexican heritage better, Danny has gained strength, confidence, and self-awareness, declaring: “I’m like me. I’m just myself. That’s it” (De la Peña 2008, 241). As these two examples demonstrate, multicultural young adult literature can provide teens of color and indigenous teens with insight into the process of racial and ethnic identity development. It can provide identity-affirming experiences, and it can help them understand the unique challenges they face. It can provide role models and support that may be missing in their schools, their homes, and their communities. Exposing the Impact of Racism Central to counter-storytelling is an examination of racism and its impact on people of color and indigenous peoples. Racism is defined as a system of advantage based on race—a system that involves cultural messages and institutional policies and practices, as well as the beliefs and actions of individuals (Tatum 1997, 7). The systematic advantages that are conferred on whites as a result of racism are often referred to as white privilege (MacIntosh 1989). These privileges include greater access to housing, jobs, and health care, as well as an impartial justice system. As Beverly Tatum points out, despite rhetoric to the contrary, every social indicator, from salary to life expectancy, reveals the advantages of being white (Tatum 1997, 8). Discussions about issues of race and racism often elicit anger, denial, guilt, and defensiveness. White people often feel vulnerable and attacked for being white and “prefer to believe that the problem is not that racism is present, but that it is being discussed” (Okun 2010, 2). People of color and indigenous peoples, too, may be uncomfortable, feeling as though they are being asked to speak for their entire racial, ethnic, or cultural group. Multicultural literature can serve as a vehicle for overcoming the silences and discomfort that prevent open dialogue. As counter-story, it is nonconfrontational. It invites the reader to suspend judgment, listen for the point or the message, and determine the truth the story contains (Delgado 1989, 2415). It acts as both a mirror—allowing teens of color and indigenous peoples to reflect on their own experiences—and as a window, providing the opportunity for white teens to view the experiences of others. The text becomes the tool for a conversation across racial and ethnic groups (Glazier and Seo 2005). Many authors of young adult literature take a critical look at the impact of racism and poverty on the lived experiences of people of color and indigenous peoples. Their characters are aware of the privileges white teens share, and they recognize “how much less they themselves have been given by virtue of their birthright” (Buehler 2010, 36). They are aware of the institutionalized racism present in the economic, educational, and judicial systems. In Ball Don’t Lie (2005), Matt De la Peña explores the concept of white privilege, challenging the idea that the United States is “a land of opportunity … where anyone … can succeed if they just pull up hard enough on their bootstraps” (olsson 1997, 6). In this scene, Dante, a young African American male, explains the futility of believing in the idea of the American dream to Sticky, the novel’s protagonist. Dante reaches down to grab a couple of stones off the ground. See that wall in front of you? he says. In America, life’s like a race to that wall. That’s the way I see it. He sets the first stone less than a foot from the wall, points and says: If you born white and got money then you start the race way up here. Ahead of everybody … But say you ain’t white and rich. Say you poor and black. Or you Mexican, Puerto Rican. … You may not even have enough food to eat a balanced meal every night. … In this case you startin, the race of life way back here. He points to the second stone. Only a fool would think someone who starts here has the same opportunities as cats startin at the first stone. (De la Peña 2005, 229–30) Nikki Grimes too examines the idea of white privilege in Bronx Masquerade (1998). At the beginning of the novel, Tyrone, a teenage African American male, exclaims: White folks! Who they think they kidding? They might as well go blow smoke up somebody else’s you-know-what, ‘cause a Black man’s got no chance in this country. I be lucky if I make it to twenty-one with all these fools running around with AK-47s. … Life is cold. Future? What I got is right now, right here, spending time with my homeys. Wish there was some future to talk about. I could use me some future. (Grimes 1998, 8) Unfortunately, national statistics support Dante’s and Tyrone’s perspectives. In 2010, 8 percent of black teens, 15.1 percent of Hispanic teens, and 12.4 percent of American Indians dropped out of high school, as compared to 5.1 percent of white teens (National Center for Education Statistics 2012). The national unemployment rate is 15.9 percent for African Americans, 15.2 percent for American Indians, and 11.5 percent for Latinos (Algernon 2012a, 2012b). In some metropolitan communities, the African American unemployment rate is three times the white rate and the Latino unemployment rate is twice the white rate (Algernon 2012a, 2012b). Approximately 27.7 percent of all black persons, 26.6 percent of all Hispanic persons (of any race), and 24.8 percent of American Indians live in poverty, as compared to 9.9 percent of all non-Hispanic white persons (DeNavas, Proctor, and Smith 2011). In Black and White (2005), Paul Volponi provides a realistic look at the realities of the juvenile justice system when two star high school basketball players, one black and one white, commit a crime together. Marcus is black, and Eddie white. Known to all as “Black and White,” the two best friends are in the middle of basketball season, headed to the playoffs, and hoping to get scholarships to good colleges. In need of money, they borrow Eddie’s grandfather’s handgun and pull a series of robberies in dark parking lots. One night Eddie shoots one of their victims, who survives and identifies Marcus as one of his assailants. It isn’t long before Eddie is implicated as well, but nobody can identify him with the same degree of certainty. Eddie won’t confess, and Marcus won’t betray. Although the two boys say they’ve gotten “past all that racial crap,” they find out that racism is entrenched in the justice system and that it impacts how they are treated. In the end, Marcus ends up in jail for nineteen months, while Eddie avoids the truth and heads off to college. The reality of Marcus’s situation is captured in this interchange between the two of them. The passage is told in Eddie’s voice. “Eddie, I don’t think taking the case to trial is going to work for me,” he [Marcus] blurted out. “Parker knows it was me. And I don’t think I can pretend it wasn’t. I don’t want to screw this up for you. Maybe your lawyer is just smarter than mine. Ms. Torres doesn’t think there is a thing she can say to make me look good. I need to take whatever she can get me.” “Whatever she can get for you? What about me, my brother? You want to plead guilty. But that’s only going to hurt my case. Do you get some kind of points from the DA for that,” I [Eddie] yelled at him. “You lousy little shit! he [Marcus] screamed, wrapping both of his hands around my jacket collar. He drove me back against the side of a brick building. And I felt the air pop out of my lungs when I hit. “We got into this mess together. But it’s just me paying for it. And I haven’t complained one fucking inch about it,” he seethed, with his face pressed up against mine. “And all you want to know from me is how clean I can keep you.” (Volponi 2005, 124–25) Volponi’s portrayal of Marcus’s and Eddie’s different paths through the justice system is real and of growing concern. According to the Annie E. Casey Foundation (2006), compared to the treatment received by white youth, policies, practices, and stereotypes within the juvenile justice system work against youth of color and expose them to greater vulnerability for juvenile detention and compromised outcomes. African American and Latino youth experience stereotyping and consequent discrimination at every step of the intake and adjudication process, including disproportionate arrest using anti-gang laws, disparate assignment of motivation and blame, harmful labeling as super-predators, inadequate assessment of available family and community resources for detention alternatives, and the claim that these youth expect to go to prison. In his book The Absolutely True Diary of a Part-Time Indian (2007), Sherman Alexie depicts the struggles, injustices, and long-lasting effects of historical oppression toward American Indians. Fourteen-year-old Arnold Spirit (Junior) lives on the Spokane Indian Reservation in Washington State. During his first day at high school, Junior discovers that his geometry textbook is so old that his mother used it in school. In anger, he throws the book at his teacher, and he is suspended. This act of defiance leads Junior, at the insistence of his teacher, to transfer from the reservation school to Reardon, an all-white school twenty-two miles away. There Junior attempts to bridge Indian and white cultures, while at home he copes with a community and a family ravaged by alcoholism and faces the controversy and guilt of leaving the reservation and his own culture. I would like to share two scenes from the book that illustrate the issues Junior and many contemporary American Indian teens face—how to succeed academically in underfunded and culturally unresponsive schools and how to live in the modern world without ceasing to be Indian. I’ll begin with the textbook incident. I grabbed my book and opened it up. I wanted to smell it. Heck, I wanted to kiss it. Yes, kiss it. … But my lips and I stopped short when I saw this written on the inside front cover: this book belongs to agnes adams. Okay, now you’re probably asking yourself, “Who is Agnes Adams?” Well, let me tell you. Agnes Adams is my mother. my mother! And Adams is her maiden name. … So that means I was staring at a geometry book that was at least thirty years older than I was. I couldn’t believe it. How horrible is that? My school and my tribe are so poor and sad that we have to study from the same dang books our parents studied from. That is absolutely the saddest thing in the world. And let me tell you, that old, old, old, decrepit geometry book hit my heart with the force of a nuclear bomb. My hopes and dreams floated up in a mushroom cloud. What do you do when the world has declared nuclear war on you? (Alexie 2007, 30–31) Now we’ll fast forward to the end of the book and the day the Reardon basketball team defeats the reservation team; Junior is playing for Reardon. The buzzer sounded. The game was over. We had killed the Redskins. Yep, we had humiliated them. … We had defeated the enemy! We had defeated the champions. We were David who’d thrown a stone into the brain of Goliath! And then I realized something. I realized that my team, the Reardon Indians, was Goliath. I looked over at the Wellpinit Redskins, at Rowdy. I knew that two or three of those Indians might not have eaten breakfast this morning. No food in the house. I knew that seven or eight of those Indians lived with drunken mothers and fathers. I knew that one of those Indians had a father who dealt crack and meth. I knew two of those Indians had fathers in prison. I knew none of them were going to college. Not one of them. I suddenly wanted to apologize to Rowdy, to all of the other Spokanes. I was suddenly ashamed. … I ran into the bathroom, into a toilet stall, and threw up. And then I wept like a baby. (Alexie 2007, 194–96) In 2009, the Department of Education conducted consultations with federally recognized American Indian tribes and American Indian school officials and educators across the United States. Across the board, tribal and American Indian educators expressed concern regarding funding for the education of American Indian children, citing subpar school facilities, limited access to early childhood education, inadequate access to technology, and shortages of qualified teaching personnel as the consequences of funding shortages, to name just a few (US Department of Education 2012). These inequities apply to schools operated by the Bureau of Indian Education, as well as the regular public schools many American Indian students attend. According to the tribal and American Indian educators, the failure of the American government to provide a quality education for American Indian students has “contributed to the perpetuation of a vicious cycle of limited economic opportunities among American Indian communities,” resulting in significant health, welfare, and justice inequities (US Department of Education 2012, 46). In order to succeed, many American Indian youth feel compelled, like Junior, to reject their Indian culture. Tribal and American Indian educators contend that school curricula should include Native languages and histories and reinforce a positive image of American Indian cultures. As one individual noted, “Administrators and teachers need to be more aware of the Native culture of their students because, if we do acknowledge their culture, it makes them feel valued and gives them self-identity (US Department of Education 2012, 31). As these three titles show, multicultural literature as counter-story can make the oppression and victimization of people of color and indigenous peoples visible—visible to themselves and to the majority culture. It can show that racism and inequality still exist in contemporary American society. It can help teens understand racism as a system of advantage—a system that is “perpetuated when we do not acknowledge its existence” (Tatum 1997, 9). As Beverly Tatum argues, “Talking about racism is an essential part of facing racism and changing it” (xix). Multicultural literature provides a platform for these conversations. Conclusion Multicultural literature that acts as counter-story “gives voice to those who have been taught to hide their emotions” (Delgado 1989, 2440). It speaks to the power of the individual and the collective, it shows teens of color and indigenous peoples defining themselves and engaging in problem solving, and it emphasizes the importance of self-reliance and self-determination (Tatum 2009). It also allows teens in the majority culture to see how the world looks from someone else’s perspective. It challenges their assumptions, jars their complacency, and invites them to action (Delgado 1989, 2440). As Richard Delgado notes, “Stories are the oldest, most primordial meeting ground in human experience. Their allure will provide the most effective means of overcoming otherness [and] of forming a new collectivity based on shared story” (2438).