THE PLACE OF REFERENCE SERVICE IN RANGANATHAN'S THEORY OF LIBRARIANSHIP Marcia H. Chappell S. R. Ranganathan approached librarianship theoretically. He sought to establish fundamental principles from which effective library practices could be systematically derived. Although he contended that he had discovered these principles, his "five laws of library science," through a rigorous scientific process, it is clear that they and the concept of librarianship based on them are more fundamentally the product of Ranganathan's Hindu tradition. Ethical and metaphysical premises characteristic of Hinduism are reflected in his conception of the social and cosmic purpose of the library and of reference service as the basic means of fulfilling that purpose. Rangana- than believed that effective reference service depended on the intuitive "flair" of the librarian and on the use of an analyticosynthetic classification scheme. While the dependence of his concept of reference service on intuition lessened its practical value for American librarians, both his discussion of analyticosynthetic classification and the broad perspective from which he speaks are potentially important contributions to the understanding and practice of reference service in American libraries. S. R. Ranganathan believed that effective reference service should be the end of all librarianship, and the whole body of his work may be seen as an attempt to achieve this end. Ranganathan views reference service from a perspective which is broader in two senses than that conventionally assumed by people writing about it in American library literature. First, he speaks at great length of the place of the reference function within a spiritual-ethical world view. He often discusses the role of reference service as making an important contribution to the social and intellectual welfare of the commu- nity, and, within the context of the reference process itself, he focuses on the quality of personal interaction between librarian and patron. Second, he regards analyticosynthetic classification as an integral part of reference ser- vice and the primary aid to the reference librarian in his basic task of helping people interact flexibly with the body of recorded knowledge. Judging from the scarcity of references in the literature, one may observe that Ranganathan's concept of reference service has been virtually ignored by American reference librarians (as in fact has the whole body of his work). It is likely that a reluctance to grapple with his broad integrative approach to reference service, his explicitly Eastern outlook, and the peculiarities of his [Libraty Quarterly, vol. 46, no. 4, pp. 378-961 01976 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 378
REFERENCE SERVICE AND RANGANATHAN 379 style have prevented American librarians from giving his work a critical, attentive examination. Yet the fact that his orientation is so different from ours may provide a valuable perspective which will enable us to look more critically at our own concept of reference service and to broaden our under- standing of the reference function. The Theoretical Approach to Reference Service Samuel Rothstein's history of reference service in America [1] demonstrates that prevailing views concerning the nature and appropriate scope of refer- ence service, and the ways these concepts are interpreted in practice, have evolved (along with beliefs about the nature of librarianship itself) in a rather ad hoc manner, in direct and immediate response to developments in schol- arship and the corresponding sophistication of procedures to organize and access the body of knowledge. In contrast to the American practice of building up a picture of good reference service by continually determining appropriate responses to imme- diate needs, Ranganathan seeks to begin with a firmly founded theoretical picture of librarianship and systematically to deduce specific procedures from it. Indeed, throughout his writings on reference service he seems as interested in demonstrating the systematic derivation of his views on reference practice as in discussing the views themselves, or, rather, the two cannot be separated, for Ranganathan holds that we can understand and accept his belief in the central role of reference service and his conception of the type of service such a role requires only if we understand and recognize as valid the process through which he arrived at his concepts. He appears to believe that once he demonstrates that his conception of reference service can be formulated in terms of his five "laws of library science," then it follows that the practices he advocates can be considered to have been scientifically deduced from the laws. If his five laws are valid, so, automatically, are the procedures based on them. Spiral of Scientific Method A brief examination of Ranganathan's "spiral of scientific method" is impor- tant, not only because it is a fundamental part of his approach to reference service but also because a workable set of principles, the formulation of which it is intended to assist, would certainly be valuable to American reference librarians.' 1. The following description is based primarily on chap. 8 of The Five Laws of Libraty Science [2, pp. 355-418J.
380 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY According to Ranganathan, the scientific process includes four phases. The first phase involves observations of concrete particular facts. In the second phase, empirical laws or generalizations are induced from the facts observed in the first phase. In the third, occurring at what Ranganathan calls the zenith of the spiral, an act of intuition reduces the empirical laws to a few "fundamental laws." Finally, in the fourth phase deductive reasoning is used "to work out all the compelling implications of the fundamental laws" [2, p. 3621, implications which are then tested against observations made in the first phase of a new cycle in the spiral. A "crisis" occurs when rigorously con- trolled observations cannot be predicted by the fundamental laws. The cycle then resumes, and new fundamental laws which encompass these new obser- vations are discovered. Ranganathan's spiral, which he presents schematically, appears to be no more than a restatement of the commonly held understanding of scientific method. It is not so much his description of the method as his application of it to librarianship that is open to question. He asserts that the process of scientific reasoning can be applied to the social sciences (which he assumes include librarianship) as well as to the pure sciences, the only difference being that in the social sciences the fundamental laws are called "normative principles" rather than hypotheses. The difference between these two types of laws is simply that, while hypotheses "furnish a descriptive formulation of the empirical facts of experience," normative principles "furnish an interpreta- tive explanation of the empirical facts of experience and of the techniques found necessary in experience" [2, p. 3651. In his concern to put librarianship on a scientific basis, Ranganathan em- phasizes the similarities between scientific hypotheses and normative princi- ples and glosses over what many would consider the fundamental difference between them, the difference between description and prescription. He does not demonstrate convincingly that he has derived the five laws scientifically because he never confronts the question of how or whether the formulation of human values, convictions of what should be, can result from the structured dialectic of empirical observation and intuition through which a scientist arrives at a hypothesis. He simply assumes that they can and that both are the result of identical acts of intuition. These, whether they lead to normative principles or scientific hypotheses, are an "integral, timefree, space-free, reali- sation" that "transcends methodology of any kind" [3, p. 550]. The phrasing of Ranganathan's five laws, however, indicates that he is not comfortable in attempting to deal with normative principles in scientific terms. The laws are supposed to be based on the spiral of scientific method and were formulated originally in The Five Laws of Library Science. They are: (1) "Books are for use," (2) "Every reader his book," (3) "Every book its reader," (4) "Save the time of the reader," and (5) "Library is a growing organism." While only the fourth law is explicitly prescriptive, the first three are evidently so in intent. The fifth alone is purely descriptive. The account
REFERENCE SERVICE AND RANGANATHAN 381 in The Five Laws of Libraiy Science of the development of the laws clearly shows that Ranganathan did not in fact use the scientific method to derive these basic normative principles. They do not represent any intuitive synthesizing of empirical laws. Rather, they are essentially a codification of current library thought and practice as observed and interpreted in light of Ranganathan's experience and his own value system. In terms of his spiral they are empirical laws rather than basic principles. As J. Periam Danton has observed, The Five Laws of Libra?y Science "does not attempt to define the functions of library activity on any other basis than that of present-day good library service; the discussion is not an open-minded enquiry into the validity of functions and activities" [4, p. 532]. Following Danton, one may say that Ranganathan has approached scientifically what should be a matter of philosophy: "Science concerns itself directly with con- crete phenomena. A philosophy, on the other hand, is interested in aims and functions, in purpose and meaning" [4, p. 536]. Ranganathan and the Hindu World View In fact, although Ranganathan claims throughout his work that his approach to librarianship is scientific, the impact of his own value system and of the Hindu tradition which nourished it is evident in many of his writings. While the conventional characteristics of a scientific methodology often appear to be imposed on his conceptions after the fact, the influence of the cosmic and moral world view of Hinduism seems integral to his thought, shaping it from within and forming the perspective from which he observes library practice and formulates his five laws. Ranganathan's approach to librarianship is fundamentally not scientific but religious in the broadest sense of the term. In his discussions of reference service he frequently refers to the metaphysical and moral contexts that define the place of librarianship within the social order. The influence of Hinduism in determining both the integrative nature of his approach to librarianship and the value system that shapes the way in which its components are integrated is unquestionable. Two conceptions basic to all forms of Hinduism are a belief in cosmic unity, in the essential interrelationship of all things, and a conviction that knowledge is a powerful agent of this unity. In the ancient Vedic religion the sacrifice was an expression and ritual actualization of unity, of this oneness of earth the microcosm and heaven the macrocosm. The Vedic writings that developed in connection with the sacrifice are the most sacred of the Hindu scriptures because the formulas they contain embody the ritual power neces- sary to actualize the sacrificial unity. This cosmic power of the word, or "holy utterance," was brahman, a term which in the late Vedas and early Upanish- ads came to mean not only the power that binds macrocosm to microcosm, heaven to earth or cosmos to man, but ultimate universal power, the un-
382 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY changing reality which underlies the world of diversity and change. This universal reality, called Brahman, is, in a sense, itself a macrocosm which is identified with the microcosm Atman, man's soul, his individual reality. By penetrating to his soul man can enter into the oneness of universal reality. The belief that cosmic unity required a knowledge of sacrificial for- mula, the "holy utterance" of brahman was translated into an emphasis on the knowledge of Atman-Brahman, that is, on a clear perception of the self in relation to the universe and all its inhabitants. This knowledge of the cosmic order, the "intuitive realization of the supreme metaphysical truth" [5, p. 131] through study of the scriptures is the "way of knowledge," one of the four traditional ways of attaining moksha, final liberation of the soul in union with the Absolute. For the Hindu, one's dealings with other people-indeed, with all the inhabitants of the universe-are governed by the perception that each indi- vidual soul partakes of, or is essentially at one with, cosmic reality; that all creatures are thus vitally bound together, all are equally valuable; and that an individual can fulfill the law of his own nature and participate in the working out of the cosmic law, the universal dharma, only if he respects and lives in harmony with other beings. As noted above, in an apparent attempt to provide himself with an objec- tive authority for the five laws which give a coherent pattern to all his work in librarianship, Ranganathan does not explicitly admit the participation, much less the central role, of Hindu premises and beliefs in the formulation of these laws. He does, however, rely either directly or implicitly on them in order to express the social and cosmic significance and the proper application of the laws. Ranganathan's belief in the importance of librarianship and his under- standing of its primary function are rooted in a faith in the pragmatic and ultimately cosmic value of knowledge. He declares that . . . the vital principle of the library-which has struggled through all the stages of its evolution, is common to all its different forms and will persist to be its distinguishing feature for all time to come-is that it is an instrument of universal education, and assembles together and freely distributes all the tools of education and disseminates knowledge. . . . This vital principle-"the spirit of the library"-persisting through all its forms is like the Inner Man; and to it are applicable the words of the Lord:- "As a person casts off worn-out garments and puts on others that are new, so does the embodied soul cast off worn-out forms and enter into others that are new. ... "He cannot be cloven; he cannot be burnt; he cannot be wetted; he cannot be dried; he is eternal, all-pervading, steadfast and immovable; he is the same forever." [2, p. 3541 This passage suggests that the normative principle from which Rangana- than actually (though not systematically) derives his laws of librarianship is faith in the value of knowledge, and that this faith is closely bound up with the Hindu tradition. This impression is reinforced by the opening pages of The Five Laws of Library Science, in which he quotes this passage from the
REFERENCE SERVICE AND RANGANATHAN 383 Manu-Smrti: "To carry knowledge to the doors of those that lack it and to educate all to perceive the right! Even to give away the whole earth cannot equal that form of service" [2, p. 91. That he immediately follows this quote with the statement of his five laws is a clear indication that he views the practice of librarianship within the context of eternal dharma, or "the right," and that he conceives of the five laws as principles to guide practice in accor- dance with the right. In Preface to Libraty Science [6], a book based on lectures presented to library school students in India, Ranganathan pictures librarianship as a social insti- tution which links cosmic and personal dharma. He contends here that the "values which one can get by caring for library science" can be equated with four basic traditional Hindu values. Librarianship bestows personal profit, or artha, on those who practice it. To society in general it brings kama, prosperity and well-being. The contribution of librarianship to the "creative joy" of those who practice it, the "fulfillment of one's intellectual personality by creative work," and to the "fulfillment of [a] nation's mission" is a manifesta- tion of dharma, the pervasive natural law. Finally, moksha, the "delight of release," may be attained through self-forgetful concentration on the practice of librarianship [6, pp. 17-30]. Librarianship enables not only librarians, but library patrons as well, to progress from what Ranganathan calls the "vital plane" to the "mental plane" and finally to the "spiritual plane" of existence. This fulfillment of individual potentialities contributes to, and occurs only in conjunction with, the progress of the entire community in accordance with the universal dhar- ma. The library performs an essential role in this individual and social pro- gression because it enables man and society to grow on the mental and, more indirectly, the vital levels: In the vital level, man needs for his growth and happiness food, shelter and clothing, and so it is for society. . . . The technical processes involved in all these stand in need of constant improvement to fill up the ever-increasing gap between nature's direct bounty and the needs of society... . Thus growth in the vital level is dependent on growth in the mental level-un-precedented enrichment of the memory of one and all by the absorption of ever-shifting information and the cultivation of intellect of a much larger number than hithertofore to the point of creative ability. Thus the attain- ment of the happiness . . . derivable from unimpeded development in the vital facet of personality demands as a help that the mental facet should too develop apart from its own intrinsic need for growth to lead to the joy . . . of knowing and creative thinking. [6, pp. 150-51] Spiritual fulfillment, the final level of development, which subsumes vital and mental development, is not, "in the present stage of human development" [6, p. 153], generally attainable through any effort on our part. The fact that the mental level, at least, is accessible should be fully exploited, therefore, not only because it is intrinsically valuable, but because it contributes to the gradual evolution of society toward "spiritual fulfillment." This suggestion becomes more definite in Classification and Communication [71,
384 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY in which he discusses cooperation as the means to and (when total) the ulti- mate end of mental and spiritual growth. At the mental level both individual development and social progress depend on the collaboration of many people. Reciprocally, the "mental heritage" of society, that is, the pool of knowledge amassed by individuals aided in varying degrees by their contact with others, itself "helps and intensifies co-operative living at all three levels vital, men- tal, and spiritual. It demands, leads to, and makes possible a more extensive co-operative life at all the three levels" [7, pp. 126-27]. The ultimate end of this "perennial self-enrichment of mental heritage" [7, p. 127] is, on the personal level, a state of "intimate, sympathetic at-one-ment with everybody else and everything else in the universe. . . . This is the burden of the song in the Divine Utterance of India called the Bhagavad Gita" [7, p. 125]. This individual spiritual growth, which depends in part on cooperation at the mental level, will both contribute to and be paralleled during "the span of life of humanity" by an evolution toward the universal harmony which is the essence of Hinduism: . . .there is every hope that the intellectual binding force, which transcends territori- al boundaries, will eventually gain in strength and lead to co-operative living on world-scale. . . . The human race is still in its infancy, characterised by explosive emotions and narrow exclusiveness. When it matures, eludes ethnic groups, develops control over emotions, becomes dominantly intellectual, and enters the supra-mental stage . . . it will get glimpses of the delight of co-operative living in un-truncated, infinite context-the delight . . . which stray individuals have realised hitherto and denoted by the profound term Pure Existence cum Pure Consciousness cum Pure De- light. . . . [7, 99.138-39] According to Ranganathan, the purpose of the library is to participate in the unfolding of this universal destiny by educating individuals into a sense of intellectual and social cooperation and unity, into a realization of interrelat- edness. Ranganathan's Theory of Reference Service Reference service is the basic means of fulfilling the social purpose of the library. Ranganathan asserts again and again that reference service is the very essence of librarianship and "the ultimate human manifestation of the five laws" [8, p. 43]. "Reference service is the primary motive and the culmi- nation of all library practices. Its varieties, the what, why and how of them, the preparation for them, the varieties of bibliographical and reference mate- rials, and the organisation of the time of the staff in relation to them-all these are drawn out of the five laws. . ." [2, pp. 383-841. Objectives and Scope In some of his writings, notably the book Reference Service [9], Ranganathan seems to subscribe to a "moderate" view that the scope and intensity of reference service should vary according to characteristics of the patron and
REFERENCE SERVICE AND RANGANATHAN 385 type of library, and that reader instruction rather than direct provision of information is appropriate in certain cases. His five laws and the definition of reference service which he bases directly on them, however, do not support such a position. They clearly call for a more extreme and intensive form of service in all types of libraries. Ranganathan defines reference service as the process of establishing contact between a reader and his documents in a personal way. "His documents" means every one of the precise documents needed by him at the moment. It also means all the documents likely to be of use to him at the moment. It further means establishing the contact without any loss of time for him. It is not possible to do all this for a reader without an intimate understanding of his precise interest at the moment. To get this understanding, there must be an intimate com- munion between the librarian and the reader. From the first moment of the reader asking for help to the last moment of his getting all his documents, the librarian will have to be personally administering to the needs of the reader. Therefore, reference service is essentially personal service. [9, p. 53] This definition leaves no room for instruction as a function of reference ser- vice in any kind of library. Moreover, Ranganathan himself argues often and at great length that the five laws call for the establishment of intensive refer- ence service, virtually a selective dissemination of information (SDI) service, in academic and public as well as special libraries [10, p. 91]. His characteri- zation of the "documentation service" which special libraries provide leaves little doubt that its objectives are essentially the same as those he has specified in his definition of general reference service. The main difference between the two appears to be simply that documentation service deals with smaller, more specialized, more recently published, and thus less accessible packages of information, which he calls "nascent micro documents." He defines docu- mentation service as: 1 The promotion and practice of bringing into use nascent micro subject by each specialist (Law 1); and 2 Pinpointed (Law 2); 3 Exhaustive (Law 3); 4 Expeditious (Law 4) service of nascent micro subject to specialists; 5 In spite of the continuous ever-increasing cascade (Law 5) of nascent micro subject in an ever multiplying number of specialised subjects, communicated through several thousands of periodicals. [11, p. 158] Thus the whole thrust of Ranganathan's work, as his social values interpreted through the five laws require, is toward total and intensive information ser- vice in all libraries. The Reference Process In contrast to American librarians, who tend to conceptualize the reference process as a series of distinct temporal stages, Ranganathan sees it as a whole, a complex of activities meshed too tightly to be treated as separate compo- nents. These activities are bound together and most adequately described in terms of the personality of the librarian and the use of an analyticosynthetic classification system.
386 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY The "Flair" of the Librarian Ranganathan contends that an essential function of personal reference ser- vice is to breathe a "redeeming" sense of life into what would otherwise be a purely mechanical process of information transfer: . .. mechanised things are dependent things. They exist for use; and they are depen- dent upon use for beauty. . . . Because of this need for redeeming use, the multitude of mechanisms, surrounding us, may justly be regarded as appealing objects making persistent demands upon us. Because of their inanimation they threaten us with the sense of death unless they are continuously dowered with our own life energy.... When the material and technical activity and, still worse, red-tape activity, of conducting a library begin to take precedence over the experience of living and serv- ing, sooner or later we shall have to pay in ennui and decadence.... Hence the need for introducing a human agency to redeem everything else by putting them to active use. When the reader comes amidst the library, there must be someone to say "Take my hand; For I have passed this way, And know the truth." [9, pp. 73-74J The aspect of reference service Ranganathan is talking about here is not prescibed by the five laws. He is refering to a personal quality which he calls "flair," a quality that is different in kind from the intellectual skills which a "pinpointed," "exhaustive," "expeditious" service requires: A reference librarian . . . cannot do his best by intellectual training alone. No doubt, a good intellectual grind is necessary as a start. But, it is not sufficient to meet all situations. Ultimately, it is all a matter of flair, we say. What is flair. It is a subcon- scious solution found for getting over difficulties. There is perhaps the help of a dash of intuition. Flair is an intensely personal quality. It has to grow in an individual. Some may be born with it. It transcends analysis with the intellect. It transcends mechanisation. It transcends even standardised thinking. The personal help of a refer- ence librarian, with an abundance of flair, is often necessary to make the library achieve its complex of purposes, social and individual. [9, p. 173] This undefinable personal quality contributes to what Ranganathan be- lieves is the ultimately indescribable essence of reference service: "Indeed, reference service is ineffable. Its details are inexhaustible. Its aroma is indes- cribable. It is intangible. It is the wholeness of the reference work that does the work. But its whole picture is beyond the intellect. Still more so, it is beyond the senses initiating and feeding the work of the intellect" [9, p. 174]. Such a contention is in effect an admission that his description of reference service in terms of the five laws leaves out its fundamental character. Ranganathan compares the ineffability of reference service to the indes- cribable nature of mystic experience and attempts to discover in the picture of the righteous man, which appears in Hindu religious and mystical texts a model for the librarian who aspires to flair: "It may . . . be of value to reproduce here some mystic word-pictures, admitting of being taken as if they were pictures of reference service its purpose, its emphasis on personal or
REFERENCE SERVICE AND RANGANATHAN 387 individual service, the qualities to be developed by a reference librarian, his preparation internally within himself, his preparation in relation to docu- ments, his devotion to service without flirtation with fruits, and above all his geniality and his sharing with readers their problems, their struggle, and their ultimate joy of achievement" [9, pp. 175-76]. The Reference Librarian as a Righteous Man In Reference Service and in the later book Documentation [12], Ranganathan not only quotes but summarizes and paraphrases traditional writings in order to demonstrate their direct applicability to the conduct of reference service. Thus in Reference Service he presents the "import" of a passage from the Taitti- riya Upanishad as follows: The reader guest is supreme to you. Give him service with all attention and in all sincerity. Give him service to the entire capacity at your command. Give him service in all modesty and in full freedom from any touch of prestige or ego. Give him service in full measure lest there should be any offence to the Laws of Library Science. Acquire the best of knowledge and information for giving him in your service. [9, p. 1771 In the same vein he summarizes the attributes of the four incarnations of God that appear in the Ramayana and constructs from these attributes a model for reference librarians: He must emulate Bharata in hard work sailing on the steam of his own conscience and in knowing thereby every document in the library, so as to make the library yield ten times more result than it would otherwise. This he must do, not for his own private purpose, but for the good of others. To be able to live such a life, he must emulate Satrugna in continually controlling the little ego in him. He should emulate Lak- shmana in serving readers efficiently and without any eye on reward or praise or even a word of approbation. He should emulate Rama in geniality, charm, ease of accessi- bility, freedom from any sense of prestige, equableness of temper, love and respect for readers, willingness to share their problems, their difficulties, and the joy coming on them with the solution of the problems and, above all, in attaining competence of a high order. [9, p. 1801 These precepts may create a picture of the ideal reference librarian, but only in the sense that it is also a picture of the ideal human being. It is easy to form an impression that Hindu values, the application of which to refer- ence service Ranganathan stresses, somehow set it apart from other areas of human activity. It is as if the reference librarian should possess certain moral qualities because he is a reference librarian rather than because he is a hu- man being subject to cosmic law. What does appear necessary is to show how such attributes are to be exemplified in the day-to-day practice of reference work. How is one who is required by virtue of his humanity to adhere to the
388 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY general moral law to interpret and carry it out in his specific capacity as a reference librarian? Ranganathan relates the traditional rules of human conduct to reference service by saying in effect that the righteous man makes a good librarian. Rather than using such rules to set up practical standards of conduct, he presents a picture of a mythical ideal reference librarian. If in his contact with the reader the librarian can convey the "radiance" of his personality [2, p. 711, and if he can marry himself to reference service [9, p. 3461 and dedi- cate himself totally to fulfilling its goals [2, pp. 78-79], then he will be able to determine and perform the tasks required of him in any reference situation. Ranganathan does not suggest how an ordinary librarian, subject to the weakness and selfishness of human nature, can attempt to approach this ideal. Evidently all finally depends on the indefinable quality of flair. And, despite his repeated insistence that his scientific spiral has put librarianship on a systematic basis, his Achilles' heel, at least from the perspective of an American librarian, is the fact that his conception rests on a complex of qualities possessed by an individual that results in some mysterious way from his being in tune with the cosmos. Such a unfathomable individual qualities can not be encompassed by any system of objectives and methods which people establish to fulfill the functions of the library. Ranganathan thus com- mits himself to a contradiction, for despite the five laws and the spiral of the scientific method, librarianship is essentially invulnerable to systematization. By contrast, American librarians are concerned about the personal qual- ities of the librarian only insofar as they can be incorporated into a system. Although convinced that the librarian must shape his service to the patron's unique personality and perceptions, and aware of the practical value of such qualities as sympathy, tact, and "approachability," American librarians ad- dress themselves primarily to designing a set of procedures whose purpose is to compensate as much as possible for the individual librarian's inevitable lack of flair. As the body of literature on the problem of question negotiation indicates, they look more closely than Ranganathan at the actual situation, at the characteristics of inquirer and librarian, the nature and quality of their interaction, and their perceptions of the library and each other. They try to determine how the interplay of all these elements affects the provision of reference service and what procedures can be established to make such inter- action more fuitful. Refusing to allow the success of the reference interview to rest on the innate qualities of an individual librarian, they draw on the findings of such disciplines as psychology, linguistics, and information science in an attempt to deepen their understanding of the various personal and intellectual factors which must be dealt with during the reference process and to establish procedures which will effectively coordinate them. While a good emotional climate is important, or perhaps even essential for American li- brarians, it is in the end no more than an aid in the accomplishment of the primary function of their service: the fulfillment of the inquirer's information need.
REFERENCE SERVICE AND RANGANATHAN 389 Analyticosynthetic Classification According to Ranganathan, a classification scheme is an effective tool only insofar as it enables the reference librarian to supply the inquirer with infor- mation which fully and precisely answers his needs. Thus the scheme should be based on, and reflect, the dynamics of thought, the way the mind separates out concepts and bits of information and recombines them and incorporates them into new patterns. This process of thinking is reflected (although some- times blurred by the idiosyncrasies of language) in the expression of ideas recorded in documents and in the way people perceive and express their own need for information. A classification scheme should, insofar as possible, lay bare the basic structure of ideas by cutting through the accretions of natural language (the superficial "verbal plane") which obscure it and prevent a clear perception of the relationships among categories of subjects. Without such a tool it is virtually impossible for a librarian to arrive at a true notion of the precise nature of patron needs or the subjects of documents. A classification scheme which functions in the manner Ranganathan envi- sions would not only be invaluable to a librarian attempting to connect an individual inquirer who has a particular immediate information need with the needed information, it would also aid specialists engaged in research by clearly and minutely displaying the interconnection of developing subjects. Moreover, as Ranganathan explains at length in Classification and Communica- tion [7], such a scheme could serve as an international language, taking its symbols from the "notational plane"-symbols which, unencumbered by the vagaries of natural language, could be ordered according to principles rooted in the universal structure of knowledge. Such desiderata, Ranganathan believed, could be embodied only in an analyticosynthetic classification scheme. The classification of a document ac- cording to such a scheme involves applying stated principles to break a sub- ject down into basic facets or components and arranging them according to various principles of preferred order. The categories and relations involved are then encoded in digits and symbols to form a class number. The analysis of a subject, the grasp of its structure, is unrelated to a partic- ular classification scheme. The way the subject is expressed, on the other hand-the always relatively imperfect attempt to show in linear form its complex nature and its multidimensional relationship with other subjects-is a function of the individual scheme. Although Ranganathan believed that his colon classificaiton, with its flexibility and capaciousness, was more sensitive than any other to the complexities and the constantly shifting nature of the field of knowledge, it is its power of permitting the manipulation of subject components that is fundamental.
390 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Classification and Reference Service The ability of an analyticosynthetic scheme to bring a virtually unlimited number of ideas into one system enables a reference librarian to connect a patron's interests, with all their complexity and ramifications, to the various combinations of concepts expressed in documents. In order to make this con- nection he must use both the methods of classification prescribed by Ranganathan's principles and the completed work of catalogers and classifi- ers who have employed the same methods. The reference librarian, prefer- ably with the aid of the classified catalog, facet analyzes and resynthesizes the subject of the inquirer's interest and discovers through the classified catalog relevant documents whose relationship to this interest is clearly apparent. The concept of analyticosynthetic classification supplies Ranganathan with terms which enable him to set forth his understanding of the reference process with a precision and an intellectual rigor lacking in works such as Reference Service, in which he speaks only generally of the use of classification. In Reference Service, he shows how a librarian can become familiar with the "wave-front of knowledge" through the joint pursuit of diverse problems along with a specialist in his own subject-field. His reaction to the entries in a bibliography, his appraisal of articles, his involuntary remarks on them, his preference as between them, and the exchange of questions and answers with him-all these give an insight into the new trends in the subject-field. The assimilation of them becomes effortless and lasting. Such experiences with spe- cialists in diverse subject-fields, coming closely one over another, helps the sensing and the assimilation of a panoramic view of the happenings in the wave front of knowl- edge. No profession other than that of the reference librarian has a chance to get such a joyful view of the universe of knowledge. [9, p. 367] Information about the resources of the library, the subject orientation of patrons, and the structure of knowledge, which the individual librarian assi- milates in the course of his work, must be shared with colleagues and is thus further assimilated into the system of librarianship. Such information is not only directly useful to other reference librarians likely to face similar situa- tions, but may also provide feedback which will allow catalogers, acquisitions librarians, and documentation and abstracting centers to monitor patron needs and modify bibliographical tools accordingly. Ranganathan argues that such sharing is desireable [9, pp. 367-691. He does not, however, indicate in any detail how it should be systematically carried out. He ignores the need for organized lines of communication and for a standardized language which would facilitate the precise and economical transmission of information among the various components of the library system. By contrast, in his writings dealing with documentation service and classifi- cation, Ranganathan argues that just such a language, in the form of analyti- cosynthetic classification, is an essential aspect of reference service. He de- scribes analyticosynthetic classification as an instrument which in every
REFERENCE SERVICE AND RANGANATHAN 391 phase of reference work systemizes choices that in Reference Service depend on the uncontrollable wisdom of intuition. It is an instrument that binds all bibliographic tools into a mutually strengthening interdependence or, as Ranganathan calls it, a "symbiosis" that economically and systematically connects readers and information. Thus the immediate provision of reference service is directly and intimately dependent on the analyticosynthetic scheme and the classified catalog, which in turn are enriched by the assimilation of experience acquired during reference service. In reference service, Ranganathan observes, the librarian "applies the clas- sification scheme in the ultimate stage of library service which is effective contact between the right reader and the right unit of thought in a personal way" [7, p. 116]. To accomplish this he must "facet-analyse" the questions put by the specialist-in other words, "facet-analyse" the mind of the specialist reader. The "facet analysis" has to be done in a subtle way so that the specialist does not become touchy, conscious of his being analysed. This requires great tact. By the trial and error method, the Reference Librarian (- Docu- mentalist) can narrow down the range within which the nascent idea sought by the specialist lies. He should go on narrowing this range until the nascent subject sought by the specialist is likely to be within a pack of not more than 50 to 60 consecutive catalogue cards in the classified part of the catalogue. Surely it is easy for the specialist reader to glance through these 50 to 60 cards-arranged in a helpful filiatory se- quence of these subjects. It may then be easy for him to say what exactly he has been looking for. [8, p. 16] The trial-and-error method of specifying a patron's field of interest is guid- ed by constant reference to the pattern of feature headings in the classified catalog. These are the representation of subjects in natural language rather than by class numbers, a translation arrived at through the chain procedure. "These throw before the reader's eyes an ordered panorama of all related subjects. . . . The orderly display of specific subjects provided by an analyti- co-synthetic classification coupled with chain procedure gives to a reader the same kind of help as an orderly display of articles in a shop does to a custom- er" [7, p. 106J. So the classified catalog makes it possible for the librarian both to discover the inquirer's needs and to locate documents which will satisfy them. The analyticosynthetic technique, based as it is on characteristics funda- mental to the whole field of knowledge, enables the librarian to grasp for himself developing patterns of knowledge and new interrelationships among the subject specialties that he has been made aware of through his contact with patrons. As E. J. Coates remarks, "The surprising and satisfactory thing about subject classificatory structure is that the general pattern for most sub- jects is more or less the same. . . . It is not necessary to learn the classifica- tion pattern for each subject anew. Once the general categories are under- stood in their application to a few subjects, the pattern for other subjects reveal themselves almost instinctively" [13, p. 156].
392 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY The analyticosynthetic technique, therefore, may be said to liberate the librarian from total reliance on the calssified catalog, which may in some areas be based on knowledge less current than his own. As a matter of fact, his function of relating new patterns of concepts, as revealed to him in the immediate interests of his patrons, to the subject structure laid out in the catalog, puts the reference librarian (at least one working in a special library) in a unique position to supply classifiers with the information they need in order to remain responsive to developments in the various subject areas: "It is they [reference librarians] that have the fullest chance, every minute of their life, to see the extent to which library classification fulfils itself. They should observe its faults and shortcomings as disclosed in the glow of the triple contact between themselves, the reading and kindred materials and their users." For, people engaged in less public areas of library work have only occasional chances to see if the classificatory language they conceive, de- sign, and build is maintaining itself library-worthy and service-worthy. The readers themselves do not know what to expect of the library as service. The inadequacy of the service rendered has to be inferred often by the fleeting expression of feeling- often expressed not vocally but by other subtle manifestations. The reference librari- ans are the only persons who have a chance to observe them, integrate them and trace them to faults in the different parts of the machinery of the library. It is they that are in the best position to advise about the faults so discoverable in library classification. These persons should be men who love humanity and derive their own joy at the sight of the joy appearing on the faces of readers by satisfied wants. [14, pp. 123-24] This passage suggests that the value of a reference librarian lies not simply in his ability to carry out certain delicate procedures, to serve in effect as a vital and particularly sensitive component in the bibliographical system, but in subtle qualities of perception and responsiveness that cannot be structured into any system. While vehemently contending that analyticosynthetic classi- fication is the central tool of librarianship and an indispensable aid to the reference librarian, Ranganathan never lets us forget that it is no more than a tool, in no way comparable to the skills of the people who use it-skills that are inseparable from moral and intellectual properties which determine the nature and quality of all human interchanges. Thus Ranganathan always returns in the end to the fundamental intuitive property of flair. Classification and Intuition This faith in flair causes Ranganathan finally to view the principles of classi- fication themselves as derived not systematically through the spiral of the scientific method: observation, induction, intuition, and logical deduction. Rather, they are apprehended mysteriously and spontaneously, as the result of a kind of intuition which seems almost a gift of grace which operates outside the bounds of any human structure:
REFERENCE SERVICE AND RANGANATHAN 393 Indian tradition is charged with the idea that whenever there is obliteration in func- tional distribution as a distribution in vogue becomes decrepit, and a totally new distribution becomes necessary, God himself appears in human embodiment to set right the functional distribution.... It is compelling and inevitable that it is not inappropriate to describe the creative classificationist as a mere medium or channel through which the classificatory language, needed by humanity at the age in question, flows out into manifestation. It is part of the grand Cosmic Economy which takes all space and all time within its context, that an intuitive classificationist of the right type is thrown forth by humanity at the right time and at the right time only. (15, pp. 15- 16] Since the principles upon which an analyticosynthetic classification is found- ed are assumed to be useful to the extent that they reflect the way the human brain deals with ideas and information, it would seem that the development of such a scheme should presuppose a detailed investigation of cognition and linguistics. Ranganathan does in fact call for studies which will determine the fundamental characteristics of human thought [16, pp. 407-8]. However, there is little evidence that he ever undertook the kind of systematic investi- gation that he advocated or attempted to make use of available research. It is ironic that his discussion of the five laws attempts to deal scientifically with the determination of values, but when treating an intellectual question, the resolution of which would seem to require a process of observation, induction, and deduction, he simply expresses his faith that it will be resolved by the inbreaking of a cosmic power that transcends human process. It is interesting that Ranganathan does not acknowledge the possibility that the cosmic law, which urges classification toward the form in which it can contribute most fully to the harmony of the universe, may employ for this purpose means more subtle and systematic than the deus ex machina device of raising up an intuitive classificationist whenever the current classification becomes obsolete. He speaks of intuition in religious rather than scientific terms (as supernatural inspiration rather than the hunch or insight that oc- curs at the zenith of a scientific spiral). He recognizes that while human methodologies are nourished by mystical intuition, that intuition remains supernatural, a power that cannot be incorporated into, or invoked through, any human method. Thus the method Ranganathan used to develop the principles on which his classification system is based is finally not describable or teachable or subject to intellectual test. The efficacy of the classification system depends simply on Ranganathan's own flair, on the truth of his intuition. To those lacking faith in his inspiration, the principles seem as likely to be rooted in idiosyncrasy as in metaphysical reality. Moreover, any addition to, or modification of, the basic rules must be contingent on the availability of classificationists who share Ranganathan's power of intuition. The dependence of analyticosynthetic classification on intuition does not destroy the classification's value or usefulness. Ranganathan has demonstrat-
394 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY ed quite convincingly that it is a potentially powerful instrument of reference service. As such, we must treat it as a tool of the same species as any of the techniques used by Western librarians. It is provisional and pragmatic; its value lies not in any direct correspondence with some fundamental reality but in its immediate "helpfulness," as decided by criteria no more authorita- tive than the judgment of the librarian and the patron. Conclusion The same observation may be made of Ranganathan's concept of reference service and (indistinguishably) librarianship in general. The value of his work is by no means negligible, but neither is it fundamental. He does not, as he tries to do, find a way of firmly anchoring the jerry-built structure of librarianship to the bedrock of metaphysical reality, of keeping it constantly attuned to the cosmic plan. As I have noted, he attempts to justify his view of reference service by pointing to the systematic manner of its derivation and, less formally, by establishing its integration into the cosmic pattern, its role in the fulfillment of natural and moral law. Neither argument is compelling. He himself does not rigorously apply the spiral of scientific method to librari- anship or show that such application is possible; and people who do not already share the body of doctrine and imagery characteristic of Hinduism, or its integrationist orientation, are unlikely to listen sympathetically or at- tentively to his moral and spiritual appeals. Ranganathan's justification of his vision is finally no more than a state- ment of faith in intuition. Since intuition is uncontrollable and incommuni- cable, we have no way of systematically exploiting it or of judging its claims. Lacking the assurance that Ranganathan's concept of reference service is valid because of the validity of its source, we must judge it against our own pragmatic common-sense standards of helpfulness. But because Ranganathan's bent was theoretical and focused primarily on the derivation of basic principles, and because he was ever confident of the librarian's flair, he generally paid little attention to specific questions of how his principles are to be followed. The picture he presents of actual reference practice, as a result, is vague and superficial, with little to distinguish it from any general statement of American reference procedure. Ranganathan's treatment of analyticosynthetic classification and its rela- tionship to documentation service is the main exception to his failure to work out the concrete implications of his concepts, and his work in this area is, as I have suggested, a potentially substantial contribution to American refer- ence theory and practice. Such a radically different perception of the function of classification as Ranganathan's may broaden the perspective of American librarians who have been locked by exclusive familiarity with one of the enumerative
REFERENCE SERVICE AND RANGANATHAN 395 schemes into the narrow view that classification is principally a method of arranging books. Ranganathan shows that the potential value of classifica- tion as he conceives it is much more extensive and fundamental than this. He makes it clear that in an analyticosynthetic scheme we possess in theory a powerful and elegant means of forging the scattered aspects of library work into an instrument uniquely suited to the provision of reference service. Such an instrument would enable the librarian to relate query and answer with a precision not at present common because it is sensitive to the nuances of thought that determine the way the ideas of the inquirer and the correspond- ing ideas stored in documents are expressed. While Ranganathan's clearest potential contribution to reference service in American libraries lies in his concept of classification, the perspective from which he writes is not without importance. His attempt to integrate the intel- lectual, moral, and emotional components of reference service and the intel- lectual and moral pressures exerted on it into one multidimensioned cosmic vision was unsuccessful. The effort itself, however-the attempt to root princi- ples and practices of reference service in a cosmic, metaphysical reality-can as least awaken American librarians to the limitations of their own approach to reference service. It may to a degree act as a counterweight to their tenden- cy to focus narrowly and restrict their attention to immediate concerns. It may stimulate them to evaluate and modify reference procedures not simply by referring to the immediate pragmatic and relatively unexamined standard of patron satisfaction but by attempting to place this criterion within the larger context of social value. REFERENCES 1. Rothstein, Samuel. The Devlopment of Reference Services through Academic Traditions, Public Li- brary Pracice, and Special Librarianship. Chicago: Aociation of College and Reference Librar- ies, 1955. 2. Ranganathan, S. R. 7he Five Laws of Library Science. 2d ed. Madras: Madras Library Associ- ation, 1957. 3. Ranganathan, S. R. Prolegomena to Libraty Casificain. 3d ed. Bombay: Asia Publishing House, 1967. 4. Danton, J. Periam. "Plea for a Philosophy of Librarianship." Library Qarteriy 4 (October 1934): 527-51. 5. Edgerton, Franklin. "Interpretation of the Bhagavad Gita." In The Bhagavad Gita, trnslated by Franklin Edgerton. New York: Harper & Row, 1964. 6. Ranganathan, S. R. Preface to Library Sciec. Delhi: University of Delhi, 1948. 7. Ranganathan, S. R. Classficaton and Communication. Delhi: University of Delhi, 1951. 8. Ranganathan, S. R. "Reference Service: The Hub and Foundation of Library Work." In Seminar on Reference Service (1971): Working Paper and Proceedings. Bangalore: Documentation and Training Centre, 1971. 9. Ranganathan, S. R. Reference Sec. 2d ed. London: Asia Publishing House, 1961. 10. Ranganathan, S. R. "Reference Service through Four Centuries." Library Herld 9 (uly and October 1966): 87-93.
396 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 11. Ranganathan, S. R. "Essence of Documentation and Training of Documentalists." Herald of Libraty Science 7 (July 1968): 157-62. 12. Ranganathan, S. R. Documentation. Delhi: Vikas Publishing House, 1973. 13. Coates, E. J. "Classification in Reference Service." Annals of Library Science 1 (September 1954): 152-61. 14. Ranganathan, S. R. Philosophy of Library Classification. Copenhagen: Ejnar Munksgaard, 1951. 15. Ranganathan, S. R. Classification and International Documentation. La Haye: Bureau de la Re- daction, 1948. 16. Ranganathan, S. R. "Hidden Roots of Classification." Infonnation Storage and Retrieval 3 (November-December 1967): 399-410.