BOOKS FOR BLACK CHILDREN: PUBLIC LIBRARY COLLECTIONS IN LOUISVILLE AND NASHVILLE, 1915-19251 Cheryl Knott Malone2 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Volume 70 APRIL 2000 Number 2 In the early twentieth century, both Louisville, Kentucky, and Nashville, Ten- nessee, provided racially segregated public library collections and services. In each case, children became a central focus of the work. Librarians who de- veloped the children's collections in library branches staffed and used exclu- sively by African Americans were limited by the need to educate as well as entertain, the dearth of books published for and about African-American children, and the professional practice of relying on standard selection guides. The children's collections in Louisville's and Nashville's black branch libraries held many of the same books available in other public li- braries, and some of those books included demeaning characterizations and images of African Americans. Branch librarians mediated between the chil- dren and the collections, creating services, such as story hours and reading clubs, that supported interpretive communities of young African American readers. Introduction In the early twentieth century, both Louisville, Kentucky, and Nashville, Tennessee, provided racially segregated public library collections and services [1, pp. 75-106, 159-98]. In each case, children became a cen- 1. I am grateful to Christine Jenkins and the anonymous referees for their helpful comments on the penultimate version of this article. I also appreciate the efforts of staff who assisted me at the Louisville Free Public Library, the Metropolitan Government Archives in Nash- ville, and the Public Library of Nashville and Davidson County. 2. Assistant professor, University of Illinois at Urbana- Champaign, Graduate School of Library and Information Science, 501 East Daniel Street, Champaign, Illinois 61820-6211. Tele- phone 217-333-6112; Fax 217-244-3302; E-mail malone@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu. [Library Quarterly, vol. 70, no. 2, pp. 179-200] © 2000 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-2519/ 2000/ 7002-0001$02.00 179
1 80 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY tral focus of the work conducted at the Western and Eastern Colored Branches in Louisville and at the Negro Public Library in Nashville. But little is known about the book collections available to African American children in the first decades of the twentieth century, when public li- braries in the South began serving black patrons within a system of racial segregation. The children's collections offered at segregated branch libraries are difficult to interpret, and they raise a number of questions about the libraries' roles, the librarians' intentions, and the children's use. Analysis of the books acquired by the public institution of the library can enrich our understanding of children's services as a mechanism for shaping black readers. Kay Vandergrift [2, pp. 125-28] asserts that youthful readers craft their own meanings out of the texts they encounter, as individuals first and as members of social and cultural groups later, often with the medi- ation of a librarian. Stanley Fish [3, pp. 303-21] argues that a text can be interpreted in multiple ways, depending on the socially constructed context within which it is read. A reader construes a text on the basis of the reader's membership in an interpretive community of shared understandings. Yet, libraries are much more than a place where librar- ians gather texts and readers interpret them. As Janice Radway [4, p. 294] has asserted: "If all of us could forget that most familiar of assumptions, the assumption that everyone who uses a library does so to engage in the same activity, that of reading, then we might see that the library and its librarians in fact foster many different kinds of inter- actions with printed artifacts." Racially segregated public libraries were places that provided access to services as well as to collections, and the services tended to influence children's use of the libraries. This article draws on original library records, annual reports, and librarians' writ- ings to begin to reconstruct the complex relationship between African American librarians and young library users. It describes and evaluates the collections librarians developed for black children in Louisville and Nashville. It also discusses the services that encouraged reading as a group activity and as an individual pursuit. Southern Background Louisville and Nashville are significant as exceptions to the standard practice of denying southern blacks library services and collections in the early decades of the twentieth century [5, pp. 32-34; 6, pp. 8-29] . Historians George Wright [7, pp. 66-79, 127-29] and Don Doyle [8, pp. 107-15] have described the race relations context in Louisville and Nashville, respectively. In Louisville, restrictions based on race began
BOOKS FOR BLACK CHILDREN 181 TABLE 1 Illiteracy Percentage Rates for Persons Ten Years Old and Over in Louisville and Nashville, 1910 Native Foreign-Born African White White American Louisville 1.2 9.5 18.7 Nashville 1.6 7.0 22.0 Source.- [9, vol. 2, p. 752; 9, vol. 3, p. 762]. to increase in the 1880s, the city police force refused to hire blacks and consistently abused African American citizens, and in 1914 the city passed an ordinance requiring residential segregation based on race. In Nashville, residential segregation intensified beginning in the 1880s as a white response to an influx of blacks moving to the city from rural areas, and in 1905 the state mandated racial segregation on streetcars. In both cities, most African Americans worked in domestic service or as unskilled laborers. At the same time, both locales offered educational opportunities denied African Americans in many other parts of the South. Louisville had a high school for African Americans and the Ken- tucky Normal and Theological Institute (later renamed State Univer- sity) , which included medical and law schools. Nashville was the site of a high school for African Americans and the home of Fisk University, Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State Normal School (later re- named Tennessee State University) , and Meharry Medical College. Nei- ther city seems to have experienced the post- World War I riots against African Americans that made headlines in Chicago, Washington, D.C., Knoxville, and other locales during the Red Summer of 1919. But de- spite the existence in each city of interracial efforts at peaceful coexis- tence initiated in response to such violence, African Americans in Lou- isville and Nashville in the 1920s increasingly turned to their own businesses and organizations for services and support. The branch libraries staffed and used exclusively by African Ameri- cans were themselves products of the New South city where at least some opportunities were available to blacks as long as they adhered to the code of racial segregation. Mere availability of a library could not overcome the lack of leisure time available to the majority of African Americans or the relatively high illiteracy rates among them, however. According to the 1910 census [9, vol. 2, p. 752; 9, vol. 3, p. 762], Louis- ville's total population numbered 223,928, with about 18 percent being African American. Nashville's population was 110,364, with about 33 percent being African American. In both cities, the illiteracy rates among African Americans were much higher than for whites, as table 1 indicates.
1 82 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY TABLE 2 School Attendance Percentage Rates for Persons Six to Fourteen Years Old, Inclusive, in Louisville and Nashville, 1910 Native Foreign-Born African White White American Louisville 88.8 84.3 86.5 Nashville 81.8 74.0 80.1 Source- [9, vol. 2, p. 752; 9, vol. 3, p. 762]. In Louisville, the illiteracy rate among black residents was 18.7 per- cent, compared to only 1.2 among native-born whites. In Nashville, the illiteracy rate among African Americans was still higher, 22 percent, compared to 1.6 among native whites. But as table 2 shows, school at- tendance by youngsters aged six to fourteen did not vary as widely along racial lines. In Louisville, 86.5 percent of the 4,902 African American children aged six to fourteen attended school, compared to 88.8 per- cent of the native white children. In Nashville, 80.1 percent of the 5,538 black children aged six to fourteen attended school, compared to 81.8 percent of the native white children. Louisville's Recommended Collection In 1902, Andrew Carnegie offered the city of Louisville a building grant totaling $250,000 for a main library and another $200,000 for eight branches. The Louisville Free Public Library (LFPL) opened a branch exclusively for African Americans in 1905, mainly in response to the activism of black school principal Albert Meyzeek and out of a desire to reserve the main library for whites only. In 1908, the new Carnegie building housing the main library opened, and the Western Colored Branch moved from its original rented rooms to a new, separate Carne- gie branch building [10]. By 1912, the Western Colored Branch held about 8,000 books with a circulation of 65,175; children's books ac- counted for 68 percent of circulation [11]. Meyzeek soon began or- ganizing support for a second branch that would be convenient to the smaller, poorer black neighborhood on the east side. The Eastern Col- ored Branch opened a few years later, the last of Louisville's branches built with Carnegie funding. The Western Branch housed more than 13,500 volumes and the Eastern Branch almost 5,000 by 1920. The head of the Western Branch and eventually of the Negro Division that oversaw both branches and all of LFPL's work with African Americans was Thomas Fountain Blue. He was born to freed slaves in Virginia
BOOKS FOR BLACK CHILDREN 183 in 1866 and attended Hampton Institute and Richmond Theological Seminary. Before becoming a librarian, he had worked as a teacher and then as the secretary of the YMCA for African Americans in Louis- ville. After becoming a librarian, Blue spent his Sunday mornings as a guest preacher in various area churches. As a solid member of the Afri- can American elite, Blue worked within the system of segregation to create opportunities otherwise denied African Americans in Louisville. He received his own training in librarianship from the white staff at LFPL. Blue then created an apprenticeship-training program for other African Americans who subsequently went to work in a variety of segre- gated libraries across the South [10]. In charge of children's work was Blue's assistant, Rachel Davis Harris, a former teacher in the Louisville public schools and the wife of E. G. Harris, pastor of the elite and influential Plymouth Congrega- tional Church [7, pp. 130-31, 151-52; 10, pp. 165-67]. Harris [12, 13] knew that many adults faced obstacles, such as a lack of leisure time and uneven reading skills, which prevented or diminished their use of the library. She, therefore, focused her attention on youngsters and saw herself as someone who not only encouraged reading but also created readers. She had a number of strategies. She put together small class- room collections that rotated among the public schools for African Americans throughout the city and, eventually, the county. She estab- lished girls' and boys' reading clubs and a debating society that assem- bled in the Western Colored Branch's meeting room. She organized weekly story hours that publicized and promoted the stories available in the books lining the library shelves, and she supported an annual children's storytelling contest organized by local poet Joseph S. Cotter [14]. She thus was part of the ''matriarchal profession" of librarians Hearne [15] has described who introduced children to folklore, fairy tales, and stories. Harris also fit the pattern of educated, middle-class African American women whom Stephanie Shaw [16, pp. 58-67] has described as employing their knowledge and skills in community devel- opment and in particular on the needs of children. And, as Jessie Car- ney Smith [17] has argued, such efforts, even when conducted in the relative quiet of the public library, also served the cause of civil rights. Over time, Harris and Blue became recognized experts on selecting and building collections for African American readers. Blue and Harris [18] compiled and distributed "A List of Books Selected from Titles in the Western Colored Branch of the Louisville Free Public Library Recommended for First Purchase." The list of 975 titles included 404 juvenile books; the youth collection accounted for about 41 percent of the total. Of the 404 juvenile books, 191 were nonnction and 213 were fiction. Most of the titles were recognized classics: fables from
1 84 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Aesop; Hans Christian Andersen's stories; legends of King Arthur; Grimm's and other fairytales; the Iliad, the Odyssey, and the Aeneid for youngsters; Greek mythology; nursery rhymes; Robin Hood; Pinocchio; and Mother Goose. In the nonfiction area were biographies of Daniel Boone, Davy Crockett, Thomas Edison, Benjamin Franklin, Abraham Lincoln, and George Washington. There were how-to books, such as Handicraft for Handy Boys, How to Amuse Yourself and Others: The American Girl's Handy Book, Things a Boy Should Know about Electricity, Young Folks' Book of Etiquette, How to Dress a Doll, What to Draw and How to Draw It, and the Little Girls' Knitting and Crochet Book. Other nonfiction titles included History of the Old Testament, History of the New Testament, First Book in Physiology, City Government for Young People, First Lessons with Plants, Stories from English History, Foods and Their Uses, and Short Stories from American History. In the juvenile fiction category, Blue and Harris recommended well- known titles by Louisa May Alcott, including Little Women, Little Men, Eight Cousins, Jack and Jill, and Old-Fashioned Girl. From author Joseph A. Altsheler were Apache Gold, Border Watch, Eyes of the Woods, Forest Run- ners, Young Trailers, and Last of the Chiefs. Frances Hodgson Burnett's Editha 's Burglar, Little Lord Fauntleroy, and Little Princess were recom- mended, as were three titles in Margaret Sidney's Five Little Peppers se- ries. Also included were classics such as Robert Louis Stevenson's Trea- sure Island, J. D. Wyss' Swiss Family Robinson, Lewis Carroll's Alice in Wonderland, and Rudyard Kipling's Jungle Book. Librarians who used Blue and Harris' list as it was intended - as a guide to first purchases for a newly established library to serve African Americans - would build a core collection not unlike those at public libraries across the country. Black children would have access to at least some of the same kinds of reading matter available to white children. In Nashville, the collection available at the Negro Public Library on opening day included many of the same children's books available at the white public library. Children's Books in Nashville Although Nashville's Carnegie Library opened to whites in 1904, the city's provision of collections and services for African Americans trailed by a decade [1, pp. 159-79]. After years of behind-the-scenes maneu- vering and direct appeals by African American leaders, the city of Nash- ville in 1916 opened the Negro Public Library as a branch of the Carne- gie Library. White librarian Margaret Kercheval hired black Nashvillian Marian Hadley as the branch librarian on condition that Hadley spend
BOOKS FOR BLACK CHILDREN 185 several weeks in Blue's apprenticeship class at the Western Colored Branch in Louisville. While Hadley was in Louisville in the late autumn of 1915, Kercheval ordered books in preparation for the Negro Li- brary's opening in February 1916. By opening day, she had ordered more than 2,000 volumes, of which about 700 were designated as juve- nile books. Kercheval expected children to make up a significant por- tion of the library's clientele. She classed about 35 percent of the titles accessioned as juvenile fiction or juvenile nonfiction [19]. In the white library in 1913, adult circulation had totaled 80,222, while juvenile cir- culation (not counting that associated with the schoolroom collec- tions) was 31,271, almost 39 percent of the total library circulation. That year the white library purchased 6,933 volumes of fiction and non- fiction for adults compared to 2,348 volumes of juvenile fiction and nonfiction; almost 34 percent of the total volumes added in 1913 were for a juvenile readership [20]. Kercheval apparently surmised that the demand for juvenile literature at the new branch would parallel that at the main library. A comparison of the opening-day collection at Nashville and the first-purchase recommendations from Louisville reveals some overlap. The two lists had thirty-eight juvenile nonfiction titles in common, as table 3 shows. The two lists shared fifty-five titles in the fiction category, as shown in table 4. Since Blue and Harris recommended only 404 juvenile titles for first purchase, while Kercheval ordered about 700 for the opening of Nash- ville's Negro Public Library, it is obvious that Nashville acquired many items not considered essential by the Louisville experts. A closer inspection of two cases where Nashville had many more titles by two particular authors than Blue and Harris recommended for first purchase can give a more complete picture of the opening-day collec- tion available to children in Nashville. The authors in question were Joel Chandler Harris, an editorial writer and columnist for the Atlanta Constitution and a collector of black folklore, and Thomas Nelson Page, a native Virginian, whose fiction and essays glorified the Old South. Kercheval ordered Joel Chandler Harris' Uncle Remus and His Friends: Old Plantation Stories, Songs, and Ballads, with Sketches of Negro Character; Uncle Remus, His Songs and His Sayings; and Nights with Uncle Remus. The library accessioned fifteen additional Harris titles for the youth collection by opening day.3 The emphasis on Harris can be interpreted 3. The other Harris titles were Daddy Jake the Runaway; Free Joe; Kidnapping of President Lincoln; Little Union Scout; Mingo; Mr. Rabbit at Home: A Sequel to Little Mr. Thimblefinger and His Queer Country; On the Plantation; Plantation Pageants; Sister Jane; Story of Aaron; Tales of the Home Folks; Told by Uncle Remus; Uncle Remus and Brer Rabbit; and Uncle Remus and the Little Boys.
TABLE 3 Overlap of Juvenile Nonfiction* in the Nashville Negro Librarys Opening-Day Collection and on the Louisville Free Public Librarys List of First-Purchase Recommendations Author Shortened Title Allen, Charles Fletcher David Crockett Allen, Nellie Burnham Geographical and Industrial Studies: United States Andersen, Hans Christian Fairy Tales Andrews, Jane Stories Mother Nature Told Her Children Bacon, Mary S. Hymns That Every Child Should Know Bass, Florence Lessons for Beginners in Reading Beard, L., and Beard, A. B. Little Folks' Handy Book Brooks, Elbridge S. True Story of Christopher Columbus True Story of Abraham Lincoln True Story of George Washington True Story of Benjamin Franklin Carpenter, Frank How the World Is Clothed How the World Is Fed Carpenter's Geographical Reader: North America Carpenter's Geographical Reader: South America Christy, Sarah R. Pathways in Nature and Literature Dopp, Katharine Elizabeth Early Cave-Men Tree-Dwellers Fox, Florence Cornelia Indian Primer Harris, Joel Chandler Nights with Uncle Remus Uncle Remus, His Songs and His Sayings Hill, Charles T. Fighting a Fire Holbrook, Florence Book of Nature Myths Home, О. В., and Scobey, K. L. Stories of Great Artists Johnson, Clifton Oak-Tree Fairy Book Lamb, Charles and Mary Tales from Shakespeare Lang, Andrew Blue Fairy Book Green Fairy Book Lounsberry, Alice Garden Book for Young People Mabie, Hamilton W. Fairy Tales Every Child Should Know Legends Every Child Should Know Heroes Every Child Should Know Heroines Every Child Should Know Myths Every Child Should Know Scobey, K. L., and Home, О. В. Stories of Great Musicians St. John, Thomas, M. Things a Boy Should Know about Electricity Various authors Arabian Nights Wilson, Lucy L. History Reader for Elementary Schools Source.- [18, 19]. *Folk and fairy tales were categorized as nonfiction in the original sources. 186
TABLE 4 Overlap of Juvenile Fiction in the Nashville Negro Librarys Opening-Day Collection and on the Louisville Free Public Librarys List of First-Purchase Recommendations Author Shortened Title Alcott, Louisa May Eight Cousins Little Men Little Women Old-Fashioned Girl Story of a Bad Boy Aldrich, Thomas Bailey Altsheler, Joseph A. Border Watch Forest Runners: A Story of the Great War Trail in Early Kentucky Andrews, Jane Seven Little Sisters Who Live on the Round Ball That Floats in the Air Story of Little Black Sambo Bannerman, Helen Story of Little Black Mingo Barbour, Ralph H. Tom, Dick, and Harriet New Wizard of Oz Baum, L. Frank Stories of Mother Goose Village Bigham, Madge A. Boy Blue and His Friends Blaisdell, Etta A., and M. F. Master of Strong Hearts, a Story of Ouster's Last Rally Brooks, Elbridge S. Editha's Burglar Burnett, Frances Hodgson Little Lord Fauntleroy Carroll, Lewis Alice's Adventures in Wonderland Coolidge, Susan What Katy Did Brownies ' Primer Cox, Palmer Blue Beard Picture Book Crane, Walter Cinderella 's Picture Book Old Mother Hubbard Picture Book Red Riding Hood 's Picture Book Robinson Crusoe Defoe, Daniel Hans Brinker, or the Silver Skates Dodge, Mary Mapes Wide Awake Girls at College Ellis, Katharine Wide Awake Girls in Winsted Jack among the Indians Grinnell, George B. Jack, the Young Ranchman Overall Boys Grover, Eulalie O. Sunbonnet Babies' Primer Longtail Monkey Helm, Mary In the Reign of Terror Henty, George A. Wulf the Saxon Blue Bonnet's Ranch Party Jacobs, Caroline E. Lady Jane Jamison, Cecilia Viets Little Colonel's House Party Johnston, Annie F. Kipling, Rudyard Just So Stories Bears of Blue River Major, Charles Munroe, Kirk Flamingo Feather Paine, Albert B. Arkansaw Bear Phelps, Elizabeth S. Gypsy Breynton Ruskin, John King of the Golden River Five Little Peppers and How They Grew Sidney, Margaret Five Little Peppers Grown Up Five Little Peppers Midway Solomon Crow's Christmas Pockets Stuart, R. M. H. Gulliver's Travels Swift, Jonathan In the Days of Alfred the Great Tappan, Eva. M Orcutt Girls Vaile, Charlotte M. Sue Orcutt Patty Fairfield Wells, Carolyn Birds' Christmas Carol Wiggin, Rate Douglas Smith Widow O'Callaghan's Boys Zollinger, Guliema Source.- [18, 19]. 187
1 88 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY as evidence that Kercheval consulted standard collection development tools such as the Children's Catalog [21], published by the H. W. Wilson Company. The 1909 edition, subtitled A Guide to the Best Reading for Young People Based on Twenty-Four Selected Library Lists, suggested thir- teen of Harris' works [21, pp. 73-74]. In contrast to both Kercheval and the Children 's Catalog, African American librarians Blue and Harris [18] listed for first purchase for the children's collection only two Un- cle Remus books by Harris. Kercheval drew on her own knowledge and experience of use pat- terns at the white library when placing book orders for the black branch. She knew, for example, how popular Uncle Remus stories were at the main library. In 1909, the children's story hour at the whites- only library presented a series of southern folk tales for six weeks, illus- trated with stereopticon lantern slides of A. B. Frost's drawings from the Uncle Remus books [22, p. 37]. Another story-hour program in 1913 featured Uncle Remus illustrated by lantern slides [20, p. 25]. Harris helped establish what has come to be called the plantation tradi- tion in American literature. The teller of the tales is Uncle Remus, whom Harris describes as "an old negro [sic] who appears to be venera- ble enough to have lived during the period which he describes-who has nothing but pleasant memories of the discipline of slavery" [23, p. xvii] . The listener is a seven-year-old white boy, the son of the woman Uncle Remus refers to as "Miss Sally." The setting is Uncle Remus' cabin, situated in Miss Sally's yard. Uncle Remus recounts what Harris calls "legends of the old plantation," many of which involve Brer Rab- bit's ability to "outfox" Brer Fox. Harris' narrative of Uncle Remus frames Uncle Remus' tales of Brer Rabbit [24, pp. 30-31]. Readers could make of the stories what they would. Whites could take comfort in Harris' portrayal of Uncle Remus as a happy slave con- tent to remain on the plantation after freedom. They could join Harris in ridiculing the dialect of southern African Americans. Harris ren- dered black dialect on the page as a series of misspellings that signified not only the way the spoken words sounded to him but also the way he imagined the words would look on the page if black storytellers wrote them [25, p. 154]. At the same time that Harris preserved and disseminated an important segment of black oral culture, he produced an object of derision that racist whites could interpret as proof of black inferiority [25]. Nevertheless, the stories could appeal to black readers by portraying the victim as victimizer, inverting the power relations of the Jim Crow era. "If the Uncle Remus books perpetuate the proslavery myths of the plantation tradition," Robert Bone [24, p. 20] has written, "they also contain one of the sharpest indictments of the institution in American
BOOKS FOR BLACK CHILDREN 189 literature." Harris himself wrote in his introduction: "The story of the Rabbit and the Fox ... is a fable thoroughly characteristic of the negro [sic]; and it needs no scientific investigation to show why he selects as his hero the weakest and most harmless of all animals, and brings him out victorious in contests with the bear, the wolf, and the fox. It is not virtue that triumphs, but helplessness; it is not malice, but mischie- vousness" [23, p. xiv]. This also suggests why children, black and white, enjoyed the stories. Alison Lurie [26, p. xii] has noted that folklore, and particularly the tales and legends of childhood, can be subversive in a number of ways: "[Folklore] can be used to express whatever is muted, suppressed, or compromised in mainstream culture ... or it may suggest that people we usually despise and overlook have unsuspected powers." Clearly, Uncle Remus' stories of the rabbit outwitting the fox appealed to read- ers who found themselves among the despised and overlooked. Unlike the folklore recounted by Harris, the fiction created by Thomas Nelson Page was unambiguous in its nostalgia for antebellum southern life and culture [27, pp. 35, 39, 53-55]. By the time Nash- ville's Negro Public Library opened, Kercheval had ordered seven Page titles: Among the Camps, or Young People's Stories of the War; A Captured Santa Claus; Polly, A Christmas Recollection; Santa Claus 's Partner; Tommy Trot's Visit to Santa Claus; Two Little Confederates; and Two Prisoners. Al- though Louisville's Blue and Harris did not recommend any of them for first purchase, the 1909 edition of the Children's Catalog listed all but Polly. Settings during the Civil War are featured in Among the Camps, A Captured Santa Claus, and Two Little Confederates, while Two Prisoners features a war widow. Typical of Page's work is his characterization of African Americans in Two Little Confederates [28], a children's novel originally published in 1888 and based on Page's own recollections of being a child in Virginia during the Civil War. Page set the novel on a southern plantation and told the story of war from the perspective of two young brothers. When the two brothers play at war, they are the officers, and their playmates, the slave children, are the rank and file. When real Union soldiers approach, the boys' mother informs the slaves that they may go with the Yankees but that if they do she will never allow them to return. The slaves assure her they have no inten- tion of leaving [28, pp. 49-50]. Page also uses dialect and misspellings to represent his black characters' speech. Despite their themes and settings, Page's books were popular outside the South. For example, Christine Pawley [29, p. 296] found Two Little Confederates to be among the titles preferred by boys using the Osage, Iowa, public library in the 1890s. Harris and Page are obvious choices for analysis because they wrote
1 90 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY about the South and included black characters and tales in their works for children and adults. But many of the authors represented in Louis- ville's and Nashville's collections included incidental black characters in their novels and stories. As Dorothy Broderick [30] has documented, these minor characters usually reflected negative stereotypes rather than realistic portrayals that moved the plot forward. Among the stereo- types Broderick identified were Aunt Chloe, who fears that the Yankees will try to take her from her master, in Thomas Aldrich's The Story of a Bad Boy [30, p. 29]; happy-slave-turned-loyal-servant Mom Beck in Annie Johnston's The Little Colonel [30, p. 61]; the bad-tempered and potentially violent black woman who fascinates the white protagonist of Susan Coolidge's What Katy Did [30, p. 65] ; and the black cook who screams when she sees that her young son's hair has been bleached golden by two white boys in Frances Calhoun's Miss Minerva and William Green Hill [30, p. 109] . In such books, young African American readers chanced upon unflattering images of blacks. In addition to folktales and fiction, the children's collections recom- mended by Louisville and purchased in Nashville included nonfiction works. Here, too, African American readers might discover references to black life and culture. An example appears in Frank Carpenter's [31] series of geographical readers, intended to supplement classroom reading. The 1910 reader on North America included descriptive tours through the tobacco and cotton lands of the South. In the section on Virginia, Carpenter noted that the state had had many plantations worked by slaves, most of whom remained in the South after emancipa- tion. He continued: "Our colored people are, as a rule, good citizens. Hundreds of thousands of them now own their homes and farms, many have learned trades or professions, and a large number have engaged in businesses of various kinds. Nearly all of them send their children to school, and not a few colored boys and girls are going to college" [31, p. 109]. Such a positive report glossed over the Jim Crow restrictions in place throughout the South and their impact on the availability and quality of schooling and the nature of the businesses and trades in which black citizens were engaged. The use of the phrase "our colored people" revealed the writer's condescension and the sense that his audience was white. Still, Carpenter offered a positive depiction of African American accomplishment, denoting not former slaves who happily continued to occupy the plantations but a striving people who owned property and pursued education.4 4. Native Americans and Chinese immigrants did not fare so well in Carpenter's descriptions. After describing the brutal practices of "savage" Indians, Carpenter reassures his readers that such behavior is a thing of the past because of the U.S. government's diligent work
BOOKS FOR BLACK CHILDREN 191 Juvenile Readers Information about the children who used such books in library branches for African Americans is elusive. In the case of Nashville, how- ever, the original register of borrowers [32] is still in existence. An analysis of the first 1,000 individuals to register, covering the period from February 11 to April 27, 1916, reveals that 298 names had the code letter "j" assigned to them, indicating they were juveniles. Judg- ing from their first names, about one-third of these juveniles were male and two-thirds were female [33, p. 6]. Among the 150 children about whom it is possible to find further information, thirty-eight had fathers who were laborers, a common working-class occupation among African Americans in southern cities at that time. Only ten men working as laborers themselves registered to use the library, suggesting that the lack of leisure time interfered with adults' ability to exploit the benefits of libraries. Among the poorest children probably were the twelve who depended on their mothers' incomes as laundresses. Parents pursued a variety of occupations, ranging from porter to janitor, from barber to cook. Also registered were children of the black middle class, including those whose parents owned their own businesses or who worked as ad- ministrators, physicians, and teachers. Among the adults who regis- tered to use the library and whose occupations could be determined, the largest category was that of teacher. The principal and ten teachers from Pearl High School registered, as did principals and teachers from a dozen elementary schools for African American children in Nashville [1, pp. 184-86]. In some cases, the listing of a teacher's name in the register is followed by listings of several juvenile borrowers, indicating that teachers escorted their students to the library to introduce them to its wonders. Historian Leon Litwack [34] asserts that black schoolchildren were exposed to the same moralistic and patriotric textbooks that white chil- dren were, and to the same "sanitized history of Anglo-Saxons and northern Europeans" [34, p. 71]. For Nashville, however, black school- children were exposed to few if any textbooks. In his study of African American life in Nashville, Bobby Lovett [35, p. 141] concluded that the public schools for black children were chronically underfunded and that they offered at most a few arithmetic and geography books. to "civilize" the various tribes [31, pp. 331-32]. In his section on San Francisco, Carpenter noted the presence of "our neighbors from the other side of the Pacific Ocean." Because they only came to work and not to become citizens who would contribute to the country's prosperity, Carpenter asserted, the U.S. government had decided "it was best not to have too many of them" and had implemented laws to keep them from entering the country [31, p. 311].
192 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Consequently, public library collections were important because they could offer supplementary and alternative reading matter for both teachers and students to use. Libraries could include material that both supported and undermined the status quo, depending on authorial intention and reader interpretation. At the same time, however, librari- ans were limited in their choices by three factors: first, the positioning of the librarian as a kind of educator; second, the range of books avail- able for acquisition; and third, a practice of collecting mainstream ma- terials. Public librarians saw themselves as having a role in the education and socialization of young people. According to Harriet Long [36] in her history of library work with children, the leaders who developed children's collections and services in public libraries during the final decade of the nineteenth century and the early years of the twentieth had five main goals: "to make good books available to all children of a community; to train boys and girls to use the adult library with dis- crimination; to reinforce and supplement the class work of the city schools; to cooperate with institutions for civic and social betterment; and first and last to build character and develop literary taste through the medium of books and the influence of the children's librarian" [36, pp. 105-6]. The goals of developing the child's character and instilling a taste for good literature shaped the librarian's ability to offer a wide variety of material. In a book intended to guide parents in selecting proper reading material for their children, librarian Frances Jenkins Olcott [37, pp. 14-17] wrote that bad books focused on adventure without any attention to the difference between good and evil. Vicious books valorized criminals and sensationalized love. Both categories of books stimulated children's imaginations in directions that led away from mo- rality and propriety. Olcott acknowledged that adults would have to intervene to lead children away from the highly popular bad and vi- cious literature to "the books that may forcibly impress on character ideas of justice, truth, honor, loyalty, and heroism" [37, p. 25]. Librari- ans worried about supplying children with fiction, especially the works of popular authors such as Oliver Optic and Horatio Alger, but many of them did, in part because they hoped that children would develop the habit of reading and eventually seek more uplifting literature. Their efforts to censor "at the site of consumption" were linked to their efforts to position themselves as professionals capable of judging the moral and aesthetic qualities of the books they considered for ac- quisition, according to Alison Parker [38, p. 76]. But librarians found it difficult to agree on the definition of a bad book and on specific
BOOKS FOR BLACK CHILDREN 193 titles intended for a youthful audience that should be kept from them [38, pp. 82-87] . To the extent that they denigrated crime novels, rags- to-riches stories, and the series books by authors such as Frank Baum and Edward Stratemeyer, they were part of a much larger group of "children's book people . . . who were certain that they knew what was good in books and good for children" [39, p. 122]. The second limitation affecting library collections resulted from the kinds of books available for acquisition. As Violet Harris [40, pp. 543- 47; 41, pp. 24-25] has shown, authentic depictions of African American characters in children's literature by African American writers did not begin to appear until the 1920s. In the early twentieth century, librari- ans had few positive or accurate portrayals of black life to choose from in any category from fiction to poetry to folklore to history. Conse- quently, some of the titles that met librarians' criteria for inclusion in children's collections featured demeaning descriptions, characteriza- tions, and illustrations of African Americans. And some of those titles ended up in the public libraries for African Americans in Louisville and Nashville. It was impossible during the Jim Crow era to build a collection of children's literature that included only positive or accu- rate images of African Americans, a condition that persisted at least into the late 1960s, when long-time children's librarian Augusta Baker noted that "if we had applied the criteria of today, where we now ex- pect a full picture of Negro life, we wouldn't have had any books" [42, p. 52]. Finally, librarians were limited by their reliance on the recommenda- tions of recognized authorities in such widely consulted guides as the Children's Catalog.5 Using standard selection guides, public librarians acquired familiar children's classics and other works of literary merit so youngsters would learn to appreciate the "best" literature. Librarians discussed the definition of "best" and debated the merits of purchas- ing works by popular authors such as Horatio Alger and George Henty, and individual librarians shaped their local collections according to their own beliefs and tastes [44, pp. 226-31]. It was a given that when the selection process involved children's books, librarians sought to protect children from "questionable books" [45, pp. 224-25]. The definition of "questionable" did not extend to include racist attitudes. The mainstream literature recommended for children's rooms of pub- lic libraries reflected the prejudices and blind spots of the mainstream culture. 5. Wayne Wiegand [43, p. 250] argues that librarians' customary use of standard selection guides results in library collections that tend to include materials approved by the dominant culture and exclude materials deemed outside the dominant culture's interests.
194 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Supportive Services Within the library branches for African Americans, librarians at- tempted to counter the negative attitudes found outside the library and in its stacks by creating a space for children to encounter literature on terms shaped by the black library staff. Children who used public librar- ies talked with librarians and each other about which books to read, joined library-sponsored discussion groups and debating societies, and attended story hours and told stories themselves. In children's minds and hands, books were not inert objects to be returned after their texts were consumed. Instead, they were sites of imagination, interaction, and interpretation. In Louisville, where the American Library Association held its annual meeting in 1917, white children's librarian Bernice Bell [46, pp. 171- 73] presented a paper outlining the work of the two branches for Afri- can Americans. The Western Colored Branch conducted outreach to the city and county schools for black children. The library provided circulating classroom collections selected by grade level. Circulation patterns revealed that African American children borrowed less fiction but more folklore than white children. Among black children, fiction accounted for 39 percent of the total circulation, compared to 48 per- cent in white classroom collections, and folklore 26 percent, compared to 16 percent in white schools. In both cases, nonfiction accounted for 38 percent of total circulation. In 1917, Bell conducted a survey of read- ing interests among fourth and sixth graders. She asked each child to write on a slip of paper the author and title of a favorite book. She found that about 12 percent of the white students but under 3 percent of the black students responded with titles the library did not recom- mend. Of those, white children enjoyed popular series, such as the Motor Boys adventures written by Howard Garis using the pseudonym Clarence Young, while black children indicated a preference for Hora- tio Alger books. Both kinds of responses registered disapproval on the part of Bell. But she noted that the staff of the Western and Eastern Branches had told her it was not necessary to expend a lot of energy trying to steer black children away from "mediocre and pernicious books" because so few of them had access to books outside the library. Bell explained to the overwhelmingly white audience attending the American Library Association's annual meeting in 1917 that black chil- dren's relative lack of familiarity with the mediocre books that 12 per- cent of the white children had indicated they liked was a result of pov- erty. "Colored parents can buy few books," she reported, "and trust without question the librarian's judgment in the selection of juvenile books" [46, p. 172]. The children's lack of access to even cheap books
BOOKS FOR BLACK CHILDREN 195 of the sensational variety gave the librarians a larger measure of con- trol, at least over those children who used the library. Toward the ultimate goal of building character and developing liter- ary taste, librarians urged children to read nonfiction as well as stories. Rachel Harris [12, p. 382] noted that fiction accounted for only about 45 percent of the circulation at the Western Colored Branch in its first five years of operation. Because African American children did not have the habit of reading, she reported, the librarians could guide them toward history, biography, and other nonfiction. Biographies satisfied the same kind of desire that the Horatio Alger books did. Harris wrote: 'That book that will tell them about a boy who, though poor and otherwise handicapped, struggled, overcame and became fa- mous, appeals to them. . . . There are few of our boys and girls who will not gladly take a copy of the life of Abraham Lincoln, or Booker T. Washington and read them over and over, their parents often having them read the same to them also. The self-made element in the lives of these men strikes a responsive chord in the hearts of our young people" [12, p. 382]. The librarians guided children's reading by recommending specific books. They further guided children's reading by organizing book clubs that met in the library. For example, the Boys' Reading Club met weekly at the Western Colored Branch. At the beginning of each meeting, the roll was called and the club required that each respondent provide a summary of the book he had read that week. When a club member gave an especially enthusiastic synopsis, the others would ask for a longer description. The club proved so popular that the library established one for girls and then one for freshmen and sophomores in high school and another for juniors and seniors. Membership en- couraged youngsters to read beyond the texts assigned for their school- work [12, p. 380]. Librarians in Louisville and Nashville also instigated story hours, an innovation that allowed them to highlight the literature of their choice by reading it aloud to audiences of impressionable youngsters. Librari- ans used story hours to promote the fiction and nonfiction they thought capable of stimulating the children's intellectual growth and their character development [47, p. 89] . The story hour became one of the most popular library services offered; at the Western Colored Branch 150 to 180 children attended weekly [12, p. 381]. The story hour had an impact on the individual child, who might hear a story and then borrow the book the story came from. But storytelling also had an impact on the interpretive community of black children. The story hour was a group activity that conveyed multiple meanings. Story hours had become standard offerings for youthful clients in
196 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY public libraries all over the country with the advent of children's collec- tions and services in the decades surrounding the turn of the twentieth century. Yet they carried special value for black children, as Harris' white counterpart at the Louisville Free Public Library noted: "Special entertainments, story hours and clubs mean far more in the life of the colored child than in the life of the average white child. He owns few toys or books; in fact, recreation in any form is almost unknown to the large majority" [46, p. 171]. Conclusion Black librarians who worked at the branches in Louisville and Nashville used oral storytelling to engage youngsters in the literate life. Harris did not invent the library story hour, but she recognized its value: "The majority of our children have never had stories told to them, their par- ents being compelled to work out from home all day, and during the evening they have not the time, though they may have the stories to tell, and the little ones have been deprived of every child's birthright - a generous supply of good stories" [12, p. 381]. Harris [48] told attendees at the National Association of Teachers in Colored Schools in 1915 that the library had instigated the story hours to inform children of the contents of the collections and to pique their interest and encourage them to read the books themselves. After the story hour focused on Tiny Tim or Oliver Twist, for instance, books by Dickens circulated. But the staff soon discovered that the story hours served other purposes as well. The librarians went beyond storybooks and told tales of English history with the result that the library's English history books for children were in high demand. She noted that chil- dren derived both enjoyment and education from the stories they heard and the stories they read. Carefully chosen stories could build character, instilling values and virtues such as obedience, courage, hon- esty, and loyalty. Furthermore, story hours helped children develop their ability to concentrate and put them in a happy frame of mind that made learning possible. And when children participated by telling stories themselves, they increased their vocabulary and honed their ver- bal expression. In Louisville, Joseph S. Cotter, principal of the S. Coleridge-Taylor Colored Public School and a published author, had suggested that the library hold a children's storytelling contest at the end of the school year. The storytelling contests began in 1913. Cotter and others do- nated money for prizes for the children who accurately repeated a tale they had heard at one of the library's story hours held during the
BOOKS FOR BLACK CHILDREN 197 school year. Cotter also had the winners' names engraved on a loving cup on display in the library. To enter, a child had to be a registered borrower in good standing at the library and a student who attended school regularly. The contest rules also required participants to have attended library story hours regularly and to tell a story that had been featured during the past year. The storytelling contest was well received and both the Western and Eastern Colored Branches made it an annual event [46, p. 170]. Among the pieces the participants had heard at the library and re- told at the contest were fairytales such as Matsuyama's Mirror and Golden Heart, folklore explaining "how fear came" and "why the sea is salty," and classics such as John Ruskin's The King of the Golden River and Na- thaniel Hawthorne's "The Great Stone Face." They also told tales from Greek and Roman mythology [49]. In 1916, as the judges mulled their decision regarding the winners, Cotter told an Uncle Remus tale for the crowd gathered in the Western Colored Branch's assembly hall [14]. In 1920, a student chose to retell The Story of Little Black Sambo [50] . Although the extant sources documenting such activities do not reveal the manner in which these tales were presented or received, it is possible to speculate that the context had an impact on the perfor- mance. A tale of Brer Rabbit told by a respected African American educator and writer to a group of African American children presented a different experience than a tale of Brer Rabbit framed by Joel Chan- dler Harris' characterization of a contented Uncle Remus. Similarly, a black librarian or student telling of Little Black Sambo's courage and cleverness created an event emotionally and materially unlike a private reading of the book with its insulting illustrations. The surrounding supportive environment may have lessened the potentially devastating impact of the worst stereotypes, at least on the children who frequented a library reserved for African Americans. Black librarians working in separate libraries had dual, contradictory roles. They worked in buildings intended to keep black children out of white libraries, and they built collections that reflected the racism children encountered in their everyday lives. Librarians working at ra- cially segregated branches in Louisville and Nashville acquired collec- tions similar to those acquired by libraries serving whites. In so doing, they introduced some racist stereotypes and images into the collec- tions. At the same time, they acted on their faith in education and racial uplift by encouraging African American children to read. They created an environment in which children could engage in reading as a social activity involving listening, telling, recommending, and inter- preting. They created a space that encouraged and supported black children's desire to participate in the life of the mind. The extent and
1 98 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY nature of collections and services offered black library users suggest the ways in which library staff conceptualized an institutional interven- tion into the reading practices and choices of children and young adults. REFERENCES 1. Malone, Cheryl Knott. "Accommodating Access: 'Colored' Carnegie Libraries, 1905- 1925." Ph.D. diss., University of Texas at Austin, 1996. 2. Vandergrift, Ray E. "The Child's Meaning-Making in Response to a Literary Text." En- glish Quarterly 22 (1990): 125-40. 3. Fish, Stanley. Is There a Text in This Class? The Authority of Interpretive Communities. Cam- bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1980. 4. Radway, Janice. "Beyond Mary Bailey and Old Maid Librarians: Reimagining Readers and Rethinking Reading." Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 35 (Fall 1994): 275-96. 5. Wilson, Louis R. The Geography of Reading. Chicago: American Library Association and University of Chicago Press, 1938. 6. Gleason, Eliza Atkins. The Southern Negro and the Public Library. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1941. 7. Wright, George C. Life behind a Veil: Blacks in Louisville, Kentucky, 1865-1930. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1985. 8. Doyle, Don H. Nashville in the New South, 1880-1930. Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1985. 9. U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. Thirteenth Census of the United States, 1910: Population. Vols. 2-3. Washington, D.C.: Bureau of the Census. 10. Malone, Cheryl Knott. "Louisville Free Public Library's Racially Segregated Branches, 1905-1935." Register of the Kentucky Historical Society 93 (Spring 1995): 159-79. 11. Louisville Free Public Library, Colored Branch Louisville Free Public Library. Louisville, Ky.: Louisville Free Public Library, 1912. African American Historical Archives, Western Branch, Louisville Free Public Library. 12. Harris, Rachel D. "Work with Children at the Colored Branch of the Louisville Free Public Library." In Library Work with Children, edited by Alice I. Hazeltine, pp. 379-82. White Plains, N.Y.: Wilson, 1917. 13. Harris, Rachel D. "The Advantages of Colored Branch Libraries." Southern Workman 44 (July 1915): 383-91. 14. "Win Much Praise as Story-Tellers." Louisville Herald, May 3, 1996. 15. Hearne, Betsy. "Midwife, Witch, and Woman-Child: Metaphor for a Matriarchal Profes- sion." In Story: From Fireplace to Cyberspace, edited by Betsy Hearne, Janice M. Del Negro, Christine Jenkins, and Deborah Stevenson, pp. 37-51. Champaign: University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science, 1998. 16. Shaw, Stephanie J. What a Woman Ought to Be and to Do: Black Professional Women Workers during the Jim Crow Era. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996. 17. Smith, Jessie Carney. "Black Women, Civil Rights, and Libraries." In Untold Stories: Civil Rights, Libraries, and Black Librarianship, edited by John Mark Tucker, pp. 141-50. Cham- paign: University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science, 1998. 18. Blue, Thomas F., and Harris, Rachel D. "A List of Books Selected from Titles in the Western Colored Branch of the Louisville Free Public Library Recommended for First
BOOKS FOR BLACK CHILDREN 199 Purchase," typescript, ca. 1919. African American Historical Archives, Western Branch, Louisville Free Public Library. 19. Nashville Public Library, Negro Branch. "Accession Book, 1915-27." Nashville Public Library Archives in the Metropolitan Government Archives, Nashville, Tenn. 20. Carnegie Library of Nashville, Twelfth Annual Report of Carnegie Library of Nashville, Tennes- see for the Year Ending December 31st, 1913. Nashville: Carnegie Library of Nashville, 1914. 21. Children's Catalog: A Guide to the Best Reading for Young People Based on Twenty-Four Selected Library Lists. Minneapolis: Wilson, 1909. 22. Carnegie Library of Nashville, Eighth Annual Report of Carnegie Library of Nashville, Tennessee for the Year Ending December 31st, 1909. Nashville: Carnegie Library of Nashville, 1910. 23. Harris, Joel Chandler. Uncle Remus, His Songs, and His Sayings. New York: Appleton, 1895. 24. Bone, Robert. Down Home: A History of Afro-American Short Fiction from Its Beginnings to the End of the Harlem Renaissance. New York: Putnam's, 1975. 25. MacCann, Donnarae. "African American Folktales versus White Supremacist Juvenile Fic- tion." In The All-White World of Children's Books and African American Children's Literature, edited by Osa Osayimwense, pp. 147-59. Trenton, N.J.: Africa World, 1995. 26. Lurie, Alison. Don't Tell the Grown-Ups: Subversive Children's Literature. Boston: Little, Brown, 1990. 27. Gross, Theodore L. Thomas Nelson Page. New York: Twayne, 1967. 28. Page, Thomas Nelson. Two Little Confederates. New York: Scribner's, 1888. 29. Pawley, Christine Jane. "Reading on the Middle Border: The Culture of Print in Osage, Iowa, 1870-1900." Ph.D. diss., University of Wisconsin- Madison, 1996. 30. Broderick, Dorothy M. Image of the Black in Children's Fiction. New York: Bowker, 1973. 31. Carpenter, Frank G. North America. New York: American Book Company, 1910. 32. Nashville Public Library, Negro Branch. "Register of the Negro Public Library." Nashville Room, Ben West Library, Public Library of Nashville and Davidson County. 33. Malone, Cheryl Knott. "Reconstituting the Public Library Users of the Past: An Explora- tion of Nominal Record Linkage Methodology." Journal of Education for Library and Infor- mation Science 39 (Fall 1998): 282-90. 34. Litwack, Leon. Trouble in Mind: Black Southerners in the Age of Jim Crow. New York: Knopf, 1998. 35. Love tt, Bobby L. The African-American History of Nashville, Tennessee, 1780-1930: Elites and Dilemmas. Fayetteville: University of Arkansas Press, 1999. 36. Long, Harriet G. Public Library Service to Children: Foundation and Development. Metuchen, N.J.: Scarecrow, 1969. 37. Olcott, Frances Jenkins. The Children's Reading. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1912. 38. Parker, Alison M. Purifying America: Women, Cultural Reform, and Pro- Censorship Activism, 1873-1933. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1997. 39. MacLeod, Anne Scott. American Childhood: Essays on Children 's Literature of the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries. Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1994. 40. Harris, Violet J. "African -American Children's Literature: The First One Hundred Years." Journal of Negro Education 59 (1990): 543-47. 41. Harris, Violet J. "Children's Literature Depicting Blacks." In Using Multiethnic Literature in the K-8 Classroom, edited by Violet J. Harris, pp. 21-58. Norwood, Mass.: Christopher- Gordon, 1997. 42. Baker, Augusta. "Guidelines for Black Books: An Open Letter to Juvenile Editors." In The Black American in Books for Children: Readings in Racism, edited by Donnarae MacCann and Gloria Woodard, pp. 50-56. Metuchen, N.J.: Scarecrow Press, 1972. 43. Wiegand, Wayne. "Catalog of 'A.L.A.' Library (1893): Origins of a Genre." In For the Good of the Order: Essays in Honor of Edward G. Holley, edited by Delmus E. Williams et al., pp. 237-54. Greenwich, Conn.: JAI Press, 1994.
200 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 44. Carrier, Esther Jane. Fiction in Public Libraries, 1900-1950. Littleton, Colo.: Libraries Un- limited, 1985. 45. Jenkins, Christine. " 'Since So Many of Today's Librarians Are Women . . .': Women and Intellectual Freedom in U.S. Librarianship, 1890-1990." In Reclaiming the American Library Past: Writing the Women In, edited by Suzanne Hildenbrand, pp. 221-49. Norwood, N.J.: Ablex, 1996. 46. Bell, Bernice W. "The Colored Branches of the Louisville Free Public Library." In Papers and Proceedings of the Thirty-Ninth Annual Meeting of the American Library Association Held at Louisville, Kentucky, June 21-27, 1917, pp. 169-73. Chicago: American Library Association, 1917. 47. Du Mont, Rosemary Ruhig. Reform and Reaction: The Big City Public Library in American Life. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1977. 48. Harris, Rachel D. "The Story Hour" (address delivered before the National Association of Teachers in Colored Schools, Cincinnati, Ohio, July 29, 1915). African American His- torical Archives, Western Branch, Louisville Free Public Library. 49. "Third Annual Story Telling Contest at the Western Colored Branch," typescript, April 21, 1915. African American Historical Archives, Western Branch, Louisville Free Public Library. 50. "Story-Telling Contests," 1913-39. African American Historical Archives, Western Branch, Louisville Free Public Library.