Services to Older Adults: Preliminary Findings from Three Maryland Public Libraries David Piper, Serenity Palmer, and Bo Xie College of Information Studies, University of Maryland, Room 4105 Hornbake Bldg, South Wing, College Park, MD 20742. E-mail: dpiper@umd.edu, spalmer@umd.edu, boxie@umd.edu This article reports preliminary findings of an evaluation of the services to older adults at three public libraries in Maryland. Data were collected in spring 2007 through in- terviews with nine library administrators and staff, and surveys with twenty-six older adult patrons at the three libraries. Approximately eight hours of observation were also conducted to gather contextual data to supplement the interview and survey data. The seven guidelines laid out by the American Library Association (1 999) were used to guide the design of data collection instruments and the analysis of data. One key finding is that these libraries offer few programs and services geared to healthy and active older adults, thus leaving much room for improvement in the future. Inter- estingly, the libraries still received high praise from the older adult participants, a phe- nomenon that requires further examination. A number of recommendations are offered to help public libraries to better serve the aging population in their communi- ties. Keywords: Older adults, aging, public libraries, user satisfaction, American Library Association Guidelines Introduction population of the United States is aging rapidly. By 2005, 36.8 million Americans were age 65 and above, a 9.4% increase since 1995 (Administra- tion on Aging, 2006). The number of older adults in the country will continue to rise in the coming years as the Baby Boomers age. It is projected that the pop- ulation of people 65 or older will expand to 40 million in 2010, and reach 55 mil- lion by 2020 - a 36% increase in that de- cade alone (Administration on Aging, 2006). American public libraries have tradi- tionally focused most of their resources on the frail, homebound, and older adults residing in institutions. While these ini- tiatives were well-intentioned, they sometimes came at the expense of the ma- jority of older adults who are active and generally healthy (Kleiman, 1995; Moore, 1985; Robertson, 2001; Van Fleet, 1989). In addition, similar to what Bundy (2005) found among the Austra- lian libraries he studied, many public li- braries in the United States do not have older adult specialists, or services and programs geared to older adults. Part of the challenge is that many public librar- ies, especially smaller and rural libraries, face increasing budgetary problems (Gordon, Gordon, Moore, & Heuertz, 2003; Bill and Melinda Gates Founda- tion, 2004). But even when public librar- ies do offer these services, they are sometimes mixed with programs for other age groups (Van Fleet, 1989). As a result, older adults may not always receive age-specific attention (Van Fleet, 1995). 1 of Education for Library and information Science, Vol. 50, No. 2 - Spring 2009 ISSN: 0748-5786 ©2009 Association for Library and Information Science Education 1 07
1 08 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE In this article, we report the major find- ings of the evaluation of library services to older adults at three public libraries in Maryland. Along the way, we aim to em- phasize that older adults are not a homog- enous user group, but rather have diverse interests, skills and needs, which public libraries need to better address. Finally, we propose potential further research di- rections, and recommendations to help public libraries better meet the needs of older adult patrons, including both those who are homebound or institutionalized and those who are more healthy and active. Though the study described here has limitations with regards to the small sam- ple size and the not-identical data collec- tion instruments used at each library, we believe that the findings are still useful for public libraries nationwide. In partic- ular, library staff could use our methods, findings, and recommendations to evalu- ate and improve their own programs and services to older adults, which could help to attract older adult patrons. Not only do public libraries potentially stand to gain assistance from older adults as volun- teers, advisors, or staff, but these "satis- fied customers" could be strong allies when county governments are deciding what public services should receive more funding (Mates, 2004). Literature Review Previous research has addressed the diverse information needs and interests of the older population (Jones, Morrow, Morris, Rites, & Wekstein, 1992; Moore & Young, 1985; Palmer, 1988; Wicks 2004). Income, transportation, health and healthcare, housing, nutri- tion, homemaker services, employ- ment, consumer needs, legal problems, companionship, and nursing home care are among the most common types of information in which that older adults are generally interested (Moore & Young, 1985). Other researchers have pointed out that these diverse interests have encouraged older adults to use the mass media, including various print sources, radio, and television for find- ing information relating to personal needs and leisure activities (Chatman, 1991; Williamson, 1998). Older adults also rely on interpersonal contacts - es- pecially family and friends - as sources of information (Wicks, 2004; William- son, 1998). In addition to their diverse information needs and interests, older adults them- selves are diverse, including the full range of cultural, ethnic and racial group-affiliations that occur in the larger society as a whole. There are also differ- ent age stages among the older adult pop- ulation. It has been documented that the "young-old" (60-74), "old-old" (75-84), and "oldest-old" (85+) have different skill levels, interests, and at varying stages in life (Kleiman,1995; Turock, 1982; Wicks, 2004). Key among the older adults entering into the "young-old" stage are the Baby Boomers who are chal- lenging earlier stereotypes about what it means to be an older adult through the ways that their interests and capabilities affect how they adjust to retirement age (Dempsey, 2007; Hildreth, 2006; Kleiman, 1995; Moen, 2003). With the onset of the Internet boom of the last decade, more attention has been given to older adults' use-or rather, non-use-of computers for information. While greater numbers of American older adults are using computers, only 35% over 65 use the Internet. In compari- son, 90% of Americans 1 8-29 are going online (Pew Internet & American Life Project, 2008). While age-related changes have contributed to difficulties for older adults trying to use computers (Chaparro et al., 2000; Charness & Holley, 2001; Smith, Shark, & Czaja, 1999), lack of training and technical sup- port is another major factor affecting older adults' use of computers and the
Services to Older Adults: Preliminary Findings from Three Maryland Public Libraries 1 09 Internet (Xie, 2003). Most public librar- ies have not been able to help to address the generational digital divide, mainly because budgetary shortfalls at public li- braries do not allow them to provide com- puter training for older adults (Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, 2004). While some attention has been paid to the generational digital divide, relatively little is known about potential gender dif- ferences in older adults' computer use. An earlier study found that factors such as age and gender can influence attitudes towards technology (Kraus & Hoyer, 1983). Barnett and Adkins (2001) exam- ined the online experiences of older women in Australia and found that even though these older women had different levels of technical skill, each of them was able to find ways to use computers and the Internet to build relationships, and stay mentally active. Another study ex- amined older adults' range of motion in their wrists, and found that older men may have more difficulty using computer input devices than older women (Chaparro et al., 2000). In evaluating public library services to older adults, the American Library As- sociation's Guidelines for Older Adults (American Library Association [ALA], 1 999) can be very useful (there are seven sections in the ALA guidelines, which we will describe in more detail when re- porting the major findings of our study; see the Findings section below). These guidelines were first created in 1 975 and have been updated twice in 1987 and 1 999. The ALA Guidelines are pertinent to services to older adults because they stress three important things: (1) Em- powerment in terms of allowing older adults to have a say in the creation of ser- vices for older adults; (2) A focus on finding ways to help older adults to stay healthy mentally, physically, and so- cially; and (3) The important role of technology in improving the lives of older adults, especially through Internet usage. The Present Study The findings discussed in this article are based on research conducted in a graduate course entitled Older Adults 'In- formation Needs, Behaviors, and Re- sources at the University of Maryland in College Park. A main assignment in the course required teams of three to five stu- dents to select a public library and write a report evaluating its past, current, and planned services to older adults. The teams were each required to use a combi- nation of research methods in order to collect data from library administra- tors/staff and older adult patrons at their chosen library. Three public libraries were studied because they were easily ac- cessible for the members on each team, and were where some of the students pre- viously worked or volunteered. Data col- lection instruments were based on the ALA Guidelines (1999) and question- naires used in an Australian study (Bundy, 2005). Key Research Questions Key research questions included: • What are the past, current and planned public library services and programs for older adults? • What are the main reasons behind these services and programs for older adults? (e.g., library administrators/staff's perceptions of the characteristics, needs and preferences of older adult patrons in their communities, available funding). • What are older adult patrons' perceptions of their libraries' services and programs for people of their age? Research Sites We report here major findings from three public libraries: Library A and Li- brary B, both of which are branch librar- ies of the Prince George's County
1 1 0 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE Memorial Library System (PGCMLS) in Maryland. Library C is a branch library of the Montgomery County Public Li- brary (MCPL) in Maryland. These librar- ies all serve ethnically-diverse populations. Both Library A and Library B have significant African American populations; Library B also has a large Hispanic or Latino population. Mean- while, Library C has a relatively large Asian population. More detailed demo- graphic information about the geo- graphic area of each of these libraries is reported in Table 1 . Staff Interviews Each team of student researchers con- tacted the administration and gained per- mission to conduct interviews with staff, administer survey questionnaires among older adult patrons of the library, and conduct observation of the older adult pa- trons. The student researchers wanted to get input from as many view points as possible, so they conducted interviews with library staffai varying levels of hier- archy, including branch managers, refer- ence librarians, and circulation staff. With the exception of one interview con- ducted over the phone, all interviews with library staff were conducted face-to-face and took place at the respective library. While the questions in the interviews were worded somewhat differently by each team, they all centered around the three key research questions. Older Adult Patron Surveys Older adult patrons' insights were gained through surveys. A total of 26 older adults filled out the survey ques- tionnaires. More detailed information about these older adult participants is shown in Table 2. To select older adult patrons for the surveys, the student researchers ap- proached patrons that "looked" like older adults and, after explaining the purpose of this study, the researchers then asked these patrons if they would be willing to participate in the study. Interested pa- trons were given the consent form (ap- proved by the Institutional Review Board of the University of Maryland) and any Table 1 : Demographic Profile of Areas of the Three Research Sites. Library A Library B Library C U.S. Total Population 50,269 14,733 47,388 281,421,906 Percentage of population age 65 9.4% 10.9% 13.1% 12.4% and over Race/Ethnicity Black or African American 30.8% 41.0% 9.1% 12.3% White 62.6% 39.5% 67.8% 75.1% Hispanic or Latino (of any race) 2.9% 18.1% 11.7% 12.5% Asian 2.9% 4.0% 14.8% 3.6% Median Household Income 76,778 45,355 68,074 41,994 (dollars) Non-English Speakers (at home) 9.1% 26.6% 36.9% 1 7.9% Minimum Education Level (of Ages 25+) High school graduate or higher 94.7% 80.5% 89.1 % 80.4% Bachelor's Degree or higher 43.0% 26.6% 52.9% 24.4% Source: US Census Bureau (2000).
Services to Older Adults: Preliminary Findings from Three Maryland Public Libraries 111 Table 2: Gender and Race/Ethnicity of Older Adult Survey Participants. Library A Library B Library C Total Gender Female 5 5 5 15 Male 6 5 11 Total U 5 10 26 Race/Ethnicity White 9 4 7 20 Black or African American 2 1 3 Asian 3 3 Total 11 5 10 26 questions the patrons had were answered by the researchers. After obtaining the signed consent form, each patron was asked to fill out the questionnaire, which took approximately 15 minutes to com- plete. The student researchers remained close by to assist the older adults with any questions that arose during the process of filling out the questionnaire. All three teams developed question- naires that contained both open- and close-ended questions. The open-ended questions allowed the older adults to an- swer some of the questions in their own words (e.g., "Do you have any thoughts you would like to share about the public library and its services?"). Some of the questions posed to the older adults by the teams required that the older adults also answer questions by way of a Likert Scale. An example of one of these questions is "Based on previous interactions, how likely is it that you will ask the library staff for assistance in the future?" The older adult participants could select one of the following anchors: "very likely," "likely," "neutral," "un- likely," or "very unlikely." Library Observation Another method of data collection was approximately eight hours of observa- tion. Specifically, the researchers wanted to discover which departments or areas of the libraries older adults regularly use. With regards to older adults' behavior, the researchers also attemtped to observe the ways that older adults interact with li- brary staff and other patrons, as well as the layout and accessibility of the libraries. Major Findings The seven sections in the ALA Guide- lines for Older Adults (ALA, 1999) are used to guide the description of the find- ings below, including whether and to what extent each of the libraries ad- dressed issues related to public library services to older adults. 1 . Integrate Older Adult Services into Li- brary's Overall Budget and Service Pro- gram Overall, the three libraries that we studied budgeted little towards older adult programs. None of them em- ployed an older adult specialist, but there is a staff member in charge of co- ordinating older adult services for the whole PGCMLS - which includes Li- braries A and B. This person helps to arrange delivery of library materials to nursing homes and senior centers in Prince Georges County, and a similar arrangement exists for the MCLs, to which Library C belongs. It was dis- covered through staff interviews that
1 1 2 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE none of the libraries had any separate funding for older adult services, or could give a definitive answer as to when such services might be created. One exception was that both Library A and B did maintain a budget for a large-print collection. 2. Provide Older Adult Access to Library Buildings, Materials, Programs and Services All three libraries offered home- bound services and were American Disabilities Act-compliant. Yet, some problems with accessibility were nonetheless apparent. For example, one librarian at Library A had diffi- culty using a wheelchair at the en- trance because the sidewalk ramp was "too steep." Construction at Library C also caused access problems for pa- trons. Nevertheless, many of the older adult participants at Library C de- scribed their enjoyment of the layout and look of the branch itself, which gave the library a welcoming ambi- ance. Other positive aspects of Li- brary C include both a Disability Resource Center and a Special Needs Library housed in the same building. Yet, the researchers at all three branches noticed through observation some minor access issues, such as the need for bolder call numbers on book spines, better lighting, and bookcases that are more easily reached by older adults. 3. Treat All Older Adults with Respect at Every Service Point Each library received high praise from their older adult patrons. At Li- brary A, all older adults surveyed agreed that the reference librarians were friendly and helpful. However, there were some differences in gender by responses at Library A: while the older women participants were most satisfied with the library's cleanli- ness, older men liked its accessibility. Meanwhile, the staff at Library B also received generally high marks from its older adult patrons. In fact, four of the five older adult participants at Library B said that even though their informa- tion needs had changed as they grew older, Library B accommodated them well. One older adult at Library B even went so far as describing public libraries as "one of the greatest public services we have in the U.S." At Li- brary C, eight out of the ten older adult participants said that their experi- ences at this library's information desk were "very helpful," and the re- maining two said they were "some- what helpful." When asked to list three things that they liked best about Library C, the older adults replied that they appreciated the helpful and friendly staff, the beauty and spacious- ness of the library, and its materials. 4. Utilize the Experience and Expertise of Older Adults The ALA guidelines request that li- braries should take actions to ensure that older adults are visible as volun- teers, staff, and on advisory boards at public libraries (ALA, 1999). With re- gards to volunteerism, there are bene- fits for both the library and older adults. For one thing, many older adults are retired and able to assist with activities that may be harder for libraries to accomplish with limited staff. Growing empirical evidence also suggests that "volunteering slows the decline in self-reported health and functioning levels, slows the increase in depression levels, and improves mortality rates" (Lum & Lightfoot, 2005, p. 31). Unfortunately, even though there were some older adult volunteers at all three libraries that we studied, none of these libraries had plans to recruit older adults as staff or to create senior advisory boards. Also, none of these libraries were offering training for staff on how to communi- cate with older adult patrons.
Services to Older Adults: Preliminary Findings from Three Maryland Public Libraries 113 5. Provide and Promote Information and Resources on Aging With regards to information and re- sources on aging, we noticed that while all three libraries had print and online resources pertaining to retire- ment planning and health issues, col- lection development in these areas did not appear to be emphasized. Our pa- tron surveys revealed that older adult participants at all three libraries mostly favored information about en- tertainment and leisure, while fiction, travel, and retirement sources were also popular. Many of these older adults also read magazines and news- papers, and checked-out DVDs/vid- eos. It is noteworthy that Library C has a large Asian user population, and as mentioned earlier (Table 2), three of the older adult survey participants at Library C were of Asian origin. Two of these participants were observed browsing AV materials, and seeking recreational books, while the third, a man who said he was originally from China, came to the library to find ma- terials on "citizenship." 6. Provide Library Services Appropriate to the Needs of Older Adults Neither of the participating branch libraries of the PGCMLS offer many lifelong learning opportunities specif- ically designed for older adults, though there are classes open to all age groups that older adults may attend. For example, staff at Library A indi- cated that book discussions are popu- lar among older adults, and Library B offers free programs such as bilingual tutoring and English conversation clubs for non-English speakers. One especially important program for older adults that none of the three libraries offered was computer in- struction geared for older adults. Staff at Library C said that since there are twenty-two computer terminals lo- cated near the information desk, a li- brarian could assist older adults with technological problems. Meanwhile, although no computer classes were currently being offered at Library B to older adults, librarians at that branch did give individualized sessions to teach patrons how to uses databases available on their computers. Library B staff claimed that about 20% of the patrons using this service were aged 65 or older. A computer class for all age groups had previously been of- fered there, but was discontinued due to low attendance. 7. Collaborate with Community Agencies and Groups Serving Older Adults ALA guidelines require that public li- braries try to collaborate with other or- ganizations that offer senior-oriented services such as community or senior centers, veterans' organizations, or edu- cational institutions in order to foster li- brary/local community involvement and life-long learning initiatives (ALA, 1999). Regarding collaborations, Li- brary C was not found to be partnering with any outside groups, except for a program with the Counselors to Amer- ica's Small Business Association (SCORE). SCORE is a national non-profit association that allows peo- ple to learn from retired business execu- tives about the "formation, growth and success of small business nationwide" (SCORE, n.d.). Library C's role is that of a host facility for people interested in attending the SCORE meetings. The only collaboration found at Library A was that the American Association of Retired Persons (AARP) provides an- nual tax services to older adults at this library. Meanwhile, Library B has been collaborating with other organizations such as developing a classic films pro- gram with a local theater, and allowing the literacy council to meet on its pre- mises, but they were not partnering with groups that specialize in older adults' needs.
1 1 4 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE Discussion As reported above, each library that we studied received high marks from the older adult participants, despite the over- all lack of older adult-oriented services as recommended by the ALA Guidelines (ALA, 1999). This was the case espe- cially with regards to the older adult par- ticipants' attitudes towards library staff. The older adult participants generally felt that reference assistance was friendly and helpful in attaining needed information. The question that these findings lead us to ask was why these older adults were satis- fied, despite the issues our study identi- fied (e.g., each of these libraries had some access difficulties, they offered few, if any, services and programs to ac- tive older adults, did not have older adult specialists/advisory boards, and did not appear to be planning any future services to remedy these issues). One possible an- swer might be that having older adult-re- lated programming may not be as important to older adult patrons as having the friendly, positive atmosphere that a public library can offer. Older adults may simply enjoy having interactions with a library staff member who is friendly, ap- pears knowledgeable, and takes the time to listen to patrons' information requests (Durrance, 1989, 1995). Having the chance to speak casually with a friendly reference librarian may help to meet the social and emotional needs of the older adults, especially those who live alone or far from loved ones. Our older adult par- ticipants may be happy with the sense of "place" that their public library offers to them. This is further illustrated in some of the Library C participants' responses that the renovations at that branch had made their visits even more enjoyable because of a more welcoming ambiance. Another possible answer might be that these older adults were not dissatisfied because they were not aware that these shortcomings existed at their libraries. In other words, it could be a case of not missing what you do not have. Perhaps these older adults expected that few pro- grams and services that took into account diversities of their interest and needs could exist at their library. However, since the three libraries did not appear to aggressively publicize any programs that they do offer, it probably should come as no surprise that the older adults are not aware that their needs could be better ad- dressed. In fact, one respondent at Li- brary B said that she was not aware that the library offered one-to-one instruction on how to use databases to search the Internet. To determine the reasons behind this finding, more systematic examination of older adult patrons is necessary, includ- ing asking older adult patrons how aware they are of services that are (not) offered at their branch. This would allow us to ex- amine whether the general level of satis- faction we found in the older adult participants in this study would be differ- ent if older adult patrons were to become more conscious of the extent to which the services offered by their branch meet the ALA guidelines. Perhaps the general level of satisfaction might be lower if the older adults believed that they were being short-changed with regards to services. On the other hand, responses to a ques- tion that asked older adult patrons to rate the services (e.g., access to older adult-specific materials, computer in- struction, helpful and knowledgeable staff) that they believe are the most im- portant to their needs, might help in un- derstanding what it is that older adults really want from their public libraries. Another issue that deserves attention is whether the ALA guidelines need to be updated. While each of the seven guide- lines were useful for structuring this pro- ject, the fact that few of the three libraries met any of them - yet the older adults were still generally satisfied - points to the possible need to revise the guidelines. Emphasis on guidelines as compared to others may be lacking. For instance, is
Services to Older Adults: Preliminary Findings from Three Maryland Public Libraries 115 Guideline #3 ("Treat all older adults with respect at every service point") more im- portant to a library's success with older adults than #8 ("Utilize the experience and expertise of older adults")? Our find- ings seem to support such an argument, though more systematic examination is necessary before any firm conclusion can be drawn. In addition, future research needs to take into account the potential impact of the time of the day on the sample selec- tion and, consequently, on the research findings. The surveys for this study were conducted during Friday and Saturday afternoons. How different would the findings have been if the surveys were conducted during the evenings, when older adults who work in the daytime visit the library? Could the older adults who visit the library during the mornings and afternoons have more free time to learn about computers than older adults who have to work during the day? These questions deserve further attention. Recommendations Based on our findings, we recommend that public libraries interested in better serving their communities' aging popula- tions: (1) Use computer classes to pro- mote collaboration and lifelong learning; (2) Provide more outreach to older adults; (3) Approach older adults; and (4) Engage minority and foreign-born older adults groups. Use Computer Classes to Promote Collaboration and Lifelong Learning Libraries need to collaborate with other organizations and create programs that promote intergenerational learning and interaction through, for instance, computer training (Xie & Jaeger, 2008). In our study, we found that recently there have been concerns at Library A about teenagers from a nearby high school who come to the library after school and loiter, talk loudly and engage in other disruptive behavior. These concerns have prompted the library to hire a security guard and have a local sheriff patrol the library on weekday afternoons. Perhaps an addi- tional solution would be to develop an intergenerational program in which the teenagers teach the older adults to use computers. This type of intergenerational programming might help to break down stereotypes that younger people have of older adults, while also cementing strong community ties (Friedman, 1997). To en- courage teenagers to participate, the li- braries could work with the schools to award service learning credit. Another option is to try "seniors-only" computer classes. Eventually, older adult graduates from the classes could teach other older adults in a peer-to-peer program, which may help older adults feel more comfortable and welcome (Rosser- Hogben, 2004). Another positive aspect of computer training is that it could help isolated older adults maintain contact with family and friends. For example, e-mail or participa- tion in senior-oriented online discussion groups or chat rooms could help older adults not only find support for the chal- lenges presented by aging, but also form new friendships with age peers who have similar interests. These types of activities can help empower older adults and give them a better sense of control over per- sonal and social lives (Dunst, Trivette, & Lapointe, 1992; McMellon & Schiffman 2002). Provide More Outreach to Older Adults Public libraries need to better publicize any special programs or services to older adults in the surrounding community. Not only should libraries post informa- tion about older adult services within their libraries or on a website, but also in places where older adults are frequently found, like churches, American Legion posts, grocery stores, senior centers, and
1 1 6 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE hospitals. A concerted attempt at out- reach not only helps to publicize events, but it is also a good way to draw nonusers into public libraries (Moore, 1985). Approach Older Adults Another important step that public li- braries can take to ensure older adults' needs are being met is to simply ask them what their needs are. As Jones et al. (1992) suggest, "the first step in any at- tempt to help elderly people cope with the myriad demands of later life is to find out what they perceive their needs to be" (pp. 227-228). Periodic user surveys or a sug- gestion box specifically for older adults to provide feedback and to share their ideas on how the library can better suit their needs are two mechanisms for col- lecting this information. Public libraries need to ask older adults what their needs are, rather than assuming that these needs are self-evident. Engage Minority and Foreign-born Older Adult Groups Public libraries could also benefit from user studies of ethnic minorities in their communities. Minority groups among all older adults in the United States are pro- jected to increase to 8.1 million (just over 20% of the older adult population) in 20 1 0, and then to 1 2.9 million (23.6%) by 2020 (Administration on Aging, 2006). Public libraries should learn about the cultural traditions among ethnic minority groups in order to create programming that celebrates older adults' diverse back- grounds. Public libraries might also cele- brate the cultural diversity of older adults by planning exhibits that celebrate such holidays as Chinese New Year, Cinco de Mayo and Kwanzaa. Older adult volun- teers could be in charge of setting up the materials and telling stories and folktales to children from their native cultures. These culturally-based initiatives may also bring non-users into public libraries. Conclusion Through surveying older adults, inter- viewing staff and observation, this study found that not enough attention was be- ing given to older adults' needs at three Maryland public libraries. Yet, despite the lack of specifically-targeted pro- grams, services and leadership opportu- nities for older adults, the older adult participants expressed general satisfac- tion with their libraries, and specifically, with reference services. While more re- search is needed to understand this as- sessment by older adults, the generally strong approval rating of reference staff and librarians found in our study may suggest that these older adults put more value on a kind and helpful environment than they do on services and programs geared toward older adults. It is also pos- sible that the level of satisfaction is re- lated to these older adults' lack of awareness that their libraries are not of- fering the services and programs geared toward older adults that the ALA guidelines recommend. These aspects should be examined in future research. Based on our findings, we recommend that public libraries should be more proactive in addressing the diverse needs and interests of their older adult patrons, including interaction with foreign-born and minority groups in the libraries' com- munities. Better outreach efforts to publi- cize services may help bring older adults who are currently non-users into the li- brary for lifelong learning and empower- ment. These recommendations can help public libraries to better serve the rapidly aging population in their communities. Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank the re- viewers of an early version of this article that was presented as a juried paper at the Association for Library and Information Science Education 2008 Annual Conference.
Services to Older Adults: Preliminary Findings from Three Maryland Public Libraries 117 References Administration on Aging. (2006). A profile of older Americans. Retrieved December 15, 2007, from http://www.aoa.gov/prof/Statistics/profile/2006/ 2006profile.pdf. American Library Association. (1999). Library ser- vices to older adults guidelines. Retrieved No- vember 21, 2008, from http://www.sos.mo.gov/ library/development/services/seniors/manual/ guidelines.pdf. Barnett, K., & Adkins, B. (2001). Computers: Com- munity for aging women in Australia. Women and Environments, 50/51, 23-25. Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. (2004). Toward equality of access: The role of public libraries in addressing the digital divide. Retrieved January 8, 2008 from http://www.gatesfoundation.org/nr/ Downloads/libraries/uslibraries/reports/ TowardEqualityof Access. pdf. Bundy, A. (2005). Community critical: Australian public libraries serving seniors. Australasian Pub- lic Libraries and Information Services, 18, 158-169. Chaparro, A., Rogers, M., Fernandez, J., Bohan, M., Chois, S.D., & Stumpfhauser, L. (2000). Range of motion of the wrist: Implications for designing computer input devices for the elderly. Disability and Rehabilitation, 22, 633-637. Charness, N., & Holley, P. (2001). Computer inter- face issues for health self-care: Cognitive and per- ceptual constraints. In W.A. Rogers & A.D. Fisk (Eds.), Human factors interventions for the health care of older adults (pp. 239-254). Mahwah: Erlbaum. Chatman, E. A. (1991). Channels to a larger social world: Older women staying in contact with the great society. Library & Information Science Re- search, 13, 281 -300. Dempsey, B. (2007). What boomers want. Library Journal, 752(12), 36-39. Dunst, C. J., Trivette, C. M., & Lapointe, N. (1992). Toward clarification of the meaning and key ele- ments of empowerment. Family Science Review, 5, 111-130. Durrance, J. C. (1989). Reference success: Does the 55% rule tell the whole story? Library Journal, 114(7), 31-36. Durrance, J. C. (1995). Factors that influence refer- ences success: What makes questioners willing to return? The Reference Librarian, 49/50, 243-265. Friedman, B. (1997). The integration of pro-active education into existing educational curricula. Journal of Gerontological Social Work, 15, 103-110. Gordon, A. C, Gordon, M. T, Moore, E., & Heuertz. (2003). The Gates legacy. Library Journal, 128(4), 44^48. Hildreth, S. (2006). Public libraries and baby boom- ers. Public Libraries, 45(6), 6-7. Jones, R.A., Morrow, G.D., Morris, B.R., Rites, J.B., & Wekstein, D.R. (1992). Self perceived informa- tion needs and concerns of elderly persons. Per- ceptual and Motor Skills, 74, 227-238. Kraus, I.K., & Hoyer, W.J. Technology and the older person: Age, sex, and experience as moderators of attitudes toward computers. In P.K. Robinson, J. Lingston, & J.E. Birren (Eds). Aging and Techno- logical Advances (pp. 31-38). New York: Plenum. Kleiman, A. M. (1995). The aging agenda. Library Journal, 120(1), 32-34. Lum, T. Y., & Lightfoot, E. (2005). The effects of vol- unteering on the physical and mental health of older people. Research on Aging, 27, 31-55. Mates, B. (2004). Seniors and computer technology. Library Technology Reports, 40(4), 32-40. McMellon, C.A. & Schiff man , L.G. (2007). Cybersenior empowerment: How some older indi- viduals are taking control of their lives. The Jour- nal of Applied Gerontology, 21(2), 157-176. Moen, P. (2003). Midcourse: Reconfiguring careers and community service for a new life stage. Contemporay Gerontology, 9(3), 87-94. Moore, B.B., & Young, C.C. (1985). Library/infor- mation services and the nation's elderly. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 36(6), 364-368. Pew Internet & American Life Project. (2008). De- mographics of Internet Users. Retrieved October 29, 2008 from http://pewinternet.org/trends/ User_Demo_7.22.08.htm. Palmer, J.L. ( 1 988). Large print books: Public library services to older adults. Educational Gerontology, 74,211-220. Robertson, G. (2001). Seniors: What they want and what they get in Canada's public libraries. Féliciter 47(6). 304-306 Rosser-Hogben, D. M. (2004). Meeting the chal- lenge: An overview of the information needs of ru- ral America. Rural Libraries, 24(1), 25-49. SCORE. Counselors to America 's Small Business. (n.d.) Retrieved July 19, 2008, from http://www. score.org/index.html. Smith, M.W., Sharit, J., &Czaja, S.J. (1999). Aging, motor control, and the performance of computer mouse tasks. Human Factors, 41, 389-396. Turock, B. J. ( 1 982). Serving the older adult: A guide to library programs and information sources. New York, NY: Bowker. U.S. Census Bureau. (2000). Hyattsville city, Mary- land-fact sheet [Data file]. Retrieved October 1, 2008, from American FactFinder database:
1 1 8 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE http://factfinder.census.gov/home/saff/main. html?_lang=en. U.S. Census Bureau (2000). State & county quick facts: Bowie, MD. Retrieved October 1, 2008, from http://quickfacts.census.gov/gfd/states/24/ 2408775.html. U.S. Census Bureau (2004). U.S. counties: General profile: Montgomery, MD. Retrieved September 20, 2008, from http://censtats.census.gov. Van Fleet, C. ( 1 989). Public Library Service to Older Adults: Survey Findings and Implications. Public Libraries, 28 (March/April), 107-113. Van Fleet, C. (1995). Public Libraries, Lifelong Learning, and Older Adults: Background and Recommendations. Retrieved on October 1 , 2008 from http://www.ed. gov/pubs/PLLIConf95/ vanfleet.html. Wicks, D. A. (2004). Older adults and their informa- tion-seeking. Behaviorl and Social Sciences Li- brarian, 22(20), 1-26. Williamson, K. (2004). Discovered by chance: The role of incidental information acquisiton in an ecological model of information use. Library & Information Science Research, 20( 1 ), 23-40. Xie, B. (2003). Older adults, computers, and the Internet: Future directions. Gerontechnology, 2(4), 289-305. Xie, B., & Jaeger, P. T. (2008). Computer training programs for older adults at the public library. Public Libraries, 47(5), 42^9.