It has long been recognized that board books play an important role in the cognitive development of infants and toddlers [1–3]. Interactions with board books help infants learn to recognize familiar objects and to develop basic concepts related to people, animals, possessions, familiar events, and daily routines. Through naming and pointing, board books help build a toddler’s vocabulary and aid in understanding language. Rhymes, rhythms, physical actions like hand clapping, and the exploration of textures build a toddler’s sensory awareness. Young children who are regularly read to exhibit early literate behavior [4]. But can board books do more? It seems likely that exposure to board books about people who look like them, and stories that reflect their world, may contribute to an infant and toddler of color’s developing appreciation of self. Research shows that infants as young as four weeks old enjoy looking at human faces in picture books [5]. As early as six months, infants begin to notice skin differences [6]. By the age of two, children begin to ask questions about differences in skin color [7]. And by the age of three, children notice physical differences such as hair texture and the shape of facial features, which leads them to categorize people and to begin to form attitudes about people of different races and ethnic groups [8–10]. Exposure to multicultural children’s literature has been shown to bolster the self‐esteem and cultural identity of children of color [11, 12]. According to Beverly Tatum [9], by providing children of color with positive cultural images and messages about their race, parents and caregivers not only encourage positive racial identity development but also mitigate the impact of stereotypes. In 1997, however, Kathleen Horning observed that board books that feature people of color are “a rarity in the nearly all‐white world of board books” [2, p. 159]. Jonella Mongo [13] confirmed Horning’s observation, finding that only forty‐eight board books featuring African Americans were published from 1990 through 2002, with the bulk of these being published between 1994 and 1999. By 2002, she could find only one title. This study asks, is this still the case? To answer this question, we conducted a content analysis of board books published in the last five years (2003–8) to determine the representation of people of color. This article discusses the issues underlying the research and presents the methodology and results of our analysis. A Note about Term Selection Racial and ethnic term selection is problematic. As James Banks [14] notes, many of the terms used do not accurately or sensitively describe the ethnic, racial, and cultural realities of the United States today. Since we based our background demographic data on the most recent available United States Census Bureau data, we opted to use their terminology for individual ethnic and racial groups. For this reason, we use the term “Hispanic” instead of “Latino” or another term and “American Indian” instead of “Native American” or another term. Educators, social scientists, and other researchers often refer to groups such as African Americans, Hispanics, Asian Americans, and American Indians as people of color rather than ethnic minorities [14]. Although this term, too, is disputed by some, we chose to use this terminology rather than ethnic minority. To refer to persons of non‐Hispanic, European descent who do not belong to any of the other groups identified in the Census Bureau data, we use the Census Bureau’s term, “white.” America’s Youngest Children The Kids Count census data online, compiled by the Annie E. Casey Foundation, captures the ethnic diversity of today’s young children [15]. Analysis of the 2000 U.S. Census data shows that of the more than 19 million children in the United States who are five years old and under, 33 percent are children of color. Almost 5 percent of those children are multiracial. The diversity of children in the United States is predicted to grow over the next two decades. Census figures show that the number of Hispanic and Asian children younger than age five has grown by double‐digit percentages since 2000; the number of African American children has also grown, although more slowly [16]. In 2005, there were 15.7 million children in immigrant families residing in the United States [17]. These included both children who were born outside the United States and children born in the United States to at least one foreign‐born parent. It is predicted that by 2050, 36 million children in the United States will be descendants of immigrants who arrived after 2005 [18]. Board Books Board books are especially designed for infants and toddlers. Constructed of heavy cardboard stock and covered with a washable, glossy surface so that they can withstand teeth, sticky fingers, and being thrown, they “help babies begin to understand the idea of books” [2, p. 158]. “True” board books—those created with the interests and needs of the youngest in mind—are frequently identification books, “naming books” or books with simple narrative lines [2, 3]. They focus on familiar objects, like a shoe or fire truck; common animals, such as dogs or cats; and everyday routines, such as eating, playing, or sleeping. Often they feature people—other infants and toddlers, mothers, fathers, grandparents, and siblings. The illustrations are simple, uncluttered, and easily identifiable. The text, too, is simple. From single words to brief rhyming text, the best board books match the short attention span and high energy level of infants and toddlers [2, 3]. Board books are among the first books that children are encouraged to “read.” When parents, caregivers, day care providers, and preschool teachers read to infants and toddlers, they engage in a give‐and‐take exchange in which children are encouraged to identify the objects, people, and actions depicted, talk about the emotions being expressed, and notice similarities and differences between themselves and the people depicted in the book. Multiple readings of a book allow for a variety of interactions. The durable format of a board book also makes it possible for children to interact with board books alone. Over time, children learn to recognize their own books, to turn the pages, and to make connections between one book and another [4]. They often develop their favorites, asking parents and caregivers to read them over and over. Development of Self‐Concept and Self‐Esteem in Young Children of Color Two of the major tasks of early childhood are the development of self‐concept and self‐esteem [19]. Self‐concept refers to “the beliefs, attitudes, knowledge, and ideas people have about themselves” [19, p. 356]. Children begin to develop a sense of self during the toddler years. By twenty‐one to twenty‐four months, children can recognize themselves in a mirror and begin to use words such as me, I, and mine as a way of demonstrating and asserting their individuality. When asked to describe themselves, toddlers do so in terms of concrete observable characteristics related to their abilities, activities, and possessions [19]. Self‐esteem involves “an overall evaluation of one’s value or worth as a person” [19, p. 360]. Although toddlers are unable to verbalize their self‐esteem because of cognitive limitations, they do communicate self‐esteem through their actions and behaviors [20]. Research shows that children with high self esteem appear confident, curious, and independent. They are able to adjust to changes and transitions, to tolerate frustration, and to handle conflict [19]. Both self‐concept and self‐esteem develop from the interaction of messages passed on by parents and society. Racial and ethnic prejudices often make it difficult for children of color to develop positive feelings of competency and worth. According to Tatum [9], the impact of racism begins early. When young children are exposed to misinformation about themselves or people who are different from themselves, images are internalized, and assumptions are formed that may go unchallenged for years. Psychologist William Cross [21] has developed a theory of racial identity development that contains five stages: pre‐encounter, encounter, immersion/emersion, internalization, and internalization‐commitment. The first stage is pertinent to this article. In the pre‐encounter stage, children of color absorb many of the beliefs and values of the dominant white culture, including the belief that it is better to be white. Stereotypes, omissions, and distortions, combined with an image of white superiority, play a role in socializing children of color to value the role models, lifestyles, and images of beauty of white culture over those of their own cultural group [9, 21]. Countering the story of white superiority is critical to the positive growth and development of self‐esteem and self‐concept in children of color. Multicultural Children’s Literature: Past and Present One of the key strategies suggested for counteracting the prejudices and stereotypes that can negatively impact a child of color’s developing sense of self‐concept and self‐esteem is to create an environment at home, in day care centers, and in preschools that reflects diversity [9, 22, 23]. Multicultural books, along with multicultural dolls, toys, wall decorations, DVDs, and TV programs, can contribute to the development of positive self esteem by providing children of color with images of themselves. Multicultural books also provide motivation for reading. However, as Rudine Sims Bishop points out, if books are to “provide mirrors … the images they offer ought to be clear and undistorted” [24, p. 27]. Until the 1960s most literature for children contained no characters or settings other than white, mainstream United States culture. The few items that did contain multicultural characters or settings were often inaccurate and insensitive [24]. Nancy Larrick’s groundbreaking study of over 5,000 children’s books published between 1962 and 1964 showed that only 6.6 percent included one or more black characters [25]. Fewer than 1 percent of those books featured contemporary African Americans. In her report, Larrick not only pointed out the hurtful effects this has on black children but also discussed the impact it has on society as a whole when the only images children see are white ones: “There seems to be little chance of developing the humility so urgently needed for world cooperation … as long as children are brought up on gentle doses of racism through their books” [25, p. 63]. Larrick’s study combined with the growing awareness of diversity issues spawned by the civil rights movement led to the beginning of the multicultural publishing movement in youth literature. Almost two decades after Larrick’s study, Rudine Sims Bishop conducted another extensive analysis of youth literature to determine the extent to which the characterization of African Americans in youth literature had changed. Shadow and Substance: Afro‐American Experience in Contemporary Children’s Fiction [26] found that the percentage of books including African Americans had increased but that many of the representations continued to be stereotypical and negative. Bishop identified three main categories of books dealing with African American themes [26]. “Socially conscious” books were those written to help white children understand the experiences of nonwhites or people of color. “Melting‐pot” books depicted whites and nonwhites together without differentiating among them and showed people of color to be no different than whites other than skin color. “Culturally conscious” books were written for African American youth and reflected the uniqueness as well as the universality of the African American experience. Shadow and Substance reinforced the fact that evaluating multicultural literature based on plot, themes, and characters is not enough. Instead, it is critical to consider the cultural and social context of the literature. Today, although attention to multicultural literature continues, the issues identified by Larrick [25] and Bishop [26] remain prominent. The changing demographics of the United States continue to outpace the publication of multicultural titles. According to the Cooperative Children’s Book Center (CCBC), which has been tracking for over a decade the number of books they receive by and about people of color, the number of multicultural titles published each year has remained static [27]. As Gail Willett notes, “when children cannot identify with a book or see their lives celebrated through stories, it may have a negative impact on their self‐image. The message they get is that their lives and their stories are not important” [28, p. 176]. Representations of ethnicity and culture too remain an issue. In evaluating and selecting multicultural literature, issues such as “visual and verbal stereotyping, authenticity and authority, perspective and world view, and underlying ideology” must be considered [29, p. 7]. While the quality of multicultural literature has improved [30], inaccuracies and stereotypes can still be found in children’s books [14]. As Banks [14] notes, books that present inaccurate portrayals of people of color confuse children, reinforce stereotypes, and can even be the source of harmful misconceptions for both children of color and white children. Finding images that reflect the diversity within families of color is also a challenge. It is often difficult, for example, to find children’s books depicting African American children with very dark or very light skin [9]. The same is true for images of Hispanic children. A recent study of Américas and Belpré award‐winning picture books found that the majority of the titles depicted Hispanics as “having brown eyes accompanied by dark hair and skin, commonly referred to as the ‘Latin look’” [31, p. 30]. Images of multiracial or multicultural children are also difficult to find. Tatum [9] and Jamie Naidoo [31] both note the dearth of mixed‐race characters in children’s books, despite the fact that over 6.8 million Americans were counted as more than one race in the 2000 census [15]. Critical Race Theory Critical race theory (CRT) is a multidisciplinary epistemology developed by legal scholars in the 1970s to address the effects of race and racism in the U.S. legal system. Critical race theory “decenters the prominent position of class and socioeconomic status found in critical legal studies and repositions race as the primary lens for exploring legislation and its political enactments” [32, p. 157]. A key goal of critical race theory is to bring about change that will lead to social justice [33]. Critical race theory has been applied within the context of education to examine the role race plays in a number of areas, including curriculum [34], school funding [35], and school discipline policies [36]. Recently critical race theory has been used to examine children’s literature [37–40]. A basic premise of critical race theory is the permanence of race. According to Jonda McNair, racism is “embedded into the fabric of our everyday lives and often appears natural, instead of abnormal, to most Americans” [40, p. 7]. As such, critical race theory scholars argue that racism, defined as “a system of privileges that works to the advantage of Whites and to the detriment of people of color” [40, p. 26], has played and continues to play a dominant role in determining inequity in the United States. Examples of white privilege include being able to walk into an advanced placement English class and see whites well represented, not being routinely followed while shopping, and not being asked to speak for all whites [40, 41]. Another essential element of critical race theory is counter‐storytelling. Counter‐storytelling is defined as “a method of telling a story that aims to cast doubt on the validity of accepted premises or myths, especially ones held by the majority” (42, p. 144). It offers a perspective that both “help[s] us understand what life is like for others, and invite[s] the reader into a new and unfamiliar world” (42, p. 41). Critical race theory scholars believe that by giving voice to the marginalized, counter‐stories validate their life circumstances and serve as powerful ways to challenge and subvert the versions of reality held by the privileged. Interest convergence theory, the final tenet of CRT that will be used in this study, maintains that people of color will not achieve racial advances unless those advances intersect with the economic interests of whites [43]. Derrick Bell [43] argues, for example, that many of the civil rights gains within communities of color have occurred because they converge with the self‐interests of whites and do not require major disruptions to the “normal” way of life for the majority of whites. He offers the Brown v. Board of Education decision as an example. According to Bell, the Brown decision made very little substantive difference in the lives of most whites. However, it led to the closing of schools in black neighborhoods, the dismissal of many African American teachers and administrators, the implementation of practices such as tracking, and the placement of a disproportionate number of African American students in special education classes, all of which make the social gains from Brown questionable. Design of the Study The research questions which guided this study were 1. What percentage of board books published and reviewed in the last five years (2003–8) feature people of color? 2. What individual groups of color are represented and to what extent? 3. For the books which include children of color, what races and ethnicities are the authors/illustrators? When selecting the sample for the study, we limited our study to board books published between 2003 and 2008. Since we were interested in examining the race or ethnicity of the featured characters, we included only board books that contained people. Finally, because librarians and educators most often purchase books that have been reviewed, we included only board books that had been reviewed. We chose content analysis as our methodology for the study. Our unit of analysis was the individual board book. Using Books in Print Online, we identified 218 books that met our criteria—5.5 percent of the total number of board books published and reviewed between 2003 and 2008. We then obtained and examined each book, recording the following information for each: (1) bibliographic information, (2) race or ethnicity of characters, (3) race or ethnicity of authors and illustrators, and (4) whether the book was a picture book reissued as a board book. The race or ethnicity of the author for each title was determined using Gale's Something about the Author (http://www.gale.cengage.com), publishers' Web pages, and authors' personal Web pages. We recognize that this study is not without limitations. In most cases, our determination of the race or ethnicity of the people portrayed was dependent on photographs or illustrations. Determining the race or ethnicity of a person from a photograph or illustration can prove difficult for individuals who have not been acculturated to the group being portrayed. Since we used Books in Print Online to select our sample, the reviewing sources were limited to those indexed in Books in Print Online. Three of the most frequently used standard selection tools for librarians and other adult intermediaries who purchase books for children, School Library Journal, Booklist, and Publisher’s Weekly, are among the forty‐one reviewing sources indexed in Books in Print. At the time the sample was developed, Books in Print Online also indexed Críticas, a monthly review of Spanish‐language adult and children’s titles. Findings Racial and Ethnic Representation of the People Depicted Our analysis revealed that the board books fell into five categories. Table 1 shows the racial/ethnic breakdown for each of these categories. A bibliography of all 218 titles organized by category can be found at http://www.sites.google.com/site/insideboardbooks/home. Looking across the five categories, it is apparent that white infants, toddlers, and adults far outnumbered people of color. One hundred ninety six, or 89.9 percent, of the books contained white characters, including thirteen from the bilingual/Spanish language category, three from the international category, and all of the titles in the category labeled “books that featured people from multiple racial and ethnic groups.” In contrast, only eighty (36.6 percent) of the books in the sample contained people of color, and just twenty‐two (10.1 percent) contained only people of color, including eight from the bilingual/Spanish category and two from the international category.3 Each category is discussed in detail below. Table 1 Racial/Ethnic Groups Represented Category Number % Books in which all of the people were white* 130 59.6 Books that featured only people of color* 12 5.5  African American 11 5.0  Biracial 1 .5 Bilingual/Spanish language 21 9.6  White only 8 4.6  Hispanic only 7 3.2  White, people of color (race/ ethnicity indeterminable) 5 2.3  Native Alaskan 1 .5 Books that featured people from multiple racial and ethnic groups* 50 22.9  White, African American 18 8.2  White, African American, Asian 14 6.4  White, people of color (race/ ethnicity indeterminable) 13 6.0  White, African American, Asian, Hispanic 4 1.8  White, Asian 1 .5 Books in which the characters were international 5 2.3  People of color only 2 .9  White, people of color 3 1.4 Note.—N = 218. * Does not include books that are bilingual/Spanish language or international. 3.  The numbers do not add up to 218 or 100 percent because all of the books in the multiple racial and ethnic category contain both white individuals and people of color. Books in which all of the people were white.— One hundred thirty (59.6 percent) of the titles fell into this category. All of the people depicted in these books were white. There was no multicultural representation; therefore, no further analysis was performed on these books. Books that featured only people of color.— This category was represented by twelve (5.5 percent) books. These books featured only people of color and were not bilingual/Spanish language or international in focus. Of these titles, eleven featured African American infants, toddlers, or families. One of the books, Little Mister, specifically featured a biracial child. It is possible that some of the individuals pictured in the other books were biracial or multiracial. (For publication information for this and other board books mentioned in this article, see the appendix.) In Shades of Black, for example, the photographs showed children with a range of skin and eye colors as well as hair textures. Five of the titles originally appeared in a picture book format. One such title is Welcome Precious. The remaining seven books were originally published as board books. Each of these books presented activities toddlers enjoy from exploring the garden, to playing with pots and pans, to turning somersaults. The language in the books varied from the unremarkable prose of My Little Toolbox to the poetic verse of Whose Toes Are Those? Books that featured people from multiple racial and ethnic groups.— Fifty of the board books (22.9 percent) were not bilingual/Spanish language or international, yet featured people from multiple racial and ethnic groups. All of the books in this category contained at least one white character. In fact, in all except three of these books, the frequency of white representation exceeded that of people of color. In two of the books, Jazzy Jobs and Let’s Play, the numbers were equal. Subway, which shows an African American mother and her daughter riding the subway, featured more people of color. Overall, in this category African American adults and children were the people of color most frequently depicted, followed by Asian American adults and children. We could identify no Alaskan Native, American Indian, or Native Hawaiian children or adults in any of the books in this category. In many of the books it was difficult to determine the race or ethnicity of the people of color because they all shared similar physical features. The only difference was the shade of brown used for their skin. This category as a whole was a mixture of reissued picture books, concept books, renditions of popular nursery rhymes, and didactic tools. Bilingual or Spanish language books.— Twenty‐one (9.6 percent) of the books were bilingual or Spanish language titles. The majority (fourteen) of books in this category were concept books. Household objects, toys, and common animals figured prominently. In most of these books, both the Spanish and English word was used to identify the featured objects. For example, in Let’s Go!/¡Vamos a Vivajar! each double‐page spread showed a form of transportation. The English word was on the left‐hand page; the Spanish word was on the right‐hand page. The characters in these books were secondary, and the majority of them were white. One exception was the series of wordless concept books written by Jill Hartley, who identifies herself as Franco/American/Mexican. All of the people pictured in these books were Hispanic. According to the publisher’s Web site, the photographs were taken in Mexico and depict Mexican objects and cultural artifacts. Seven of the books in this category were storybooks. Two of them were Spanish‐language translations of popular picture books. Me Quieres, Mama is a Spanish translation of the popular Mama, Do You Love Me? and features an Alaska Native child and her mother. ¡Fiesta! is a bilingual book originally published in 1996. Four of the children depicted appear to be Hispanic, while the other two appear to be white. Caillou: La Hora del Baño and Caillou: ¡Eso es Mío are Spanish translations of two of the books in the Caillou series, which chronicles the adventures of a French toddler. The other three storybook titles belong to the Dora the Explorer series. These titles are written primarily in English with the occasional introduction of a Spanish word. Dora and her family are Hispanic. International or global books.— This category was represented by five titles intended to present a global view of childhood. Each of these books used vibrant photographs of children from around the world in their homes and communities to convey this message. In Happy Birthday! and To Be a Kid, the children that represented the United States were white. In Global Babies, there were two photographs from the United States. One pictured a white infant; the other an American Indian infant. The remaining two titles in this category included a counting book set on an unidentified Caribbean Island and a tribute to Gauguin. Racial/Ethnic Representation of the Authors and Illustrators Overall, the authors and illustrators of the board books in the sample were white. Of the books which featured only African American infants, toddlers, and/or families, four of the books were written and illustrated by African American authors and illustrators, five were written and illustrated by white authors and illustrators, and two were written by an African American author and illustrated by an Asian American illustrator. Little Mister, which features a biracial toddler, was written and illustrated by Randy DuBurke, who is African American. Of the seven books that featured only Hispanic children and/or adults, four were by Jill Hartley, a Franco/American/Mexican photographer. None of the other books in the bilingual/Spanish language category appeared to be written or illustrated by a Hispanic author or illustrator. We were only able to determine the authors for two of the three Dora the Explorer books, and both were white. Me Quieres, Mama, the only book to feature an Alaskan Native child and her mother, was written and illustrated by white individuals. As noted earlier, fifty of the books featured characters from multiple ethnic and racial groups. We were able to identify the race or ethnicity of thirty‐three of the authors and thirty of the illustrators. Only one book, The Book of Things That Go Zoom, was illustrated by an African American illustrator. The other authors and illustrators were white. Discussion Clearly, Horning’s [2] assertion is still correct. Despite the increasing ethnic and racial diversity in the United States, board books that feature people of color remain a rarity. Even rarer seems to be the creation of board books by authors and illustrators of color. We will employ two lenses—the typology developed by Bishop [26] in Shadow and Substance and critical race theory—to explore the significance of our findings. Similarities with Bishop’s Typology During our analysis we were struck by the similarities we noticed between our findings and those Bishop discovered in her analysis of picture books representing people of color in 1982 [26]. The majority of the board books in the sample that featured people from multiple racial and ethnic groups appeared to be “melting‐pot books”—books that depicted people of color and whites together without differentiating among them. Often the only difference in the illustrated characters was the hue of their skin. All the other physical attributes remained the same. In these books race is made irrelevant, little more than a matter of skin color. A series by Michelle Sinclair Colman typifies this approach. In Country Babies Wear Plaid, illustrator Nathalie Dion uses the same slender, tall figure to depict mothers of various races. These moms are all taking part in the same activities in the same settings—nothing is different but the color of their skin. As Mongo points out, “just painting the faces of characters brown in a book is not sufficient” [13, p. 29]. It is critical that the illustrations in books reflect realistic features of people of color, portray people of color in believable situations, and be culturally accurate [13, 14, 29]. Although it might be argued that it is difficult in an eight‐page board book to do all of this, or that an illustrator’s style might prohibit this, as Mongo argues, authors and illustrators have a responsibility to provide resources which allow all children as they grow “to understand and to value themselves” [13, p. 32]. Culturally conscious books are defined as books written for African American youth that reflect the uniqueness as well as the universality of the African American experience [29]. We found that this description applied to the eight books in the sample about African Americans that were written by African Americans. Each of these books celebrated African American identity. The illustrations depicted a wide range of skin colors, hair styles, and body types, and showed children as part of loving families. As Bishop explains, “when African American artists illustrate books about African Americans, they create attractive, realistic, recognizably African American children” [44, p. 39]. As stated earlier, a number of these titles originally appeared as picture books. It appears that rather than commissioning well‐established authors and illustrators of color to create “true” board books, many publishing houses mined their backlists for board book reissues. This stands in sharp contrast to the trend in the late 1990s and early 2000s when publishing houses such as Black Butterfly Press and Just Us Books worked with African American authors and illustrators to produce “true” board books that depicted African American families and culture. Those efforts resulted in several board book titles, many of which are no longer in print, that served as models of quality board books for African American infants and toddlers [13]. We expected at least some of the bilingual/Spanish language books to fall into the “culturally conscious” category, that is, to depict the uniqueness as well as the universality of the Hispanic experience. They did not. Instead, the lack of Hispanic characters and cultural representation in the majority of these books seems to suggest that the intended audience for them is primarily children in English‐speaking households who are learning Spanish as a second language. The focus seems to be on learning the language, not on featuring the people or the culture. The only exceptions were the Jill Hartley books, discussed above, and while the publisher’s Web site indicates that the photographs are of Mexican objects, it would probably be more appropriate to say they are objects photographed in Mexico. Many of the items pictured are not representative of Mexican culture—yo‐yos, for example. The lack of books representing the Hispanic experience stands in sharp contrast to current demographic data showing that 22 percent, or roughly 16 million, of all children under the age of eighteen in the United States are Hispanic. Of these 16 million children, 32 percent are under the age of five [45]. The three Dora the Explorer board books are particularly problematic. A number of Latino/a scholars argue that Dora “distorts Latino/a identity, making it seem that there is one singular, authentic Latino/a culture” [45, p. 215]. According to Nicole Guidotti‐Hernández [46], this is politically dangerous because it leads non‐Hispanics to assume that all Hispanics are like Dora and thus are all the same. To address better the needs of Hispanic children, the publishing houses could commission Hispanic authors and illustrators, such as Pat Mora and David Diaz, to create “true” board books that provide multiple mirrors on the Hispanic experience. If nothing else, they could mine their backlists for appropriate picture book titles by Hispanic authors and illustrators to convert into board books. The final category identified by Bishop is the “social conscience” books—books created from an ethnocentric, non‐African American perspective [26]. Many of the books in this category contain stereotypes. Feast for 10 appears to be one of these books. The book features an African American family and begins with the mother and her children shopping for dinner. The family is large—there are five children. Among the items they are buying are “chickens to fry” and “bunches of greens.” While these details may appear innocuous, they help to perpetuate long‐standing stereotypes about African Americans. As Bishop points out, “no matter how innocent the story, and how well‐meaning the author, [a book like this] cannot be divorced from the sociocultural and political environment out of which it grew and the one into which it will be released” [29, p. 9]. Critical Race Theory We believe that white privilege is apparent in the production and publication of board books. Our findings show that the parents of white children can easily purchase board books that feature characters that look like their children, assuring that their children see themselves over and over in books from infancy. Thus, at a very young age, white children receive the message from books that they are important, and according to critical race theory scholars, the message that to be white is better. Parents of children of color, on the other hand, will find it almost impossible to locate board books that show their children’s faces or cultures, especially if their children are Native Alaskan, American Indian, Native Hawaiian, Hispanic, or biracial. Even if parents do find board books that include children of color, the representations may be inauthentic or monolithic. The lack of board books featuring children of color denies these children an important resource for developing a positive self‐concept. Instead, beginning in infancy children of color not only get the message from books that their lives and their stories are not important but also that to be white is better. The fact that all of the books that featured characters from multiple races/ethnic groups included white children and/or adults can be considered another subtle manifestation of racism. There were no books that featured, for example, only African American and Hispanic children together. Each time more than one race or ethnicity was depicted, there were also white characters. And as stated in the findings, in all except three of the fifty books in this category, the number of white individuals outnumbered the number of individuals of color. While it might be argued that this accurately reflects the U.S. population, it can also be argued that this normalizes whiteness. It sends a subtle message that people of color play supporting roles in American society, a stereotype that the Council on Interracial Books for Children warned about in 1979 in their brochure 10 Quick Ways to Analyze Children’s Books for Racism and Sexism [47]. As discussed above, another tenet of critical race theory is counter‐storytelling. The majority of the board books in the sample were written and illustrated by whites, effectively excluding the voices and viewpoints of people of color. There were a few books in the sample which could be interpreted as counter‐stories. Shades of Black, for example, challenges the often‐held misconception that African Americans have similar physical features. In this book Sandra Pinkney uses terms like golden brown and velvety orange to describe the skin color of the children in the photographs. Their hair is described as soft puffs and twisted corkscrews. And their eyes are amber, green, ebony, and blue. Tickle Tickle, Welcome Precious, and Little Mister counter the belief held by many in the majority culture that most African American children grow up lacking positive male adult role models. These three books feature fathers cuddling, tickling, and holding their infants and toddlers. Even the Dora the Explorer books, with their shortcomings, provide a counter story to commonly held beliefs about Hispanic women, which include “obedience to the church, submission to men, and limited participation in public discourse” [46, p. 214]. As Guidotti‐Hernández [46] notes, to the contrary, Dora is an adventurous, independent, geographically mobile, problem solver. One final tenet of critical race theory appears to be at play here—the theory of interest convergence. According to this theory, publishers of board books would be willing to commission authors and illustrators of color to create board books that featured characters of color if the companies believed people of color would purchase them and they would profit financially. As McNair explains, in this scenario, “the intellectual interests of people of color and the economic interests of Whites would converge” [39, p. 28]. Unfortunately, despite evidence to the contrary, a common stereotype persists that people of color do not buy books [13, 39]. According to the Book Industry Study Group, in the year 2000, African Americans spent approximately $365 million in total book expenditures [39, 48]. This same study found that African Americans who were active book buyers prefer to purchase books written by African American authors [39, 48]. A study conducted by the Selig Center for Economic Growth found that Asian American consumers spend dramatically more than the average U.S. household on education, which includes books [49]. McNair [39] notes that In My Family/En Mi Familia, a recipient of the Pura Belpré Award, has sold more than 300,000 copies. These figures indicate that if board books that featured people of color were published and appropriately marketed, it is likely that the publishing industry would find the endeavor to be financially rewarding. Appropriate marketing is key. As McNair [30] points out, African Americans tend to read reviews published in magazines such as Essence, rather than utilize best seller lists published in newspapers like the New York Times. Mongo [13] reiterates this point and adds that because African Americans have difficulty locating books by and about African Americans in many of the mainstream bookstores, they tend to shop in smaller, independent bookstores. The same may be true for other people of color. Thus, a planned effort would be needed on the part of publishing houses to ensure profitability. Conclusion As Walter Dean Myers argues, all children, not just those who belong to the majority culture, have a right to read stories depicting their lives and experiences [50]. Responding to the absence of authors and illustrators of color in book club order forms, McNair states that “there is simply no excuse not to include more titles by African Americans, Asian Americans, Latinos, and Native Americans” [40, p. 29]. This conclusion is no less true of board books, especially given the potential role they play in the development of self‐concept among children of color. Central to critical race theory is the promotion of social justice through change. The primary goal of the Association for Library Services to Children (ALSC) is “to lead the way in forging excellent library service for all children” [51]. In 2006, public libraries in the United States spent more than $1.2 billion on library collections [52]. In 2007 circulation of children’s materials was 34 percent of the total circulation, and attendance at children’s programs totaled 59 million [53]. Public library usage data shows that people of color are just as likely as whites to use public libraries [54]. Perhaps it is time for librarians to use our financial capital and our professional credibility to challenge the large, mainstream publishers to provide board books for children of color. We also need to purchase books from small, independent presses that not only focus on issues of multiculturalism and diversity but are often owned and operated by people of color. The CCBC provides an up‐to‐date list of African American, American Indian, Asian American, and Hispanic presses (see http://www.education.wisc.edu/ccbc/books/pclist.asp). By helping to ensure that infants and toddlers of color see reflections of themselves from a very early age, the library profession will be continuing to play a leadership role in the ongoing fight for equity and equality in American society.