INTERRACIAL CHILDREN'S BOOKS: PROBLEMS AND PROGRESS PAUL CORNELIUS ABSTRACT This article discusses why, in the middle 1960s, many writers, editors, and publishers be- came keenly aware that racial minority groups were very inadequately represented in chil- dren's books and considers some of what has happened in the past five years to redress this situation. The following four aspects of these subjects are treated: (1) factors which created interest in the problem of racial imbalance in children's books, with a brief history of racial atti- tudes in children's books published since the 1890s; (2) conditions which until recently have impeded publication of interracial children's books, descriptions of several recent series publica- tions for teen-agers from minority groups, and reviews of the activities of the Council on Interracial Books; (3) the recent Black Power movement in the world of children's books; and (4) an evaluation of four recent interracial children's trade books. About five and a half years ago, many writers, editors, and publishers became more aware that racial minority groups were very inadequately represented in the world of children's books. This arti- cle discusses the sources of concern that developed in the mid-1960s and some of what has happened in the past five years to redress this racial imbalance. The problem can be illustrated by children's books that were published then. Laurie and Gregg, characters in We Live in the City, a picture book for children published by the Children's Press in 1963, live in Chicago-but the book's illustrations include no black people. A little Golden Book called A Visit to the Zoo contains a detailed il- lustration of a scene at New York's Central Park Zoo-but no dark faces are shown. These are only two exam- ples of a multitude which could be given to show that for a long time children's books published in the United States paid little attention to the one-eighth of the inhabitants of this country who are black. The representation of black people has begun to improve, but even in 1969 only a few interracial children's books were published in comparison with the total number issued. In 1965, Nancy Larrick, in "The All- White World of Children's Books," showed how few books for black and other minority-group children had been published. Describing "the almost com- plete omission of Negroes from books for children" [1, p. 63], she concluded that integration may be the law of the land, but it certainly was not a com- mon feature of children's books. To obtain evidence on the extent of racial bias in children's books, Larrick surveyed the seventy book-publisher members of the Children's Book Coun- cil who published trade books for chil- dren in 1962, 1963, and 1964. She found that the sixty-three publishers who responded to her survey published 5,206 children's trade books during those years, but only 349 books-or 6.7 percent-included one or more black characters. The percentage of books including figures of contemporary American blacks was, in fact, much lower than 6.7 percent, because even this small proportion included blacks in books about such subjects as the 106
INTERRACIAL CHILDREN'S BOOKS 107 Carribean, Africa, the Boston Tea Party, and Jefferson Davis. Her re- search disclosed that, over the three- year period, only forty-four (four-fifths of 1 percent) children's trade books from the sixty-three publishers told a story about blacks in the contemporary United States. Twelve of these forty- four books were simple picture books showing blacks in pictures but omitting them from the text. In many books showing black people, only tanned faces appeared-sometimes in a crowd. The delicate shadings of many of the tanned faces made it difficult to tell whether they were black or sunburned. A number of the publishers surveyed had produced only all-white books dur- ing the three-year period. The four most active publishers of children's books during those years-Doubleday, Frank- lin Watts, Macmillan, and Harper & Row-fared one-third worse than the 6.7 percent average. They put out 866 children's books, but only 4.2 percent of these books had blacks represented in text or illustration. Larrick pointed to improvement made in some interracial children's books published over two decades. She pointed out, for example, that the 1964 winner of the Caldecott Medal Award, compared with the 1946 winner, showed great improvement in the portrayal of black children. The 1946 Caldecott Medal Award was given to The Rooster Crows: A Book of American Rhymes and Jingles, described by Larrick as having "four pages showing Negro chil- dren with great buniony feet, coal black skin, and bulging eyes (in the distance, a dilapidated cabin with a black, gun- toting, barefoot adult). White children in this book are nothing less than cherubic, with dainty little bare feet or well made shoes" [1, p. 65]. In contrast, the 1964 Caldecott Medal Award win- ner, Ezra Jack Keats's The Snowy Day, gives a sympathetic picture of a small black boy, whose mother, however, a huge figure in a gaudy yellow plaid dress, seems to resemble a traditional stereotype of a black woman. She con- cluded that, in spite of improvements, "consciously or unconsciously, most writers and artists have long been fol- lowing the formula for pure white books" [1, p. 84]. One year after the publication of Larrick's article, the treatment of racial minority groups in books for young persons again received considerable at- tention and publicity when the House of Representatives Committee on Edu- cation and Labor, whose chairman was Representative Adam Clayton Powell, held hearings on the treatment of racial minorities in textbooks and library books used in the nation's public schools. The committee tried to obtain information on "( 1) the role of the pub- lishing industry in producing books suitable for the needs of the educa- tionally disadvantaged, low income, and culturally deprived schoolchildren; (2) the treatment of minority groups and their role in American society in the basic reading texts used in all schools; (3) official school and library selection policies; (4) the extent of expenditures under the Elementary and Secondary Education Act and other legislation sup- porting book purchases; and (5) al- leged price-fixing of books by publishers and restriction of school and library purchases to certain editions with ques- tionable binding-cost and durability" [2, p. 2]. Persons from the publishing industry, authors of children's books, educators, school superintendents, other school administrators, and persons hold- ing posts in state educational systems
108 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY were invited to appear before the com- mittee. Many witnesses testified that the treatment of racial minorities in books for young persons was distorted and had contributed greatly to misun- derstanding and distrust between the races. Loretta Barrett, editor of Dou- bleday's Zenith Books, a series of his- tory texts for juveniles, emphasizing the contributions minority groups have made to the making of the United States, said: Zenith Books were developed to aid the teaching of history of the United States, not Negro, Puerto Rican, or WASP history, but U.S. history, the whole picture of the vital contributions various minority groups have made to our Nation in its social, cultural, and political development.... I first became aware of this tremendous need when I was teaching history in a high school in North Philadelphia, whose school population was 99.9 per cent Negro. I found that almost without exception the textbooks from which I was assigned to teach history had either ig- nored or underplayed the role of America's minorities in the building of our nation. [2, pp. 228-29] Lerone Bennett, Jr., author and se- nior editor, Ebony magazine testified about textbooks: The pattern of meaning we call education is not relevant to the lives of black Americans who constitute the majority of the public school pupils in Washington, D.C., and a ma- jority of the elementary school pupils in Chi- cago and other cities. Education does not tell these students who they are and how they got that way. It does not give them an image of their condition. It does not corroborate their reality. They do not live in the country de- scribed in the books. The books, the words, the pictures are about another people who live in another country. [2, p. 215] Dorothy Sterling, the author of chil- dren's books, commented about chil- dren's trade books: Today . . . when we are in the midst of a civil rights revolution, it is difficult to under- stand why so few books about minority groups are appearing. A recent issue of Publishers' Weekly lsts the children's books to be published this fall. From their descriptions, only two or three are about Negroes or Puerto Ricans. [2, p. 276-77] The Larrick article and the House of Representatives hearings in 1966 were two major manifestations of a strong upsurge of interest in the treatment of racial minorities in books for young persons. There were a number of rea- sons for this heightened interest.' First, and perhaps most important, on April 11, 1965, President Johnson signed the $1,307,582,973 Elementary and Sec- ondary Education Act of 1965. When he signed the bill, Johnson said: "By this act we bridge the gap between help- lessness and hope for more than 5 mil- lion educationally deprived children" [3, p. 133]. The act gave financial aid ($1,060,082,973) to schools having large numbers of children from low- income families-many of whom were, of course, from racial minority groups -and provided for the purchase of text- books and library materials ($100 mil- lion) [3, p. 133]. Since the act was passed late in the 1964-65 school year, the first money dispensed under it ar- rived at many schools too late to be used for salaries of new faculty. There- fore, in many instances it was used to purchase textbooks and library books. When schools having many minority- group students tried to purchase inter- racial books with their new money, how- ever, they discovered that much less in- terracial material existed than what they had hoped to find. Increasing pres- sures from these schools in 1965 and T I am indebted to Mr. Dan Lacy, senior vice- president, McGraw-Hill Book Co., for suggesting to me some of the ideas in this and later para- graphs.
INTERRACIAL CHILDREN'S BOOKS 109 1966 for more and better interracial books for young persons helped bring about the upsurge of interest in the treatment of minority groups in such books. There were other reasons for the up- surge of interest. The assassination of President Kennedy, who had defended the cause of blacks and other minority groups, was a great blow to blacks and helped turn the civil rights movement, which through 1963 had been largely nonviolent, into a more radical direc- tion. From 1964 on, polarization in- creased between the radical and moder- ate elements of the civil rights movement and between the black and white races. The great Harlem riot in the summer of 1964 was the first major riot of a number of such which were to occur in northern cities in 1965, 1966, 1967, and 1968. In 1964 and 1965, violent racial conflict also increased in such southern states as Alabama and Mississippi. The Goldwater presidential campaign and the growing Vietnamese conflict in 1964 also helped to divide the country in several ways: black ver- sus white, conservative versus liberal, liberal versus radical, prowar versus antiwar. All these developments helped to bring about what began to look like a crisis in race relations. A result was a reexamination of what, racially speak- ing, was wrong with children's books. Many writers have contributed to this reexamination. Besides Larrick's article, several other studies pointed out that, at a very early age, black chil- dren learn to feel inferior to white chil- dren and white children superior to black children in part because of atti- tudes communicated to them in the books they read. One article said that "the white child's world of fantasy and fairies is a white world. Alice is white in the white wonderland. A main sym- bol is the white rabbit.... Snow White is, of course, white, as are the dwarfs and rescuing prince" [4, p. 2057].2 Ken- neth B. Clark's Prejudice and Your Child [5] showed that white children feel superior to black children, not be- cause of contact with black children, but because they adopt prevailing atti- tudes that white adults hold about black people. The Kerner Report produced evidence that our schools' failure to present a positive picture of black peo- ple to students accounts for much of the hostility which exists between the races [4, p. 2057]. Other studies have concentrated on the long history of distorted racial atti- tudes in children's books published in the United States. An article published in 1967 said that "the representation of the Negro in books for children has been, since the beginning of the century, only a fractured mirror of reality, dis- torting Negro life through stereotypes presented in the mass media" [6, p. 4571]. Since developments in the world of children's books in the middle and late 1960s cannot be fully understood without a knowledge of this history, I shall briefly summarize some of it here. From 1890 to 1910, a spate of senti- mental children's books, commonly called "plantation stories," about black twin children living on southern planta- tions before or after the Civil War were published [6, p. 4572]. The sets of twins in these stories were close relatives of the Gold Dust Twins who used to ap- pear on soap boxes. In these two de- cades, stories were also published about poor but happy (as the stereotype de- manded) black people in the South be- ' Mrs. Johnson is quoting Abraham F. Citron from a paper presented in 1966.
110 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY fore and after the Civil War. They were shown fishing, playing pranks on one another, having fun at the horse races, and taking naps under shady trees. These stories caricatured black people as shiftless, joking, unambitious, and speaking a strange, illiterate dialect [6]. Books written about black children during the first thirty years of the twen- tieth century generally did not reflect the great sociological changes that were taking place in black culture during those years-for example, the drastic changes in the lives of many black peo- ple who migrated from southern rural areas to northern cities [6, p. 4572]. Interracial children's books written dur- ing those years were almost always written by white authors. Black authors who had written or who had ideas for children's books were told by publishers that no market existed for books about black children [6, p. 4573]. In the 1930s, some quality books for black children were published, but they were only a miniscule portion of all the chil- dren's books published. World War II called into question many long-standing attitudes whites held about blacks and blacks about whites [6, p. 4573]. The armed forces were racially segregated, but the home front provided new opportunities for black and white people to get to know each other on a first-hand basis when they worked side by side in industries which had been developed to aid the war effort [7, p. 65]. The new contact on the assembly lines and elsewhere on the home front provided members of both races with a new experiential basis for challenging and ultimately modify- ing traditional racial stereotypes. Long- standing attitudes about blacks and other minority groups were also chal- lenged when Americans found them- selves confronted by the racist doctrines and the military might of Nazi Ger- many. The war against the Nazis and the issues it raised may, in fact, have been a major catalyst of the civil rights movement of the 1950s and 1960s and, more generally, of the great changes in racial attitudes which have occurred in this country since World War II. In- terracial children's books published after the war reflected a number of new attitudes about race, frequently hav- ing new themes, stories, and illustra- tions which more accurately represented black childhood experiences than books published earlier. The Supreme Court decision in 1954 that segregation in public schools was unconstitutional exercised a major in- fluence on the publishing of children's books. This decision had of course far- reaching effects on many aspects of American life, and some children's books published in the 1950s reflected changes brought about by this deci- sion. They were concerned with segre- gation, integration, and making one's way in a new, sometimes hostile school environment among students who were members of another race [8]. Two black librarians who were especially active in the interracial children's book field in the 1950s, as well as in the two pre- vious decades, were Augusta Baker, now coordinator, Office of Children's Services, the New York Public Library, and Charlemae Rollins, now retired children's librarian, the Chicago Public Library. The bibliographies of inter- racial children's books they published in the 1950s and earlier drew attention to the best such books already pub- lished, but they also showed a need for many more books [6, p. 4575]. Themes, types of stories, and illus- trations continued to improve after
INTERRACIAL CHILDREN'S BOOKS 111 1960 as children's books by black au- thors and illustrators began to receive considerable attention. Blacks some- times became consultants and editors, and interracial children's books were more frequently concerned with real life situations of black children. Still, in spite of the progress, as Larrick showed in 1965, the number of inter- racial books for black children was still pitiably small. Black authors, illustra- tors, and editors continued furthermore to be few, and most interracial chil- dren's books were still written, illus- trated, and edited by whites. Until recently, books about black children were poor business risks. Pres- sure from the South and other parts of the country frequently kept book clubs from selecting books about black chil- dren for their members. Sterling tells the following story about sales experi- ences with interracial children's books in the 1950s: The same year that Mary Jane appeared (1959) [her book about a black girl's first year in a school with many white students], an acquaintance wrote a far less controversial book about a Negro child visiting a white fam- ily for a Fresh Air Fund vacation. Her book was already in galleys when the sales depart- ment heard about it. They were so dead set against it that she was obliged to revise it, transforming the Negro youngster into a white one. At still another publishing house, an edi- tor reports that during the '50's she brought out three books in which Negroes appeared. "The books won favorable comment," she said, "but the effect on sales was negative. Cus- tomers returned not only these titles but all stock from our company. This meant an ap- preciable loss and tempered attitudes toward further use of Negro children in illustrations and text." [9, p. 169] Another passage from the same article shows that in the 1950s the North as well as the South could give a difficult time to salesmen who tried to sell inter- racial children's books: "At a cocktail party that fall [1959] . . . a salesman told me that although he liked some of my books he wouldn't dare enter a bookstore in Chicago with a book that had a picture of a Negro on its jacket" [9, p. 169]. Salesman's pressures on publishers were not, however, the only obstacles in the way of publishing books for black children. Another major difficulty per- sisting to this day is that black authors and editors, who logically should be the major persons producing and distribut- ing books about young black persons as well as encouraging their production and distribution, are still very few. In- deed, some persons in the interracial children's book field say that even now the American publishing industry is doing little to cultivate black authors or put black editors into positions of greater responsibility. The small num- ber of black editors in positions of re- sponsibility at American publishing houses is emphasized by many who have been concerned with the problem. Bradford Chambers, editor of Inter- racial Books for Children, the news- paper of the Council on Interracial Books for Children, has told me that he knows of only one black editor who is editing children's books-a woman on the intermediate level who is editing an ethnic series for Scholastic Book Ser- vice. Leigh Dean, of the Juvenile Book Division of the McGraw-Hill Book Company, has told me that in the fall of 1968 there were approximately 3,000 trade editors in the New York City publishing industry, of whom three were black. A recent Time magazine situation report on black authors and editors said: There are only four top-level black editors in New York trade publishing, probably fewer
112 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY than 30 in the whole book-publishing world. (In addition, there are at least 15 small opera- tions run completely by blacks.) Most books on or by blacks being presented today are re- prints. This is especially true of black studies texts, which are mainly reissues of earlier works. Of the new titles, many are by white scholars who have moved into the new market. In the whole book industry (22,000 new titles last year), it is estimated that only 35 new books were actually by blacks. Trade houses report that from 0% to 8% of their books are now by or about blacks. But one major (and typical) New York publisher, not- ing that its output of black books has increased "sharply," reckoned the actual score at two new titles in 1969; up to six in 1970. These figures are not solely the result of discrimination. The market for books among blacks is still small. The educational market has been fed mainly with reprints, and the popular market, largely white, remains satisfied with a handful of bestsellers. [10] The market for books for young black persons may still be small, but it has grown considerably in recent years. The market has grown because children and teachers from racial mi- nority groups, who now frequently re- quest interracial educational materials, have increased considerably in num- bers in recent years. School decentrali- zation programs, such as those carried out in New York City public schools in the past few years, have also stimu- lated the need for new, improved inter- racial materials prepared by persons from several racial groups. These de- velopments call for an increase in the number of black editors and authors. Why are there not more black au- thors and editors? Some persons in the interracial book field say in answer to this question that only a few blacks currently receive the good education necessary for the writing and editing of children's books. Unquestionably there is much truth to this view. Whitney Young, as director of the Urban League, must have had it in mind when he pro- posed a "more than equal" program in which employers would seek out and train for professional jobs blacks who had the innate ability for such employ- ment but lacked the skills which should have been provided by a good educa- tion. Young has said that "for more than three hundred years the white American has received preferential treatment over the Negro," and that "what we ask now is that there be a deliberate and massive attempt to in- clude the Negro citizen in the main- stream of American life" [9, p. 174]. Sterling has asked editors "to make a deliberate and massive effort to seek out Negro writers and manuscripts with Negro themes" [9, p. 174]. Chambers has another explanation of the shortage. He charges that the chil- dren's book publishing industry does not think that its best interests would be served by a more energetic effort to find black authors and editors. There- fore, it is making no such effort to re- cruit them. He calls this industry a last bastion of the white racist fantasies of the American middle class, for the most part unwilling to change the stereo- typed attitudes about race and society traditionally put into children's books and which most white parents want to find in them. The children's book pub- lishing industry's loyalty to the white middle class, he says, is largely based on financial considerations. It realizes that most white parents who buy chil- dren's books are subconsciously com- mitted to myths of white superiority and black inferiority and would prob- ably stop buying children's books if the industry made wide-ranging changes in its racial attitudes. Frances Keene, former editor-in- chief for juvenile trade books, the Mac-
INTERRACIAL CHILDREN'S BOOKS 113 millan Company, has also blamed the publishing industry for not making enough effort to provide more and bet- ter interracial materials for young peo- ple: Despite the changing picture in schools, li- braries, and school libraries, the juvenile editor meets continued reluctance on the part of the publishing management to embark on a con- sistent policy of providing interracial appeal in books for boys and girls. Resistance con- tinues, although the need is attested to by school and city librarians alike. For example, in such major cities as Baltimore, Detroit, and New York, librarians report a great demand for books in two categories: (1) teen-age in- terracial fiction that deals honestly with con- temporary problems; (2) career stories that give a true picture of job training and of job opportunities for young people of different ori- gins. These needs are corroborated by city li- brarians in places where ethnic pressures are less mandatory and acute, such as Concord, N.H., and Hartford and Clinton, Conn. An initial print order of 15,000 copies for books in either of these two categories could easily be sold, according to an estimate recently made by an informal group of juvenile edi- tors. However, the purchasing committees of major publishing houses are slow to respond to this manifest reality of the current market. Nor have they by any means fully met the demand for picture books with interracial il- lustrations and for fiction aimed at the middle age-group in which characters from different ethnic groups are shown in real situations. To implement the editor's awareness of the demand for integrated books and for books that will interest children of different economic levels, support is needed from reviewers, li- brarians, teachers and social workers. [11, p. 7]5 INTERRACIAL SERIES Despite such problems, many pub- lishing houses have put out in recent years increasing numbers of interracial books for young people-some of high quality. Several series publications in particular have been successful in in- structing teen-agers from minority groups, and other series currently be- ginning publication also stand a good chance to be successful. The following discussion is only a sampling of some of the more outstanding recent series and is not a full description of all the work being done in this field. One of the first series of books for young persons of minority groups was the Zenith Books series, begun by Dou- bleday in 1965. This series, which is concerned with the history and biog- raphies of blacks and other minority groups from colonial times to 1941, was begun by Charles Harris, a black edi- tor, to provide interesting educational reading material for young persons of minority groups. Each Zenith Book is written by a black or other minority- group historian in collaboration with a children's book author. The books, published in inexpensive paperback form, are written on a sixth-grade read- ing level, but their content parallels many sixth- to twelfth-grade social studies and English courses. The pub- lisher says that Zenith Books are "de- signed to encourage the slow, the bored, the inhibited student toward greater participation in class. At the same time, their use will give all students a more balanced picture of American growth and development based on the achievements of America's minority citizens" [12]. Some of the books pub- lished so far in this very successful series are: Agnes McCarthy and Law- rence Reddick, Worth Fighting For (1965), a history of the Negro in the United States during the Civil War and Reconstruction; Carol Drisko and Ed- gar Toppin, The Unfinished March (1967), the story of the Negro in the United States, Reconstruction to World 'For further consideration of this subject, see the editorial in the Autumn 1970 issue of Inter- racial Books for Children, 3:2.
114 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY War I; Daniel Chu and Elliot Skinner, A Glorious Age in Africa (1965), the story of three great African empires; Daniel Chu and Samuel Chu, Passage to the Golden Gate (1967), a history of the Chinese in America to 1910; Basil Davidson, revised and edited by Haskel Frankel, A Guide to African History (1965), a general survey of the African past from earliest times to the present; and Lavina Dobler and Edgar Toppin, Pioneers and Patriots (1965), the lives of six Negroes of the Revolutionary era. Of the McGraw-Hill Book Com- pany's many kinds of interracial pub- lications, only the two new series for young black persons, the Black Legacy Series and the Of Black America Series will be mentioned here. The new Black Legacy Series, the publisher's statement of purpose says, is "an open end series of biographies which will tell the stories of Afro-American men and women who have made significant contributions to American culture. The biographies are written in a lively, entertaining style, with an easy-to-read vocabulary. De- signed to support school social studies curricula, they serve as an excellent in- troduction to young readers of the Ne- groes in all walks of life whose efforts have added to the richness of our na- tional heritage" [13, p. 81. Books cur- rently available in this series are: Lewis Fenderson, Daniel Hale Williams, Open Heart Doctor (not yet published), the story of the black doctor who was the first doctor to perform open-heart sur- gery; Claude Lewis, Banneker, the Man Who Saved Washington (1970), about the black mathematician and in- ventor, who corresponded wvith Thomas Jefferson, advocating rights for his people, and who was chosen to be a member of Washington's committee to plan the capital city; Lewis Fenderson, Thurgood Marshall, Fighter for Jus- tice (1969), the story of the son of a Baltimore postal worker who became America's first black justice on the Supreme Court; and Simeon Booker, Suzy King Taylor, Civil War Nurse ( 1969), the story of a woman who grew up as a slave in pre-Civil War America and then, despite innumerable obstacles, became a nurse, working under Clara Barton, and who also served as a teach- er to the first Negro regiment during the Civil War. McGraw-Hill's Of Black America se- ries is composed of six books based on research for the CBS-TV Xerox pro- duction, "Of Black America," which was broadcast during the summer of 1968. The publisher's statement of purpose says that "these six books pro- vide a thorough examination of several aspects of the Black man's condition in America, both past and present" [13, p. 22]. This series includes two volumes by Robert Liston called Slavery in America (vol. 1, 1970; vol. 2, to be published in 1971 ), a history of slavery and its heritage; Robert Liston, Black History (not yet published), a book about the contributions black people have made to American civilization; Otto Lindenmeyer, Black and Brave Soldiers of the U.S.A. (1970), the story of the part played by black soldiers in U.S. wars from the revolutionary war to the Vietnam war; Lloyd Weaver, In Search of a Past (not yet published), the story of the black cultural heritage traced to its roots in Africa [13, p. 22]. Three other outstanding paperback series which began publication several years ago, the Macmillan Gateway En- glish Program, the Scope Books of Har- per and Row, and the Impact Series of of Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, are about black people and other minority groups and, like Zenith Books, are
INTERRACIAL CHILDREN'S BOOKS 115 aimed at students who are bored, in- hibited, or deficient in reading skills. Two very new series being published especially for black teen-agers are Rich- ard W. Baron's Black Poets Series and Black Autobiographies Series [ 14]. Baron began publishing its Black Poets Series on June 24, 1970, with Some Changes by June Jordan, author of Who Look at Me. Future volumes in this series will include Larry Neal's Midnight Special, and Ain't No Ambu- lances for No Nigguhs Tonight by Stan- ley Crouch. Publishers' Weekly says that the Black Autobiographies series "comprises adaptations, particularly for ghetto high-school students, of firsthand accounts of the lives of important black men and women often left out of the history books [14]. On May 21, 1970, the first two books in the Black Auto- biographies series were published: In Chains to Louisiana: Solomon Nor- thrup's Story, adapted by Michael Knight (Northrup was a free man in New York State who was kidnapped into twelve years of slavery in Louisi- ana), and The Slave Who Bought His Freedom: Equiano's Story, adapted by Karen Kennerly (Equiano was an eighteenth-century Ibo; his book pro- vides a vivid description of a slave crossing). Future Black Autobiogra- phies will include the stories of Jim Beckwourth, the black frontiersman; Henry Ossian Flipper, the first black graduate of West Point; and William Wells Brown, who was born a slave and became an abolitionist, novelist, and historian. ENCOURAGING WRITERS AND ILLUSTRATORS The publication of a trade book for children cannot usually be brought about by fiat of a publisher, as may be the case with textbooks and litera- ture anthologies. A good children's book is often produced by the teamwork of a writer and an illustrator who enjoy working together and whose work har- monizes in some elusive way. Such "marriages" cannot be willed into be- ing simply because a publisher wants to put out a new children's book. Good writers and illustrators of chil- dren's books are hard to come by, and good writer-illustrator teams are espe- cially rare, but black writers, illustra- tors, and writer-illustrator teams are rarer still. A major reason why a pro- portionate number of black children do not grow up to be writers of children's books is that they are raised in unfor- tunate economic, social, and cultural circumstances which stifle their literary ability. Parents and teachers of young persons from disadvantaged back- grounds have at this time a special obligation to provide children who show superior literary ability with the means to develop their talent [15]. One organization which was brought into existence to provide financial as- sistance for the writing, publication, and distribution of interracial chil- dren's books is the Council of Inter- racial Books for Children, which has its headquarters in New York City [11]. The council had its origins late in 1964 when a group of children's book writers held a meeting to discuss why so few good books for black and other minority group children were being published in the United States and what they could do to encourage the writing and publication of such books. A major re- sult of thi's meeting was the creation of the council, which was incorporated as a nonprofit organization on April 5, 1965. The council tries to "encourage the writing, production, and effective dis-
116 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY tribution of books especially created to fill the needs of non-white and urban poor children," and through such books "to give all American children full awareness and deeper understanding of one another" [11, pp. 8-9]. To en- courage the writing of interracial chil- dren's books, the council awards three $500.00 prizes each year for the best manuscripts it receives and then tries to put these manuscripts in the hands of editors at publishing houses which may be interested in such books. The prizes are given in these three cate- gories: (1) unpublished black authors; (2) unpublished American Indian au- thors, and (3) unpublished Chicano and Puerto Rican authors. The council provides a "Manuscript Clinic" in which editors work on manu- scripts which have won council prizes but need additional editing before they can be published; and it may also give, if asked, marketing advice to its prize winners. It has sponsored the making of a bibliography of the best interracial children's books published over the years and has encouraged publication of new as well as paperback editions of books in this bibliography. In an effort to keep the public informed about the most recent developments in the in- terracial children's book field, it pub- lishes a newspaper, Interracial Books for Children, several times a year. Through all these efforts, the council hopes to encourage black and white au- thors, editors, and publishers to pro- duce more and better interracial chil- dren's books. CURRENT RACIAL ISSUES IN CHILDREN'S BOOKS On January 9, 1968, about 100 black leaders representing twenty black or- ganizations met in Washington, D.C., and formed a Black United Front to organize the black people of that city [16, p. 54]. The persons at the meet- ing, which had been called by Stokely Carmichael, represented a wide range of political views, and the meeting soon showed signs of tension between the militant and more conservative ele- ments. On January 14, Carmichael stated on a Washington radio program some of the views of the militants: "The black man cannot be concerned with America. He must be concerned with people first . . . , and people is the opposite of what America stands for. The first thing we should do is to un- derstand how we have been divided by the white man. Then we should move in and take over the institutions in our community . . . , police, welfare, school board and stores from the local 5-and- 10 to the industrial complexes in Watts" [16, p. 55]. To inspire black people to acquire control over educational, economic, po- litical, and other institutions, some black leaders in recent years have ad- vocated various kinds of militancy more or less like Carmichael's. The power struggle at the Ocean Hill-Brownsville school system in the fall of 1968 be- tween the largely white-controlled United Federation of Teachers and the largely black and Puerto Rican Ocean Hill-Brownsville local school govern- ing board was a struggle by blacks and Puerto Ricans for real control over their schools. A very militant approach to black power in the political sphere has been taken by the Black Panther party, which in the 1968 national election sup- ported "the right of self defense" by "the oppressed peoples of America" [16, p. 521]. Eldridge Cleaver, the Black Panther party candidate for president in 1968, said that the purpose of his
INTERRACIAL CHILDREN'S BOOKS 117 campaign was "to lay the base for a revolutionary movement that will unite black . . . and white radicals" [16, p. 5211. Something like a Black Power move- ment has recently developed in the world of children's books. Some blacks are now saying that, because white au- thors have never known how it feels to be black, their writings necessarily distort the experience of being black, and that only interracial children's books by black authors can accurately describe how it feels to be a black child. Several black authors have indeed be- gun to put militant racial views into their children's books. Black and white authors who disagree with these views say that white authors can write books about the black childhood experience if they have enough imagination and em- pathy. Two recent books for young readers about black people which illus- trate this controversy are Sounder [ 1 7], by William H. Armstrong, who is white and Black Folk Tales [18], by Julius Lester, who is black. THE CASE OF SOUNDER Armstrong says that his moving story of a poor black southern sharecropper, his wife, eldest son, three younger chil- dren, and courageous coon dog, Sound- er, was told to him fifty years ago by a gray-haired, black schoolteacher from the South who taught him in a one-room Negro school. Because of his great pov- erty, the sharecropper was forced to steal food for his family. The sheriff and his two deputies arrested him for this crime at his cabin, brutally mis- treated him, and were taking him away to jail in a wagon, when Sounder, en- raged at seeing his master being hit by strangers, escaped the eldest boy's grasp and chased the wagon. As he leaped at the wagon, one of the deputies shot him in the head, wounding him severely. Sounder lay in the road for a long time, but later he made his way back to the sharecropper's cabin, se- cluded himself under it for a long time, and then disappeared into the woods. For weeks no one knew whether he was dead or alive. Then one day he re- turned from the woods, the living skele- ton of his former self, the wounds in his head and one of his feet having somehow healed themselves. Sounder took up watch near the cabin, waiting for his master to come home. When the eldest boy and his mother found that the father lhad been sen- tenced to hard labor and removed from the local jail, they tried, without suc- cess, to learn whether he had been sent to one of the many road camps which moved around the state, or to a prison farm, or to a road quarry. Each year in the fall, when work in the fields was finished, the boy made long searches on foot for his father, but he did not find him. On his wanderings around the state, he met a schoolteacher who be- friended and educated him. The boy stayed at the teacher's cabin in the win- ter, where he did chores which paid for his schooling, and in the summer he worked at home in the fields. When he came home, Sounder hobbled down the road to meet him. One hot summer day a number of years after the father had been taken away, a lone figure appeared on the horizon. Sounder, who had not barked or been animated since he was hurt and his master had gone, began barking loudly. When the figure got closer, the boy saw that it was his father and that he was very crippled. He had been severely injured in an avalanche of limestone in a prison quarry. In the
118 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY fall of that year, he died on his last hunting trip in the woods, and a few weeks later, just before Christmas, Sounder died too. Sounder won the 1969 Newbery Medal for the most distinguished work of fiction for young persons published in 1969 [19], and it has been praised by many critics. Effie Lee Morris, co- ordinator, Children's Activities, San Francisco Public Library, wrote: "Fol- lowing the injustice of a typical and too- frequent occurrence in the rural South, the book adds another dimension in the understanding of black people. It is deeply moving and truly beautiful." Edmund Fuller wrote in the WaU Street Journal that "Sounder is a re- markable story, compassionate, power- fully moving, showing the qualities of dignity and endurance at their highest in both man and beast. A memorable dog story, it is also the chronicle of a man, a woman, and a boy, equally hard to forget. I believe Sounder will be read for a long time to come."' Sounder has also been criticized, how- ever, for giving an inadequate portrayal of the black man's experience. Critics who hold this view maintain that since Armstrong is white he could not pos- sibly understand how it feels to be a black sharecropper, and that he there- fore subconsciously gave the sharecrop- per and his family feelings which white people want black people to have in such circumstances rather than feelings they really would have. Tom Feelings, the talented black artist who has illus- trated a number of young people's books, including Julius Lester's To Be a Slave and Black Folk Tales, has ex- pressed this view of Sounder in a note to Bradford Chambers: So much stress these days is placed on the writing of children's books on the Black ex- perience, as a result of popularity and money- making potential, that a lot of people are for- getting whose experience it is. Truly meaningful writing about the Black experience must come, of course, from those who have lived and know it-Black people. That's what authenticity is all about. Anything else, though possibly of merit, is synthetic. No book like Sounder, by William Arm- strong, should be winning any award for ex- cellence, when Blacks know that the Black man who told his story to Armstrong (when Armstrong was a boy) was aware that he was talking to a member of the race of people that had caused him and his people so much pain and misery. That man was masking his hos- tility, and what he told Armstrong could not have been authentic. After all, telling the whole truth of how Black people feel about their relationships with white people was not prevalent among the Blacks of that man's day, as it would have made our survival impossible. It seems today that whites would rather hear of the Black experience from white writers. Witness William Styron's Nat Turner and, in children's literature, Mary Hays Weik's The Jazz Man, both full of stereotypes of people who do not know the experience out of which they are writing. One could go on and on with examples.5 Feelings does not give many details in this note about what he objects to in Sounder, but Albert V. Schwartz, in an article he has published in Interracial Books for Children [20], and in conversation with me, has de- scribed rather fully what he thinks is wrong with the book. Schwartz has told me that Armstrong was unable to give its members the angry feelings they most certainly would have had. Instead, he gave Sounder, the dog, most of the angry feelings. Being white, Armstrong assumed that black people in the situa- tions he describes are docile and fear- ful rather than angry. With angry feel- ' For these two quotations see the dust jacket of the first edition of Sounder. s I am indebted to Mr. Bradford Chambers for providing me with this note.
INTERRACIAL CHILDREN'S BOOKS 119 ings, Schwartz says, the sharecroppers would have looked very much like mem- bers of the Black Panther party, who are not afraid to express their rage at society. Schwartz gives several examples to show that the members of the black sharecropper family are the inhibited, fearful Negro stereotypes found in older literature, but that Sounder shows much rage. The sharecropper, for example, does not resist the sheriff when he is arrested: "Stick out your hands, boy," ordered the second man. The boy started to raise his hands, but the man was already reaching over the stove, snapping handcuffs on the outstretched wrists of his father. [ 17, pp. 2 1-2 2 ] Sounder, on the other hand, shows tre- mendous rage towards the sheriff and his deputies: The wagon (taking the father away to jail) started, and the sheriff rode behind it on his horse. Sounder made a great lunge forward, and the boy fell against the corner of the porch. Sounder raced after the wagon. No one yelled after him. The mother stood still in the doorway. The deputy who wasn't holding the reins turned on the seat, aimed his shot- gun at the dog jumping at the side of the wagon, and fired. Sounder fell in the road, and the sheriff rode around him. Sounder's master was still on his back in the wagon, but he did not raise his head to look back. [17, p. 26] Schwartz gives examples of how the oldest boy fails to express his anger, only one of which I shall mention here. On one of his long journeys in search of his father, the boy waited outside the iron fence of a road camp. He leaned against the fence and hooked his fingers around its wires: Suddenly something crashed against the fence in front of the boy's face. A jagged piece of iron tore open the skin and crushed the fingers of one of his hands against the fence Lost in thought and watching the convicts, the boy had not seen the guard, who had been sitting under a tree with a shotgun across his knees, get up and come to a toolbox filled with picks and crowbars which stood near the fence. [17, pp. 85-86] The guard laughed, but none of the con- victs looked up. The boy knew that his father was not among them, for his father would have attacked the guard. Then the guard threw the scrap of iron toward the boy, but the boy showed no anger: It landed a few feet from the boy. He looked at the iron and he looked at the man. The white spot between his hair and his eyes was the spot. The iron would split it open with a wide gash, and blood would darken the white spot and make it the color of the man's sun- burned face. And the stone that David slung struck Goliath on his forehead, and he fell on his face on the ground, the boy thought. But he left the iron on the ground. [17, p. 89] Besides believing that Armstrong is unable to let his black characters ex- press their angry feelings, Schwartz has other objections to the book. He believes that it teaches the American white man's traditional doctrine, largely irrelevant to the plight of many black people in the United States, that hard work, patience, and study bring suc- cess. It also seems to teach an attitude that whites say black people had in earlier times, when they had no chance to improve their lot, that men should not aggressively try to change unfor- tunate conditions but instead should re- sign themselves to them, abiding by the Lord's will: "Maybe he [the teacher] will write letters to the road camp for you," the mother said, " 'cause you'll soon be so busy with schoolin' and cleanin' the schoolhouse for him that you can't go searchin' no more." "Maybe I'd have time," the boy said. "But he says like you, 'Better not to go. Just be patient and time will pass.'"
120 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY "It's all powerful puzzlin' and aggravatin,' but it's the Lord's will" [the mother said]. [17, p. 101] Schwartz also says that Armstrong did not adequately explain how the sharecropper family supported itself after the father was arrested, an over- sight which indicates that he does not have much appreciation of the anguish of poverty. BLACK FOLK TALES If Sounder does not, in the view of some critics, contain a truthful account of the black man's experience, what kind of book does? Probably many who share Schwartz's views on Sound- er would agree that Julius Lester's re- cently published book for young people, Black Folk Tales, gives such an ac- count. Julius Lester, columnist, folk singer, photographer, and radio per- sonality, is the author of the 1968 New- bery Medal runner-up, To Be a Slave, and several other successful books in- cluding Revolutionary Notes and Look Out, Whitey! Black Power's Gon' Get Your Mama. His views resemble those of the Black Panther party in that he believes that the oppressed peoples in the United States should ready them- selves for revolution [21], and that in view of what the black man has suffered at the hands of the white man over the centuries, he is justified in feeling and expressing hatred toward the white man. Discussing a course he taught to black teen-agers in the South several years ago, Lester has said: There was a girl in my class whose brother was the first black child to integrate a high school. And what did she decide to write about in her composition? Her first dance! I had to push those kids to write about their own ex- periences and their own feelings. And once they got these out the results were unbelievable. They have to learn that whatever they feel, whatever they write, is going to be acceptable. And if they say to themselves, 'I feel hate,' they have to express this too. [22, p. 2071] Lester has put many passages ex- pressing hatred of whites in his Black Folk Tales. Many children's book au- thors, teachers, and librarians of both the black and white races disagree with Lester, contending that children of any race may be harmed by books contain- ing race hatred. Augusta Baker, co- ordinator, Office of Children's Services, the New York Public Library, who is black, has refused to allow Black Folk Tales into the New York Public Li- brary's children's book collection for this reason. Her decision must have been a painful one to make, since a number of the stories in Black Folk Tales contain no passages of race hatred alid since all the stories have consider- able literary value. Lester says that "the stories in this book come from the black people of Africa and Afro-America" [ 18, p. viii]. The stories, which in some cases exist in many forms and are many centuries old, derive from oral traditions in Afri- ca, the pre-Civil War South, and Amer- ican cities. Lester has probably invent- ed some of thie passages expressing hatred of "whitey," since he has retold all the stories in his own style. Other passages, however, he must not have invented, since the main theme of some of the tales, handed down from gener- ation to generation, is such hatred. Passages attacking white people in Black Folk Tales are not difficult to find. The first paragraph of the last story in the collection, "Keep on Step- ping," reads: "You know, white folks are something else. Always been like they are now. Just don't want to let a nigger be a man. Somehow they figure if you become a man, they ain't one
INTERRACIAL CHILDREN'S BOOKS 121 no longer" [18, p. 173]. Other tales in the collection, such as "Stagolee," "High John, the Conquerer," and the beauti- ful story "How God Made the Butter- flies" contain passages expressing ani- mosity towards whites. It would probably be easy to make too much of the politicization of current racial issues found in some recent chil- dren's books and in comments on them. Several of the attitudes just discussed in all likelihood derive more from a feeling of "proprietary right" which some black authors and illustrators now have about trade books for young black persons than from a deep-seated urge to inject themes of racial conflict and hatred into such books on anything like a grand scale. Although there will certainly be continued-evolution of ra- cial attitudes in children's books, there will probably not be in them greatly increased politicization of racial issues like that just discussed, since most black as well as white parents are prob- ably against giving books containing ra- cial attitudes like those in Black Folk Tales to their children. Still, it is worth pointing out that, for whatever the reason, some recent interracial chil- dren's books and comments on them reflect such politicization. Of course, as has been pointed out previously, un- desirable racial attitudes have pervaded white children's books from time im- memorial. INTERRACIAL TRADE BOOKS OF HIGH QUALITY Good interracial children's books need not have for their theme the ir- remediable antagonism between the black and white races. Without mini- mizing current racial problems, they can help the races to overcome the problems left to them by a tragic past by deepening understanding of what it means to be black or white. In the final section of this article, I have somewhat randomly selected for dis- cussion four good trade books-two for young children and two for teen-agers -which illustrate some of the best work currently being done in the field of interracial children's books. Each book is a solid contribution to the grow- ing list of good interracial children's books published in recent years. One of the best interracial books for young children recently published is Stevie [23] by John Steptoe, who is under twenty years old, Brooklyn-born, and black. Stevie is the story of a little boy named Robert, an only child who lives with his parents in the big city -perhaps Brooklyn, New York. One day, Robert's mother tells him that a little boy whose mother has to work is coming to live with him during the week. The little boy's name is Stevie, and as soon as he moves in, Robert discovers that he has mixed feelings about him. He likes playing with Stevie, but he is also jealous and does not want to share the spotlight with him. When Robert comes home from school, he finds that Stevie, who is not yet school age, has been playing with his toys. Robert's reaction: "I wished his mother would bring somma his toys over here to break up." Elsewhere Robert says about Stevie: "And on Saturdays when his mother comes to pick him up, he always tries to act cute just cause his mother is there." One Saturday, Stevie's mother and father say that they are going to move away and that Stevie is not going to come back any more. After Stevie is gone, Robert finds that he misses his little playmate. He remembers how they played cowboys and indians on
122 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY the stoop and roasted marshmallows in the park. He also remembers "when I was doin' my homework I used to try to teach him what I had learned. He could write his name pretty good for his age." Stevie may have been compe- tition, but he was also like a little brother. Two aspects of Stevie make it some- thing new and different in the world of children's books. First, the simple but universal story is given a new dimen- sion of realism because John Steptoe has told it in the dialect of English spoken by black children who live in big city ghettos. The unorthodox spell- ing and grammar of this book make the world of Robert and Stevie much more vivid to the black children for whom it was primarily written than it would have been had normal spelling and grammar been used. As a result, the book probably rings true to many black children who find in it life as they have experienced it. Second, Steptoe's paintings for Stevie, the best things in the book, create a perfect mood for the story. His red, green, blue, and orange colors are bright and warm; his details are suggestive; and the children he draws reveal their feelings in their expressions. His paint- ings show the great importance in a child's world of familiar adults and of other children, as well as of everyday objects like flower pots, chairs, and cur- tains. Sam [24], by Ann Herbert Scott, with drawings by Symeon Shimin, is another beautifully illustrated book for young children about a black family. Sam is a little boy who wants to play with someone in his family but discovers that his parents and brother and sister are doing things for which he is either too little or too big. In his efforts to play, Sam arouses the ire of everyone in his family. His mother is peeling apples for a pie, but, when Sam picks up a knife from- the table, she tells him to put it down. When he picks up one of his older brother's books, his brother yells at him. Sam's sister tells him to put her doll down, and his father tells him to get his hands off the typewriter, on which he has made an experimental ping. Finally, when his father tells him to go look for his mother, Sam cries and everyone gathers around him. Knowing what the matter is, his mother gives him a job to do for which he is neither too little nor too big. She lets him bake a tart in the oven with her pie, and Sam is happy again. Shimin's superior large illustrations in three colors-the domi- nant one a soft brown-make Sam a very attractive book. Since Sam's pre- dicament is universal amoung young- sters his age, the story should be of interest to all young children of what- ever race. The Soul Brothers and Sister Lou [25], by Kristin Hunter, won the 1968 Award of the Council on Interracial Books for Children for being the best book by a Negro published in 1968 for older children. Its main character, Lour- etta Hawkins, a black teenager who lives in Southside, the slum section of a northern city, tries to find her identity as she is torn between the destructive militancy of some of her peers who want to destroy white society by means of revolution, and a more moderate ap- proach to racial and other problems advocated by her teachers and older brother. Louretta is a member of the Hawks, a gang of boys and girls who, like most young people their age, are trying to find an interesting way to spend their free time after school. They are
INTERRACIAL CHILDREN'S BOOKS 123 continually harassed in almost every- thing they do, however, by the local police, most of whom Miss Hunter de- scribes as white racist bullies. Officer Lafferty, the head policeman in the neighborhood, is the worst bully: Officer Lafferty's favorite sport was to catch groups of Southside boys in out-of-the-way places like vacant buildings and alleys, where there would be no witnesses to what he did. He would call them names and accuse them of committing crimes, just to provoke them into saying something back or hitting him or run- ning away. If they ran away he would shoot them. If they did anything else, he would beat them up with his club and take them to the police station and charge them with resisting arrest and assaulting an officer. [25, p. 6] Because of conditions in Southside, Louretta is forced to make a choice. On the one hand, she considers fol- lowing the advice of Miss Hodges, her English teacher, and other friends, who say that the American system offers hope to all persons, including members of minority groups, who work hard, are conscientious, and are loyal to society's traditional values. On the other hand, she is tempted to follow the lead of Fess, a new boy in the Hawks, who advocates such revolutionary activities as throw- ing Molotov cocktails into stores owned by white merchants and beating up policemen. Louretta's choice is not made any easier by the difficult conditions of her home life. She lives in a small, five- room house with her mother and eight brothers and sisters. She shares the double bed in one of the bedrooms with two younger sisters. Her father disap- peared several years before the novel begins, after he could not find a job and realized in shame that his family did not qualify for welfare while he was still at home. Louretta furthermore does not always get along with her mother, who tries to teach her children a doctrine held by many older black people but rejected by Louretta and her friends: stay in your place and hang on to what you have. Louretta's conflicts come to a head after William, her older brother, a young man of considerable character, rents a small building formerly oc- cupied by a small Christian church in order to start his own printing busi- ness. He reluctantly allows the Hawks to use part of the building as a club- house when Louretta tells him that such a move may be the only way to keep the gang from getting in trouble with the police. When the Hawks give a dance in their new clubhouse, the police, using a flimsy pretext, raid the club- house and kill Jethro, one of the most- liked boys in the Hawks. After Jethro's death, Louretta becomes radicalized. She becomes cynical about the values taught her in school, professes a hatred for all whites, and falls under the influ- ence of Fess. The turning point in the story comes when Louretta, almost com- pletely radicalized, attends a night meeting of a very radical black organi- zation and discovers that its leader is teaching the same hatred, based on race, that she had found in white policemen like Officer Lafferty. Revulsed by what she hears, Louretta runs from the meet- ing, escaping the clutches of Fess, who chases after her, tries to persuade her to return, and, when that fails, tries to as- sault her sexually. What Louretta runs to, having given up the radical views of Fess and his friends, is music, and music is the means by which Miss Hunter resolves her story. From the beginning of The Soul Brother and Sister Lou, Louretta and her friends show a considerable talent and liking for music. Throughout
124 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY the story, Louretta plays the piano, accompanying four boys in the Hawks who sing rock music. Indeed almost everyone in this novel--especially the members of Louretta's family and her friends on the street-is musical. After Louretta abandons radicalism, she takes up music much more earnestly. Assisted by Blind Eddie, an old musician who teaches her blues and rock harmonies and rhythms, she and the four boys form a rock music group and are soon asked by a recording company to sign a contract. The contract enables Lour- etta and her four friends, who now call themselves the Soul Brothers and Sister Lou, to make a considerable amount of money and thereby escape many of the problems of ghetto life. With their new- ly acquired wealth, the rock stars forget much of their bitterness toward society. The fact that The Soul Brothers and Sister Lou is a full-scale novel about the life of a black teen-age girl in a northern ghetto is enough to recom- mend it, since few novels have been written about this subject. It can also be recommended because, in spite of its many stereotyped characters, it has sev- eral rather fully realized characters- Louretta, her mother, and Mrs. Jack- son, for example. The novel furthermore has an authentic ring because much of the material in it is obviously derived from Hunter's own experience. Since the story is an exciting one, almost any teen-ager would want to read on to the last page. The novel's ending, however, is un- satisfactory. With their newly earned money, Louretta and the boys connect- ed with the rock group escape the diffi- cult problems of ghetto life by buying gadgets and other consumer goods. Louretta buys a new washer and dryer for her mother, and David, one of the boys, buys a bright red motor scooter. Ulysses becomes a glutton and quickly goes from "a big husky boy to a big fat one" [24, p. 241]. Fess, the radical, who becomes the rock group's lyric writer, changes from an ardent revo- lutionary to an ardent backer of busi- ness. The transformation the teen-agers make seems to me to be vulgar, but Hunter seems to find that changing their lives by giving them large sums of money is a convenient way to extricate them from their difficult life situations and end her story. Having a consider- able sum of money presents a new problem to each of the teen-agers, to be sure, but a thoughtful reader may still feel that, by making Louretta and her friends prosperous rock stars, Hunter has evaded dealing with some of the complex issues she raised earlier in the novel. Virginia Hamilton, the author of The House of Dies Drear [26], the second teen-age novel and the last book I shall discuss, may well be the best black au- thor writing for young people at pres- ent. Hamilton, who has a highly sensi- tive ear for language and considerable narrative ability, achieved a great suc- cess several years ago when she pub- lished her novel, Zeely [27]. The House of Dies Drear, published in 1968 and considerably longer than Zeely, is the story of Thomas Small, the son of a black American history professor, who moves with his family from North Caro- lina to an Ohio college town, where his father has taken a new post in the college's history department. Instead of renting or buying an ordinary house, however, Thomas's father has rented from an historical foundation a large, mysterious old house on the edge of town, which was once an important
INTERRACIAL CHILDREN'S BOOKS 125 hiding station for slaves on the under- ground railroad. Before moving to Ohio, Thomas had learned a number of exciting things about the house by sneaking a look at a copy of a report written at the historical foundation in his father's study. The report said that Dies Drear, the wealthy abolitionist who built and owned the house before the Civil War, and two or three slaves Drear was trying to help escape had been killed in the same week by bounty hunters. The three slaves were not fleeing to Canada but were returning to the South, each with a considerable amount of money, to purchase the freedom of other slaves. The report also said that Dies Drear had devised an ingenious method to help runaway slaves find their way through Ohio to Canada and in some cases back into the South. There was also a rumor that Dies Drear and the murdered slaves haunted the house, and that Drear had filled the house with antiques and other valuable possessions which had disappeared when the house was plundered after his death but which some people speculated were hidden near the house. To top off all the mys- tery, which any young reader would certainly relish, the report said that the caretaker of the house was an old man with white hair and piercing green eyes whom the townspeople called Mr. Pluto, a name for the god of the under- world. When Thomas arrived with his fam- ily at the house of Dies Drear, any anticipation he had that he would find adventure and mystery there was more than satisfied. The house, on the side of a high hill on the outskirts of town, was separated from the highway by a muddy stream. Dark, forbidding, and isolated in appearance, the former hiding place for runaway slaves con- tained hidden passageways in its walls and foundation as well as caches and a door which was disguised as a wall mirror. Thomas and his family soon discov- ered that the house, in addition to being surrounded by rumors that it was haunted by the ghosts of Dies Drear and the murdered slaves, also contained secrets jealously guarded by very real persons living nearby, and that neigh- bors down the road were doing every- thing they could to learn these secrets. As the story unfolds, attempts are made to frighten Thomas and his family off the property. Mysterious small, triangle- shaped objects, resembling the markers Dies Drear used to show runaway slaves the direction of escape, are found at- tached to the upstairs bedroom doors. Thomas is frightened by a "ghost," which makes an Ahhh-ing sound, and Mrs. Small's new kitchen is invaded and coated with a thin layer of flour mixed with apple juice during the family's absence. Thomas and his family soon discover that Dies Drear's treasure of valuable tapestries, glass objects, and antique furniture indeed exists near the house and that considerable efforts are being made to keep the Smalls, or any- one, from learning about it. They also discover that Mr. Pluto is related to the third slave who was not killed! While unraveling the mystery of the house of Dies Drear, Thomas and his family journey in effect back into the American past, learning as they go something they did not know before about the history of slavery in America. As well as being a thrilling mystery story for young people, full of strikingly realized characters and overtones of the supernatural, Hamilton's novel should give young readers a deeper
126 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY understanding of what the black man's experience in America has been. The House of Dies Drear is an example of a very superior interracial novel which teenagers of any race would en- joy. * * * This article has discussed the prob- lems of publishing interracial children's books, with special emphasis on the period since 1965. It has ended with the presentation of good examples to illustrate the presently developing trend. However, in the story of this progress, questions have been raised and problems presented that wait for the future to answer and solve. How can black authors, illustrators, and edi- tors be recruited to share their views of the interracial experience? How can the content of the adult world, black and white, polarized and divided by generations of sad experience, be mold- ed for children to promote justice and understanding instead of prolonging and intensifying these regrettable con- flicts? And finally, can the market, on which the success of publishing depends, be made to respond to the laudable new books? Surely, books of the kind just discussed will contribute to the understanding that will enlarge the market; and the enlarged demand will elicit more books. All who have inter- ested themselves in the publication of interracial children's books must con- tinue in their efforts with the zeal a just cause deserves. BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE Much has been written in recent years about interracial children's books, and this bibliographical note will only refer the reader to several important sources from which he can obtain siz- able bibliography for a study of this subject. Bibliography on the history of the treatment of black people in chil- dren's books can be obtained from Dharathula H. Millender, "Through a Glass Darkly," Library Journal 92 (December 1967): 4571-76. For re- cent periodical literature on this sub- ject, one should consult the heading "Negroes in Children's Literature" in recent numbers of the Readers' Guide to Periodical Literature. For a list of books published in recent years for use in a course on black culture, see Doro- thy Sterling, "What's Black and White and Read All Over," English Journal 58 (September 1969): 826-32. Back issues of the Horn Book magazine and the Wilson Library Bulletin should be consulted for lists of new interracial children's books. REFERENCES 1. Larrick, Nancy. "The All-White World of Children's Books." Saturday Review 48 (September 1965): 63-64, 83-85. 2. U.S., Congress, House, Ad Hoc Subcom- mittee on De Facto School Segregation, Committee on Education and Labor. Books for Schools and the Treatment of Minor- ities. 89th Cong., 2d sess., 1966. 3. "School Aid Bill Enacted." Facts on File 25 (April 1965): 133. 4. Johnson, Edwina. "Black History: The Early Childhood Vacuum." Library Jour- nal 94 (May 1969): 2057-58. 5. Clark, Kenneth B. Prejudice and Your Child. Boston: Beacon Press, 1963. 6. Millender, Dharathula H. "Through a Glass Darkly." Library Journal 92 (De- cember 1967): 4571-76. 7. Silberman, Charles E. Crisis in Black and White. New York: Random House, 1964. 8. Sterling, Dorothy. Mary Jane. New York: Doubleday, 1959. 9. Sterling, Dorothy. "The Soul of Learning." English Journal 57 (February 1968): 166- 80. 10. Time, April 6, 1970, p. 100.
INTERRACIAL CHILDREN'S BOOKS 127 11. "The Council on Interracial Books for Children, Inc." An unpublished proposal sent by the Council to the Ford Founda- tion in 1966. 12. "Zenith Books: New Series Worth Not- ing." Interracial Books for Children 1 (Winter 1967): 1. 13. McGraw-Hill Book Co. McGraw-Hill Junior Books: Fall 1969. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1969. 14. "Children's Books." Publishers' Weekly 197 (April 1970): 40. 15. Simon, Mina Lewiton. "Who Will Speak for Them?" Horn Book 44 (August 1968): 451-53. 16. Facts on File 28 (February, December 1968): 54-55, 520-22. 17. Armstrong, William, H. Sounder. Illus- trated by James Barkley. New York: Har- per & Row, 1969. 18. Lester, Julius. Black Folk Tales. Illustrated by Tom Feelings. New York: Richard W. Baron, 1969. 19. "Newbery-Caldecott-Wilder Awards." Li- brary Journa 95 (March 1970): 1173. 20. Schwartz, Albert V. "Sounder: A Black or a White Tale?" Interracial Books for Chil- dren 3 (Autumn 1970): 3, 8. 21. Lester, Julius. Revolutionary Notes. New York: Richard W. Baron, 1969. 22. Geller, Evelyn. "Julius Lester: Newbery Runner-up." Library Journal 94 (May 1969): 2070-71. 23. Steptoe, John. Stevie. New York: Harper & Row, 1969. 24. Scott, Ann Herbert. Sam. Illustrated by Symeon Shimin. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1967. 25. Hunter, Kristin. The Soul Brothers and Sister Lou. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1968. 26. Hamilton, Virginia. The House of Dies Drear. Illustrated by Eros Keith. New York: Macmillan Co., 1968. 27. Hamilton, Virginia. Zeely. Illustrated by Symeon Shimin. New York: Macmillan Co., 1967.