FINAL COMMENT CAN A "HARD" SCIENCE ANSWER "HARD" QUESTIONS? A RESPONSE TO SANDSTROM AND SANDSTROM James M. Nyce' and Nancy P. Thomas2 It is clear from the Sandstroms' recent Comment in the Library Quarterly [1] that we all share a sincere desire to improve LIS research. Where we differ is on how this may best be achieved [2]. This takes us in our response to questions that relate to theories of science and their epistemologies, the relationship between science and philosophy, and the contribution ethnography can make to the research enter- prise. Alan R. Sandstrom and Pamela Effrein Sandstrom have argued that debates over issues like these contribute little to the practice of science "in the lab or the field" [1, p. 251]: we disagree. Hard Science/Nonscience Proponents of "hard" science consider human events, actions, and objects as both subject to and best understood in terms of general rules, laws, and principles. It is not surprising then that they see rule, law, and principle as goals at which ethnogra- phy can (and should) arrive. In short, if as ethnographers we work hard enough and smart enough, human artifacts and events can be reduced to universal rules and principles-ones that may even have mathematical validity. However, to label the methodologies of "hard" science as "scientific," and alternative approaches as "antiscience" or "nonscience," is to privilege positivistic claims to "knowledge of the human condition" [1, p. 252] in ways that we believe actually work to the disadvantage of science, LIS researchers, and library practitioners. Let us explain. While we do not deny the "productivity" of science, we believe it is necessary to "reclaim the experiential basis for science against ... claims to escape it" [3, p. 118]. Although those who privilege hard science seem to agree that science is con- text bound in both its agendas and ramifications, what they do not acknowledge is that the percepts, norms and conventions of science are also themselves historical and cultural artifacts. In short, for them it is business as usual. However, these con- ventions cannot be separated from the context in which they are created and repro- 1. Direct correspondence to the authors at the School of Library and Information Manage- ment, 1200 Commercial Street, Emporia, Kansas 66801. Telephone 316-341-5320; Fax 316- 341-5233; E-mail nycejame@emporia.edu. 2. School of Library and Information Management, 1200 Commercial Street, Emporia, Kan- sas 66801. Telephone 316-341-5062; Fax 316-343-7745; E-mail thomasnaXemporia.edu. [Libraiy Quarterly, vol. 69, no. 2, pp. 295-298] ? 1999 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-2519/99/6902-0006$02.00 295
296 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY duced-history and culture determine what are taken to be the "scientific canons of evidence" [1, p. 251] at any given point in time. It is not enough to say that scientists operate within a sociopolitical context. What also needs to be acknowl- edged is that the conventions that scientists follow cannot be separated from the context in which they are created and reproduced. In addition, no matter how robust an analytic we employ, it is not possible, well, to reach through culture to something like "nature." For this reason, neutrality in terms of a "scientific knowl- edge" is an unachievable goal. Moreover, we believe that the social context and the socially constructed nature of experience are effectively denied when distinctions between physical and social "facts" collapse and methods designed to explore the physical world are applied to the social order. To finesse the difference between social facts and the facts of the natural world is to deny the constructed nature of social reality and to treat language as though it is representational. It is to believe that a one-to-one corre- spondence exists between words and things in the world [4]. In short, to argue that language "simply has nothing to do" with scientific knowledge makes little sense to us [1, p. 252]. To make an appeal, as the Sandstroms do, to validity and reliability does not make this issue go away [1, p. 249]. The "rigor" and "precision" the Sandstroms demand of ethnography emerge from a belief that a physics of society is both possible and necessary. This is a logical, but unfortunate, consequence, of classifying human events and artifacts as "natu- ral" [1, p. 251]. However, opting for a social physics based on nature and rule will in the end obscure, not clarify, the issues the LIS research community takes as its own. In brief, it can be argued that culture and society and their operations and objects are not of the same order of things as those purported to be in nature (one thinks here of Weber). According to this view, human objects, events, and actions emerge neither from nature, nor from the supernatural [1, p. 251], but from his- tory. As such, the human enterprise has much more to do with intention and mean- ing than with what science might call cause or event. What human artifacts reflect and embody instead are negotiations over structure, power, and agency. Science and Philosophy Further, if it is necessary to separate science and philosophy for a scientific ethnog- raphy to emerge [1, p. 251], we distrust both the intent and the project. While this is no place to replay the history and philosophy of science that has taken shape over the last century or so, many have argued persuasively that methodologies born of "physics envy" [5, p. 603] have not achieved what they promised. In spite of claims that "thanks to scientific ethnography," "our knowledge of the human con- dition is far in advance of what it was even a few years ago" [1, p. 252], we are not even close to creating a "science" of society [6, p. 13]. While many would still welcome a social-scientific Newton, Anthony Giddens reminds us that these folks "are not only waiting for a train that won't arrive, they're in the wrong station altogether" [6, p. 13]. This stance is not radical, nor is it particularly "postmodern" [1, pp. 250, 252]. In fact, it represents a consensus within both sociology and anthropology [6, 7]. Furthermore, it is not unprecedented. All we have to do is look at Franz Boas, the American anthropologist to whom we and the Sandstroms have referred. Early in his career, Boas believed (and wrote) that the physical and historical sciences had equal value, depending on the investigation and the subject [8]. Only under pres-
FINAL COMMENT 297 sure, for example, would Boas write of the historical sciences as a supplementary tool [9, p. 58; 10, p. 614]. However, as time went on, when it came to human objects and events, Boas become less confident of a science that claimed social artifacts were rule or law bound [9, p. 18]. In fact, by the end of his life, we find Boas writing: "In preparing my doctor's thesis I had to use photometric methods to compare intensities of light. In pursuit of the experiments, I was led to consider the quantita- tive values of sensations. In the course of this investigation I learned to recognize that there are domains of our experience in which concepts of quantity, of measures that can be added or subtracted and with which I was accustomed to operate, were not applicable" [11, p. 20]. Research Agenda, Ethnography, and LIS We question the claim that a scientific ethnography has led to a "revolution in the study of human behavior" [1, p. 253]. In fact, historically, the failure of social positivism to answer some of the knottiest of the problems facing society is exactly what has driven so many researchers to pursue alternative research paths. When we turn to research in LIS, we would argue that the most significant problems are those that involve the sociocultural aspects of issues like database design, informa- tion literacy, and information seeking and transfer. These issues not only cannot be addressed from within a positivist agenda, they cannot even be raised. Michael H. Harris [12], for example, has argued that the acceptance of a "pluralist" philoso- phy by the library community since the late nineteenth century has rendered invisi- ble the cultural, social, and political contexts within which information and infor- mation artifacts are created and distributed. We would argue that the same problem can be found in "hard" science and "scientific" ethnography because they too fail to acknowledge the constructed nature of science and of the ontologies and epistemologies that support it [3, p. 119]. We have argued elsewhere for a strong ethnography, one that starts with issues like these [13, 14]. The task is to not just to ask what meaning is for example or how it gets constructed and revised. It is also to ask about those structures that inform and determine what meaning is taken to be. In short, what we also want to get at are the basic assumptions and categories that inform social life. For example, we would argue that ethnography requires the investigation of what others take to be "common sense." This would include looking at both the enactment and production of common sense, which is recoverable. It would as well be an inquiry into the structures and resources that make common sense, however defined, both possible and fundamental [13, p. 39; 14, p. 7]. This is precisely the kind of founda- tional analysis that a "scientific" ethnography neglects, and this weakens both the ethnographic project and the results it can achieve. The point we want to make here is that however one classes or defines the objects one studies, there will be, in pragmatic and analytic terms, wins and losses. If we were to read human events and artifacts as natural objects, we would have to give up culture and society for which it is difficult to build rules and laws. This reduction would make it difficult, if not impossible, to consider the role culture and society have in LIS issues and to add to our knowledge of meaning, intention, and struc- ture. We regard the latter to be both critical and foundational. And we agree with Harris that when science and method are framed in terms of "law" and "rule" this leads to "too much trivial work on the wrong questions" [12, p. 212]. A "scientific" ethnography cannot begin to ask, let alone, answer, that most fun-
298 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY damental of questions about the social world: "What is going on here?" [15]. If we are to answer the "hard" questions-those that have to do with meaning, inten- tion, and structure, we cannot reduce ethnography to a positivist project. To mis- take "culture" for "nature" obscures rather than illuminates events and objects in the social world. To argue, as the Sandstroms have, that "scientific" ethnography transcends "tribal group, gender, social class, race, and religion" [1, p. 251] does not negate their effects; what it does instead is hide them from view. REFERENCES 1. Sandstrom, Alan R., and Sandstrom, Pamela Effrein. "Science and Nonscience in Qualita- tive Research: A Response to Thomas and Nyce." Library Quarterly 68 (April 1998): 249- 54. 2. Thomas, Nancy P., and Nyce, James M. "Qualitative Research in LIS-Redux: A Response to a [Re] turn to Positivistic Ethnography." Libraty Quarterly 68 (January 1998): 108-13. 3. Deetz, Stanley. Democracy in an Age of Corporate Colonization. Albany: State University of New York Press, 1992. 4. Wittgenstein, Ludwig. Philosophical Investigations. Oxford: Blackwell, 1972. 5. Horn, Jim. "Qualitative Research Literature: A Bibliographic Essay." Library Trends 46 (Spring 1998): 602-15. 6. Giddens, Anthony. New Rules of Sociological Method. New York: Basic Books, 1976. 7. Geertz, Clifford. The Interpretation of Cultures. New York: Basic Books, 1973. 8. Boas, Franz. "The Study of Geography." Science 9 (1887): 137-41. 9. Bunzl, Matti. "Franz Boas and the Humboldtian Tradition: From Volksgeist and Nation- alcharakter to an Anthropological Concept of Culture." In Volksgeist as Method and Ethic, edited by George W. Stocking, pp. 17-78. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1996. 10. Boas, Franz. "Letter to Science." Science 9 (1887): 614. 11. Boas, Franz. "Franz Boas." In I Believe, edited by Clifton Fadiman, pp. 19-29. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1939. 12. Harris, Michael H. "State, Class, and Cultural Reproduction: Toward a Theory of Library Service in the United States." Advances in Librarianship 14 (1986): 211-52. 13. Nyce, James M., and L6wgren, Jonas. "Towards Foundational Analysis in Human Com- puter Interaction." In Social and Interactional Dimensions of Human Computer Interfaces, ed- ited by PeterJ. Thomas, pp. 37-47. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995. 14. Bader, Gail, and Nyce, James M. "When Only the Self Is Real: Theory and Practice in the Development Community."Journal of Computer Documentation 22 (February 1998): 5- 10. 15. Goffman, Erving. Frame Analysis. New York: Harper, 1974.