THE DEVELOPMENT OF LIBRARIES IN MEXICO FERNANDO PENALOSA I A RCHEOLOGICAL remains indicate the existence of a rudimentary form of library in prehistoric Mexico. Some seven thousand years ago members of a Mongoloid race inhabited the valley of Mexico and left to posterity a library of "books" carved in stone, dealing with myths, stars, or architectural designs. This library was completely covered by a flood of lava and ashes from a near-by volcano and preserved until this century in a suburb of Mexico City.1 The next available evidence of library activity occurs in the Aztec civilization of historic times. In 1521 the conquering Spaniards found large collections of hieroglyphics relating the results of scien- tific experiments or treating historical and religious topics. These libraries, largely of an archival nature, were lo- cated in the temples and were under the supervision of the priests. The conquest ended by destroying Aztec civilization, and with it the Aztec libraries and ar- chives.2 The Spaniards were not long, however, in filling the cultural void; missionaries came to proselyte and to educate, and a thin veneer of European civilization was imposed upon the coun- try. The clergy were the intellectual leaders in this movement. At their insti- gation the first printing press was estab- lished in Mexico in 1544, by Juan Pablos. Other presses were soon set up, and books and official reports were printed on them. Although the civil and religious authori- ties placed numerous obstacles in the way of those desiring to import books to the colony, libraries were rapidly formed in schools, convents, government offices, and private homes. The majority of the books in the colo- nial libraries dealt with ecclesiastical or philosophical subjects; heretical or liberal works were excluded. The books were shelved in alphabetical order by author, and a special mark of ownership was branded into the binding of each volume. Under penalty of excommunication it was forbidden to take books from mo- nastic libraries without permission of the superiors. Fray Juan de Zumarraga, first bishop and archbishop of Mexico, who pos- sessed a large private library, was gener- ous in donating books to various monas- tic establishments. In 1533 he sent to the council of the Indies a report calling at- tention to the need for good libraries in the colony. Three years later an Augus- tinian friar, Alonso de la Veracruz, estab- lished in the Convent of San Agustin in Mexico City the first semipublic library in the New World. According to the chronicler Fray Juan de Grijalva: He set up in the college . .. a distinguished library, which the year before (1536) he had brought from Spain, and assembled (as he him- self says) from various places and universities where there were books of all the faculties and of all the known arts and languages. The original collection consisted of sixty boxes of books, to which this great man added all those which came to his attention and were not in the li- brary. He adorned the library with maps, ce- lestial and terrestrial globes, astrolabes, prayer "'A Mexican Library 7,000 Years Old," Literary Digest, LXXXII (July 12, 1924), 24. 2 Juan B. Igufniz, El Libro: Epitome de bibliologfa (M6xico: Editorial PorrCia, 1946), p. 191. 115
116 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY books, and sextants, indeed all those instru- ments which serve the liberal arts. And so it be- came a place of great renown and esteem in the kingdom ... 3 An excellent library was that of the Convent of San Francisco in Mexico City. The religious of this institution spared neither expense nor effort in bringing together a great collection of books, and by the end of the sixteenth century they had the best library in New Spain. The University of Mexico, founded in 1553, was particularly fortunate in re- ceiving a copy of almost every book that was published in New Spain. Although the principal convents were located in Mexico City, monastic li- braries flourished also in the provinces. In 1646 the bishop of Puebla, Juan de Palafox y Mendoza, founded a seminary to which he gave six thousand books to form a library. His successors continued to support the library, especially Bishop Fabia.n y Fuero (1765-73), who ordered the construction of the building, which is still occupied by the library, called the Biblioteca Palafoxiana. Until their expulsion from the colony in 1767, the Jesuits had some of the finest libraries in their colleges and residences. Among the most important were those of the Profesa residence in Mexico City, the Colleges of San Ildefonso and of San Gregorio in Mexico City, the Novitiate of Tepoztlan, and the Caroline College in Puebla. Monastic libraries were much used by preachers and doctors of law, who sought out quotations to use in their lengthy harangues, and by the numerous histori- ans at the end of the sixteenth century and the beginning of the seventeenth. These libraries reached their greatest de- velopment by the middle of the sixteenth century, and by the eighteenth they were rapidly beginning to decline. The initial impetus of conquest and colonization was spent. Gold and other precious com- modities were no longer easy to come by, and the mother-country depleted its gold supply in fruitless wars with dire eco- nomic consequences. Intellectual inquiry was stifled by state and church. The great missionary zeal of the early friars was virtually gone, and the religious orders suffered from the general eco- nomic and intellectual depression. Mo- nastic libraries were often left utterly un- attended, and many books and manu- scripts were stolen or sent to Spain. Some books were even sold as scrap paper to makers of firecrackers. Valiant efforts on the part of some librarians to save the literary and historic treasures in the mo- nastic libraries were largely without effect. Toward the end of the eighteenth cen- tury the first public library was estab- lished in Mexico. This was the library of the cathedral of Mexico, called the Biblioteca Turriana in honor of its found- ers, three priests named Torres, two brothers and their uncle. The uncle, Cayetano D. Torres, left his collection of books to the cathedral in 1787 with the express order that it should be placed at the disposition of the public. The library was founded in 1788 with the collections of the three Torres and an endowment of 20,000 pesos as a free library for the use of the literate public. The municipal gov- ernment contributed to its support, and it grew to more than nineteen thousand volumes. Aside from institutional libraries, pri- vate libraries flourished during the co- lonial period. Most of these were willed upon the death of the proprietors either 3 Felipe Teixidor, Ex libris y bibliotecas de M&xico (Mexico City: Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores, 1931), pp. xii-xii.
DEVELOPMENT OF LIBRARIES IN MEXICO 117 to one of the monastic orders or to the cathedral of Mexico. Among the most notable of the private libraries was that of Melchor Perez de Soto. This un- fortunate individual ended his life in the prisons of the Inquisition, and his mag- nificent library was incorporated into the general archives. According to Berist'ain, Vicente Torija had the best private li- brary in the Americas.4 Worthy of men- tion also were the libraries of the scholar Carlos de Siguienza y G6ngora, and of the illustrious poetess Sor Juana Ines de la Cruz. Shortly before the War of Independ- ence (1810-22), some Mexican libraries were already becoming more secular and liberal in character. There were more books of foreign origin entering the colony, including works prohibited by the censor or by the Inquisition. For ex- ample, Jose Perez Becerra, a customs official of Guanajuato, had a private li- brary of more than nine hundred vol- umes, of which only 15 per cent consisted of religious works. He had many books of a scientific character, especially in medi- cine, and there were many literary and historical works.6 II The first century of Mexican inde- pendence was a stormy one. Civil and foreign wars threw the country into tur- moil, while social and intellectual prog- ress was made exceedingly difficult. Tyrants like Jturbide and Santa Anna blighted the country. Mexico lost two- thirds of her territory to the United States, and European intervention placed the Austrian Maxmilian as "em- peror" over the unwilling Mexican peo- ple. Nevertheless, some educational and cultural progress was made during the nineteenth century, and libraries shared in it. One of the new library developments in independent Mexico was the creation of public libraries by various state gov- ernments. The first state library was established in Oaxaca in 1826. The li- raries of Durango and Guadalajara date from the period of the reform (ca. 1850- 60), and most of the others were founded later. Though these libraries were general in nature, approximately 50 per cent of their book stock was composed of theo- logical works, and they possessed few modern books. The State of Mexico Central Public Library was founded in 1827 with an ap- propriation of 9,000 pesos for the pur- chase of books in Europe. It was first lo- cated in Tlalpam, but the collection was transferred to Toluca in 1830 and shelved for the greater part of its history in the Toluca Literary Institute, a liberal arts college. The collection consisted of books taken from the convents and others bought in Europe. The priest Mariano Davila Arriaga, director of the library in 1830, ordered 308 of its books to be burned, most of which were listed in the Catholic Index.' Although the library now has its own modern building, its book stock has changed but little in the last hundred years. The most important of the state libra- ries has been the Guadalajara Public Li- brary, which was formed in 1861 from convent libraries in the city. Although deficient in modern books, it is still rich in historical works and especially in manuscripts referring to the religious history of the region. 4Teixidor, op. cit., p. xxiii. 6 Harry Bernstein, "A Provincial Library in Colonial Mexico, 1802," Hispanic American His- torical Review, XXVI (May, 1946), 162-66. 6 Jos6 Garcia Pay6n, La Biblioteca publica central del estado de Mxico (Toluca: Talleres grificos, 1934), p. 3.
118 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY A presidential decree was promulgated on October 24, 1833, establishing a na- tional library, and attempts were made to form one in 1833, 1846, and 1851; but it was not until 1857 that the chaotic po- litical situation became settled enough for any attempt to succeed.7 It was in this sixth decade of the century that the fifty-year struggle between the liberals and the conservatives came to a climax with the passage of the laws of reform by the liberal governments of Comonfort and Juarez, by which particularly the powers of the clergy and of the military were drastically curbed. In 1857 Presi- dent Comonfort suppressed the clerical- dominated University of Mexico and turned over its properties, including an extensive library, to the formation of a national library. Some ninety-one thou- sand volumes, mostly religious or philo- sophical works, expropriated from the clergy and the nationalized colleges were also destined for the library. In 1861 Benito Juarez expropriated and national- ized the religious schools, colleges, con- vents, and libraries, among them the Convent of San Francisco with 16,417 volumes, the San Fernando Apostolic College with 9,500, the Convent of San Diego with 8,273, the Convent of San Agustin with 6,747, the Convent of Santo Domingo with 6,511, the Profesa residence with 5,020, the Convent of La Merced with 3,071, the Convent of Porta Coeli with 1,431, and the convents of El Carmen, San Joaquin, and San Angel.8 The bishops had taken particular pains to support the seminary libraries, among the most important of which were those of the seminaries in Mexico City, Morelia, and Oaxaca, and those of the College of San Gregorio, the College of Todos Los Santos in the capital, and the College of San Ildefonso, now the Na- tional Preparatory School. Almost all these convent and school libraries were dispersed to other collections, private or public. The year 1861 was one of plenty for the Mexican bibliophile, for a large number of the books from the convents and libraries found their way into private libraries. So great was the number of books appearing on the market after the closing of the religious establishments that many were sold abroad. Perhaps the only ecclesiastical library kept intact was the Palafox Library in Puebla. In accordance with the reform laws, the Puebla Seminary together with the library and its other dependencies passed to the jurisdiction of the state of Puebla. The famous library was opened later as the State Public Library, and, al- though the government did not add to the collection, it carefully preserved its original twenty-five thousand volumes. The library contains valuable seven- teenth- and eighteenth-century Bibles, engraved maps of the same period, and a large collection of manuscripts and incu- nabula. After independence the tradition of fine private libraries continued. Genaro Garcia cultivated Mexican historical literature and distinguished himself as the director of the National Museum; at his death his library was sold to the Uni- versity of Texas. Many famous Mexican private libraries similarly ended up in the collections of university libraries in the United States. Jose Maria Andrade, one of the most notable Mexican bibliophiles, brought together an important library of 4,484 rare books and manuscripts per- taining to the history of Mexico. Maxi- milian bought Andrade's library as a 7 Rafael Carrasco Puente, Historia de la Biblio- teca Nacional de Mexico (Mexico: Secretaria de Re- laciones, Departmento de Informaci6n para el Extranjero, 1948), p. 9. R Igutniz, op. cit., p. 195.
DEVELOPMENT OF LIBRARIES IN MEXICO 119 nucleus for a truly national library. But, when the empire fell, this library was packed into boxes and hurriedly carried on muleback to Veracruz, whence it went to Leipzig. There Hubert Howe Bancroft bought the most valuable parts, as well as the libraries of the German priest Augustin Fischer (an intimate of Maximilian) and of the historian Jose Fernando Ramirez. After the restoration of the republic a location for the national library was found in the old church of San Agustnm. At the end of 1867 the library of the cathedral was expropriated by the gov- ernment and destined for the national library. In the same year Jose Maria Lafragua was designated director and Dr. Jose Marla Benitez librarian. Fifteen years were spent in adapting the church to library purposes. By 1867, the library had acquired 104,337 volumes, but it was not formally inaugurated until April 2, 1884. Jose Maria Vigil was named director of the library in 1880. A paragon of self-ab- negation and service, he worked so inten- sively in preparing the institution for its inauguration that he was too ill to attend the official ceremonies. Under him the li- brary was classified according to the Namur system, with a few modifications. He personally revised each catalog card and almost went blind from excessive use of his cataract-afflicted eyes. Vigil was also active as a university professor of philosophy and literature, as a compiler of literary anthologies, and as a historian. He left to his successors a printed cata- log, an official bulletin, and a collection of 200,000 volumes. He was active as direc- tor of the library until his death in 1909, when he was succeeded by the historian Francisco Sosa. The national library began active operations and enjoyed its most fruitful growth during the years of the dictator- ship of Porfirio Diaz, who ruled Mexico, except for four years, from 1877 to 1910. Under Diaz, Mexico at last achieved in- ternal peace, but economic prosperity was enjoyed only by the small upper class, and civil liberties were greatly re- stricted. Nevertheless, within the limits set by the prevailing social philosophies and conditions of the times, intellectual activity did flourish. Scientific and liter- ary societies enjoyed a healthy growth, and publication of books, periodicals, and newspapers increased greatly. The pur- chase and reading of books, especially European books, increased. New de- mands were made on existing libraries which could not be met, and new types of libraries came into being. Especially worthy of mention are the libraries of the National Museum, founded in 1880, and of the various private learned societies, notably the Antonio Alzate National Academy of Sciences. The director of this scientific library, from its founding in 1887 to 1940, was the distinguished scholar Rafael Aguilar y Santillan. Under the Diaz administration the re- search libraries as well as the public li- braries were the province of the privi- leged few. The schools reached only a tiny percentage of the total population, and the European education and culture imposed on Mexico in the colonial era was still a veneer. Yet the complacency of the upper class was soon to be shat- tered by the sudden and violent up- heaval of the inarticulate masses at the close of the Diaz regime. III Mexico has witnessed in the twentieth century an almost continuous revolu- tion, which may be divided into three 9Luis Gonzilez Obreg6n, The National Library of Mexico, 1833-1910 (Mexico, 1910), p. 45.
120 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY phases. The first ten years of the revolu- tion, 1910-20, were a military phase spent in the overthrow of the Diaz gov- ernment in a great popular revolt and later in civil strife among rival revolu- tionary leaders. The twenties and thir- ties were spent in agrarian reform and in strengthening the position of labor. Since the beginning of World War JI in- creasing emphasis has been laid on in- dustrialization of the country. Little was accomplished in the way of library development during the military phase of the revolution. Although much property belonging to the upper social class was destroyed in the fighting, there still remained many fine private libraries, such as that of Joaquin Garcia Icazbal- ceta, with 12,000 volumes, now belonging to one of his relatives; of Luis Gonzalez Obregon (7,000 volumes); of Nicolas Leon (5,000); of Federico Gomez de Orozco (5,000); and of Francisco Perez Salazar (3,000).10 The revolutionary federal and state governments have emphasized education for the masses, including the provision of popular libraries. Scholarly and anti- quarian libraries have correspondingly been neglected until quite recently. The national library and the university and state libraries have progressed but little in the present century. Although the na- tional library is still the largest and best- stocked of Mexican libraries, many of its procedures, especially those concerning public services, are antiquated. Although open daily, the library does not admit children without permission, and only professional people and research workers may take books home. The library is understaffed, and much of its book stock is in very poor physical condition. Until recently valuable works rotted on the floor or were piled high, wrapped in newspapers. Although Mexican law re- quires the presentation of a copy of each publication to the national library, this rule has seldom been observed. Since 1929 the national library has been a divi- sion of the University of Mexico. The university, which is autonomous and in- dependent of government control, has not been able to support the national library as adequately as could the gov- ernment. Thus the anomalous situation has been created of a library not well enough supported to be a real national li- brary, nor modern enough to be a library for university use. An opportunity for the national li- brary to become the central library for the university has been offered by the new campus, now under construction, of the University of Mexico. The national library will soon move to its spacious and modern building on this campus and will thus be in a position to effect many changes in its organization and pro- cedures. The university expects to move its various libraries to the new campus as the various schools of the university move. The national library then may begin to serve a co-ordinating function among the various decentralized libra- ries.1' At present the university has as many libraries as it has faculties or schools. The most important are those for the Faculty of Philosophy and Let- ters, the School of Medicine, the Law School, the School of Engineering, the School of Chemistry, and the National Conservatory. The library of the Na- tional Preparatory School, a division of the university, serves students preparing for the Baccalaureate degree. The library 10 Rafael Heliodoro Valle, "Libraries in Mexico," Library Journal, XLVIII (1923), 265-68. 11 Robert B. Downs, "Observaciones y suges- tiones sobre la organizaci6n de las bibliotecas de la Universidad de MWxico," Boletin de la Biblioteca Nacional, III, No. 3 (July-September, 1952), 3-16.
DEVELOPMENT OF LIBRARIES IN MEXICO 121 of the National Museum serves the Na- tional School of Anthropology and His- tory. Few of the books may be borrowed for home reading. Similar conditions pre- vail in the new National Polytechnic In- stitute in Mexico City and in the Mon- terrey Technological Institute, although the libraries of the institutes are much smaller and the book stocks somewhat more modern. The libraries of the state universities are even poorer in facilities and in organ- ization. The state public libraries are much the same as they were during the nineteenth century-storehouses for val- uable bibliographical rarities. More im- portant in the research field are the librar- ies of the various governmental depart- ments and the libraries of the private scholarly societies, such as the Alzate Academy of Sciences with its 100,000 volumes, including extensive files of sci- entific periodicals. The library of the Mexican Society of Geography and Sta- tistics has 17,000 volumes of books and maps. The library of the National Mu- seum, with its 90,000 volumes in an- thropology, archeology, and history, in- cluding 846 very rare native manuscripts and 18 codices, was recently reorganized according to the Library of Congress system. Of rapidly growing importance is the library of the internationally sup- ported fan American Institute of Geog- raphy and History, which has a rich col- lection of books and periodicals on the geography, ethnology, and history of the Americas and a fine collection of maps and atlases. The Institute issues the Boctin bibliogrdfico de antropologia amer- icana, the Revista de historia de America, and other scholarly publications. The Carrillo y Ancona Library of the Archeo- logical and Historical Institute of Me- rida, Yucatfin, has over 7,000 volumes, including rare works in the Mayan lan- guage. Other important scholarly libra- ries are those of the Geological Institute in Mexico City and of the Astronomical Observatory in Tacubaya. With the increasing participation of the federal government in national eco- nomic and social matters has come an expansion of government departments and facilities. Since the revolution the federal government has developed its own departmental libraries. The most important governmental libraries, aside from the national library and the Na- tional Museum library, are those of Congress and the ministries of Foreign Relations, Health and Welfare, Public Education, and Treasury and Public Credit. In 1940 the public library of the General Office of Statistics was opened in Chapultepec Castle with some fifty-five hundred books and thirty-three thou- sand pamphlets. The federal government, however, has made its most important contribution to Mexican library development in the field of the popular library. With the general cessation of internal warfare about 1920, the government turned much of its energy to the vast problem of educating the illiterate masses. Popular libraries figured prominently in this educational program. In 1921 the Department of Li- braries was created in the Ministry of Public Education, with Jaime Torres Bodet as chief of the department. The li- brary laws still in force in Mexico are those of July 25, 1921, creating the Min- istry of Public Education, and of Sep- tember 29, 1921, establishing the De- partment of Libraries. In 1926 the ad- ministrative regulations governing the department went into effect. The Department of Libraries started with fairly large funds at its disposal. It established hundreds of libraries (many containing but a few dozen books) in all
122 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY parts of the country and conducted short courses in library science, even by cor- respondence. In 1924 the department be- gan to establish libraries in prisons, army camps, and hospitals. Libraries were in- stalled in the federal penitentiary, the Belem jail, the penal colony in the Marfas Islands, the reform schools in Coyoacan and TlIlpam, and in thirty- five army camps and twenty-two hos- pitals. By 1926 1,661 public libraries had been established by the federal govern- ment in all parts of the country. An interesting example of the type of work done by the Department of Librar- ies during its early years was the small Don Quijote Library established in 1923 in Mexico City's Chapultepec Park. A circular structure of blue-tile book shelves in the open air, it housed one hundred volumes of Spanish and Mexi- can classics and some children's books. This small library was a favorite gather- ing place for students and others in the cool shade of the ancient ahuehuete trees. In May, 1928, Mexican librarians entered into closer relations with their American colleagues when the Mexican government sent a delegation to the an- nual meeting of the American Library Association in West Baden, Indiana. The delegation included Esperanza Velaz- quez Bringas, Joaquin Diaz Mercado, and Rafael Heliodoro Valle, all of the De- partment of Libraries, Rafael Aguilar y Santillan of the Alzate Academy Li- brary, Joaquin Mendez Rivas of the Na- tional Library, and Toblas Chavez of the University of Mexico Libraries. Though an extensive program of library co-opera- tion with the United States was agreed upon, unfortunately it has borne little fruit, with the possible exception of the publication by the Mexican government of the Monograflas bibliogrdficas mexi- canas. Mexico was seriously affected by the world-wide economic depression of the early thirties, and the federal govern- ment drastically curtailed its library services. The Department of Libraries was able to support only the libraries in the Federal District and by 1935 the department was responsible for only thirty-one libraries.'2 However, substan- tial economic recovery was made during the presidency of L'azaro Cfirdenas (1934-40), and during the same period great strides were taken in the field of mass education, especially in rural edu- cation. In July, 1937, the Department of Li- braries was reorganized and given a "so- cialist" orientation in line with the pre- vailing educational and social philosophy of the government. Books were made more readily accessible to the working classes, small collections were placed on trains, and small circulating libraries were sent out into rural areas on the heels of the new rural schools which were rapidly springing up. Bookmobiles went into the rural areas to distribute books, to present lectures on hygiene, temper- ance, and general cultural subjects, to give record concerts, and to show motion pictures. By the time Cardenas had fin- ished his term of office, bookmobiles had traveled more than 100,000 kilometers. There were also 39 public libraries, 33 of them in the Federal District, 9 circulat- ing libraries on buses and trains, and 1,136 rural libraries of from fifty to one hundred volumes each."3 During the ad- ministrations of Presidents Manuel Avila 12Juana Manrique de Lara, "The Popular Li- brary Movement in Mexico," Wilson Bulletin for Librarians, IX (1935), 409-14. IS La Educaci6n p3blica en Mexico desde cl 1? de diciembre de 1934 hasta cl 30 de noviembre de 1940 (Mbico: Secretaria de Educaci6n Pfiblica, 1941), I, 304 fif.
DEVELOPMENT OF LIBRARIES IN MEXICO 123 Camacho (1940-46) and Miguel Aleman (1946-52) popular library service was ex- panded somewhat, but, faced with grow- ing industrialization, the federal govern- ment has paid increasing attention to libraries of a less popular nature. The Department of Libraries, in addition to its other duties, co-operates with certain government-supported libraries, includ- ing the Library of Social Sciences (estab- lished in 1925), the library of the Min- istry of Education, much used by stu- dents and teachers, and the Cervantes Library (established in 1924). The Cer- vantes Library is the only Mexican li- brary occupying a building constructed especially for library purposes. Most of its books are reference materials, and 95 per cent of its patrons are students using books for school purposes. It has a spe- cial children's section and a periodical department. Another important public library in the Mexican capital is the Ibero-Ameri- can and Fine Arts Library, which was founded in 1938 with a collection of fif- teen thousand volumes mostly concern- ing the literature and arts of Mexico and of other Spanish-American countries. Something new in Mexican library service was created on March 28, 1944, when the National Periodicals Library was inaugurated in the remodeled San Pablo y San Pedro Church. This collec- tion of newspapers and magazines is a department of the national university and was formerly located in the depart- ment of newspapers and magazines that was formed in 1912 in the national li- brary. The materials of the Periodicals Library are for reference use only and are not cataloged. The library has thirty thousand bound volumes and about ten thousand others ready for binding. It also has a department of iconography, which contains collections of postage stamps, maps, reproductions, and en- gravings. Although it is housed in an old church, it has ample quarters and an attractive, well-lighted interior. Another important recent develop- ment was the establishment in 1947 of the Library of Mexico. The noted scholar Jose Vasconcelos left the directorship of the national library to accept the post as director of the new library. It is located in the spacious quarters of an old fortress in the capital known as La Ciudadela ("The Citadel"), which was used as an arms factory during the past war. The library is growing rapidly under an effi- cient and forward-looking administra- tion and is actually becoming the closest to a real public library in the American sense that Mexico has. Besides the library promotion carried on by the federal government, the gov- ernment of the Federal District has established its own system of popular libraries as part of its educational pro- gram. The Federal District has a union catalog of the books in the libraries under its jurisdiction, and maintains a system of interlibrary loans. By 1944 fourteen libraries had been established and a dozen more were planned, each with book stock ranging from eight hundred to two thousand. The people in the various towns are enthusiastic about the libra- ries, and in 1944 two hundred delegates, mostly peasants or workers from various localities of the district, attended a li- brary conference in Mexico City. Towns- people have co-operated with the govern- ment of the Federal District and with the national government in the establish- ment and administration of local popular libraries. One good example of this is the small library established in the town of San Salvador Cuauhtenco in an isolated rural area in the Federal District. Even though many of the 697 inhabitants of
124 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY the town are illiterate, the library is much used, and the local school sends children to read and study there. The three hundred books of the collection are shelved according to the Dewey system in a converted seventeenth-century chapel.14 In the states the library movement has progressed in recent years. The Gabino Ortiz Library in Jiquilpan, Michoacan, was one of the first to be established under the provisions of an act passed in November, 1940, for exteniding public li- brary service to the states. By 1941 forty-eight libraries had been established under the provisions of this act. In 1940 the Guanajuato municipal government obtained donations of books from authors and publishers to organize a public library. Farther to the north, the public library in Hermosillo, Sonora, re- cently moved into a beautiful modern functional building. It is necessary also to mention the li- braries established by foreign govern- ments and foreign colonies in Mexico. Among the most important, all in the nation's capital, are the free circulating libraries of the English Institute, the In- stitut Frangais d'Amerique Latine, and the Alliance Fransaise. The efficient techniques and the philosophy of Ameri- can librarianship have established two important points of penetration into Mexican intellectual life. The oldest of these, the Benjamin Franklin Library, was established in 1942 as a joint under- taking of the United States Department of State and the American Library Asso- ciation for the purpose of providing pub- lic library services. Since 1948 it has functioned under the sole jurisdiction of the State Department as an information library and is now concerned almost ex- clusively with disseminating information about the United States. Small branches are maintained in Guadalajara, Monter- rey, and Puebla. The other important American library in the Mexican capital, and the only real college or university library in the coun- try is in Mexico City College, an Ameri- can institution incorporated under Mexi- can statute.15 Its cosmopolitan staff is swiftly building up a collection and a type of library service that is bound to exert an influence on the conservative Mexican academic libraries. The library of the American School Foundation per- forms a similar function in the field of the school library. IV What may be said about the future of Mexican librarianship? The present situ- ation is far from bright. According to Peraza y Sarausa, there are 333 libraries in the entire republic (119 in the Federal District), but, of these, only 28 have more than five thousand volumes, and 23 of these are located in the Federal Dis- trict.16 Mexico is now in an important period of growth and change. The country is being rapidly industrialized, and the literacy rate is increasing sharply. A large reading public now exists and is growing larger, and it may demand bet- ter library facilities. However, it is un- likely that the extension and improve- ment of library services in Mexico will 14 George J. Finney, "A Rural Popular Library in Mexico: San Salvador Cuauhtenco," Library Jour- nal, LXVII (1942), 344-46. lb Alice M. Dugas, "Experiment in International Education," Wilson Library Bulletin, XXV (1951), 606-9. 16 FermIn Peraza y Sarausa, Directorio de biblio- tecas de Mdxico (La Habana: Ediciones Anuario Bibliogrifico Cubano, 1946).
DEVELOPMENT OF LIBRARIES IN MEXICO 125 come from local initiative. As in the past, further support must be forthcoming from the federal and state governments, but prerequisite to more support is an en- lightened public opinion in regard to li- brary needs and possibilities. The only group capable of enlightening the public and influencing the government are the Mexican librarians themselves. They are a generally well-informed and progres- sive group, but they are few in number and are not organized into a national association. American-trained librarians in the Mexico City College Library, Library of Mexico, Cervantes Library, and else- where are exceedingly few-less than a dozen in all. These will have to be the leaders in a modern Mexican library movement, but they will be able to do little until their numbers increase. Mex- ico is in desperate need of trained librari- ans, but the Mexican system of educa- tion for librarianship is grossly inade- quate for the requirements of modern libraries. The first course for librarians was opened in 1916 in the national library; other courses were offered in 1925 and 1929. The National Library School, under the auspices of the Ministry of Education, has functioned since 1945. Its curriculum strongly emphasizes his- torical bibliography, languages, and cat- aloging and paleography. The library curriculum at the Women's University places more emphasis on cultural sub- jects and less on library techniques. When Mexican library courses cease to emulate the Pcole des Chartes and are organized with greater attention to Mexi- can needs, a great forward step will have been taken. Mexico is on the threshold of a great modern library movement, and when there are enough trained librarians they may be depended upon to help in promoting the library services which Mexico so urgently needs.