LIBRARY OPERATIONS RESEARCH: A PROCESS OF DISCOVERY AND JUSTIFICATION FERDINAND F. LEIMKUHLER ABSTRACT This article begins with a discussion of the broad role of operations research (0. R.) in a society undergoing change. The nature of 0. R. teams in a library environment is then con- sidered. The function of models in 0. R. is analyzed, the development of a model being con- trasted with its formal presentation. Criteria for good models are suggested. This article then focuses on storage models for libraries, first considering the Dewey classification system from this perspective and then summarizing more current research carried out under the direction of the author with a grant from the National Science Foundation. Operations research (O. R.) is the art of using the scientific method to help understand and solve sociotech- nical problems. It focuses attention on managerial decision making in times of crisis and change. It did not originate from any "direct heave-ho of poetic strength," as Marshall McLuhan [1] puts it, but as an expedient way for society to adjust to situations in which technologies and cultures are mixed. McLuhan says that "operations re- search programs the hybrid principle as a technique of creative discovery.") Operations research began with the study of military logistics in World War II and has since become an inte- gral part of the military organization. Today, it is flourishing in the industrial world in support of corporate planning and adjustment to the introduction of computer-based management informa- tion systems. At the same time, a very substantial beginning has been made in the application of 0. R. to the large- scale, complex problems in the public sector. Library 0. R. is part of this latter development. As a creative activity, 0. R. can serve an important prophetic role by an- ticipating future social and technical developments. McLuhan argues that it is very difficult for man to understand the environment in which he lives. Only when new technologies come along and create new cultures do we become aware of the older environment which is re- placed, or rather incorporated, into the new one. Man prefers to go into the future looking backward, and as the old is justified in terms of the new, man begins to perceive more fully the struc- tural properties and components of the older environment. The power of the arts to anticipate future cultural de- velopments has long been recognized. McLuhan quotes Ezra Pound, who called the artist "the antennae of the race." By taking a position which is es- sentially antienvironmental or counter- cultural, the artist can train his powers of perception and judgment about the nature and implications of environmen- tal change. Today, new technologies and their consequent environments succeed each other in such rapid succession that technology itself is performing the function of art in making us aware of the psychic and social consequences of technological development. 84
LIBRARY OPERATIONS RESEARCH 85 The meeting of two environments in the clash of new and old technologies is a time of action and hybrid energy. It is also a moment of truth and revela- tion-a particularly favorable time to observe the forces of change in society. In these periods of transition, society needs a science of change, not only to help man to adapt to environmental changes, but, much more important, to help chart and hold a steady course toward more permanent goals, even amidst the most disrupting innovations. McLuhan believes that man is begin- ning to learn the futility of changing goals in order to accommodate technical change. Operations research is a way of making a systematic inquiry into the problematic relationship between organizational goals and the possibil- ities of technical innovation. A TEAM APPROACH In the field of library and informa- tion science a relatively small but sub- stantial beginning has been made, one which has been largely financed with federal support to some libraries-but more often to university professors and their students. For this reason, one might say that libraries have been more useful to 0. R. than has 0. R. been useful to libraries. University libraries are excellent and convenient labora- tories in which to have students de- velop their skills in this field and to engage in scholarly studies of the man- agerial and systems-design problems of service organizations and educational institutions. While it is true that this research has not always been directed toward the immediate benefit of the local library, since the researcher may have a mixture of motives and the fed- eral funder may be seeking results of much more general significance, the quality and relevance of the work that has been done may be as good as, or even better than, the work being done in other areas. What is missing is the presence of more permanent in-house 0. R. teams which can concentrate on model implementation as well as model development. The small, multidiscipline-team ap- proach is an essential feature of 0. R., since only a group of men can provide competence in the variety of disciplines and techniques that are needed in the study of broad problems. An in-house team takes on the characteristics of the organization it serves. Thus, when 0. R. spread from the military to industry there was a substitution of industrial engineering talent for mechanical engi- neering, and a substitution of econo- metricians and other behavioral scien- tists for physical scientists. At the same time, the military, management, and engineering schools of the country be- gan to develop specialized programs in the field. A typical 0. R. team may consist of two scientific types, two en- gineering types, and one or two people from the behavioral or administrative sciences. They tend to report in a staff capacity to the vice-presidential level of a corporation and are more con- cerned with long-range planning and development than with day-to-day op- erations. It is not obvious what mixture of talent would best serve a library 0. R. group. Early experience has shown that people with backgrounds in applied mathematics, statistics, computer sci- ence, industrial engineering, the phys- ical sciences, sociology, psychology, and economics can make significant contri- butions. A five- or six-person team with training in some of these areas and a fair amount of professional library
86 FERDINAND F. LEIMKUHLER experience should make an excellent beginning. It is difficult, of course, to muster the funds for such ventures, and perhaps most libraries will have to depend on larger organizations for 0. R. support, either at the university level or in association with other li- braries. The WICHE consortium of universities and colleges [2] supports 0. R. and systems-development work on a national level and works closely with applications people at participat- ing institutions. A similar arrangement is being followed for the nine campuses of the University of California in the Library Systems Development Program of the Institute of Library Research [3]. In addition, libraries can secure 0. R. services from management con- sulting groups, but the difficulty in using outside help is the possible lack of understanding, experience, and com- mitment in the formulation and solu- tion of library-type problems. Thus, it is difficult to escape the need for li- brary professionals to take the initia- tive in both the direction of 0. R. activities and participation in the work itself. CREDIBILITY Industrial operations researchers have come to learn that credibility is the major factor in getting support for their work. As Harvey Wagner [4] says, just like pregnancy, there is no such thing as a little credibility. Either an executive believes that the 0. R. approach to his problems is valid and useful or he dismisses the whole thing as worthless. Apparently, there are enough managers who are believers and enough operations researchers who are successful and/or cautious, since in a relatively short period of time it is es- timated that over half of the major firms in the United States have es- tablished corporate 0. R. groups, and that in the next ten years the remain- ing half are expected to join the ranks of the believers. Operations research can be a rela- tively expensive undertaking and it is a long-term, high-risk research invest- ment. For this reason there is a ten- dency to build an 0. R. program slowly around a few carefully chosen studies which will tend to promote confidence within both the group and the organi- zation. Wagner stresses the fact that the 0. R. effort must always be di- rected toward management systems considerations, that is, the results must eventually be integrated into the in- formation, decision-making, and con- trol structure of the organization. The study cannot be undertaken in isolation from the surrounding organizational environment and must ultimately be considered part of a total systems ef- fort. Wagner believes that many 0. R. projects fail because it is not realized that implementation must begin on the very first day of the project. The man- agers who are expected to act on the re- sults must be involved at the start, and the analysts must always be prepared to modify their models in accordance with changes in the organizational en- vironment-changes which the 0. R. effort may precipitate. An important factor leading to mis- understanding and lack of credibility on the part of managers is the language of the discipline. In 0. R. the model is the message. Operations research mod- els are problem statements in solution format and therefore are a very precise way of stating a problem. Because the solution is usually a mathematical one, the problems are stated in a highly idealized manner and may not be rec-
LIBRARY OPERATIONS RESEARCH 87 ognizable to a manager confronting a similar real-world problem. The litera- ture of 0. R. follows the custom in science of reporting work in the man- ner which logically justifies the infer- ences made. Usually these justifications have little relation to the psychological process by which the really valuable discoveries were made and the essential features of a model were fixed in the analyst's mind. Nevertheless, a model is never fully accepted in 0. R. circles until it has been justified in a scientific manner. This means listing the assump- tions and deductive steps needed to draw relevant conclusions from the model and giving an orderly descrip- tion of the design and analysis of ex- periments aimed at testing hypotheses suggested by the model. Also, a good bit of attention may be given to show- ing how this model differs from and relates to other models reported in the literature. MODELING William Morris [5], in his excellent essay on modeling, points, out that many people tend to confuse the ad hoc justification of models in scientific papers with descriptions of the model- building process itself. Morris believes that the process by which an experi- enced analyst arrives at a model of a management problem is essentially an intuitive one. A thorough familiarity with the model literature and the meth- ods of logical justification can be of great help in the discovery process, but it is not a substitute for the cre- ativity needed in model building. De- scriptions of the modeling process are hard to find. Analysts learn by doing, and they like to define 0. R. as "what 0. R. people do." Experienced analysts are reluctant to give much formal at- tention to this part of their work. They tend to dismiss questions about their choice of variables, environmental fac- tors, and solution techniques as either too trivial to bother with or too non- trivial to be answered. And yet, it is this aspect which is crucial to an under- standing and appreciation of 0. R. work. Morris tries to be more explicit and suggests three hypotheses about modeling. 1. It is a process of enrichment or elaboration. One begins with a very simple model, quite distinct from real- ity, and moves toward more elaborate models which more nearly reflect the complexity of the actual management situation. This seems obvious, but it is important and does take a certain amount of poise to confront a compli- cated problem with a simple model in which one deliberately suppresses con- sideration of the complicated realities. 2. Analogy and association with similar models and problem situations often determines the starting point in model building. This is why the experi- enced analyst can often get a head start on the model. 3. Modeling involves two sorts of looping or alternating procedures: (a) alternations between modifications of the model and confrontation by data, and (b) alternation between explora- tion of the deductive tractability of the model and the assumptions which char- acterize it. This is the most important and the hardest part of model building. Striking the proper balance between descriptive realism and mathematical sophistication is no easy trick. It in- volves a great deal of trial and error and sensitivity testing. The end prod- uct is essentially an approximation elaborate enough to capture the essen-
88 FERDINAND F. LEIMKUHLER tials yet gross enough to yield com- putable solutions. Morris gives several useful tips on modeling, and lists five criteria for good models. These are: 1. Relatedness to other 0. R. models and techniques. 2. Transparency or ease of interpre- tation; intuitive satisfaction. 3. Robustness or sensitivity to the assumptions made. 4. Fertility or richness in deductive possibilities. 5. Ease of enrichment or ability to modify and expand the model. Others may quibble over this list, but it serves the purpose of suggesting what modelers are thinking about as they stew over a problem. Obviously this process is not going to yield uni- form results in every application. Harvey Wagner notes how he is struck by the way those 0. R. experts who have perfected certain modeling tech- niques are able to tackle almost every problem they encounter with their own specialty, such as linear programming, dynamic programming, queueing the- ory, etc. He believes their ability to do this-and do it successfully attests more to their personal genius than it does to the flexibility of the techniques they use. USEFULNESS In some areas of application there have been enough models developed for the same kind of problem-that it is now possible to practice a little 0. R. on 0. R. itself; that is, to develop a model for the problem of selecting an 0. R. model for solving a problem. Recently, William Souder [6] made such a study of the many models (over forty) which have been proposed for the purposes of allocating resources among risky research programs. In order to establish criteria and to weigh their importance in evaluating such models, he polled 128 experienced re- search administrators and management scientists. From this survey, thirty-six significant factors were identified, grouped into five main categories of suitability, and assigned ranks and weights. The five categories, which Souder calls "model features" are as follows (in the rank order of their importance): 1. Realism or accuracy in represent- ing real world systems. 2. Flexibility or applicability to var- ious kinds of problems. 3. Capability to perform various kinds of computational analysis. 4. Usefulness or ease of application and comprehension. 5. Cost or the expense of setting up and running the model. The thirty-six criteria associated with these features are listed below. Realism: Multiple objectives Multiple constraints Orthogonal variables Market risk variable Technical risk variable Manpower limits parameter Facility limits parameter Budget limits parameter Data uncertainty variable Premises uncertainty variable Flexibility: Applied projects Basic projects Priority decisions Initiation decisions Budget allocation applications Project funding applications Capability: Future times analyses Optimization analyses Simulation analyses Selection analyses
LIBRARY OPERATIONS RESEARCH 89 Allocation analyses Scheduling analyses Usefulness: Low sensitivity Familiar variables Discrete variables Computer not needed Special persons not needed Special interpretation not needed Low amount of data Easily obtainable data Easy to estimate parameters Cost: Low setup costs Low use costs Low personnel costs Low computer time Low data costs There are some interesting contrasts between Souder's list and Morris's list of model characteristics. Their view- point is somewhat different in that Mor- ris is interested in discovery and Souder is more interested in implementation. This may explain why Souder includes "cost," which is always a concern of the manager, and Morris includes "re- latedness," which is important to the analyst as a means of validation. Along with deductive arguments and experi- mental evidence, models need to be subjected to critical review by other analysts, and this is frequently done by establishing relationships among models. Souder does this implicitly when he compares different investment planning models, which are related to one another by the listed thirty-six points of comparison. Models can be used as efficient de- vices for processing managerial infor- mation, and in this sense 0. R. becomes part of the general field of information science with special application to the development of management informa- tion systems. In the same way that we can distinguish between the intellec- tual activities of discovery and justifi- cation in the model-building process, it is possible to recognize a similar dis- tinction in the process of model im- plementation. Justification in this case rests on the crucial question "does it work," or, in the parlance of the sys- tem's designer, "is it operational." Oper- ational systems, like polished 0. R. models, are media and become part of the technological apparatus of society. Such media, like books, libraries, and computers, are what McLuhan calls "make happen" agents and not "make aware" agents. The fact that they com- bine to create new environments re- quires human involvement. This in- volvement can be relatively passive, making the changes that take place a source of wonder or grief. Or, this involvement can be active and creative if we take the trouble to study the processes of change in order to exercise control over our environment. We can, as McLuhan says, "think things out before we put them out." BIBLIOGRAPHIC CONTROL Operations research views the world in a problematic way, that is to say, the content of an 0. R. study is the model and the content of a model is a problem related to a technological en- vironment. Problems arise from the efforts of men to exercise control over their environment by creating new technologies or exploiting the ones available. Patrick Wilson [7] defines the library problem as the problem of bibliographic control. "Bibliographic control is a form of power," he says, "power to obtain the knowledge re- corded in written form." He argues that bibliographic control is much more than simply locating items of in- formation or being able to line them
90 FERDINAND F. LEIMKUHLER up and make them march on command. Rather, it is a kind of knowledge about knowledge and, "if knowledge is a form of power, as the familiar slogan claims, bibliographic control is, in a certain sense, power over power." "This mastery," he says, "is not only the knowledge of the contents of texts; it is knowledge of all uses to which texts can be put, by all possible users in all possible circumstances. We shall never in this world have such control; but the ideal is an intelligible one." He footnotes this with a proof of the im- possibility of building a "universal bibliographic machine" without ruling out the possibility of machines of lim- ited power. Granted that bibliographic control, or some limited form of it, is the aim of a library, where does the 0. R. analyst begin? He could begin by find- ing a harried librarian and ask him to describe some problems and see if any lend themselves to mathematical for- mulation. This is not such a bad way to start as it may seem at first glance. It has the important advantage of motivating the analyst and the librar- ian to become engaged in a common cause at the outset. There is greater assurance of an initial success. If the analyst starts from a position of math- ematical technique alone he runs the risk of having his so-called real-world problem evaporate. It would be better to rely on the hypothesis that, if ex- perienced librarians have not been able to find a satisfying solution to a prob- lem, the answer is not obvious. Fur- thermore, if the problem is really meaningful to the library environment, then one can be assured that no matter where you start you will begin to con- verge on the more central issues and problems in library operations. Be- cause modeling is an evolutionary process of enrichment and elaboration, there is a built-in quest for an ultimate model which will define the library problem. The analyst should eventually con- sult the large literature on librarian- ship if only to find justifications for current library practice and arguments against it. For example, it is difficult to proceed far in storage problems without recognizing the influence of great analytic minds like that of Melvil Dewey. The most commonly used book storage system used in American li- braries today is based on Dewey's "Decimal Classification and Relative Index" model which he first published in 1876. By drawing on the properties of the mathematical notion of the real line, the decimal system is a relatively simple, logical way of arranging items in an orderly, linear way. It makes pos- sible the insertion of an unlimited amount of new materials while main- taining a fixed relationship according to subject matter. The relevance pattern must be a hierarchic one and is depen- dent on the somewhat arbitrary de- cision as to which two adjacent items relate most closely to the new one that is inserted between them. It is a tes- timony to the ingenuity of librarians that they have been able to make this system work so well and so long in the assembling of both small and large col- lections. The very practical advantage of the decimal system is that many patrons can and will serve themselves. How well they do this is difficult to ascer- tain, but it does make it possible for libraries to operate in a largely self- service manner, which has enormous economic advantages. Author and title guides are provided for the user who
LIBRARY OPERATIONS RESEARCH 91 knows what he wants beforehand and only needs a shelf location or who pre- fers to browse in that way. Some auxil- iary subject cataloging is provided for the patron whose relevance patterns may not match the shelf pattern. This reliance on shelf retrieval has its short- comings. The user tends to select from what is available since there is no easy way to indicate what is missing. The system does accumulate obsolete, re- dundant, and mismatched information, and there are no built-in controls for reorganizing a collection so as to better accommodate current user needs and space consideration. In practice, many deliberate violations of the system are made out of necessity and usually in a somewhat arbitrary manner, such as in the shelving of oversized and under- sized material, new book collections and old book depositories, and reserve collections and special reference li- braries. These kinds of shortcomings and exceptions often provide the best grist for the beginning of an 0. R. study in a library. STORAGE PROBLEMS One cannot overlook the importance of the scale of operations in justifying an 0. R. study. It is a common prac- tice in industry to rely on the big com- panies to take risks in research and development. A 10 percent savings in cost to a big firm can more than jus- tify the cost of a study, while a small firm would never even consider such a study. This is true in libraries where a relatively small percentage of sav- ings in space and labor could be sub- stantial in absolute terms. The size of large libraries and their space require- ments continues to be the most per- sistent problem in library administra- tion. It is a problem anticipated over a century ago by the librarian-mathe- matician Leibnitz when he foresaw whole "cities of books." This was the theme of Fremont Rider's [8] re- search as librarian at Wesleyan Uni- versity. Rider spent a lifetime groping with the problems of book storage in libraries, and it is interesting to reread how he reported his findings. Rider concluded that "no emenda- tions in present library methods alone were going to provide a sufficient solu- tion to our growth problem," and that technical innovations were needed, not for the purpose of replacing the li- brary, but to create a new environment in which the conventional library would be an integral part. With remarkable anticipation of what has become known as the systems approach to problem solving, Rider reported his work in the following manner: "And the reason for our failure to integrate what were really facets of one single problem was that we were blinded by the 'status quo.' We insisted on continuing to ac- cept as library axioms, unalterable and unquestionable, certain assumptions which no longer had validity, such dicta, for instance, as: Libraries are collections of books; books are stored on shelves; library materials have to be cataloged; catalogs have to be made on cards; books must be arranged by their call numbers, etc., etc." "It is not until we have looked be- hind, and beyond, every one of these- and many other-supposedly basic axioms of library method, and have seriously questioned their validity as axioms, that we begin to make any real progress. For, when we do this, we are suddenly amazed to find all the mismatched bits of our research li- brary growth puzzle falling, almost of
92 FERDINAND F. LEIMKUHLER themselves, into a quite astonishingly new synthesis." Rider's solution was the microcard, forerunner of the present-day micro- fiche. In this way, he helped discover a new medium which is becoming in- creasingly important to libraries. How- ever, in looking at his invention in retrospect, it seems that he has pre- served the essential character of the conventional library. He proposed or- ganizing a microform library in sub- ject catalog format, just as the con- ventional library is already in principle an enormous subject catalog of books. In this sense then, Rider's suggestion is essentially a change of scale. It was only a year after Rider pub- lished his work that Vannevar Bush [9] introduced his notions of elec- tronic memory systems using associa- tive rather than hierarchic retrieval schemes, along with some very ad- vanced concepts of miniaturization. His monumental article, "As We May Think," became the blueprint for the new field of information science which precipitated a technological battle be- tween the computer and the book. J. C. R. Licklider [10] says, "One must be prepared to reject not only the schema of the physical library, which is essentially a response to books and their proliferation, but the schema of the book itself, and even that of the printed page as a long term storage device, if one is going to discover the kinds of pro-cognitive systems needed in the future." He does not reject the schema of the computer. RETRIEVAL PROBLEMS Contemporary with Rider was the great British documentalist, S. C. Brad- ford. Bradford [11] focused attention on journals, periodicals, and serials. Serials storage is a significant depar- ture from the decimal system for monographs. Serials are shelved by title and date of publication and there- fore have built-in age control and missing item control. There is greater uniformity of size and ease in predict- ing shelf requirements. There is also a considerable simplification in the procedures for getting new items on the shelf, an advantage that is looking even more attractive as automatic order systems create bottlenecks in the cataloging procedures for monographs. The importance of this medium is quite evident in the sciences and technology, where it constitutes the bulk of the important literature. One of the very significant differ- ences between serials and monograph storage is that the problem of biblio- graphic control is largely the respon- sibility of the publisher and not the library. Searching in this medium is a chainlike process from item to item, where each item is expected to have its own references to the next one. This is like having the catalog im- bedded in the material itself, rather than trying to imbed the material into a catalog. Special retrieval services may be provided as guides to periodi- cals, but this is almost always done outside the library proper. This free- dom from subject classification permits any one serial item, such as a particu- lar journal, to change its subject con- tents radically over time and still maintain a fixed relative location on the library shelf. The loss of local con- trol is readily apparent when a library attempts to shelve an item in serial form which does not meet the stan- dards of first-rate journals in the pro- vision of bibliographic controls and retrieval services. Such materials are
LIBRARY OPERATIONS RESEARCH 93 virtually lost the moment they are shelved. Bradford's study of the periodical literature was aimed at establishing bibliographic control. His institutional solution was the establishment of a national lending library which would be a central depository and clearing- house for most periodicals. Local li- braries would hold small selective col- lections which could even be discarded while depending on the backup services of the central library. The logic for his position rests on his so-called law of scattering, by which he sought to explain why the abstracting services consistently included only about a third of the articles actually published in scientific and technical journals, al- though the total number of abstracts was about equal to the total number of articles. Bradford was disturbed by the amount of apparent duplication and showed empirically that the rec- ognized articles on any one topic were distributed in a highly skewed manner over the journals publishing them. Thus, trying to see every article on one topic becomes a Herculean task, but to see, say, half of these articles one might only have to search through about 10 percent of the journals carry- ing such articles. Bradford's model can provide a rich starting point for the study of journal selection problems in a library, or for the distribution of journal holdings over a branch library system, or, on a larger scale, over a network of libraries. Technological developments going on in the world of librarianship and in- formation science today are greatly enlarging the scope of the problem of bibliographic control and shifting the emphasis from storage and selection to larger problems of information re- trieval and transfer. These lead to the design and development of information retrieval systems which deliberately refuse to predicate their conceptual plan on the operations of a conven- tional library. Whether or not this is being done more as an exploratory tactic in the process of discovery or whether it is prophecy of the future remains to be seen. As a technique for discovery, one has to be willing to recognize the need for taking positions which are essentially counterenviron- mental in order to test the integrity of that environment. However, as a fore- cast of the future there may be some comfort in knowing that the time of justification will come for the new technologies too; and in that justifica- tion there is an implicit justification for the technology which is superseded. LIBRARY PROBLEMS While problems of information awareness, transfer, and retrieval re- quire reference to a much larger sys- tem environment, there are many problems which remain within the domain of the local library. Among these are the problems of document selection, storage, and delivery. These are "practical" problems involving the messy realities of limited budgets for acquisitions, buildings with "odd-ball" dimensions and exotic designs, and funders and users with peculiar whims and preferences. Is this the kind of environment in which 0. R. can flour- ish? The answer would seem to depend on the way the library views itself. If it is viewed as something obsolete or just "making do," then the library does not need 0. R. If it is seen as a place without options and without goals of its own, then there are no problems of this variety. An alternate
94 FERDINAND F. LEIMKUHLER and more viable view would see the library as a microcosm of the larger bibliographic world of which it is one of the essential base points. It would seek its justification in the larger en- vironment and not depend solely on its own internal and perhaps obsolete va- lidity. If the library is open, 0. R. can be useful. To the 0. R. analyst, the problems of the library have not been solved until they are no longer intel- lectually interesting and no longer socially useful. Certainly, the prob- lems of bibliographic control at the local level do not meet either of those criteria. Where library 0. R. is done as an adjunct to its being taught on the cam- pus, a shotgun approach to problem formulation may result. However, a certain amount of wandering or ran- dom searching over the problem field must be expected from any truly cre- ative 0. R. effort. This is true of the experience at Purdue University, where I have directed a library operations project over the past six years with support from the National Science Foundation's Office of Science Infor- mation Service. Most of the studies made were related to the teaching pro- grams of the university and resulted in masters' theses and doctoral dis- sertations. However, this work was done as a team effort and in conformity with the objectives of the sponsor and the university library. The library director and his staff were actively engaged in this work both as partici- pants and as reviewers. The first major study, by Cox [12], was made of book shelving problems. This was followed by a series of related investigations. Raffel [ 13 ] perfected Cox's mathematical formulation in order to improve on his solution tech- nique. A subsequent application study in which he compared the model solu- tions with the actual shelving patterns in three branch libraries at Purdue University was made by Popovitch [14]. O'Neill [151 developed efficient statistical techniques for gathering book shelving data. The shelving model had implications for several other studies. For example, Roberts [16] demonstrated its rela- tionship to many industrial problems and to models for packaging and cut- ting steel and paper stock for inven- tories. He applied it to the design of industrial warehouses. Recently, Ravindran [17] has developed a new solution technique using network or graph theory which greatly expands the model's solution and application capability. An interesting extension was made by Sterling [18], who used the book shelving model to efficiently block MARC II bibliographic record on magnetic computer tapes. Of special significance was the recognition given to the use of these studies in the plan- ning of Princeton University's 500,000- volume auxilliary library. The concern with library storage problems led directly to studies of depositories by Lister [19] and Mann [20] and of book usage models and retirement policies by Jain [21]. This led also to studies of the Bradford dis- tribution [22] and its application in information search and storage models by Leimkuhler [23] and Baker [24]. O'Neill [25] used this work as a de- parture point for his study of journal productivity and library organization, and Kraft [26] drew on it in his study of the journal selection problem. The focus on storage and selection models begged the question: "Is this all there is to a library?" In response
LIBRARY OPERATIONS RESEARCH 95 Baker [27] formulated a three-part conception of the library environment based on the behavioral interactions of users, funders, and librarians. Nance [28] simulated this model on a com- puter and applied it to several branch libraries; Hassel [29] revised the model to include the process of sys- tem's design; DeWeese [30] focused on the sociological aspects of the model; and Rzasa [31] studied the problems of goal setting by library managers. At the outset, the Purdue studies deliberately took a counterenviron- mental stance with regard to library automation. That is to say, no attempt was made to justify the use of com- puters in libraries. Computers were used in all of the studies as a com- putational or analytic tool but not as an exemplar of futuristic information systems-not initially, anyway. Even- tually, the time had to come when this technical dimension had to be con- sidered. This was done in the work of Korfhage and DeLutis [32]. Another expansion of the technological environ- ment has occurred in the studies of the human factors in the use of microform readers by Buck and Lee [33]. Throughout the course of these studies a concerted effort was made to relate the work done to the experience of librarians and other operations re- searchers, both directly through active participation and indirectly in the lit- erature. The goal, admittedly, was aimed not at the improvement of the Purdue libraries, but toward the im- provement of libraries in general by seeking to demonstrate the validity of the 0. R. approach through the ex- amples and arguments which would attract the mutual attention and inter- est of librarians and operations re- searchers. The fact that the Operations Research Society of America scheduled two sessions at its thirty-eighth na- tional meeting in Detroit (October 1970) and another session at its thirty- ninth meeting in Dallas (May 1971) for the presentation and discussion of library-type models is ample evidence of the professional interest in this sub- ject by analysts. Of equal or perhaps greater importance is the interest being shown by libraries and graduate li- brary schools, as evidenced by the present conference. REFERENCES 1. McLuhan, Marshall. Understanding Media: The Extension of Man. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1964. 2. Gulko, Warren W. Program Classificationt Structure. Preliminary ed. Boulder, Colo.: Western Interstate Commission for Higher Education, June 1970. 3. Bellomy, Fred. Organizational Structure of the UC LSD Program. Report no. LSD 70-38. Santa Barbara: University of Cal- ifornia Library Systems Development Program, September 1971. 4. Wagner, Harvey M. Principles of Opera- tions Research. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1969. 5. Morris, William T. Management Science: A Bayesian Approach. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1968. 6. Souder, William E. Suitability and Valid- ity of Mathematical Models for Research Investment. Ph.D. dissertation, Saint Louis University, August 1970. 7. Wilson, Patrick. Two Kinds of Power: An Essay on Bibliographical Control. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1968. 8. Rider, Fremont. The Scholar and the Future of the Research Library. New York: Hadham Press, 1944. 9. Bush, Vannevar. "As We May Think."
96 FERDINAND F. LEIMKUHLER Atlantic Monthly 176 (July 1945): 101- 8. 10. Licklider, John C. R. Libraries of the Future. Cambridge, Mass.: M.I.T. Press, 1965. 11. Bradford, S. C. Documentation. Washing- ton, D.C.: Public Affairs Press, 1950. 12. Cox, J. Grady. Optimum Storage of Li- brary Materials. Lafayette, Ind.: Purdue University Libraries, 1964. 13. Raffel, Leslie J. Compact Book Storage Models. M.S.I.E. thesis, Purdue Univer- sity, June 1965. 14. Popovitch, John D. Compact Book Stor- age. M.S.I.E. student project, Purdue University, June 1965. 15. O'Neill, Edward T. Sampling University Library Collections. M.S.I.E. thesis, Pur- due University, January 1966. 16. Roberts, Stephen D. 'arehouse Size and Design. Ph.D. thesis, Purdue University, January 1968. 17. Ravindran, Arunachalam. On Compact Book Storage in Libraries. Research Memo no. 70-14. Lafayette, Ind.: School of Industrial Engineering, Purdue Univer- sity, December 1970. 18. Sterling, Keith. Cost Exchange Analysis of Variable Length versus Fixed Length MARC II Bibliographic Records. Tech- nical Memo no. 5. Berkeley: University of California Institute of Library Re- search, April 1969. 19. Lister, Winston C. Least-Cost Decision Rules for the Selection of Library Ma- tewials for Compact Storage. Ph.D. thesis, Purdue University, January 1967. 20. Mann, Stuart H. Least-Cost Decision Ru'es for Dynamic Information Mcnage- ment. Working paper, Division of Man- Environment Relations, Pennsylvania State University, June 1971. (To appear in Information Storage and Retrieval.) 21. Jain, Aridaman K. A Statistical Study of Book Use. Ph.D. thesis, Purdue Univer- sity, January 1968. 22. Leimkuhler, Ferdinand F. "The Bradford Distribution." Journal of Documentation 23 (September 1967): 419-27. 23. Leimkuhler, Ferdinand F. "A Literature Search and File Organization Model." American Documentation 19 (April 1968): 131-36. 24. Baker, Norman R. "Optimal User Search Sequences and Implications for Informa- tion Systems Operation." American Doc- umentation 20 (July 1969): 203-12. 25. O'Neill, Edward T. Journal Usage Pat- terns and Their Implications in the Planning of Library Systems. Ph.D. thesis, Purdue University, January 1970. 26. Kraft, Donald H. The Journal Selection Problem in a University Library System. Ph.D. thesis, Purdue University, January 1971. 27. Baker, Norman R. "A Descriptive Model of Library/User/Funder Behavior in a University Environment." Drexel Library Quarterly 4 (January 1968): 16-30. 28. Nance, Richard E. Strategic Simulation of a Library/User/Funder System. Ph.D. thesis, Purdue University, June 1968. 29. Hassel, H. Paul. An Analytical Design Framework for Academic Library System Formulation. Ph.D. thesis, Purdue Uni- versity, 1968. 30. DeWeese, L. Carroll, III. Status Concerns and Pro fessionalization among Librarians. M.S. thesis, Purdue University, January 1969. 31. Rzasa, Philip V. The Development of Measures of Effectiveness for a Univer- sity Library. M.S.I.E. thesis, Purdue Uni- versity, June 1969. 32. Korfhage, Robert R., and DeLutis, Thomas G. A Basis for Time and Cost Evaluation of Information Systems. Re- search Memo no. 69-6. Lafayette, Ind.: School of Industrial Engineering, Purdue University, June 1969. 33. Lee, David R., and Buck, James R. An Evaluation of Selected Parameters at the Microform Reading Man-Machine Inter- face. Ph.D. thesis proposal, Purdue Uni- versity, December 1970.