LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE AS A SOCIAL SCIENCE: NEUTRAL AND NORMATIVE CONCEPTIONS Archie L. Dick' When library education was institutionalized at universities in the 1920s and 1930s in the United States, it pursued a social scientific path of disciplinary growth guided largely by perspectives in the philosophy of science. In this way, objectivity and neutrality became prominent professional ideals of library educa- tion. A different conception of social science denies a disinterested outlook and provides the basis for recent challenges to the profession's traditional perception of itself and its disciplinary growth. This article explores alternately the "neu- tral" and "normative" conceptions of library and information science as a social scientific discipline. Introduction There is a deep-seated ambivalence that characterizes the library profes- sion today. One manifestation of this is evident in the concern for the future of education in library and information science. A recent re- sponse sets forth two options. The first is that of the professional school. In this approach, a school of library science would have to "articulate its mission and how its mission fits into the schema of the university" as in the cases of schools of medicine, law, and engineering [1, p. 172]. The second approach is that of the academic unit. This approach re- quires library science to "articulate its intellectual contribution to the university . . . in unambiguous terms" and to compete with other aca- demic units on an equal footing [1, p. 174]. The distinction between these approaches lies in the perception of library and information sci- ence as an applied discipline oriented more narrowly to professional practice, on the one hand, and as a foundational discipline for the pur- poses of a broader basic education on the other. It is especially in the latter approach that library and information science appears largely to 1. Department of Information Science, University of South Africa, P.O. Box 392, Preto- ria, South Africa, 0001. [Library Quarterly, vol. 65, no. 2, pp. 216-235] X 1995 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-25 19/95/6502-0003$01.00 216
LIS AS A SOCIAL SCIENCE 217 be conceived as a social science and integrated into the mainstream of the university's teaching and research program. This conception is one possible source of the profession's embattled collective mind-set and may be traced to early attempts to institutionalize its education at universities and the subsequent disciplinary alignment with the social sciences. One can only speculate on how things might have been if the other route had been taken, that is, if the profession had retained control over its education in libraries themselves under the auspices of professional library associations. Excellent historical ac- counts of the "university" approach are provided in the literature [2, 3]. What seems to be lacking are analyses of the historical emergence of and contemporary trends in the social sciences themselves, as well as an appraisal of library and information science as a professional disci- pline using alternative conceptions of social science. This article explores, in support of the currently favored academic- unit approach referred to earlier, the profession's predominant percep- tion of itself as a social science in its contrasting "neutral" and "norma- tive" conceptions. Prominent among the issues that continue to impede a sound develop- ment of the knowledge base of library and information science are those concerned with its disciplinary status and its disciplinary identity. Disciplinary Status On the question of whether library and information science is a disci- pline, opinion is still divided broadly into two camps. One camp main- tains the proposition that it is an interdisciplinary field of study and includes individuals who recommend opportunistic borrowing from other more established social sciences [4, 51. The other camp rejects an ancillary or interdisciplinary status and affirms instead either that it is indeed a discipline in its own right or that it needs to become one [6, 7]. It is mostly in this latter camp that arguments for developing library and information science essentially along the lines of a social science may be found. In this effort, however, library and information science tends to assume the key features of the so-called traditional liberal social sciences. This largely "neutral" conception requires it to sacrifice certain professional characteristics considered by some members of the oppos- ing camp to be desirable and worth retaining. Value neutrality, for ex- ample, is a central quality of traditional liberal social sciences and highly regarded as a professional outlook for librarians. Its staunch support has led to the rejection of the "normative" and often prescriptive ap- proaches recommended by interested outside observers as means of
218 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY enhancing the profession's social status. These approaches advocate, for example, regulating the production of books, controlling the flow of information, and actively recommending good books [8, 9]. The vigor with which professional skepticism toward such interventionist strategies in the provision of information and information services is maintained, is revealed in the observation that the role of the neutral provider is worth pursuing even if "it may keep us forever out of the professional pantheon" [10, p. 253]. What is deserving of our attention here is that this is not the only conception of social science. There is no need to abandon disciplinary projects at the expense of professional status and authority. Newer scholarly developments hold out the promise of recovering normative dimensions and of reconciling the discipline with the profession. Before a discussion of the dominant view of the social sciences that frames much research and thought in library and information science and more recent reconceptions of this view, an indication of the diversity of per- ceptions of the profession's essential nature is worthwhile. Disciplinary Identity The question regarding the essential disciplinary nature of library and information science, or what kind of discipline it is, is unsettled. One possible source of this lack of consensus is the absence of a cohesive response to several calls for developing its philosophy on the one hand and its science on the other. These twin requests tend to emphasize different conceptions of the profession's projected disciplinary devel- opment. Although analyses of the philosophy of librarianship range from re- statements of aims and functions to attempts to identify formal philo- sophical aspects in information work, they share the common ideal of its broadest possible alignment with scholarship in general. In these approaches the ideal is that of a learned profession. Analyses of the science of librarianship, in their turn, range from early views of librari- anship as a science in the broad Germanic sense to the recendy popular view of the profession as a social science, especially in its imitation of positivist features of the natural sciences. These approaches have in mind a scientific profession. The failure to respond satisfactorily to these challenges has perhaps led to a state of affairs that prompted the remark that "there is perhaps no profession or field of study less rooted in a coherent discipline" [11, p. 63]. The perception of its ancillary status following an unfortunately reductionistic rationale, moreover, is expressed by William McGrath:
LIS AS A SOCIAL SCIENCE 219 "Library and information science is still largely a derivative profession, not yet a discipline in its own right . .. we derive from or are a branch of education which itself depends on sociology and psychology and which, in turn, derive from biology, chemistry, and physics" [12, p. 219]. An added difficulty surrounding the lack of, or even loss of, disciplin- ary identity of library and information science is the confusion gener- ated by changes in names, titles, and labels. The observation by Marga- ret Wilkinson is well worth heeding in this situation. She asserts that "the important thing is to be clear about our professional identity under whatever label" [13, p. 200]. When viewed in the context of Charles Snow's two-cultures debate as separate fields of study, library science and information science are characterized in divergent ways. Library science is identified, for exam- ple, as a "science" in the broad Germanic sense of Wissenschaft (14]; "4a social science" [15; 16, p. xiii]; an "empirical science" [17, p. 16]; "a genuine, albeit immature, natural science" [18, p. 518]; an "applied, vocationally-directed social science which also contains elements that are related to the natural sciences and the humanities" [19, p. 17]; an "ap- plied science" [20, p. 158]; and an art, even a fine art untouched by science [21, p. 587]. In its turn, information science is also described in different ways as allied to the natural sciences [22, p. 5]; as an "experi- mental science" [23, p. 13]; as an "interdiscipline" [24, p. 488]; and as a "social science" [20, p. 157]. Reinforcing this ambivalence, connections with the humanities are emphasized in the conception of this field of study as "librarianship," with the qualification that "'humanistic' is conceived in ways that do not prejudge it as belonging to one of two antithetical cultures" [25, p. 12]. Information science need not be excluded from this association with the humanities either. Margaret Stieg, for example, argues that "infor- mation science and the humanities are not inherently opposed; it is only our mental constructs and metaphors that force them to such a relationship" [26, p. 67]. It is essentially the "two-cultures" dichotomy that has dominated our thinking along these lines, and yet this metaphor is cast largely in social and political terms and ignores the whole question of intellectual relationships. Stieg suggests the need for more fruitful approaches for librarians, information scientists, and the educators in these disciplines [26, p. 63]. There is another category of perceptions that emphasize inclusiveness and continuity as distinct from the largely dichotomous views following the two-cultures framework. This category includes Pierce Butler's asso- ciation of library science with scholarship in its broadest sense [27, p. 246; 28]; Shiyali Ranganathan's notion of Ekavakyata-unity [29,
220 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY p. B17]; Joseph Nitecki's "metalibrarianship" [30]; H. Curtis Wright's [31] and Anthony Debons's [32] "metascience"; and the inclusivist [19] or holistic approach of Jean Kesting [33, p. 59]. Regardless of the wide diversity of these perceptions and notwith- standing the variety of views of the conjunction and disjunction of li- brarianship and information science, there is a greater acceptance today of the discipline's social scientific orientation in its search for disciplinary identity [34]. This marks a gradual slide from ambivalence to alignment. This trend is, however, due to a much earlier shift of control over library education from the profession itself to universities. The Drift toward the Social Sciences When library education moved from libraries themselves to the universi- ties in the early 1920s in the United States, its disciplinary development assumed a clearer, but not uncontroversial, sense of direction. Library and information science was increasingly seen as a social science in its narrower association with the natural sciences. In its desire for accep- tance as an intellectually respectable academic discipline, the "scientific" path appeared to be the most promising [35, 36]. This path is still pur- sued today with considerable vigour [37]. There is an interesting histori- cal context to this trend. The initial debate surrounding the issue of its disciplinary identity was a lively one. Douglas Waples (representing the scientists) saw the profession as a social enterprise and sought to establish its knowledge base in the social sciences, which reached powerful levels of influence in the 1920s and 1930s at American universities. C. Seymour Thompson (representing the humanists) viewed the profession alternatively as an educational enterprise and identified literature and a knowledge of good books as the key elements in its knowledge base [38, p. 311; 2, p. 9]. This debate sustained a healthy interchange of viewpoints that kept open the question as to whether library science should be consid- ered as a genuine social science or not [35, 39]. Although the original impulse of this debate subsided as the former (scientific) approach gained increasing support, this article argues that contemporary chal- lenges in the natural and social sciences provide an opportunity to re- open the debate [40, pp. 139-58]. The validity and value of these recent challenges for future disciplin- ary development of the profession may be assessed in the context of a cursory overview of the manner in which a certain conception of social science was used to shape its growth.
LIS AS A SOCIAL SCIENCE 221 The "Neutral" Conception of Social Science It would seem that a picture of what it is to be a social science has held the library community captive. This picture is one that reflects by and large some misunderstandings and the selective use of perspectives in the philosophy of science. Attempts to develop the scientific aspects of library and information science reveal the influence of selected thoughts of two philosophers of science who feature prominently in the profes- sional literature, namely, Karl Popper and Thomas Kuhn. The effects of more narrowly positivist approaches are also clearly discernible in the discipline. In this pursuit of its social scientific status, the profession embraced the ideals of neutrality and objectivity and sought to formu- late laws and generalizations applicable to library-related activities. These ideals are considered to be linked to classical liberalism as it emerged in the nineteenth century, and while they are appropriate for the liberal state, they are not suited to the social sciences [41, p. 1]. Issues involving values were thought to lie outside the sciences, and hence the social sciences "were expected to remain silent on questions or disputes concerning ultimate moral values" [41, p. 15]. It becomes clear in an examination of the library profession's search for its social scientific base, following the philosophy of science path, why objectivity and neutrality assumed such prominence as professional ideals. The Use of Popper in Library and Information Science Selected ideas of Karl Popper (1902-94) have been applied in aspects of library and information science and merit careful examination. In Popper's The Open Society [42] and The Poverty of Historicism [43] there are discussions, of variable length and detail, of the philosophy of the social sciences. It is especially in the latter work that his ideas on the social sciences become evident through a refutation of the doctrine of historicism or historical determinism, namely, his rebuttal of the propo- sition that the nature and structure and form of society must proceed from stage to stage by inevitable laws. Popper argues that the methods of the social sciences, if properly understood, are not fundamentally different from those of natural scientists. He is convinced that the natu- ral sciences have been mistakenly equated with logical positivism and that, when this view has been emended, they have much to commend themselves as models for the social sciences. Popper distinguishes scientific knowledge from nonscience or meta- physics by his principle of falsifiability [44, p. 73]. He claims that science
222 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY grows not by mechanical induction of general propositions from accu- mulated reports of particular observations but by the imaginative for- mulation of hypotheses that are then tested and, unless they elude all efforts to falsify them, revised and replaced. This process may be de- scribed as an on-going dialectic of conjecture and refutation. It is especially Popper's break with subjectivist epistemology that Ber- tram Brookes finds attractive for the theoretical development and subse- quent disciplinary demarcation of information science [45]. Popper's world three (as one component of a "three-world" ontology) is the basis for an "objective epistemology" for information science instead of the "commonsense theory of knowledge." This "third world" of objective knowledge includes published literature and is objective in the sense that it is publicly observable and can be studied by scientific methods. It becomes the proper study of information science for Brookes, but this narrower focus, which neglects aspects related to subjective and social contexts of the creation and use of information, has evoked critical response [46]. Also, Brookes's own efforts to demarcate the field of information science and to supply it with appropriate mathematical tools tend to concentrate strongly on the published literatures of the natural sciences only. Don Swanson seeks a more practical application of Popper's ideas in information retrieval. In a study concerning the requirements for future catalogs, Swanson concludes that more effective search strategies would take into account guesswork or conjecture [47, p. 315]. Swanson con- tends that the fundamental role of libraries in the growth of knowledge is to facilitate "problem-orientated access to knowledge," that is, to rec- ognize Popper's method by which knowledge grows and to adapt biblio- graphic tools in accordance with this philosophical doctrine [48]. What this really means is that the design of our retrieval tools should be guided by the conjecture and refutation view of the growth of knowl- edge [49, p. 402]. It would seem that librarians and information scientists adopt a selec- tive approach in their application of Popper's ideas. Concentrating per- haps too exclusively on Popper's third world of objective knowledge as a means of supplying theoretical credibility to information science's search for a legitimate area of inquiry, other useful aspects of his philos- ophy tend to be overlooked. The use of Popperian ideas in information retrieval, moreover, leads to a growing emphasis on artifacts such as documents, indexes, and abstracts (as valid third world items) at the expense of people such as authors, indexers, abstractors, and users. The broad approaches that concentrate on these two distinctive sets of concerns are described as different "paradigms" and bring us to the application of "Kuhnian" terms in the library profession.
LIS AS A SOCIAL SCIENCE 223 The Use of Kuhn in Library and Information Science Thomas Kuhn (1922-) doubted Popper's version of scientific progress. Instead of giving up a falsified scientific theory in favor of another on purely rational grounds, Kuhn maintained that sociological factors also played a significant role [50]. The dilemma of rationality versus social influence was a central concern for Kuhn, and few social scientists real- ize that he struggled to preserve objectivity and rationality in science. A recent article, for example, postulates that Kuhn did not refute logical empiricism but rather that he introduced a historical picture of science [51]. It is especially the notion of a "paradigm" that is applied in several different ways by social scientists to serve a variety of purposes. In spite of Kuhn's clear statement that the acquisition of a paradigm marks the sign of maturity in the development of any given scientific field [50, p. 11], library and information science theorists follow the example of most social scientists to use the term to examine and develop what they believe to be its scientific aspects. Paul Roth confirms this trend among social scientists: "For Kuhn, the notion of a paradigm is part of his method for structuring the history of science. Social scientists have made the notion part of the definition of what it is to be a science, which is not what Kuhn intended" [52, p. 124]. While Kuhn holds that scientific research may proceed without para- digms [50, p. 11], many social scientists are convinced that a paradigm specifies the defining criteria for science and that its absence necessarily inhibits scientific progress. Kuhn's use of the term "paradigm" is inter- preted in widely different ways and is even said to have been interpreted in many ways by Kuhn himself [53]. What is clear is that he intended it as a means to structure the history of science rather than an attempt to define or redefine science. Yet it would appear that social scientists either use Kuhn to fill the methodological void left by the demise of positivism [52, p. 116] or find him "a very convenient stick with which to beat science" [54, p. 30]. Some even apply his "incommensurability of paradigms" thesis to support doctrines of cultural relativism and the bolder claims that science is arid and inappropriate to the understand- ing of human beings, human nature, and society. The application of the term "paradigm" in library and information science appears to give credence to two questionable assumptions, namely, that the social sciences ought to follow the model of the natural sciences and that library and information science is a social science. Moreover, the several conceptions of the so-called paradigmatic nature of library and information science reveal precisely the absence of what a paradigm is supposed to signify, namely, theoretical consensus. It has
224 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY even been suggested that the multiplicity of paradigms in other social sciences may actually restrict interdisciplinary research and disallow cross-pollination between research disciplines and an applied discipline such as library and information science. In spite of the potential benefit of such mutual disciplinary interaction toward building the "theory base which supports and enhances the library and information professions," there is the caution that the first step in this process is to "understand that existing paradigms may inhibit the interdisciplinary inquiry neces- sary to accomplish this task" [55, p. 584]. The several uses of the term "paradigm" in library and information science literature, as indicated earlier, reflect widely divergent percep- tions of its role and value. Library and information science is nonpara- digmatic in the sense that it does not yet possess a truly scientific tradi- tion [56]. In this view, references to paradigms are no more than indications of broad trends or conceptual metaphors to distinguish one school of thought from another and are better signified as perspectives, models, concepts, and even ideologies. Such examples in the literature of library and information science include, among others, "traditional reactive" and "idea-system paradigms" [57]; "non-reductive paradigm" [58]; "information paradigms" [59]; "cognitive paradigm" [60]; "Cran- field paradigm" [61]; "conversation as a new paradigm for librarianship" [62]; and "organizational paradigm" [63]. Lloyd Houser and Alvin Schrader contend that it is premature to talk about paradigms in library science if they are "not based on a scientific theory and scientific research activity" [56, p. 16]. The view that library and information science is still a "youthful" science, and hence preparadigmatic, features strongly in the literature. The professional discipline is perceived here as either a multiple para- digmatic science or a dual paradigmatic science. A cogent explanation of the "prescientific" status that emanates from the existence of more than one paradigm in library and information science is advanced by Johannes Meijer [64]. He suggests that a possible reason for the pres- ence of a variety of paradigms that serve as points of departure for this discipline is its broadness. Two paradigms that Meijer highlights are the administration and information paradigms. It is especially the latter that has gained popularity and widespread acceptance but that has not yet been scientifically grounded as a defensible foundation for library and information science. There is a need, in Meijer's view, for a central paradigm for the profession that will provide an insight into its goal and mission and enhance scientific activity and professional practice [64, p. 228]. As dis- tinct from an emphasis on the need for a single central paradigm, there is the perhaps contrary view that "paradigmatic tolerance" is required
LIS AS A SOCIAL SCIENCE 225 in library and information science. Johan Olaisen calls for the need to explore several paradigms so that library and information science may transcend the "functionalist" or "logical empiricist" paradigm that has led it to be characterized as a "one-dimensional science" [65, pp. 147-48]. In the area of information retrieval research, David Ellis maintains that the inherent categorial duality of its focus restricts the number of its paradigms to two, namely, the physical and the cognitive paradigms [66]. In this "basic irreducible duality" the physical paradigm focuses on artifacts (documents, document representations, abstracts, indexes, and databases), while the cognitive paradigm concentrates on people (authors, indexers, intermediaries, and users). Ellis claims that this has retarded paradigm articulation and theoretical development in infor- mation retrieval research. He states: "This categorial duality both ex- plains the lack of success which has attended attempts to develop a strong theoretical science within a well developed paradigmatic frame- work and why progress in the field is likely only to be fragmentary, or piecemeal" [66, p. 61]. It would appear that the several views regarding the existence of one or more paradigms in library and information science assume that without a clear consensus there can be no "normal scientific practice" and, hence, no scientific revolutions and intellectual advances. The per- ceived difficulty with this is that if theoretical consensus and Kuhnian "'normal science" is regarded as the royal road to scientific achievement, there may emerge a rationale for insisting that one research method "for the good of the field" should predominate [52, p. 127]. Yet this is precisely what researchers in library and information science have re- cently sought to avoid [5, 67]. It is possible that the essential qualities of universality and broadness in this professional discipline precludes it from paradigmatic status since theoretical consensus is achieved only by sacrificing other competing paradigms [52, p. 179]. The "Normative" Conception of Social Science A well-defined picture of library and information science, characterized predominantly as a neutral social science in its traditional liberal concep- tion, emerges from the brief analysis presented above. In its efforts to gain academic recognition, it has largely followed the imitation by other social scientists of certain methods and ideas used in the natural sciences. Unfortunately, as some commentators point out, the social sciences have often copied inessential features of the natural sciences, thereby missing the real benefit that the latter may offer. John Wisdom, for example,
226 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY observes that the misunderstanding by several social scientists of logical positivism has led to a dismissal of empiricism as a valid approach to knowledge [54]. The critique of positivism in library and information science inquiry is well documented and needs no discussion here [5, 67]. More important, though, the pretensions of value neutrality and ob- jectivity as these are maintained in the neutral conception have led to a greater emphasis in library and information science activities on the means of service delivery rather than their ends, that is, whether they are desirable or morally valuable [ 15, 68]. This dimension of the ethical, which is avoided in traditional liberal social sciences, is openly con- fronted in the alternative conception. In this view, moral and political commitments are openly acknowledged as bases for undertaking re- search or for designing services. This approach is admittedly more dan- gerous in that it is wide open to abuse. An example that comes readily to mind is that of Nazi anthropology. The all-important question to be answered is, of course, "Whose moral and political commitments" or "whose values" should this conception of social science advance? Proponents of this alternative, partisan approach in which the ideals of the good life for some individual or group are promoted and imple- mented argue that neutrality in any field is a matter of degree [41, p. 2]. This implies that breaking the silence on "what morally ought to be" is not a theoretical weakness but an honest confrontation with issues of moral philosophy in intellectual and cultural practice. Value-freedom, neutrality, and indifference on this view is to be replaced by a conscious partiality. This requires a reconception of the separation between re- searcher and object of research and of the degree of participation by ordinary people in intellectual and cultural inquiry. The central proposition that normative approaches challenge is the "Enlightenment thesis that the growth of scientific knowledge is an un- mixed good" [69, p. 2]. The normative conception of social science seeks a more integral relationship between social scientific inquiry and the pursuit of the human good. On this view, the social sciences are de- scribed as areas of "moral inquiry" and even as "moral theology" [70]. The growth of library and information science as a discipline no longer rests securely and uncontestedly on the foundation of science as a neutral and objective enterprise. Efforts at infusing the knowledge base of the profession with normative approaches are nonetheless mar- ginal and poorly understood by many. One reason for this is that such "alternative" strategies are loosely connected and have not gathered suf- ficient momentum to completely dislodge the neutral conception of so- cial science. It is well worth surveying the emergence of these strategies as they are found in recent professional literature. Although these alter-
LIS AS A SOCIAL SCIENCE 227 native approaches share the view that there is no neutral platform for library and information science that is completely free of value commit- ments, they envision its future disciplinary growth quite differently. I have identified two broad camps, which can be described as the reform- ers, who do not totally reject the rational scientific enterprise of the Enlightenment itself, and the transformers, who propose a more radical deconstruction of the notions of individuality and rationality that are viewed as historically constituted forms of domination. The Reformers One group of oppositional thinkers take their cue from contexualism, which is based upon the challenge that confronted the mechanistic con- ception of the world that dominated Western scientific thought from the second half of the seventeenth century to the end of the nineteenth century. This challenge originated from research findings in several natural sciences, most notably those in contemporary physics, and its central concern was the elimination of the dualism of mind and matter (or of knower from the object of knowledge). The traditional perception of the fundamental separation between subject and object was gradually being replaced with a view that the subject and the object, as components of the knowing process, are dynamically linked with each other within a greater whole and that this holistic approach offered deeper insights into an understanding of a multidimensional reality. In the social sciences, the reaction to the mechanical worldview led to the emergence of a "contextualistic" theme that, by and large, paral- leled the antipositivistic arguments advanced by philosophers of the nat- ural sciences. This conceptual reorientation in the social sciences has as its central focus the ideas of unity, plurality, spontaneity, and ecological dependency of human activity [71]. Contextualism, as a "new look" in the social sciences, concentrates upon the "the study of the individual in his or her natural surroundings, in context, in the culture, and in the historical time" [72]. Its basic themes have already been applied, among others, in such disciplines as psychology, communication, and theology. A contextual approach to theory in library and information science that draws on the holistic ideas of the physicist David Bohm is proposed by Donald Beagle [73]. In his essay, he emphasizes such features as wholeness, interconnectedness, environment, and knowledge as a "pro- cess." He associates his interpretation of contextualism with the "new physics" and Bohm's notion of the "implicate" order and states that "libraries are not some negentropic aberration from a fundamental law
228 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY of cosmic disintegration, but rather are an expression of an integrative law of underlying order. Perhaps by using this synthesis (new world view) we shall gain deeper and more coherent insights into the nature of knowledge and libraries" [73, p. 43]. The contextualist theme is adjoined to a normative one in neigh- boring disciplinary writings regarding the notions of "the information society" and "information-age technologies." Certain communication theorists emphasize the movement beyond an optimist-pessimist frame- work toward an alternative one that openly accommodates norms such as justice, fairness, and freedom. This approach brings into view an ideal of "responsible technology" based on definite notions of "the pub- lic good" and "a desirable society" [74, 75]. Emphasizing the relevance of contextualism, but underscoring more strongly the lived experiences and social construction of reality by mar- ginalized sections of society, another group of authors advocate ap- proaches to library and information services and library education that depart from the traditional models in order to establish those that high- light collective identities. One strand in this category of approaches refer to "development librarianship," "appropriate librarianship," "contextual librarianship," and "Afrocentric models" [76, 77] to emphasize greater sensitivity to local culture, local communities, and indigenous knowledge bases. Multicultural librarianship may also be placed here although am- bivalence characterizes the view of the librarian's intermediary role in rendering services to minority groups [78]. Another strand focuses prin- cipally on the gender biases inherent in traditional library thinking. This feminist outlook affirms an outright rejection of an "androcentric" and value-free library and information science and calls for a rethinking of its philosophy to acknowledge women's ways of knowing, since they are the profession's majority anyway [79, p. 31; 80]. The reform-minded camp hopes to improve library and information science as a social science by emending mistakes and omissions. The adherents have in mind the addition of new subject matter, theories, and methods complementary to existing ones. The incorporation of these ideas does not require a basic recasting of library and information science as a part of the rational project of the Enlightenment but a repositioning of the social dimension of human experience as pivotal in that project. They wish to retain the notion of objectivity in the form of a so-called strong objectivity. The argument is that the demise of neutrality should not give way to an epistemological relativism but calls for an exploration of strategies that detect "systematically distorting as- sumptions that have proved most powerful in the projects of margin- alized groups" [81, p. 587].
LIS AS A SOCIAL SCIENCE 229 The Transformers If the central idea for the reformers is that of incorporation, the princi- pal proposition of the more radical transformers is one of emancipation. They contend that the library profession ought to examine critically the interests and values that its discipline subscribes to by concealing others. The apparent avoidance of values, according to them, is a strong value commitment itself and the seemingly needless exercise of self-reflection is little more than a tactical ploy to replicate itself. Following Michel Foucault's analysis of power and knowledge, this camp submits that the constitution of "a specific field of knowledge is a political act which simultaneously configures a field of ignorance" [82, p. 381; 83, p. 85]. The professional discipline they envision should do the following. 1. Support the liberation of library users from a "virtual conceptual tyranny over access" [84, p. 399]. Drawing on poststructuralist analyses of theories of knowledge and language, some deconstruct traditional positivist ap- proaches to reading [85] and subject access [86, 87]. They highlight the deep assumptions of many professional tasks to reveal the scope and nature of bias embedded in selection policies and tools of access such as indexes and catalogs. They maintain that the reproduction of existing ideas and thoughts are facilitated through traditional classification schemes and indexes, whereas innovative scholarship is nearly impossi- ble [86, p. 208]. Categorization structures, moreover, not only reflect offensive attitudes toward minorities but inhibit investigation into sensi- tive areas of race relations as well [87]. 2. Improve the critical consciousness of librarians as intermediaries concerning the way in which library materials are linked to "the power and privilege of certain classes to represent the world through books in ways that serve their interests" [5, p. 354]. Critical theory supplies the intellectual thrust for examining how librarians can gain an insight into their unavoidable involvement in cultural activities that promote certain perspectives and suppress others. It allows a more suitable context for questioning the "apolitical servants of the people" perception of librarians' role by locat- ing their professional tasks within larger educational, political, and cul- tural contexts that shape canon making, curriculum development, pub- lic opinion formation, agendas for public debate, competing claims to valid knowledge, the entrenchment of cultural styles, and so forth. 3. Assist library educators to appreciate how power inequities are inscribed "into the heart of LIS [library and information science] theory" [82, p. 384]. Using the technique of discourse analysis, Bernd Frohmann demon- strates how the cognitive viewpoint gained a firm theoretical foothold
230 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY in library and information science. Through various discursive strate- gies, the cognitive viewpoint insinuated itself into several dimensions of library and information practice in the widely accepted ideological guise of "user-centrism." Of greater significance than his specific indication that the cognitive viewpoint is far from being value neutral is Froh- mann's general achievement of explicating the actual power plays sur- rounding the emergence of manifestly innocent theories to dominant positions in the profession. 4. Inform library administrators of the increasing influence of market mecha- nisms on the design of libraty and information services. The notions of infor- mation as a commodity and users as information consumers derive a considerable measure of legitimacy from the cognitive viewpoint, and they provide grist for the mill of capitalist-based designs of library and information services. The near-passive and uncritical acceptance by the library profession of private businesses' and multinational corporations' growing influence in the library world evoke in some professionals a strong counterreaction. The outlines of a more radical socialist response is appearing on the fringes of mainstream approaches. The essential counterthrust to the commodification of information and the concentration of basic library-related activities in the hands of fewer profit-making companies is threefold. First, socialist thinkers rec- ognize the need to inform library managers of the insidious implications of commercialization in the era of information-age capitalism for the profession's commitment to information and knowledge as a public good [88, p. 12; 89, p. 411]. Second, they advocate a resistance to efforts to reduce political issues in library-related activities to those of techno- logical innovation, efficiency, and expertise [88, p. 13]. In this way, they subvert the professional posture of value neutrality. Third, they propose more effective organization of and communication between left- thinking groups that champion the cause of human rights in order to consolidate the stand against corporate domination of the information sector. Related to this is the acknowledgment that the work of civil rights groups ought to be made more widely known [90, p. 67]. Conclusion The perception of library and information science as a neutral social science is no longer uncontested. As positivism recedes as the only viable model for the social sciences, several theoretical candidates are either vying for supremacy or exploring new alignments and alliances. The alternative approaches seem to be united mainly in their identification of a common enemy, namely, positivism. While they have made possible
LIS AS A SOCIAL SCIENCE 231 a trenchant critique of the profession's claim to value neutrality, their own essential conception of partisan perspectives that do not at the same time sacrifice validity and objectivity still requires a clearer delinea- tion. What is clear is that this patently normative conception of social sci- ence has revived the early debate as to whether the library profession is essentially a disinterested social enterprise or a committed educational enterprise. At this point, one can only speculate how the new normative approaches will influence future disciplinary development and profes- sional practice. One difference will be a critical reconsideration of con- cepts such as neutrality, objectivity, freedom, and equality in the context of library thought and practice. Another difference will be a sharper awareness of the subtle ways in which power marshals certain prejudices in support of itself under seemingly innocuous guises. One thinks here, for example, of opposing views regarding the neutrality of information technology or retrieval tools. Finally, the new normative approaches will help to highlight the neglected role of librarians as intellectuals in the public domain and the accompanying ethical challenges of making the world a better place in which to live. The reconciliation of moral dimensions of library theory and practice with issues of validity and objectivity poses a stiff challenge. This over- view of the stirrings of ferment in the field of library and information science reflects my own unsettled position and my attempt to come to grips with these forces of transformation. Perhaps ambivalence is a fea- ture of the times in which we live. If the library profession, nonetheless, continues to regard itself predominantly as a social science deserving of higher study and as an integral part of the academy, then there is still much to be done. REFERENCES 1. Hurt, Charlie D. "The Future of Library Science in Higher Education: A Crossroads for Library Science and Librarianship." In Advances in Librarianhip, vol. 16, edited by Irene P. Godden, pp. 153-81. San Diego, Calif.: Academic Press, 1992. 2. Stieg, Margaret F. Change and Challenge in Library and Information Science Education. Chicago: American Library Association, 1992. 3. Williamson, Charles C. The WiUiaumson Reports of 1921 and 1923. Metuchen, N.J.: Scarecrow, 1971. 4. Rawski, Conrad H. "The Interdisciplinarity of Librarianship." In Toward a Theory of Librarianship: Papers in Honor of Jesse Hauk Shera, edited by C. Rawski, pp. 116-46. Metuchen, NJ.: Scarecrow, 1973. 5. Harris, Michael H., and Itoga, Masaru. "Becoming Critical: For a Theory of Purpose and Necessity in American Librarianship." In Library and Information Science Research:
232 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Perspectives and Strategies for Improvement, edited by Charles R. McClure and Peter Hernon, pp. 347-57. Norwood, N.J.: Ablex, 1991. 6. Bayless, Sandy. "Librarianship is a Discipline." Library Journal 102 (September 1977): 1715-17. 7. Bekker, Johan. "Bibliology as an Occupational and Academic Discipline." Mousaion 11 (1978): 29-59. 8. Ortega y Gasset, J. "The Mission of the Librarian," translated by J. Lewis and R. Carpenter. Antioch Review 21 (1961): 133-54. 9. Hoggart, Richard. "Populism Rules-OK?" Library Association Record 94 (1992): 24. 10. Asheim, Lester. "Librarians as Professionals." Libraty Trends 27 (Winter 1979): 225-57. 11. Biggs, Mary. "The Scholarly Vocation and Library Science." In Advances in Librarian- ship, vol. 15, edited by Irene P. Godden, pp. 29-75. San Diego, Calif.: Academic Press, 1991. 12. McGrath, William E. "Science and Library Science: A Challenge to Library Educa- tion." Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 25 (1985): 219-22. 13. Wilkinson, Margaret A. "Three Hypotheses." Canadian Library Journal 41 (1984): 195-200. 14. Broadfield, Arthur. A Philosophy of Librarianship. London: Grafton, 1949. 15. Line, Maurice B. "Ends and Means-Librarianship as a Social Science." Library World 66 (1965): 270-75. 16. Shuman, Bruce A. Foundations and Issues in Library and Information Science. Englewood, Colo.: Libraries Unlimited, 1992. 17. Machlup, Fritz. The Study of Information: Interdisciplinary Messages. New York: Wiley, 1983. 18. Harris, Michael H. "The Dialectic of Defeat: Antinomies in Research in Library and Information Science." Library Trends 34 (1986): 515-31. 19. Bekker, Joan. "Die Twee Kulture en die Nuwe Bibliotekaris" (The two cultures and the new librarian). In Die Nuwe Bibliotekaris: Festchrist ter ere van H. 0. K. Zastrau (The new librarian: Festschrift in honor of H. 0. K. Zastrau), edited by A. Blom, J. A. Boon, and R. de Wet, pp. 7-21. Pretoria: State Library, 1987. 20. Lor, Peter. "The Future of Education for Library and Information Science in South Africa." South African Journal of Higher Education 5 (1991): 155-63. 21. Thompson, C. Seymour. "Do We Want a Library Science?" Library Journal 56 (July 1931): 581-87. 22. Kochen, Manfred. Intergrative Mechanisms in Literature Growth. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood, 1974. 23. Farradane, Jason. "The Nature of Information." Journal of Information Science 1 (1979): 13-17. 24. Yuexiao, Zhuang. "Definitions and Sciences of Information." Information Processing and Management 24 (1988): 479-91. 25. Kaplan, Abraham. "The Age of the Symbol-a Philosophy of Library Education." Library Quarterly 34 (October 1964): 295-304. 26. Stieg, Margaret F. "Information Science and the Humanities: The Odd Couple." In Information Sciene: The Interdisciplinary Context, edited by J. M. Pemberton, pp. 60-69. New York: Schuman, 1990. 27. Butler, Pierce. "Librarianship as a Profession." Library Quarterly 21 (1951): 235- 47. 28. Richardson, John. The Gospel of Scholarship: Pierce Butler and a Critique of American Librarianship. Metuchen, N.J.: Scarecrow, 1992. 29. Ranganathan, Shiyali R. Documentation and Its Facets. Bombay: Asia House, 1963. 30. Nitecki, Joseph Z. "An Idea of Librarianship: An Outline for a Root-Metaphor
LIS AS A SOCIAL SCIENCE 233 Theory in Library Science."Journal of Library History, Philosophy and Comparative Librar- ianship 16 (1981): 106-20. 31. Wright, H. Curtis. "The Occupational Alignment of Librarianship with the Meta- sciences." Scholar and Educator 9 (1985): 15-19. 32. Debons, Anthony. "Relation between Library and Information Science." South African Journal of Library and Information Science 53 (1985): 65-67. 33. Kesting, Jean G. "Die Konvensionele Biblioteek en Huidige Navorsingseise" (The conventional library and current research demands). In Nuwere Ontwikkelinge op die Gebied van die Biblioteekwese en Inligtingsvoorsiening (New developments in the area of librarianship and the provision of information), edited by H. C. van Rooy and A. J. Viljoen, pp. 59-105. Potchefstroom: Potchefstroom University Press, 1969. 34. Cronin, Blaise, and Davenport, Elisabeth. Postprofessionalism: Transforming the Informa- tion Heartland. London: Taylor Graham, 1988. 35. Waples, Douglas. "Do We Want a Library Science? A Reply." LibraryJournal 56 (1931): 743-46. 36. Butler, Pierce. An Introduction to Library Science. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1933. 37. Brooks, Terrence A. "The Model of Science and Scientific Models in Librarianship." Library Trends 38 (1989): 237-49. 38. Shera, Jesse H. "Education for Librarianship-an Assessment and a Perspective: A Review Article." Library Quarterly 49 (July 1979): 310-16. 39. Shera, Jesse H. "Recent Social Trends and Future Library Policy." Library Quarterly 3 (October 1933): 339-53. 40. Neill, Samuel D. Dilemmas in the Study of Information: Exploring the Boundanres of Informa- tion Science. New York: Greenwood, 1992. 41. Root, Michael. Philosophy of Social Science: The Methods, Ideals, and Politics of Social Inquiry. Oxford: Blackwell, 1993. 42. Popper, Karl R. The Open Society and Its Enemies. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1963. 43. Popper, Karl R. The Poverty of Historicism. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1964. 44. Popper, Karl R. The Logic of Scientific Discovery. 2d ed. New York: Harper Torchbooks, 1968. 45. Brookes, Bertram C. "Letters to the Editor." Journal of Information Science 8 (1984): 40. 46. Rudd, David. "Do We Really Need World 11 1 ? Information Science With or Without Popper." Journal of Information Science 7 (1983): 99-105. 47. Swanson, Don R. "Requirements Study for Future Catalogs." Library Quarterly 42 (1972): 302-15. 48. Swanson, Don R. "Libraries and the Growth of Knowledge." Library Quarterly 50 (1980): 112-35. 49. Bergen, Dan. Quoted in Nitecki, Joseph Z. "The Concept of Information-Knowledge Continuum: Implications for Librarianship." Journal of Library History, Philosophy and Comparative Libraianship 20 (1985): 387-407. 50. Kuhn, Thomas. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1970. 51. Reisch, George A. "Did Kuhn Kill Logical Empiricism?" Philosophy of Science 58 (1991): 264-77. 52. Roth, Paul A. Meaning and Method in the Social Sciences: A Casefor Methodological Plural- ism. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1987. 53. Masterman, Margaret. "The Nature of a Paradigm." In Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge, edited by I. Lakatos and A. Musgrave, pp. 59-91. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1970.
234 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 54. Wisdom, John 0. Philosophy of the Social Sciences 11: Schemata. Aldershot: Averbury, 1987. 55. Gatten, Jeffrey N. "Paradigm Restrictions on Interdisciplinary Research into Librari- anship." College & Research Libraries 52 (1991): 575-84. 56. Houser, Lloyd, and Schrader, Alvin M. The Search for a Scientific Profession: Library Scienc Education in the U.S. and Canada. Metuchen, NJ.: Scarecrow, 1977. 57. Wasserman, Paul. The New Librarianship: A Challenge for Change. New York: Bowker, 1972. 58. Monasterio, Xavier 0. "A Note on Paradigms in Information Science." In Perspectives in Information Science, edited by Anthony Debons and W. J. Cameron, pp. 197-207. Leyden: Noordhof, 1975. 59. Zaaiman, Reginald B. "The Development of Information Science Seen as a Form of Scientific Revolution." Mousaion 11 (1978): 3-25. 60. De Mey, Marc. "The Relevance of the Cognitive Paradigm for Information Science." In Theory and Application of Information Research, edited by 0. Harbo and L. Kajberg, pp. 48-61. London: Mansell, 1980. 61. Brookes, Bertram C. "Information Technology and the Science of Information." In Information Retrieval Research, edited by R. N. Oddy et al., pp. 1-8. London: Butter- worths, 1981. 62. Bechtel, Jennifer M. "Conversation, a New Paradigm for Librarianship?" Colege & Research Libraries 47 (1986): 219-24. 63. Lewis, David W. "An Organizational Paradigm for Effective Academic Libraries." Colkge & Research Libraries 47 (1986): 337-53. 64. Meijer, Johannes G. "Presupposisies as Uitgangspunte in Wetenskapbeoefening" (Pre- suppositions as points of departure in scientific work). South African Journal of Library and Informaion Science 9 (1991): 217-30. 65. Olaisen, Johan. "Alternative Paradigms in Library Science: The Case for Paradigmatic Tolerance and Pluralism." Libri 35 (1985): 129-50. 66. Ellis, David. "The Physical and Cognitive Paradigms in Information Retrieval Re- search." Journal of Documentation 48 (1992): 45-64. 67. Dick, Archie L. "Influence of Positivism on the Design of Scientific Techniques: Impli- cations for Library and Information Science Research." South African Journal of Library and Information Science 59 (1991): 231-39. 68. Asheim, Lester. "Means and Ends in Librarianship." In Libraries and Information Science in the Electronic Age, edited by H. Edelman, pp. 100-111. Philadelphia: ISI, 1986. 69. Bellah, Robert N. et al. "Introduction." In Social Science as Moral Inquiry, edited by N. Haan et al., pp. 1-18. New York: Columbia University Press, 1983. 70. Postman, Neil. Conscientious Objections: Stirring up Trouble about Language, Technology, and Education. New York: Knopf, 1988. 71. Georgoudi, Marianthi, and Rosnow, Ralph L. "The Emergence of Contextualism." Journal of Communication 33 (1983): 76-88. 72. Sarbin, Theodore R. "Contextualism: A World View for Modern Psychology." In Nebraska Symposium on Motivation, vol. 24, edited by J. K. Cole and A. W. Lanfield, pp. 57-84. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1977. 73. Beagle, Donald. "Libraries and the 'Implicate Order': A Contextual Approach to Theory." Libri 38 (1988): 26-44. 74. Lyon, David. "Assessing the Information Society Concept, New Technology, Social Change and Social Theory." In Norm and Context in the Social Sciences, edited by S. Griffioen and J. Verhoogt, pp. 183-204. Lanham, Md.: University Press of America, 1990. 75. Woodward, Wayne. "Toward a Normative-Contextualist Theory of Technology." Crit- ical Studies in Mass Communication 10 (1993): 158-78.
LIS AS A SOCIAL SCIENCE 235 76. Mchombu, Kingo. "Which Way African Librarianship?" IFLA Journal 17 (1991): 26-38. 77. Rochester, Maxine K. "Emergence of the Asian Pacific Area: Implications for the Education and Training of Librarians." IFLA Joumal 18 (1992): 43-50. 78. Leonard, Gillian D. "Multiculturalism and Library Services." Acquisitions Libranran 9/ 10 (1993): 3-19. 79. Hannigan, Jane A., and Crew, Hilary. "A Feminist Paradigm for Library and Infor- mation Science." Wilson Library Bulletin 68 (October 1993): 28-32. 80. Harris, Roma M. Librarianship: The Erosion of a Woman's Profession. Norwood, NJ.: Ablex, 1992. 81. Harding, Sandra. "After the Neutrality Ideal: Science, Politics, and 'Strong Objectiv- ity'." Social Research 59 (Fall 1992): 567-87. 82. Frohmann, Bernd. "The Power of Images: A Discourse Analysis of the Cognitive Viewpoint." Journal of Documentation 48 (December 1992): 365-86. 83. Foucault, Michel. PowerlKnowledge: Selected Wnrtings and Other Interviews, 1972-1977, edited by C. Gordon. Translated by C. Gordon, L. Marshal, John Mepham, and Kate Soper. New York: Pantheon, 1980. 84. Farmer, Jill A. "A Poststructuralist Analysis of the Legal Research Process." Law Libra,ry Journal 85 (1993): 391-404. 85. De Beer, Carel S. "Besinning oor die Veelvoudige Leesproses" (Reflection on the multiple reading process). Suid-Afrikaanse Tydskrif vir Biblioteek- en, Inligtingkunde 59 (1991): 165-70. 86. Delgado, Richard, and Stefancic, Jean. "Why Do We Tell the Same Stories? Law, Reform, Critical Librarianship, and the Triple Helix Dilemma." Stanford Law Review 42 (1989): 207-25. 87. Berman, Sanford. Prejudices and Antipathies: A Tract on the LC Subect Heads Concerning People. Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland, 1993. 88. Blanke, Henry T. "Libraries and the Commercialization of Information: Towards a Critical Discourse of Librarianship." Progressive Librarian 2 (Winter 1990/91): 9-13. 89. Lindsay, John. "Radical Librarianship." In Communication and Class Struggle. Vol. 2, Liberation, Socialism, edited by A. Mattelart and S. Siegelaub, pp. 408-12. New York: International General, 1983. 90. Merrett, Christopher. "Human Rights, Information, and Libraries in South Africa: A Radical Perspective." In A World Too Wide: Essays on Libraries and Other Themes in Honour of Reuben Musiker, edited by J. Sherman, pp. 61-74. Johannesburg: University of Witwatersrand Library, 1993.