THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Volume 49 APRIL 1979 Number 2 ON THE USE OF THE RECORDS OF RESEARCH Patrick Wilson and Mona Farid How muclh of what kind of knowledge of prior research is needed and wanted by those conducting research? Can it only be acquired, or is it best acquired, by the use of the original reports of prior research? Situational familiarity is the kind of knowledge wanted; historical familiarity with ancestral research is a conventional requirement differing in importance in different areas. The comprehensive literature search, often supposed to be a necessary preliminary to a new research effort, is usually unnecessary in theory and often unnecessary in practice. Working familiarity with research areas from which potentially useful contribu- tions are expected is sought in proportion to the expectation of impact of others' work on one's own. Use of original research reports is not indispensable and is often an inferior means of acquiring the desired familiarity. Librarians and others exaggerate the need for bibliographic access to original research reports; greater development of means of avoidance of use of such reports would be of more value to research than further development of bibliographical access. The attempt to discover new knowledge requires the use of old knowl- edge; research builds on prior research. Since librarians, bibliographers, and information-system designers and operators manage the paper re- sults of research in the interest of their future use, it should be of acute interest to them to know how the records of research are needed and wanted in further research activity. Our questions are these: How much and what kind of knowledge of prior research is needed and wanted by those conducting research? Can this knowledge only be acquired, or is it best acquired, by the use of the original reports of prior research? To the [Library Quarterly, vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 127-1451 ?1979 by The University of Chicago. 0024-2519/79/4902-0001$01.58 127
128 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY second of these complex questions our answer is negative with some qualifications: use of those reports is not indispensable, and is often an inferior, means of acquiring the needed or wanted information. If true this has implications for libraries which we briefly consider in the final section. We aim to account for the use of records of all sorts of research in further research: scholarly and scientific, pure and applied. We do not try to account for their use in technological work, though what we say about science and scholarship probably applies a fortiori to technology as well. We are concerned with the needs of research, not with the needs of research workers in their other roles and activities, for example, as teachers or administrators or private citizens. The records of research that concern us form the "primary" literature of science and scholarship: the journal articles and technical reports and, outside the sciences, the learned monographs reporting the results of attempts at gaining new knowledge or new understanding. Much is known about the use of such records from years of study of the communication and information- gathering behavior of, primarily, scientists. We do not propose to sum- marize or add to the empirical data; we propose to analyze the situations to which the data refer. I. The Distribution of Familiarity If and when the journal articles and monographs that report the results of original research are used it is for some purpose; if we wish to understand their function and utility we had better start by considering those purposes. The records of research figure more or less prominently in the personal information-gathering activities of individual research workers, and we must try to understand the goals of those activities. To do this we shall first consider the ways in which different pieces of research work can be related and then the different sorts and degrees of familiarity with research that one might aim at. We will then put these considerations together to arrive at a simple and general account of the goals of information gathering in research. There are four sorts of relationship among different research efforts that need to be recognized. First, direct competition. Others may be en- gaged on research projects with the same goal as one's own, using the same or similar methods of work. We are now familiar with the ubiquity of direct competition, of simultaneous independent discovery, of the phenomenon of being anticipated by others. Crick and Watson's race with Pauling is a familiar recent incident [1-3]. Second, parallel research. Others may be doing work similar to one's own, aiming at the same sort
RECORDS OF RESEARCH 129 of result and using the same sorts of methods, without being in competi- tion. Two sociologists conducting similar surveys among different populations, two chemists analyzing similar compounds using similar techniques-these illustrate parallelism of research where, unlike direct competition, both parties can be first to find what they seek. Third, ancestral research. Work ancestral to one's own is work in the historical progression that leads to the research situation in which one's own work takes place. Knowledge of ancestral research will be one of our two chief topics. Fourth, donor research. This is the name we give to work in one research area that contributes to the conduct of research in other areas by supplying research tools, raw materials, problems for solution, evi- dence, or imaginative stimulus. Knowledge of donor research will be the second of our chief topics. No research worker needs to be familiar with more than a small fraction of the work done by others; nor is the same degree of familiarity always needed or sought. We can usefully distinguish several levels and types of familiarity that may be aimed at. The first type is familiarity with the state of knowledge in a research area at a given time: for example, what is presently known, what is presently unknown, what hypotheses are currently live ones, what concepts and tools are available for use in further inquiry. Such familiarity is in principle independent of familiar- ity with the historical details of any actual piece of research; one can know what is presently known without knowing how we came to have our present knowledge, though this statement will have to be qualified below in Section 11. We shall use the phrase "situational familiarity" for this knowledge of the situation at a particular time and also for the closely related knowledge of changes in a situation that have come about due to research during a period of time. Familiarity with changes in a situation does not simply mean knowledge of conclusions reached or results claimed in particular research reports completed during the period; for knowledge of changes that have occurred is independent of knowledge of the particular historical events leading to the changes and compatible with ignorance of efforts that lead to no change, or no perceptible change. Much research does not significantly alter the state of knowledge; much simply duplicates, or slightly reinforces, or trivially extends prior work, or makes simple modifications or applications of prior work. We can contrast the size of a body of research literature produced during a time period with the size of a critical survey of additions and changes in knowledge achieved in that body of literature; intuitively it is clear that a large body of research literature may yield only a small change in the state of knowledge. A quite distinct type of familiarity is familiarity with the actual details of the history of particular research activities. If situational familiarity is
130 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY knowledge of the achieved substance of knowledge, this second type, which we will call "historical familiarity," is knowledge of personal and group activities and of the "results" of those activities. It is characteristic of research that it has a public and a private side; the public side is what is presented in the official published records of research, the private side is the usually unreported biography of re- search work. Research ends in a story: of what one has found, or what one has proved, or the hypothesis one arrived at and is presenting to the world, or the arguments one has formulated and offers to the public, and so on. The published record of research is one version of this story out of many different possible versions. Behind the public story finally formulated and presented to the world lies the private story of what went wrong as well as what went right, of successive attempts and corrected versions, of mistakes and lucky guesses, of detours and dis- couragements. Familiarity with the private history of research cannot usually be acquired from the published records, for those are highly stylized, impersonal accounts of an idealized version of the actual course of events [4, pp. 34-35]. The record contains an account of the results of research; but those results may in fact turn out not to effect any change in the state of knowledge at all, or not the sort of change claimed by the research worker. Knowledge of the story of a piece of research is not the same thing as knowledge of the change in knowledge achieved through that research. Either sort of familiarity might be had in different degrees for differ- ent areas of research. For the sake of simplicity, we will distinguish three levels of familiarity. The highest level is that necessary for qualification as an expert: it is expert familiarity. Expertise commonly implies the highest degree of both situational and historical familiarity. No one attains expertise in many research areas; the level of familiarity mostly aimed at is workingfamiliarity, knowledge sufficient for use in a particular work context or adequate to the presumptive needs of the situation. Working familiarity is not the name for a level or degree of knowledge that is constant from instance to instance and person to person; it is simply the amount necessary to do a job, which will vary from case to case. The lowest level of familiarity worth noting is that of nodding familiarity, bare knowledge that a certain sort of knowledge exists or that a certain sort of research is or was being conducted-too little knowledge for use but enough to allow one to know there is something one might seek to learn about if need arose. Nodding familiarity is knowledge of categories of knowledge and inquiry, which one can have without any knowledge of the "content" of those categories. Now we can formulate the goals of information gathering and sketch the means through which one tries to reach these goals. A research
RECORDS OF RESEARCH 131 worker will aim to achieve and maintain different types and levels of familiarity with different research areas. The normal pattern would presumably be to maintain (1) expert situational familiarity in the imme- diate area of one's own current work and with areas in which one planned to conduct future research; (2) expert current historical famil- iarity with the work of competitors; (3) high levels of both sorts of familiarity with current research closely parallel to one's own; (4) work- ing situational familiarity with significant donor areas of research; (5) nodding familiarity, situational or historical, with less promising donor areas. The most plausible explanation of this normal pattern (if it is indeed that) of information gathering is that the level of familiarity aimed at corresponds to the expectation of impact, that is, one's estimate of the likelihood that occurrences in an area, if learned about, would have an effect or impact on one's own work. From the self-centered perspective of the research worker, what others do is of interest only insofar as it is likely to have an impact on one's own current or projected research. We have to distinguish probability of impact from expected size of impact; a small probability of a large impact is not the same as a large probability of a small impact. It seems intrinsically plausible to suppose that one's expectation of impact guides one's information-gathering behavior, that the greater the expected impact of a research area, the more attention one pays to it. Whatever the distribution of familiarity aimed at, we expect it to be pursued through a regular and more or less systematic set of arrange- ments for gathering information [5, chap. 21. At any given time a research worker has an accumulation of knowledge and skill developed through formal academic study and the subsequent practice of research. He also has a pattern of information-seeking behavior, that is arrived at by trial and error during his career and is subject to further modifica- tion. The ingredients of the pattern are familiar: regular reading or scanning of a certain inventory of journals; regular conversation or correspondence with colleagues; regular consultation of new issues of abstract journals or book-reviewing media; regular attendance at meet- ings, conferences, and the like. He has developed over time an inventory of occasional sources of information, a mental directory listing people and documents to which he can turn for specific sorts of information in case of need. The pattern is supplemented and modified by chance encounters with people and documents. The current reading and talking leads one back and out to other documentary sources as one follows up citations and personal recommendations for reading. The texture of this pattern of information gathering, which constitutes one's information-gathering
132 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY style, differs widely from person to person. The amount of information gathered, the time and energy devoted to the process, the relative reliance on personal as opposed to documentary sources, the degree of interest in the past, the width and depth of knowledge aimed at and achieved-all will vary enormously from person to person and, perhaps, systematically from research area to research area. The current habitual information-seeking pattern is one's way of keeping up, is what Voigt calls the "current approach" [6, p. 21], and consists of a continual search for information relating to one's current and prospective research. II. Ancestral Research and Retrospective Search Can the required kind and degree of familiarity with prior research be acquired solely on the basis of such a current habitual pattern of infor- mation gathering? In a still commonly held view of research, it cannot; the current system must be supplemented by periodic systematic retro- spective literature searches. "The accepted technique of research is to make a literature survey before starting on the experimental aspects of a new problem," says Voigt [6, p. 29]. At the beginning of a research project, "a complete bibliography of the subject should be made," ac- cording to Smith's Guide to the Literature of the Zoological Sciences [7, p. 6]. Sometimes it is allowed that the complete bibliography may be made or used at the end rather than the beginning of the project. In either case, one is to have a list of all work ancestral to one's own, presumably so that one can attain expert familiarity with the record of work on one's subject that has already been done. The instruction to begin with a survey of "the literature," however, is empty without further specification of the scope of the bibliography to be assembled. The attempt to discover all prior work historically related in any way to the current undertaking could be an endless one; the attempt to discover all prior work logically related to the current undertaking, similarly, could be an endlessly ramifying one. Perhaps the usual under- standing would be that the bibliography must at least include all prior investigations conducted within the same disciplinary group to which the current effort belongs of the same phenomenon or problem to which the new research is addressed. The comprehensive retrospective literature search undertaken before or after a research project looms large in the picture of research held by many librarians and information specialists. The comprehensive bibliographies, catalogs, abstract journals, and on- line bibliographic data bases available in research libraries presumably serve to facilitate what is supposed to be a necessary part of a research project. This is how one important element of knowledge already ac-
RECORDS OF RESEARCH 133 cumulated is thought to enter into the discovery of new knowledge: one begins, or ends, with a systematic search for relevant published records of prior research and the acquisition of expert familiarity with that record. Accepting for the moment the need for familiarity with the record of all prior research on the same subject, it is obvious that this familiarity need not be gained as a result of a particular episode in which a com- prehensive literature search, aimed at construction of a complete bib- liography and using the formal bibliographical apparatus available in research libraries, is conducted. Newer editions of Smith's Guide adds these comments: "Actually, research workers do not make an exhaustive survey of the literature before beginning their work. They read some of the more important recent publications bearing on their problems and continue the literature search and background reading as the work proceeds. . . . The research worker is never through making bibliog- raphy and reading for information bearing on his project" [8, p. 5]. Familiarity may be gained piecemeal on the basis of references in recent papers followed up over a period of time rather than on the basis of a single concentrated effort to discover bibliographical references to all prior work at once. The retrospective search may be continuous rather than episodic and may proceed informally rather than by use of formal bibliographic tools. Enough evidence is available to allow us to say that, insofar as search is episodic, it is not comprehensive, and insofar as it is comprehensive, it is not episodic [9, p. 217; 10, p. 13; 11]. If a retrospective search is conducted in aid of one research project, it may be the last search conducted even though new projects follow one after another. In most cases, a new project is a project in the same research line as its predecessor; the evidence provided by the Johns Hopkins group is compelling on this point [ 12]. New research is usually a direct continuation of one's own previous research, a natural next step in the same direction. For many research workers, research done after the doctoral dissertation is a continuation of that dissertation work, and a retrospective search done for the dissertation may be the last one ever done. What would be uncovered by a later deliberate retrospective search will already have been uncovered by the previous search plus regular current information gathering. Not entrance into a new project, but entrance into a new line of research, would be the occasion for a literature search. Even then there may be no need for a search, either episodic or continuous. It may not be needed because it has already been done by another and is available in the form of a monograph, a literature review, or a simple bibliography. Or it may already have been done by oneself, if the new line was a line which one had long planned to enter, and with whose literature one had maintained familiarity in the past. In
134 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY this case time might be needed to study, but none to locate, prior research. Or the literature of the new line may also be the literature of the old line, as in the case of a recent bifurcation of a single previous line. Or the new research may be in a newly opened line with no past research to learn about. If the object is to explore a newly discovered phenomenon, or work out details of a new theory, or try out a newly discovered technique, then knowing what one is trying to do involves knowing that there is no accumulation of prior work to study. If familiarity with prior research is required for each new line of research entered it does not follow that a retrospective search will be needed for each new line or, of course, that it would be an episodic one using formal bibliographic tools if it is needed. The need will arise only when one enters an old established research line with which one lacks familiarity. We have not so far challenged the claim that expert familiarity with prior research is necessary to the conduct of new research; but in one important sense it is clearly not necessary. The familiarity with prior work that someone engaged in the research work must have is not a degree or kind of familiarity that everyone engaged in the work must have. Much if not most research work, at least in science, is done not by individuals working alone but by groups and teams of people working together as coequal collaborators or in collegially or hierarchically or- ganized groups [13, 14]. Only one member of a research group may require any high level of familiarity with prior research in the area; the others may need no more familiarity than can be obtained by conversa- tion with the one informed person. The contributions of others may rest on their already acquired familiarity with areas quite different from the area of research ancestral to the new work. If the project begins with no member of the group sufficiently familiar with prior work, a literature search may be required to allow at least one member to gain familiarity; if it begins with one member already familiar with prior work, no search will be needed. Not everyone engaged on a research project, then, requires expert familiarity with the record of prior research in the same subject or along the same line. But does anyone? What would be the purpose of acquiring such familiarity? The first and most obvious purpose would be to dis- cover the present state of knowledge in the immediate area of investiga- tion; this is simply the attainment of situational familiarity. If situational familiarity can be attained otherwise than by examination of the pub- lished records of prior inquiry, then familiarity with the record will be unnecessary. In principle, as we have seen, this is possible, and it is often possible in practice. One person can tell another what the situation is, or describe it in a systematic review of the current state of knowledge. That
RECORDS OF RESEARCH 135 is one of the reasons why books are written. If familiarity with the current state of knowledge is a necessity in the conduct of research, familiarity with the published record of prior inquiry is not similarly indispensable. If it is true that one cannot reach the "frontiers of re- search" without acquiring detailed familiarity with a small or large body of recent research literature, this seems to be accidental rather than essential; the more recent the research, the less likely that it will have been summarized, or that a single opinion about its contents will have crystallized. It hardly makes sense to say that one can learn all but the most recently acquired bits of knowledge from formal summaries but could not in principle learn the last bits that way. A second reason for aiming at familiarity with the record is a common one: to establish the novelty of the proposed research and to avoid unwitting duplication. But one can often know without examination of the record that no one can already have done what one is setting out to do. Or one's work may be of a sort such that, if others have already arrived at conclusions similar to one's own, new and independent arrival at these conclusions is simply not a fault or a loss but rather a virtue. And one may always be willing to take the risk of duplicating the work of others; indeed, where others mean to keep their work secret one may intend to try to duplicate their work. Examination of the record is a way of attempting to avoid unwitting duplication, but it is not the only way, and one may be engaged in witting duplication. A third purpose of acquiring familiarity with the record might be the need to establish the logical and historical relations between one's own and prior research. But why should it be necessary to do this, and why should the research worker be thought capable of doing it even if he is familiar with the record? Research can have valuable new results whether or not the performer of the research is aware of the logical and historical connections of his own with prior work. And a historian would be injudicious if he took the research worker's opinion about historical and logical connections very seriously. As Liddell Hart says of military plans, "Documents rarely register the real originating causes. They do not show how ideas are sown, and grow, in the minds of the actual planners. While some who sow ideas are apt to overestimate the effect of their particular seed, those in whose minds they grow are even more inclined to discount the effect, however influential it may have been" [ 15, p. 489]. The final reason for aiming at familiarity with the record is to avoid pitfalls and take advantage of other's experience.' But it is familiarity with the private, not the public, side of research that would provide such 1. On pitfalls, see Ravetz [16, pt. 2].
136 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY help; what it would be helpful to know is just what is left out of the published record. None of the reasons for requiring familiarity with the record of ancestral research is fully persuasive as exhibiting the technical necessity of such familiarity. We can find a clue to the character of the requirement of expert knowledge of prior research simply by reflecting that the supposedly necessary literature search was to be conducted before or after conduct of research. But what could be the utility of a search conducted after the research was completed? It would be too late by then to worry about unwitting duplication of effort, or to take advantage of others' prior experience, or to benefit from a knowledge of the current state of knowledge. But it would not be too late to put in the scholarship; and exactly that may be its necessary point. Expert historical familiarity with prior research is no technical necessity for the conduct of research at all but a social necessity for having it accepted by others. Successful research might be conducted in entire ignorance or prior efforts, by luck or by genius. If one knows how to proceed or invents a new way of proceed- ing, and happens on or is steered to a suitable project, one may do valuable new work though wholly unfamiliar with prior work. But professional groups of researchers have their own standards of scholarship, that is, of familiarity with prior research in their fields and its exhibition in references to prior work incorporated in new research reports. And it is expected by the fully certified professional practition- ers of a branch of research that every new entrant into the branch, as well as the established members of the branch, will observe the estab- lished standards of scholarship. These standards may be only loosely tied to technical requirements of familiarity necessary for continued success in research. And the standards are subject to change over time. There is always room for dispute over standards of scholarship, for they mu-st be conventional and to some degree arbitrary; all new work is multiply connected to prior work by historical and logical relationships that could be pursued endlessly. The precise degree of familiarity required is and must be conventional and arbitrary; whether it is permitted, for exam- ple, to rely on abstracts of others' work or whether the originals must be thoroughly examined is a question to be decided by convention, not by investigation of technical utility [17, p. 291; 18, p. 19]. In one research area people may simply ignore much or most of what has been done before them, while in another, no more and no less scientific or respect- able, memory of old work may scrupulously be kept alive. If this is true for all fields of research, it is still more obviously true where the distinction between the state of knowledge and the contents of the research record fails, as it may do for several reasons. In primarily descriptive, rather than experimental and theoretical, research areas,
RECORDS OF RESEARCH 137 the present state of knowledge might be fully describable only by re- capitulating the contents of the whole corpus, for present knowledge might simply be the sum of those contents. In that case, though the distinction of situational and historical familiarity would still exist, in practice the acquisition of both would be acquired simultaneously. In other fields, situational and historical familiarity might be indistinguish- able in principle. Knowing the results of a research area might simply consist in knowing what was said in the corpus and perhaps knowing the private side of the work done by those in the field as well. The distinction between history and achievement would disappear, and knowing the field would be the same as knowing the literature of the field-not only in practice but in principle. In the former case, knowledge of the current state of knowledge carries familiarity with the research record as a technical requirement; in the latter case, convention reigns supreme. To the question of the amount of historical familiarity with ancestral research that is needed in the conduct of present research, then, there is no general answer but that it depends on the conventions of particular research areas. We will not question the claim that someone in a research group needs familiarity with the current state of knowledge; but it is not generally true that one must reconstruct that state for oneself from the historical record. The literature search, whether episodic or continuous, is indeed important in some areas in consequence of the standards of scholarship its occupants impose on themselves; in others it is of slight importance. III. Donor Research and Permissible Ignorance Corresponding to the "vertical" question of knowledge of research an- cestral to one's own is the "lateral" question of knowledge of work in other research areas, past and present. Research areas are to lesser or greater degrees isolated from their neighbors, first by lack of things to borrow, second by a disinclination to borrow. Every group of research workers defines its own limits of permissible ignorance. In the social situation in which a person's work takes place, ignorance of certain areas of research may not only be tolerated but positively expected (perhaps Marxian economics or Hegelian philosophy, for most American aca- demics in the past); the outsider may think such ignorance harmful, though permitted. Familiarity with a putative contributory field may be required, though to the outside observer ignorance of that field would seem to be harmless. As the research group sets the requirements of scholarship, so it defines the relevance of other research areas, often in ways that seem bizarre to the observer. Of course it is pointless for the
138 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY outsider to attempt to correct the habits and standards of the insider. Stigler is brisk on this point (having to do with economists' ignoring psychology): "It is a gross impertinence for an outsider to tell the spe- cialists that they do not know how to deal with the problems on which they specialize" [ 19, p. 13]. Professional research workers claim the right to be in charge of their own ignorance; the same people who control social expectations with regard to standards of scholarship are the people who claim the right to judge which other research areas are and which are not worth attending to. The use of knowledge produced in other research areas is subject to changing conventions as much as the use of one's own past literature. The individual research worker's expectations of the usefulness of work in other fields are thus determined in part by the conventions of his field. Whole research areas are eliminated in advance as areas of permis- sible ignorance. The thus lightened task is that of acquiring and main- taining familiarity with the work of those recognized as likely donors, to a degree corresponding to one's expectation of impact on one's own work. Before inquiring further about what information-gathering prac- tices this task imposes, let us dwell briefly on the sorts of donations that might be expected. A research area may contribute conceptual or physi- cal tools that others can use (theories, concepts, procedures, experi- mental apparatus, etc.). A research area's results may serve as raw material or data for analysis in another area. Results in one area may constitute problems for solution in another area, or may open up new avenues for research by others, enabling them to pursue new inquiries. These gifts of tools, raw materials, problems, and enablements constitute one large group of donations. Another large group consists of the findings that constitute positive and negative support for assumptions, procedures, and findings in other research areas. Positive donations are results that directly or indirectly support another's research position without necessarily facilitating that work; negative donations are findings that increase the vulnerability of another's position. At the worst, results in one line of work may effec- tively ruin work in another line by destroying its foundations. A spec- tacular example: "If a team investigating indications of irregularities in the movement of galaxies produces data that prove the universe is lop-sided, this creates serious, even mind-boggling problems for scores of other astronomers who have all based their efforts on the assumption that the universe is isotropic: the same in all directions" [20, p. 43]. The third group of donations consists simply of the provision of stimulus, of good ideas, of things that trigger the imagination. A dona- tion in one of the first two groups may also be of this third sort; but a poem or novel might have an intellectual effect as profound as any tool
RECORDS OF RESEARCH 139 or evidential finding, and research in one area may provide analogies and metaphors that others find stimulating and profitable. Given such a variety of contributions that might be found in the research literature, and given the enormous bulk of that literature, shall we conclude that researchers must constantly be engaged in a desperate and necessarily unsuccessful attempt to "read and remember all the literature that has a reasonable probability of being useful or interesting at an unspecified future time"? [21, p. 5]. The evidence is against it; studies of time spent reading the literature show only modest invest- ments of time (for example, [22, chap. 4]). And it is easy to see why mere nodding familiarity with potential donor fields should often be ade- quate. It is clearly not true that research workers aim to know of every- thing that has any chance of any impact on their own work. Small possibilities of small impacts can be and are ignored. Does one want to know of every shred of evidence from elsewhere that would support one's own work? Not if one thinks one's own work is self-sufficient, or the other work less substantial and well supported than one's own. Does one want to know of every possible challenge to one's own work that is implicitly offered by other work? No; some challenges may be serious and impossible to avoid, as some confirming evidence may be too momentous to overlook. But many challenges and confirmations can be overlooked. Research workers do not operate under the requirement of constant awareness of the totality of logically relevant evidence [23, pp. 211 ff.]. At least, however, a research worker must want to know all results or procedures developed elsewhere that would forward his own work by making it faster or easier or richer in conclusions and findings? Not so; one may rationally ignore the existence of an improved technique if one's old technique gives satisfactory results and if acquisition of facility with the new technique would require a large investment of time and effort. The case for adoption of new techniques in research is similar to the case for the adoption of any technical innovation; it is often better to stick with an admittedly inferior technology than to incur the costs of adopting an improved technology [24]. Nor need one, even if one is eager to adopt the most advanced intellectual technology, want to know of every sign of the appearance of potentially useful new tools. "Good ideas usually acquire significance only when they are refined and elabo- rated and have gone through what is often an exhaustive process of patient modification and revision. Only then do they become useful in an operational sense," and it is perfectly rational to ignore novelties until they have been worked over by others to the point of immediate useful- ness [25, p. 80; cf. 26, p. 301]. Finally, one may see potential utility in others' work but estimate that
140 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY to use it oneself would require more or less extensive reorientation of one's own work or of one's own thoughts about one's work. And it is consistent with much that has been learned about research work to think that researchers follow a conservative policy of avoidance of reorienta- tion as long as their work progresses satisfactorily [27]. Usefulness that is contingent on giving up already established and productive theories and procedures may properly be ignored as long as one's work continues to go well. When it does not, then it is time to seek new approaches. One may ignore much that might under different circumstances be helpful as long as one does not need help. The result of this is that awareness of the possibility of donations arising in a research area does not directly lead to an interest in keeping informed of developments in the area. Of course one is not indifferent to all sources of donations; but when one is interested, need that interest show itself as an interest in reading the research literature of the donor field? Clearly it need not. When one does expect useful work to come from another research area, one may still ignore particular research reports in that area. Work in one area may have high potential impact on work in another area though no particular bit of work in the first field has any likelihood of impact on work in the other. The occurrences that concern one who thinks an area a promising source of help may not be occurrences reported in particular pieces of research literature; they may be rather the cumulative result of work reported in many pieces of literature. The literature of a research specialty can be thought of as a continuing conversation among members of a group in the course of which they come to group conclusions. The conclusions may be momentous for outsiders, but the details of the conversation may be unintelligible or of no interest. One may wait until someone else pieces together the frag- ments reported in the research literature and reports on the changes in the state of knowledge that derive from a body of research work [28-30]. The job of synthesis of fragmentary reports is one requiring time and energy in such amounts that one may often rationally conclude that the benefit to be gained is far less than the cost in time and energy. Even if no effort at all need be expended in search for the relevant literature time and effort cannot be avoided in study and synthesis of that litera- ture, and the price may be too high. The fragmentariness of the original research literature is one reason for preferring not to rely on the original research report. The form in which results are presented in the original research report is another. "The materials from which scientific knowledge is achieved are neces- sarily remote in form from their specialized originals; they are robust, general-purpose, standardized versions" [16, p. 200]. If one is going to make use of another field's findings, one is interested in mastering only
RECORDS OF RESEARCH 141 so much of the findings as makes a difference to one's own work and allows their use. But the original versions of the findings may be very much more complex, elaborate, and refined than need be for the use one will make of them. Until standardized "export models" of a field's results are available, the potential user in another field may be reluctant or unable to make use of them. An exportable finding or procedure can be used in ignorance of the circumstances of its development, of the controversies surrounding its inception, of the nuances in its under- standing that are of prime concern to the specialists who developed it. Exportable findings and procedures must be robust, insensitive to crude and clumsy, even ignorant, use. And the vehicles of communica- tion of exportable findings are not original research reports but sum- maries and popularizations. The journal is what insiders read (some- times) for reports of original research. The textbook, the monograph, the critical review, the review of progress are what outsiders read for reports of exportable results. It is working familiarity that one wants, and the secondary works are designed to allow acquisition of working familiarity, as the original reports are not. Even working familiarity with an important donor field is not neces- sary, however. Paradoxically, the more important the donor field, the less one may need to know of it. The very bulk of the literature of a field one thinks potentially useful in the conduct of research may simplify, not complicate, one's situation. Instead of attempting to master the litera- ture, one joins forces with another who is already master of the litera- ture. This is why teams of researchers are formed, each to contribute an already acquired familiarity so that others need not invest the time and effort necessary to acquire that familiarity for themselves. One does not undertake to master complex branches of statistics simply because it would be useful to know statistics in a particular research problem; one consults a statistician or, if the knowledge is needed throughout the conduct of research, adds a statistician to the group. However much one wishes one knew a field of science or scholarship that one does not know, there are alternatives to the job of becoming master of it. One can choose one's research project so that ignorance is permissible, or join forces with one who has the knowledge one lacks. The possibility of successful research in ignorance of most other research goes along with the possi- bility of collaboration among people of different areas of ignorance and knowledge [13]. IV. Research Records and Library Service What, then, is the status of the research literature with respect to the conduct of further research? To what extent is its use necessary to the
142 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY conduct of further research, and what is the character of the necessity? If the preceding analysis is correct, then use of the literature is avoidable in theory and often in practice, except insofar as conventional require- ments of scholarship prescribe its use. Its use is neither necessary nor sufficient for acquiring expert situational and historical familiarity with the immediate area of one's work. Working and nodding familiarity with donor research can be gained more effectively in other ways than by study of the original literature. The original literature is a poor vehicle of communication for those wanting the lower levels of familiarity; it is written for insiders rather than outsiders; it is too detailed, too frag- mentary, too technical. The works of synthesis that are superior for those wanting the lower levels of familiarity may be lacking, and the researcher then has to face the alternatives of studying the original literature or doing without the help that could be derived from its content. But if use of the original literature is not always successfully avoided, it is almost always avoidable through the provision of suitable substitutes. And the substitutes are more than just substitutes, for the syntheses make knowledge available to those who would be unable to extract it for themselves from the original sources. Access to the sources is useless to those who could not evaluate or even understand them. One can understand and use, from secondhand accounts, vastly more than one could discover for oneself from the originals and vastly more than one would have the patience and interest to discover, even when one had the ability [5, chap. 3]. It has been noted-for instance, by Voigt and by Orr-that librarians overestimate the importance of what Voigt calls the "exhaustive ap- proach," the need for access to complete bodies of published research ancestral to one's own [6, p. 29; 31, p. 1 54n.]. It is likely that the need for access to original research literature in contributory fields has similarly been overestimated. The frequency of the need for comprehensive retrospective literature searches has been overestimated, as has the width and depth of familiarity with donor research areas that is needed for the conduct of research. It is likely too that, as a consequence, librarians overestimate the benefit that would come from improvements in physical and bibliographical access to the research literature. No doubt many researchers suffer from their ignorance of relevant and useful work of others [11]; but it would be rash to think that the sufferings would be much decreased by improvements in access to the research literature. Depending on the field and on the individual's information-gathering style, a researcher may draw heavily or lightly from other fields. If little use of others' work is made it is not because of the inaccessibility of the literature, and use would not increase solely from improvements in bibliographical or physical access. Some indi- viduals may be deterred from use of others' research by lack of adequate
RECORDS OF RESEARCH 143 access. More, it seems likely, are deterred by the difficulty of using, not finding, the literature, and still more by the lack of much expectation of impact of others' work on their own. A utilitarian service can be improved in two quite different ways: by improving the performance of a task or by removing the need for the performance. A doctor may improve his ability to cure an illness or he may find ways of preventing the illness from occurring in the first place. The second case, of preventive medicine, is the more attractive to the client. Libraries can improve their services in analogous ways: in the first case by providing easier and faster bibliographical and physical access to the research literature, in the second by providing substitutes for use of the research literature. The second is the more attractive case for the researcher. Physical and bibliographical access to the original literature is and will continue to be necessary, at least for those who produce the works of synthesis that can largely eliminate the need of others for access to the literature, and for occasional reference use. But a second order of improvement of library service would consist in the provision of more reviews, more authoritative critical surveys, more compendious works of reference, more works of haute vulgarisation, more works of synthesis. As means of gaining working situational familiarity with the research of others these are superior, not inferior, devices, at least in research areas in which a clear distinction can be made between the state of knowledge and the contents of a research corpus. Librarians may feel that it is not their business or within their capacities to do more than make available the works of synthesis pro- duced by others. But if they are in the enterprise of organizing knowl- edge for use, then it should be their business to do more. And more is within their capacities, particularly of those who have scholarly or sci- entific training, as many do (for examples, see [321). Librarians can improve their abilities to serve as sources of referral to knowledgeable individual researchers. They can provide better bibliographical control over, for instance, the review literature [33]. They can advise in the selection of works of synthesis. Working alone or in collaboration with active researchers, they can prepare evaluative rather than simply enumerative bibliographies, a step in the direction of synthesis [34, chap. 7]. They can provide direct bibliographical assistance to those preparing reviews and other works of synthesis, taking on what may easily be half the burden of the job [35, p. 30]. Their involvement need not stop at bibliographical assistance. Librar- ians of appropriate background can work in teams with other experts, who could join together in a one-time, one-task project for the prepara- tion of a work of synthesis. The teamwork characteristic of much re- search can also characterize the work of synthesis, and libraries can furnish an institutional home for such teams. Subject-specialized li-
144 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY braries might take on continuing responsibility for large or small research areas, drawing on successive short-term involvement of different aca- demic and nonacademic research workers, advanced graduate students, emeriti faculty members, and the like. One can easily imagine organiza- tional forms somewhere between the continuing information analysis center [36] and the conventional library that would facilitate temporary group formation for the work of synthesis. These organizations would require more flexible administrative arrangements than are generally found in libraries. Public sponsorship of continuing programs of synthe- sis in innovative libraries would appear a well-warranted aid in the transfer of knowledge from researcher to researcher and would consti- tute a second-level improvement in library service. But whether or not librarians can improve their service in this second way, they should at least understand and remember that libraries are part of an information transfer system, and that from the wider perspective of the organization of information transfer the goal of a rational policy would be not to increase the use of the primary research literature, but incidentally to reduce its use. The goal would be to increase access to the usable content of the literature by provision of more effective substitutes for the use of the literature itself. REFERENCES 1. Watson, James D. The Double Helix. New York: Atheneum Publishers, 1968. 2. Merton, Robert K. "Singletons and Multiples in Scientific Discovery." American Philosophical Society Proceedings 105, no. 5 (October 1961): 470-86. 3. Hagstrom, Warren 0. "Competition in Science." American Sociological Review 39 (1974): 1-18. 4. Ziman, J. M. Public Knowledge: An Essay concerning the Social Dimension of Science. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1968. 5. Wilson, Patrick. Public Knowledge, Private Ignorance: Toward a Library and Information Policy. Contributions in Librarianship and Information Science, no. 10. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1977. 6. Voigt, Melvin J. Scientists' Approaches to Information. ACRL Monograph no. 24. Chicago: American Library Association, 1961. 7. Smith, Roger C. Guide to the Literature of the Zoological Sciences. Minneapolis: Burgess Publishing Co., 1942. 8. Smith, Roger C., and Painter, Reginald H. Guide to the Literature of the Zoological Sciences. 7th ed. Minneapolis: Burgess Publishing Co., 1967. 9. Rubenstein, Albert, et al. "Explorations on the Information-seeking Style of Re- searchers." In Communication among Scientists and Engineers, edited by Carnot E. Nelson and Donald K. Pollock. Lexington, Mass.: Heath Lexington Books, 1970. 10. Slater, Margaret, and Fisher, Pamela. Use Made of Technical Libraries. Aslib Occasional Publication no. 2. London: Aslib, 1969. 11. Martyn, John. Report of an Investigation on Literature Searching by Research Scientists. London: Aslib Research Department, 1964.
RECORDS OF RESEARCH 145 12. Garvey, William D.; Lin, Nan; and Tomita, Kazuo. "Research Studies in Scientific Communication. IV. The Continuity of Dissemination of Information by 'Productive Scientists.' " Information Storage and Retnreval 8 (1972): 265-76. 13. Weinberg, Alvin M. "Scientific Teams and Scientific Laboratories." Daedalus (Fall 1970), pp. 1056-75. 14. Weinberg, Alvin M. Reflections on Big Science. Cambridge, Mass.: M.I.T. Press, 1968. 15. Hart, B. H. Liddell. History of the Second World War. New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1971. 16. Ravetz, Jerome R. Scientific Knowledge and Its Social Problems. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1971. 17. Martyn, John. "Citation Analysis." Journal of Documentation 31 (1975): 290-97. 18. Glass, Bentley. "A Survey of Biological Abstracting, Part II." A.l.B.S. BuUetin 5 (April 1955): 18-21. 19. Stigler, George J. The Intellectual and the Market Place, and Other Essays. Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press, 1963. 20. Seagrave, Sterling. "Wise Men from the South Peer toward What May Be Limits of the Universe." Smithsonian (April 1977), pp. 40-47. 21. Kent, Allen. Textbook on Mechanized Information Retrieval. 2d ed. New York: Intersci- ence, 1966. 22. Meadows, A. J. Communication in Science. London: Butterworths, 1974. 23. Carnap, Rudolf. Logical Foundations of Probability. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1950. 24. Norris, Keith, and Vaizey, John. The Economics of Research and Technology. Studies in Economics, no. 7. London: Allen & Unwin, 1973. 25. Rosenberg, Nathan. Perspectives on Technology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1976. 26. Stigler, George J. "The Nature and Role of Originality in Scientific Progress." Econom- ica 22 (1955): 293-302. 27. Kuhn, Thomas S. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. 2d ed., enl. International Encyclopedia of Unified Science, vol. 2, no. 2. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1970. 28. Herring, Conyers. "Distill or Drown: The Need for Reviews." Physics Today 21 (Sep- tember 1968): 27-33. 29. Herring, Conyers. "Critical Reviews: The User's Point of View."Journal of Chemical Documentation 8 (1968): 232-36. 30. Science, Government, and Information: A Report of the President's Science Advisory Committee. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1963. 31. Orr, Richard H. "The Scientist as an Information Processor." In Communication among Scientists and Engineers, edited by Carnot E. Nelson and Donald K. Pollock. Lexington, Mass.: Heath Lexington Books, 1970. 32. Dictionary of American Library Biography. Edited by Bohdan S. Wynar. Littleton, Colo.: Libraries Unlimited, Inc., 1978. 33. Virgo, Julie A. "The Review Article: Its Characteristics and Its Problems." Library Quarterly 41 (October 1971): 275-91. 34. Wilson, Patrick. Two Kinds of Power: An Essay on Bibliographical Control. University of California Publications, Librarianship, no. 5. 1968. Reprint. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1977. 35. Council on Biological Sciences Information. Information Handling in the Life Sciences. Washington, D.C.: Division of Biology and Agriculture, National Research Council, 1970. 36. Weisman, Herman M. Information Systems, Services, and Centers. New York: Becker & Hayes, 1972.