FRIENDS HISTORICAL LIBRARY OF SWARTHMORE COLLEGE5 Albert W. Fowler6 Friends Historical Library, located in the main library building on the campus of Swarthmore College, holds significant research collections on the history and doctrines of the Society of Friends. Quakers founded Pennsylvania and, for a time, furnished political leaders and shared in the governments of Delaware, New Jersey, North Carolina, and Rhode Island. Maryland, New York, South Carolina, and Virginia also con- tained significant Quaker settlements. Quakers, as social reformers and pacifists, created the Native American rights movement after 1755, the crusade to abolish slavery, and the temperance, women's rights, and peace movements. Scholars have utilized Quaker publications and docu- ments to investigate many aspects of American history and life: women, blacks, Native Americans, economic development, education, family, marriage, migration, and social mores. The Swarthmore College Peace Collection is located in the same building as Friends Historical Library. The Peace Collection is the only major archives devoted exclusively to the collection and maintenance of the papers of individuals and the records of organizations committed to the establishment of world peace through disarmament, pacifism, con- scientious objection, and nonviolent social change. Friends Historical Library has a rich collection of seventeenth- and eighteenth-century books and pamphlets by Friends in America and England. The library actively collects current Quaker publications, and its holdings now exceed 38,000 volumes of books and pamphlets, plus numerous serials, tracts, and broadsides. It holds over three hun- dred major manuscript collections, principally personal and family pa- pers and records of Quaker organizations. 5. 1 am grateful to Professor J. William Frost, director of Friends Historical Library of Swarthmore College, for helpful comments on several drafts of this paper. 6. Formerly Curator, Friends Historical Library of Swarthmore College, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania 19081.
RESEARCH NOTES 57 Meeting Records The most significant holdings of the library are the Quaker meeting archives from the late seventeenth century to the present, the largest collection in the world of Quaker records, either in the original manu- script or on microfilm. Friends Historical Library cooperates with the Quaker Collection of Haverford College Library as the official depos- itories for the records of Philadelphia and Baltimore Yearly Meetings, as well as for over two hundred quarterly, monthly, and preparative meet- ings affiliated with them. Some records of meetings (mostly of the Hicksite branch) affiliated with Ohio Yearly Meeting and Illinois Yearly Meeting are also included. Records of the yearly meetings include men's and women's minutes, minutes of ministers' and elders' meetings, minutes of the Meeting for Sufferings (the executive bodv between sessions of the yearly meeting), financial accounts, and records of important committees concerned with Native Americans, peace, race relations, worship and ministry, temper- ance, and religious education. Monthly meeting records normally include minutes of men's and women's meetings for business, minutes of ministers' and elders' meet- ings, registers of births, deaths, marriages, and removals, and in some instances documents of special interest, such as records of suffering during the American Revolution and certificates of manumission of slaves. Friends Historical Library initially became a depository of records of Philadelphia Yearly Meeting (Hicksite) in 1926. Previously, many rec- ords had been deposited at the Yearly Meeting offices in Philadelphia or were still in the custody of existing meetings. In 1975 additional meeting records came when the Philadelphia Yearly Meeting records depository at Arch Street in Philadelphia was closed and records stored there were transferred to Friends Historical Library and to the Quaker Collection at Haverford College. In 1986, Friends Historical Library joined with the Quaker Collection of Haverford College Library in a cooperative, grant-funded project (supported by the Pitcairn-Crabbe Foundation, various Philadelphia Quaker funds, and two Pennsylvania state agencies) to describe the archival records of Philadelphia Yearly Meeting and its constituent meetings. Because the records have been divided physically, scholars could not be certain which meeting records could be founid at Swarth- more, Haverford, or elsewhere. This project has resulted in the prepara- tion of a detailed inventory of the records available at the two libraries. In addition, archivistJack Eckert has prepared for publication a guide to the records based on this inventory [1].
58 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY The library has microfilm holdings of records of meetings affiliated with Canadian, Indiana, New England, New York, North Carolina, Ohio (Damascus), Virginia, and Western Yearly Meetings. Also included are significant holdings of microfilms of British Quaker records, including minutes and epistles of London Yearly Meeting and minutes of its Meeting for Sufferings. Except for microfilm of Quaker meetings in Yorkshire, few minutes of monthly meetings in Britain are available, but the library does have microfilm copies of registers of births, deaths, and marriages for many English, Irish, and Welsh meetings. Published Writings Historians and bibliographers will be particularly interested in the many seventeenth- and eighteenth-century books and pamphlets written by early Quaker leaders and their religious opponents. The leaders of the Society of Friends fused distinctive qualities of inward worship, without the guidance of professional clergy, with an energetic drive for world transformation. Most of the over three thousand works by Friends that had appeared in print by 1700 are represented in the holdings of the library. Friends' early writings included polemical tracts, proclamations, prophetic warnings of judgment, doctrinal works, accounts of persecu- tion of Friends, advice on church government and individual conduct, and journals of religious experiences. Tracts on ethical testimonies were significant, especially on the defense of individual conscience against the power of the state, the struggle for religious toleration, and measures for the promotion of social justice. Other Quaker writings defended their distinctive social practices, particularly the refusal to swear oaths, the use of "plain language," and the omission of various expressions of social deference in a highly stratified society. The nineteenth century was a time of severe internal strife for Friends, resulting in several schisms from 1827 to 1877. Since the period of schisms, various strands of religious thought and expression, particu- larly quietism, fundamentalism, evangelicalism, liberalism, and the social gospel, could be found among American Quakers. Official disciplines that stipulated the rules of conduct required of Friends in good standing were published beginning in the late eighteenth century. Many of the important serials and tracts emerged from this period of discord, as each of the Quaker groups attempted to justify its position. Serial holdings of the library, in addition to leading journals of Quaker thought, include proceedings of yearly meetings and their committees; newsletters of monthly and quarterly meetings; annual reports of schools, hospitals, and philanthropic societies; and journals about such
RESEARCH NOTES 59 social issues as abolition of slavery, temperance, assistance to the poor, and peace. Quaker educators produced important writings addressed to children: stories, serials, and Sunday school lessonis. Works about Quaker missions and relief efforts to repair the wounds of war became significant after the nineteenth century. The most pressing social issue for Friends in the twentieth century is peace. Although Quakers are perhaps best remembered for their philan- thropy, they have also made notable contributions in business, science, and medicine. Less emphasis exists in the arts and literature, although the library has virtually every edition, most variant printings, and the periodical contributions of the Quaker poet John Greenleaf Whittier. The library has a collection of broadsides, some published as early as the mid-seventeenth century. A number of antislavery broadsides are included. Tracts issued by Friends Tract Associations in England and America are also part of the library's holdings. Many Friends publica- tions are devoted to local history and genealogy, with approximately a thousand books on Quaker families included in the library. Manuscripts Friends Historical Library holds more than three hundred major manu- script collections describing a wide variety of aspects of Quaker life. The essential belief that the Light of God can reach women and men alike opened the way for women to preach equally with men from the found- ing of Quakerism in the 1650s, and women have also participated in various aspects of Quaker religious life, though not necessarily at all times on an equal basis with men. The structure of making decisions on church affairs, through business meetings, resulted in an unusual struc- ture of church government in which separate men's and women's meet- ings were established. Women's business meetings gave women experi- ence in making decisions and later became one reason why Quaker women played such a crucial role in establishing the women's rights movement. Friends Historical Library (along with the Quaker Collection at Haverford) has an extensive collection of minutes of women's business meetings. The most important of the manuscript collections devoted to an indi- vidual woman are the papers of Lucretia Mott (1793-1880), a Philadel- phia Quaker minister who worked energetically in the movement for immediate abolition of slavery and helped found the women's rights movement in 1848. Other collections of manuscripts pertaining to women in the nineteenth century include: Emily Howland (education of blacks), Graceanna Lewis (botany, abolition, women's rights), and Cor-
60 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY nelia Hancock, Martha Schofield, and Abby Hopper Gibbons (work with blacks, education). Significant collections of twentieth-century Quaker women include: Mary Elizabeth Pidgeon (women's rights), Mary Ellicott Arnold (cooperatives, work with Native Americans), Anna Gillingham (education), Ruth Paine and Mary Knowles (civil liberties), and Lucy Biddle Lewis (Quaker relief, peace) [2, pp. 157-68]. Numerous philanthropic organizations were established by Quaker women to assist poor women or black women in the nineteenth century, and the library has 'records of some important ones, including the Association for the Care of Colored Orphans, 1822-1979; the Central Employment Association, 1840-1942; the Female Association of Phila- delphia, 1828-1978; and the Northern Association of the City and County of Philadelphia for the Relief and Employment of Poor Women, 1841-1929. Important manuscript material documents the work of Quakers to assist blacks. One of the most significant documents is a "Census of Black People Residing in Philadelphia and the Liberties" (1847). Quakers established some schools for blacks, the most important of which was the Institute for Colored Youth, founded in 1837, later renamed Cheyney State College. Also deserving mention are the Friends Freedmen's Asso- ciation, formed to assist freed blacks following the Civil War, and the Friends Neighborhood Guild, a settlement house in North Philadelphia. Three important committees established by Philadelphia Yearly Meeting (Race Relations Committee, Social Order Committee, and Meeting for Social Concerns) dealt with racial and urban issues. There are collections of manumissions from the late eighteenth century, when Quakers were required to free their slaves to remain in good standing with their meetings. Papers of important Quaker abolitionists include those of Joseph Dugdale, Isaac Tatem Hopper, Samuel Janney, Daniel Neall, and John Greenleaf Whittier. Papers concerning Native Americans include records of Indian com- mittees established by various Hicksite Quaker bodies and personal papers of Quakers who worked with Native Americans, including those of Barclay White, Albert Lamborn Green, Samuel Lightfoot (all of whom served as Indian agents under Grant's administration), Halliday Jackson, Samuel Janney, and Mary Ellicott Arnold. The library holds numerous journals, mostly kept by Quaker minis- ters, who traveled to meetings in America and sometimes in Britain. The journals primaily record spiritual reflections and less often contain ac- counts of ordinary daily activities. The library has manuscript drafts of the best known Quaker religious journal, which is by John Woolman (1720-72) [3]. Other important manuscript collections include Joseph Wharton (business); the Elkinton family (business, travels in the ministry); John
RESEARCH NOTES 61 Greenleaf Whittier (abolition, poetry, literature); Moses Sheppard (phi- lanthropy, assistance to blacks); Elias Hicks, Benjamin Ferris, and Joel Bean (nineteenth-century religious controversies); Frank Aydelotte (education); William I. Hull (peace, Quaker history); Painter brothers (botany, farming); John Bright (politics); and Inazo Nitobe (education in Japan). In addition there are account books, commonplace books, and the Charles F. Jenkins Autograph Collection. Several collections of per- sonal papers document relief work in Europe organized by the Ameri- can Friends Service Committee following World War I. Friends Histor- ical Library is also responsible for the preservation of some official records and pictures relating to Swarthmore College [4-7]. While the library's collections emphasize written material, there are some notable works of art including two "Peaceable Kingdoms" by Edward Hicks, paintings and a large collection of drawings by Benjamin West, and silhouettes, particularly an album by Auguste Edouart. There are some important art-related manuscript collections, including letters and a journal of Edward Hicks, a few Benjamin West manuscripts, correspondence of art critic Earl Shinn with leading nineteenth-century artists, and a small collection of records of the Ladies Art Association of New York. In addition, the library's visual resources include an exten- sive photograph collection, mainly of portraits of Friends and pictures of Quaker meeting houses in America and overseas. Some costumes and artifacts are also in the library's collections. Guides to Friends Historical Library Friends Historical Library's holdings are described in several publica- tions, including the Catalog of the Book and Serials Collections of the Friends Historical Library (1982) [8], Guide to the Manuscript Collections of Friends Historical Library of Swarthmore College (1982) [4], and Guide to the Records of Philadelphia Yearly Meeting, edited by Jack Eckert (1989) [1]. Archival and manuscript holdings of the Swarthmore College Peace Collection are summarized in the Guide to the Swarthmore College Peace Collection, second edition (1982) [91, and Guide to Sources on Women in the Swarthmore College Peace Collection, edited by Wendy E. Chmielewski (1988) [10]. Brief descriptive leaflets of both the Friends Historical Library and the Peace Collection are also available. History of Friends Historical Library Anson Lapham, a Quaker banker from Skaneateles, New York, estab- lished a "Friends Repository" when he donated 150 Quaker books in
62 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 1871, two years after Swarthmore College opened its doors. The aim of this new library was to collect books, manuscripts, and relics "exclusively for matters pertaining to Friends" [ 1]. At its inception, the library had a twofold purpose: education of the young Hicksite Friends at Swarth- more College in the moral principles and religious traditions of the Quakers and the development of a resource to assist future historians of Quakerism. Today, the Friends Historical Library emphasizes scholarly research on Quaker history, and it is used by Swarthmore College stu- dents and faculty, as well as by scholars from colleges and universities in this country and overseas, who find source material in the library's collections to add to our understanding of Quaker history and faith and to analyze its connection to wider social and intellectual currents that have influenced the development of this country. Recent books that have made extensive use of this library's holdings include: J. William Frost and Hugh Barbour, The Quakers (New York: Greenwood, 1988); Thomas D. Hamm, The Transformation of American Quakerism: Orthodox Friends, 1800-1907 (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1988)- winner of the Frank S. and Elizabeth D. Brewer Prize Essay of the American Society of Church History; H. Larry Ingle, Quakers in Conflict: The Hicksite Reformation (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1986); Barry Levy, Quakers and the American Family: British Settlement in the Delaware Valley (New York: Oxford University Press, 1988); Kather- ine Smedley, Martha Schofield and the Re-Education of the South, 1839- 1916 (Lewiston, N.Y.: Edwin Mellen, 1987); Jean R. Soderlund, Quakers and Slavery: A Divided Spirit (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1985); and W. Ross Yates, Joseph Wharton: Quaker Industrial Pioneer (Bethlehem, Pa.: Lehigh University Press, 1987). The library was first located in the College Building (now known as Parrish Hall), and its special fireproof structure enabled it to survive a disastrous fire in 1881 that destroyed the entire building except Friends Historical Library. The charred edges of some books in the collections still bear witness to the effects of that fire. In 1906 Friends Historical Library moved into the tower room of the new Swarthmore College Library building provided by Andrew Carnegie. In 1929 Friends Histor- ical Library moved into a new wing adjoining the 1906 Carnegie Library, thanks to the generosity of Clement Miller Biddle (1876-1959), a mem- ber of the Swarthmore College Board of Managers from 1927 to 1956. The Biddle Wing, as it was sometimes called, was donated in memory of his father, Clement M. Biddle (1838-1902), also a member of the Swarthmore College Board of Managers from 1874 to 1894. By the 1960s, library facilities at Swarthmore College became so crowded that a new building was necessary. The Cornell family provided for a section to house Friends Historical Library in the new McCabe
RESEARCH NOTES 63 Library building, which opened in 1967. This section was given in memory of Esther Haviland Cornell and Edward Cornell, a member of the Board of Managers from 1916 to 1929. With the appointment in 1893 of professor of engineering Arthur Beardsley as curator and librarian, a practice began of appointing a member of the Swarthmore College faculty to serve as the chief adminis- trator of Friends Historical Library. Beardsley served until 1917 and was followed by John Russell Hayes, 1927-36, William Isaac Hull, 1936-39, Frederick Barnes Tolles, 1941-71, John Morrison Moore, 1971-73, and since 1973, J. William Frost, all of whom have provided the leadership required to bring the library into an important place among research libraries in the country. Following a distinguished career at Swarthmore as professor of history and related fields from 1892 to 1929, William 1. Hull was appointed in 1929 as the first Howard M. Jenkins Research Professor of Quaker History, serving in that post until his death in 1939. Tolles and Frost have also occupied this special faculty chair established by the Jenkins family. Hull established a framework in which the chief administrator of Friends Historical Library also teaches courses in Quaker history and related areas in history and religion and publishes scholarly books and articles on Quaker history. These scholar-adminis- trators have been assisted in managing the collections by professional librarians, particularly E. Virginia Walker, 1936-47, Dorothy Gladden Harris, 1940-7 1, Jane Rittenhouse, 1971-76, Albert W. Fowler, 1976- 89, and beginning in 1989, Mary Ellen Chijioke, and other staff. The first catalog of Friends Historical Library perished in the fire that consumed Parrish Hall in 1881. Joseph Smith's A Descriptive Catulogue of Friends' Books [12] was made the basis of the next catalog, and the copy with annotations and shelf locations for the Quaker books owned by the library still survives. It was gradually replaced, begining in the 1940s, with a standard card catalog prepared by professional library catalogers, including Judith E. Sachs, Dorothy Gladden Harris, Mildred E. Hirsch, Juliet Pyle, and Claire Shetter. Claire Shetter, who joined the Friends Historical Library staff in 1962, has prepared descriptions for over half of the works in the library's publications catalog. The library uses the Library of Congress Classification, although the Quaker schedules (BX7600-BX7799) have been modified. In 1977 the library began to contribute bibliographic records to OCLC and to use its database to obtain cards for the catalog. Now plans are underway, in cooperation with Bryn Mawr and Haverford colleges, to replace the cards with an automated, computer-based library catalog. A special card catalog has been developed to describe the library's manuscript and archival holdings. Some manuscript collections have catalog records identifying each letter or document. Normally, descrip-
64 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY tions for manuscripts and archives are prepared as brief records of entire collections, with more detailed typed inventories serving as the principal finding aids. The existence of birth, death, marriage, and removal records in Quaker meetings has led to a great demand for genealogical research using the library's resources. For genealogists who cannot visit the li- brary, the library will furnish a list of genealogical researchers along with information on what is needed for arranging a search, including fees charged. The William Wade Hinshaw Index to Quaker Meeting Records, a card index to genealogical data from the records of 307 Quaker meet- ings in the United States, supplements Hinshaw's well-known Encyclope- dia of American Quaker Genealogy [13]. The Hinshaw index emphasizes meetings in Indiana, Iowa, and Kansas, with only thirteen Pennsylvania and four New Jersey meetings included. Most Friends meetings are not abstracted in either the Hinshaw Encyclopedia or index, requiring for those meetings a specific examination of actual meeting records. Conservation of the Collections For many years the library has employed a conservator to mend manu- scripts, encapsulate documents, prepare storage boxes for bound vol- umes using acid-free material, maintain leather-bound books, and over- see proper storage of manuscript and archival collections. Some books, especially significant seventeenth-century publications, have been sent out for rebinding by a specialist in rare books. The library is a member of the Conservation Center for Art and Historical Artifacts in Philadel- phia, which has surveyed the collections, trained our conservator, and provided advice when needed. An active program of preservation microfilming continues, with a special emphasis on minute books of Quaker meetings. Access Advance arrangements by researchers, while encouraged, are not neces- sary to consult the library's collections. Admission is not charged, though contributions are welcome. A few collections are restricted, and access to others may be limited where the paper is in extremely fragile condition. Normally, access to the collections is granted for research purposes only. Permission for publication must be granted specifically by the director. Some manuscript collections and most meeting records have been
RESEARCH NOTES 65 microfilmed, and when microfilm is available researchers are asked to use it instead of the original manuscripts. Photocopying facilities, includ- ing a microfilm reader-printer, are available. Photocopying is restricted when books or manuscripts are extremely fragile, and all photocopying must comply with copyright laws. Manuscripts and archives are not available on interlibrary loan, though limited interlibrary lending can be arranged for books. Certain microfilms may be lent or duplicated for research purposes, but the terms under which Friends meeting records are deposited preclude any lending of microfilms of them. REFERENCES 1. Eckert, Jack. Guide to the Records of Philadelphia Yearly Meeting. Haverford, Pa.: Haver- ford College, Records Committee of Philadelphia Yearly Meeting, and Swarthmore College, 1989. 2. Brown, Elisabeth Potts, and Soderlund, Jean R. "Sources on Quaker Women." In Witnesses for Change: Quaker Women over Three Centuries, edited by Elisabeth Potts Brown and Susan Mosher Stuard. New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press, 1989. 3. Woolman, John. A Journal of the Life, Gospel Labours, and Christian Experiences of That Faithful Minister of Jesus Christ, John Woolman .. . Philadelphia: Joseph Crukshank, 1774. It was included in The Works ofJohn Woolman: In Two Parts. (Philadelphia: Joseph Crukshank, 1774.) Woolman's journal, one of the most widely read publications written by a Quaker in America, has been reprinted in numerous editions. See especially, The Journal and Major Essays of John Woolman, edited by Phillips P. Moulton. New York: Oxford University Press, 1971. 4. Guide to the Manuscript Collections of Friends Historical Library of Swarthmore College, Swarthmore, Pa.: Swarthmore College, 1982. 5. Harris, Dorothy G. "Manuscript Resources of the Friends Libraries: Friends Historical Library, Swarthmore College." In Then and Now, Quaker Essays, Histonrcal and Contempo- rary, edited by Anna Brinton. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1960, pp. 215-27. 6. Curtis, Barbara L. "Searching the Sources: Quaker Archives in the Philadelphia Area." Quaker History 70 (Spring 1981): 40-46. 7. Fowler, Albert W. "Quakers Journey to the Orient." Committee on East Asian Libraries Bulletin, no. 83 (February 1988), pp. 1-4. 8. Catalog of the Book and Serials Collections of the Friends Histonrcal Library. 6 vols. Boston: Hall, 1982. 9. Guide to the Swarthmore College Peace Collection. 2d ed. Swarthmore, Pa.: Swarthmore College, 1982. 10. Chmielewski, Wendy E., ed. Guide to Sources on Women in the Swarthmore College Peace Collection. Swarthmore, Pa.: Swarthmore College, 1988. 11. Lapham, Anson. Letter to George Truman, December 26, 1870. Small Collections- Truman, Friends Historical Library of Swarthmore College. 12. Smith, Joseph. A Descriptive Catalogue of Friends' Books ... 2 vols. London: Joseph Smith, 1867. Smith published a supplement to his Catalogue in 1893. In addition, Smith published Bibliotheca Anti-Quakeriana; Or, A Catalogue of Books Adverse to the Society of Friends. London: Joseph Smith, 1873. 13. Hinshaw, William Wade. Encyclopedia of Amenrcan Quaker Genealogy. 6 vols. Ann Arbor, Mich.: Edwards Brothers, 1936-50.