NEW APPROACHES TO PRESERVATION' RICHARD DANIEL SMITH I. INTRODUCTION The preservation of library materials is a major concern of librarians. In- creasing numbers of books are so badly deteriorated they cannot be circulated. Persons in many fields are experiment- ing with and searching for ways to im- prove preservation practices. The ob- jectives of this discussion are to review existing technology and report upon new approaches that librarians may ap- ply to preserving and restoring library paper materials. In the future, highly stable printing papers and book components will be more widely used in the manufacture of books. Present-day library collec- tions, however, are largely composed of books printed on unstable paper. A sub- stantial percentage of these books were not manufactured for permanent use, and libraries will continue to acquire significant works printed on imperma- nent paper. The novel preservation treatments presented in this report are applicable for most books already in libraries and for books to be printed on unstable papers of the foreseeable fu- ture. The preservation of books and rec- ords is not a new problem. Over 3,000 years ago, an Egyptian scribe reported that papyrus scrolls in his charge had to be dried and unrolled to determine whether the rain had washed off the ink writing [1, p. 18, line 12-p. 19, line 2; 21. Within a century or two after the invention of paper in China, the Chi- nese were treating paper to prevent at- tack by insects and book worms. By A.D. 500, they felt they knew enough to preserve paper for several hundred years [3, pp. 152-53]. In 1594 Shakespeare wrote: "So should my papers, yellowed with their age, / Be scorn'd like old men of less truth than tongue" [4, p. 290]. In the early 1 700s, European scholars com- plained that irresponsible and profiteer- ing papermakers were selling dirty thin paper [5, p. 2]. The scholars believed the government should force paper- makers to produce good paper, just like the paper produced in Shakespeare's time. We also show a tendency to view the This investigation was made possible by en- couragement, guidance, and support from the Chi- cago Testing Laboratory, Chicago, Ill.; the Coun- cil on Library Resources, Inc., Washington, D.C.; the Institute of Paper Chemistry, Appleton, Wis.; and the Department of Chemistry, the Oriental Institute, the Toxicity Laboratory, and the Grad- uate Library School of the University of Chicago, Chicago, il. The Allied Chemical Corp., Chicago, Ill.; E. I. duPont de Nemours & Co., Chicago, Ill.; Harshaw Chemical Co., Hinsdale, Ill.; Hercules Incorporated, Chicago, Ill.; M & T Chemicals, Inc., Rahway, N.J.; Morton Chemical Co., Chicago, Ill.; and Stauffer Chemical Co., New York, N.Y., kindly donated many of the chemicals used in the experimental work. A large number of individuals, both within and without the above organizations, made contributions to this research. Particularly significant assistance from five of them calls for recognition: Howard W. Winger, professor, the Graduate Library School, brought the problem to my attention; Don R. Swanson, dean, the Grad- uate Library School, supported my research; Bertie L. Browning, senior research assocate, the Insti- tute of Paper Chemistry, gave me an appredation for the complex nature of paper and guided much of the research; Harold W. Tribolet, manager, De- partment of Extra Binding, R. R. Donnelley & Sons Co., Chicago, Ill., evaluated my ideas from the viewpoint of a practicing conservator; and Walter A. Wozniak, chief chemist, the Chicago Testing Laboratory, helped me with experimental and testing problems. The results presented repre- sent a summary of the author's doctoral research. 139
140 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY past through rose-colored glasses. To- day librarians have few problems with rain, insects, book worms, and dirty thin paper; but they complain about the impermanence of paper produced since the introduction of wood fiber sources during the 1860s. This empha- sis on the period beginning with 1860 is not 100 percent accurate. Fifty years ago, Chapman investi- gated the condition of paper in books of the Imperial Library in Calcutta, In- dia [6-8]. He discovered that books published before 1860 were also deteri- orating and that some of these books were in a far more critical condition than books published after 1860. He identified bleaching practices and new paper fiber sources as the probable causes of the unstable paper manufac- tured between 1800 and 1820, and rec- ognized that a solution to the problem of deteriorating books would require the efforts of many specialists. Chapman compared books from the Imperial Library with identical copies from other libraries located on the hot Indian plains, in the Himalayan foot- hills, part time on the plains and part time in the foothills, and in England. He found that books stored under cool- er conditions, in England and in the Himalayan foothills, had longer useful lives. Likewise, moving the books from the plains to the foothills reduced the rate of deterioration. In 1920, Chap- man was so agitated about book losses that he actually proposed moving the Imperial Library collection to the foot- hills, 500 miles from the reading rooms in Calcutta [7, p. 243]. By 1922, he modified his stand and wanted to air- condition the proposed new library building [8, pp. 452-53]. Air-condition- ing using refrigerants for cooling did not really begin to develop until the early 1930s. Chapman's desire for air- conditoning was no less radical (far- sighted?) than his desire to move the collection. Chapman fully appreciated the effect of storage conditions on the life of books and, through chemical analyses, established that an association existed between acidity and paper deteriora- tion. We now know that acidity in pa- per is the main cause of paper deterio- ration and that poor storage conditions accelerate the rate of paper deteriora- tion. The reactions which cause books to deteriorate occur after the books are received by libraries. Theoretically, therefore, librarians have the ability to make decisions and take whatever ac- tion is necessary to stretch out the use- ful life of books. Some knowledge about the manner in which paper deteriorates may be helpful in planning and sched- uling preservation work in libraries. 2. THE NATURE OF PAPER DETERIORATION The manner in which paper deterio- rates is highly significant. Permanence and durability are the two characteris- tics of paper involved. Permanence is the capacity of paper to retain its orig- inal characteristics, and durability re- flects the ability of paper to stand up in use [9]. All book papers probably have more durability than would be required for use in research libraries if the use occurred when the papers were new and strong. Unfortunately, research li- brary patrons do not use books only when the paper is new and strong. A book may be used infrequently in re- search libraries and over prolonged pe- riods of time. The disintegration of books has been predicted by generations of librarians, but the books still stand upon the shelves, embrittled perhaps, but intact. To explain this, we must understand
NEW APPROACHES TO PRESERVATION 141 that the real-life rate of deterioration is not a straight line. It is an exponen- tial curve, descending sharply at first, and then leveling off to push total dis- integration into the far distant future. The straight and curved lines in fig- ure 1 are two ways of visualizing the very same loss in folding endurance. Because time is not specified, figure 1 can be considered as a generalization for all types of paper. The left axis and the straight line represent the logarith- mic relationship. This form is highly regarded by scientists because the line can be extended to make a prediction of future properties. The right axis and curved or exponential line give informa- tion more significant to librarians be- cause the curve represents the actual number of folds before the paper breaks. Paper loses folding endurance very rapidly at first and then more and more slowly as time goes on. (It may be helpful when considering fig. 1 to remember that the logarithmic numbers 2.0, 1.0, 0.0, and -0.8 are equal to 100, 10, 1, and about 0.16.) The exponential rate of paper de- terioration suggests three things: (1) Books will remain intact on the shelves indefinitely after their leaves become so embrittled that the pages cannot be turned (papyrus scrolls are examples of this effect). (2) Permanence or a low rate of deterioration is far more impor- tant than durability when books will be used infrequently over long periods of time. (3) The best time to treat books for preservation is when they are new and strong. 3. A PROGRAM FOR PRESERVATION Each library must consider its own responsibilities and means when plan- ning a preservation program. No single plan can be recommended for all librar- ies. Popular libraries of ready refer- ence tools and best sellers are chiefly 2.0 100 Ln 1.6 -80P 0 1.2 Logarithm of 60 folding endurance 0 - 08~~~~~~~~~~~~ o 04 Co 0.4 _ \_20 z o Foldin\ E 00- endurance 0 0-0.4 -08 T ime - FIG. 1.-Nature of folding endurance loss
142 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY interested in durability, not permanence. Research libraries are interested pri- marily in permanence, or maintaining their collections over an indefinite pe- riod of time. This discussion is directed toward the needs of the research li- brary, but the suggestions can be mod- ified to suit libraries with less perma- nent collections. Books in research collections are like- ly to be exposed to all the causes of paper deterioration during their ex- pected lifetime. Counter-measures must be considered when a preservation pro- gram is established. Other papers in this issue report on the chemistry of paper deterioration and methods of en- vironmental control [10, 11], and I shall avoid these topics insofar as pos- sible. The impermanence of library mate- rials is largely related to the degrada- tion of cellulose in paper and other book components. Cellulose is a stable organic chemical and the major com- ponent of paper fibers. The integrity of paper fibers and their resistance to de- terioration vary widely with the com- position and manufacture of the paper and the storage history of books. The quality of paper fibers can deteriorate rapidly as a consequence of oxidative, hydrolytic, and photochemical reac- tions. Oxidative and hydrolytic attacks are particularly important. Oxidative degradation is both a direct and an in- direct cause of paper impermanence. Oxidative reactions can cause an im- mediate scission of the cellulose mole- cule or prepare the way for other un- desirable reactions. Oxidized cellulose is unstable and particularly liable to discoloration. However, the presence of oxygen is required for the production of oxidized cellulose, and its formation normally proceeds very much more slowly than that of hydrolyzed cellu- lose. The preservation of library materials is contingent on minimizing the rate of hydrolytic acidic attack. The accepted preservation treatment for unstable book paper includes neutralization as well as the deposit of a benign, alkaline buffering agent in the treated paper. Such a treatment does not, however, strengthen weakened or embrittled pa- per, although an alkaline condition does restrict the activity of trace metals like copper and iron. Deacidification does not decrease the probability of biologi- cal attack because alkaline conditions favor the growth of many fungi and make books more appetizing to insects and rodents. Deacidification does not prevent oxidative or photochemical at- tack, although the alkaline buffer neu- tralizes the acidic by-products of these reactions. These problems and other hazards to books must be considered when planning a complete preservation program. A preservation program should make it reasonably certain that a library can discard only those materials which it no longer needs, rather than be forced to discard materials because they have deteriorated beyond use. With this gen- eral objective in mind, I propose that a preservation program for a research li- brary should include: 1. A deacidification treatment, be- nign to book and user, which includes the deposit of an alkaline buffering agent and protection against biological attack. 2. A strengthening and restoration treatment capable of improving the dur- ability of heavily used materials and restoring the condition of borderline books so they can be rebound and cir- culated.
NEW APPROACHES TO PRESERVATION 143 3. A method for protecting infre- quently used books by storing them, preferably as individual units, in cheap, transparent, and disposable containers. My specific preservation program, which I shall call the Chicago Process, will be discussed in four parts: (1) pa- per deacidification, (2) protection from living organisms, (3) paper strength- ening, and (4) prolonged storage. Some emphasis will be given in this discussion to the work of earlier investigators whose work is scattered and frequently overlooked. 4. PAPER DEACIDIFICATION 4.1 INTRODUCTION Acidic attack is the most significant cause of deterioration in library mate- rials. The best publicized source of acidity is papermaker's alum, which is introduced principally during the man- ufacture of paper. Books are also de- stroyed by acidity which develops while the books are stored in libraries [ 12 ]. The sources of this acidity include air pollutants and the oxidation prod- ucts of paper fibers and printing ink mediums. For purposes of perspective in paper deacidification technology, I will first consider the use of organic deacidifica- tion agents, then inorganic deacidifica- tion agents, and finally nonaqueous de- acidification. Some methods of deacidification, as, for example, the sprinkling of alkaline inorganic powders like chalk on paper, are unlikely to be effective. Kathpalia [13, p. 251] reported unsatisfactory re- sults with chalk powder (calcium car- bonate). Another authority studied an acidic paper coated with an alkaline coating. The TAPPI water extract pH was alkaline as a result of the coating, but the paper was impermanent because its center remained acidic [14; 15, pp. 1524, 1527]. The ideal deacidification treatment would avoid the problem of wetting and drying books by using a gaseous pro- cess. Regrettably, gaseous treatments are not permanent because the deacid- ification agent escapes by volatilizing back out of the book, and the book re- verts to its acidic condition. Other dif- ficulties with gaseous processes include undesirable side reactions and the haz- ardous properties of available chemi- cals. 4.2 ORGANIC DEACIDIFICATION AGENTS Organic alkalies, based on nitrogen, are effective deacidification agents. Amines or their derivatives have been widely applied to produce an alkaline condition and thereby stabilize paper or prevent metal corrosion or tarnish- ing. Low-molecular-weight amines are used as gases or vapors, and heavier amines are used as liquids or dissolved in suitable solvents. The potential benefit of amines in deacidifying library materials, however, can be outweighed by the problems which amines may cause under library conditions. These problems originate in the side reactions and effects which amines undergo and cause. Most amines have physiological effects on human be- ings, and many amines present toxicity hazards at rather low levels of concen- tration. Organic alkalies, which contain nitrogen, discolor paper by reacting with the carbohydrates in paper to form brown, nitrogen-containing polymers. "Browning reactions" are a widespread phenomena in carbohydrate chemistry, and food and paper scientists have pub- lished much research [16-33]. (For purposes of completeness, the references cited [16-33] discuss the browning re-
144 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY actions of amines and carbohydrates as well as the more ordinary causes of color reversion in paper.) Some applications of amines and their derivatives in stabilizing paper were enumerated in a previous Library Quarterly article [34, p. 281]. In addi- tion, amines have been patented as va- por-phase corrosion inhibitors in anti- tarnishing wrapping papers [35] and used to stabilize dark-colored and black cellulosic plastic-molded products [36, p. 361; J. T. Bent, district sales man- ager, Plastics Division, Eastman Chem- ical Products, Inc., Rochester, N.Y., personal correspondence]. Amines are used to stabilize electrical papers against heat degradation [37, 381. Gaines [39] and Volgenau [40] investi- gated the effect of gaseous, liquid, and solid amines on the thermal stability of cellulose. They found that the amines which were effective in stabilizing the strength properties of paper also caused the paper to discolor. Langwell [41, p. 27] asserted that the simplest organic alkali, ammonia, as an air pollutant, is a cause of paper discoloration. A thorough discussion of amines is beyond the scope of this paper, but the Langwell vapor-phase deacidification (VPD) process [42-44] requires com- ment. The need for comment exists be- cause the data on which Langwell [42, 43] asserts the safety of his VPD pro- cess under library conditions is incom- plete. Moreover, some research appli- cable to the toxicology of the VPD process has not heretofore been dis- cussed in library literature. The Langwell VPD process is similar to the use of moth balls, where a solid material is placed close to the endan- gered goods and protection is conveyed via a vapor phase. The solid agent in the VPD process is cyclohexylamine carbonate (cyclohexanecarbamic acid cyclohexylammonium salt), manufac- tured by bubbling carbon dioxide through cyclohexylamine under appro- priate conditions. The chemical reac- tion is shown by figure 2. Cyclohexyl- amine carbonate is acidic rather than alkaline, so it cannot be the deacidifica- tion agent. On vaporizing, therefore, it may reasonably be assumed that a ma- jor portion of the solid agent must re- vert to the alkaline chemical., cyclo- hexylamine. Consequently, this discus- sion will focus on cyclohexylamine, the deacidification agent in the VPD pro- cess. Research on cyclohexylamine is cur- rently stimulated because some people produce it as a metabolic product of the cyclamate family of artificial sweeten- ers. The U.S. Food and Drug Adminis- tration is concerned about the toxicity of cyclohexylamine and is developing information on the quantities of cycla- CH2-CH2 CH2-CH2 CH2-CH2 2 CJ-'2 H-NH2 + CO2 DI CH2 CH-NH-C-O H3N-CH CH2 CH2-CH2 CH2- CH2 CH2-CH2 Cyclohexylamine + Carbon _ Cyclohexylamine carbonate dioxide - FiG. 2.-Formation of cyclohexylami'ne carbonate
NEW APPROACHES TO PRESERVATION 145 mates safe for human consumption. In the process, they may establish safe ingestion levels for cyclohexylamine. The toxicology of cyclohexylamine has been reviewed [45], and small quanti- ties have been found to be hazardous to health [46-48]. The Royal Air Force Laboratories in Porton, England, investigated the tox- icity of cyclohexylamine carbonate in 1956 [49]. The report of this investiga- tion has been identified as the Porton Report, and it has been cited as indi- cating that cyclohexylamine carbonate was safe for use in libraries [42, 43]. The Porton Report presented data ob- tained by short-term and relatively gross tests to justify the use of cyclo- hexylamine carbonate for the vapor- phase prevention of metal corrosion. Kenneth P. DuBois, professor of phar- macology and director of the Toxicity Laboratory, the University of Chicago, advised me that the Porton Report con- tained some evidence which suggests that an occasional and brief exposure to cyclohexylamine carbonate vapor would not be harmful. He stated further that the report contained no i.iforma- tion to support the contention that hu- mans could tolerate long-term exposure to cyclohexylamine carbonate vapor. The Porton Report included data which can be interpreted as showing the necessity for further investigation be- fore the VPD process is widely applied in libraries. It stated that the cyclo- hexylamine carbonate vapor concentra- tion at 650 F (180 C) would approach five to six grams per cubic meter under saturated conditions and ranged from one to two grams when fresh air was introduced. The lowest vapor concen- tration reported was 1.1 grams per cu- bic meter, that is, about one part per thousand, when trays containing cyclo- hexylamine carbonate were placed, to- gether with experimental animals, in a static ten-cubic-meter test chamber. In the VPD process for deacidifying books, sheets of paper, impregnated with cyclohexylamine carbonate, are in- serted at twenty-five-page intervals for books printed on heavily sized or coated papers and at fifty-page intervals for books printed on porous papers [43, 44]. One publication [43] recommends the impregnated paper not extend be- yond the pages of the books being treated. Another publication [44] rec- ommends the impregnated paper be sized larger so it will extend beyond the pages of the books undergoing treat- ment. The cyclohexylamine carbonate contained in or migrating to the periph- ery of the book or the protruding edge of the impregnated paper volatilizes in- to the surrounding air similarly to the volatilization of the cyclohexylamine carbonate placed on trays during the Porton experiments. The Porton Report does not specify the rate of air change during the two- hour animal exposure experiments when the cyclohexylamine carbonate vapor concentration ranged between one and two grams per cubic meter of air. Consequently, this data cannot be applied directly to library book stacks but can be used to establish a possible concentration of cyclohexylamine car- bonate vapor. Air in low-use areas like library book stacks that are air-condi- tioned is typically recirculated three to four times per hour and changed com- pletely once per hour. In dynamic test chambers, the conventional practice is to change the air once per minute, so it is reasonable to assume that the unspec- ified rate of fresh air introduction in the Porton experiment changed the air at least once per hour. Hence, it is plau- sible that, if many of the books in an air-conditioned book stack were deacid-
146 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY ified according to the VPD process, the book stack air would also contain about one gram of cyclohexylamine equivalent per cubic meter of air. Temperatures in American book stacks are customarily maintained about 75?-77? F instead of at 65? F as in the Porton experiments. This higher temperature would favor a higher concentration of cyclohexyl- amine carbonate vapor. In 1961, after a variety of experi- ments including inhalation studies where exposures continued four hours per day over a five-month period, Le- monova [50] recommended that the maximum concentration of cyclohexyl- amine in air not be allowed to exceed 0.001 grams per cubic meter, that is, about one part per million. (For com- parison, the longest exposure of the Porton investigation lasted thirty hours, six hours per day for five days.) Ac- cordingly, this argument at least sug- gests the possibility that the Langwell VPD process (one part per thousand) might expose library personnel to 1,000 times the maximum amount of cyclo- hexylamine Lemonova concluded it was safe for Russian factory workers to breathe. It follows that, before cyclo- hexylamine carbonate can be used without hesitation by librarians, the safety of air-borne concentrations of cyclohexylamine carbonate which ac- tually occur under practical book stack conditions must be determined by ap- propriate inhalation studies. In addi- tion, it would be desirable to establish the dissociation rate of cyclohexylamine carbonate into cyclohexylamine, as this information does not appear to be avail- able in the literature. Likewise, the rates at which cyclohexylamine carbon- ate vapor evolves from treated books should be investigated, both when the impregnated paper protrudes and when it does not protrude from the treated books. More precise information should be developed on the rate of browning and the degree to which discoloration would affect legibility and colored illus- trations. Such a study might also con- sider the problem of how frequently the cyclohexylamine carbonate lost by vola- tilization should be replaced to main- tain the condition of alkalinity. If the safety of the VPD process is assured under normal conditions, li- brarians should consider that large- scale applications would require the presence of substantial quantities of cyclohexylamine carbonate and that these quantities could become hazard- ous in case of fire. Ten grams of cyclo- hexylamine carbonate are recommended when deacidifying two pounds of loose papers contained in a closed box [44]. More than 95 percent of the books in urban research libraries are in need of a deacidification treatment.2 Hence, a 3,000,000 book library (given that the average book weighed two pounds) could contain about 30,000,000 grams or thirty-three tons of cyclohexylamine carbonate. Cyclohexylamine carbonate, like cyclohexylamine [47, p. 605], would undoubtedly be classed as hav- ing dangerous properties. 4.3 INORGANIC DEACDIFICATION AGENTS Calcium and magnesium carbonates are stabilizing agents. They are found in stable, old papers and probably were introduced accidentally during the pro- cess of preparing the fibers or inten- tionally to cheapen and whiten the pa- per and improve its printability. Early papermakers probably used limestone and dolomite stone rolls and containers for fiber maceration. Hard water, com- monly used as the vehicle to work up I The figure of 95 percent is based on data from a study I am currently conducting at the Newberry Library, Chicago, III.
NEW APPROACHES TO PRESERVATION 147 paper fibers, contains appreciable quan- tities of calcium and magnesium com- pounds. Lime (calcium hydroxide) was thrown on old rags to hasten their dis- integration, and any residue would have converted naturally to the carbon- ate. High-quality, finely pulverized limestone (calcium carbonate) is called whiting. It is and was widely used as a low-cost extender, filler, and whitener. Actually, the providential use of mild, alkaline buffering agents to preserve cellulosic materials preceded paper- making. The Egyptians used natron, a natural and impure form of sodium bi- carbonate (common baking soda), in mummification [51, pp. 317-47]. Plen- derleith [52, p. 94] reported that certain mummy wrappings, which I believe contained natron, had an astonishingly fresh appearance. Sodium bicarbonate was tested as a deacidification agent by Barrow [53, p. 45] and, after acceler- ated aging tests, was reported to have detrimental effects on paper. Sodium bicarbonate begins to lose carbon diox- ide at 500 C (122? F) [46]. By 1000 C (2120 F), the temperature of acceler- ated aging, it is converted into sodium carbonate, a strong alkali, that would be harmful to paper. The condition of mummy wrappings some thousands of years old is impressive testimony on the stability of cellulose in the presence of moderately alkaline compounds like so- dium bicarbonate. During the 1930s, many groups were seeking solutions to the problem of im- permanent paper. The Brown Com- pany, the Institute of Paper Chemistry, the Ontario Research Foundation, the S. D. Warren Company [54], and the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Na- tional Archives, and National Bureau of Standards worked on the problem [55, 56]. In these organizations and elsewhere [57-59], the contribution of moderate alkalinity to paper perma- nence was recognized. Then World War II diverted attention from the problem of deteriorating paper, and it became difficult for the library community [60] as well as industry to apply the devel- opments of the 1930s. Early aqueous deacidification meth- ods involved the deposit of alkaline ma- terials to solve an air-pollution laundry problem, and they are reported by the U.S. Bureau of Standards [61; 62, p. 189]. Present-day aqueous deacidifica- tion treatments are modifications of an invention made at the Ontario Research Foundation in Toronto by Otto Schier- holtz [63], who received a U.S. patent entitled Process for the Chemical Sta- bilization of Paper and Product in 1936. Schierholtz immersed paper in or sprayed paper with aqueous solutions of barium, calcium, or strontium bicar- bonates or hydroxides. His immersion times varied from five seconds to about two minutes. Then the wetted paper was dried to deposit the alkaline earth metal carbonate throughout the stabi- lized sheet of paper. Schierholtz recom- mended a carbon dioxide gas treatment to convert hydroxides to carbonates and, when necessary, a suspension of carbonates in the treatment solution to increase the neutralizing potential of the treatment. He reported that more concentrated bicarbonate solutions could be prepared by using carbon di- oxide gas under pressure, and advised that the pH of a water extract from paper treated by his process should ex- ceed a value of 6.5 and that a deposit of up to 2 percent by weight might be required for stabilizing groundwood pa- pers like newsprint. He was aware that acidity causes instability in alum-rosin- sized papers and asserted that treat- ment according to his invention would
148 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY make alum-rosin-sized papers more durable with age. The deacidification treatments attrib- uted to the late W. J. Barrow are so well known and appreciated that it is not necessary to discuss them in detail. Barrow [53, pp. 44 45; 64, p. 286] originally used a calcium bicarbonate immersion method. During the mid- 1940s, he developed his two stage im- mersion process which consisted of twenty-minute immersions in a saturat- ed solution of calcium hydroxide fol- lowed by a saturated solution of calci- um bicarbonate. Instructions on how to prepare these solutions and deacidify paper have been published [13, 53, 65- 67]. During the 1940s and 1950s, the Bar- row immersion process was widely ap- plied. In 1957, Gear [68, p. 296; per- sonal correspondence] installed his one- stage (magnesium bicarbonate) thirty- minute immersion process in the U.S. National Archives Document Repro- duction and Preservation Branch. In 1959, a saturated solution of calcium and magnesium bicarbonates was rec- ommended for spray deacidification [65, p. 50]. The calcium bicarbonate was subsequently deleted [69, pp. 19- 20], but magnesium bicarbonate appar- ently has not been recommended in an immersion process by the Barrow Re- search Laboratory [70, pp. 31-32]. The possibility of using deacidification agents other than calcium and magne- sium salts was considered in 1965 [69, pp. 14-17], but the laboratory made no additional recommendations. Russian workers [71], however, have expanded the list of choices to include pH buf- fered solutions of borates and phos- phates. Until recently, all liquid deacidifica- tion treatments used water as a carrier for and solvent of one or another inor- ganic chemical deacidification agents. Water has advantages. Aqueous immer- sion treatments make it possible to sta- bilize paper from acidic attack to dis- solve or carry away many of the harm- ful products of paper deterioration. The wetting of paper and its subsequent drying under pressure may strengthen it by improving fiber-to-fiber bonding. On the other hand, water has expensive liabilities. It can be difficult to wet sized paper, and all wet paper is relatively slow and/or expensive to dry. Paper takes up about twice its weight in water and, when wetted, expands considera- bly. Paper and books may be seriously damaged on wetting if they are con- strained. Book and writing papers usu- ally retain 10 percent or less of their dry strength while they are wet. Wet, weak paper is easy to damage in han- dling, and a high degree of craft skill is essential for deacidifying paper with aqueous treatments. Aqueous deacidification solutions have a long history of effectiveness. In- organic chemicals providentially stabil- ized certain mummy wrappings for thousands of years and some early pa- pers for several hundreds of years. A variety of deacidifying treatments have been developed in the last forty years, and many of these treatments are in use for stabilizing rare and valuable li- brary materials. The problem of treating whole books and entire library collections, however, has not been solved by conventional aqueous deacidification treatments. The need for a nonaqueous deacidification treatment was succinctly stated by the American Group of the International Institute for Conservation of Historic and Artistic Works in October 1968. Their Committee for Paper Problems reported: "A non-aqueous means of deacidification that would not be harm-
NEW APPROACHES TO PRESERVATION 149 ful to paper, pigments, and the various media must be developed" [72, p. 30]. In the following section, I will review the literature pertaining to non-aqueous deacidification treatments and then de- scribe a novel method for meeting the specifications of this committee. 4.4 NONAQUEOUS DEACIDIFICATION Nonaqueous deacidification treat- ments involve the use of a nonaqueous solution composed of a deacidification agent and an organic solvent. The ma- jor advantage of using organic solvents is the possibility of treating whole books and therefore libraries. Organic solvents are available as liquids over a wide range of temperatures, and they can be blended together to obtain specific working properties. Far less heat en- ergy is required to dry organic solvents from paper because suitable solvents have much lower specific heats of va- porization than water does. On the other hand, certain organic solvents are poisonous or hazardous to health. Some organic solvents have flammable vapors that can burn with explosive speed. The dyestuffs in some inks and paper are more or less soluble in organic solvents. Fat and other skin components can be dissolved and der- matitis problems can arise from pro- longed contact with many organic sol- vents. These hazards must be consid- ered and safety measures incorporated when designing a nonaqueous deacidifi- cation treatment. Barrow recognized the possibility for improvement and described two at- tempts at nonaqueous deacidification [69, p. 16]. The first attempt, using di- glycolamine, failed because the treated paper did not remain alkaline on accel- erated aging. The reacidification could have occurred because diglycolamine volatilized out of the paper or because the chemical reacted further with the cellulose to produce an acidic condition. The second attempt used a solution of magnesium acetate dissolved in water and mechanically mixed with trichlor- ethylene. The results presumably were erratic because magnesium acetate is not soluble in trichlorethylene, and be- cause water and trichlorethylene, like water and oil, are immiscible liquids. Langwell [73, p. 493] reviewed non- aqueous systems, concluded they had advantages over aqueous treatments, but emphasized their lack of usefulness due to cost, flammability, and toxicity of the solvents. Baynes-Cope [74] has proposed the use of barium hydroxide, a toxic chemical, in methanol (wood or methyl alcohol). Regrettably, he found it necessary to limit this method to "the deacidification of single documents in cases where aqueous solutions can not be used, e.g., for water-labile inks and vellum" [74, pp. 8-9]. With this background, we can define two requirements for an ideal nonaque- ous deacidification treatment: (1) The deacidification and alkaline buffering agent deposited in the treated papers should be a benign inorganic chemical, demonstrably compatible with paper and books over long periods of time. (2) The solvent for and the carrier of the deacidification agent should be be- nign to operators and to books under the conditions of treatment and easy to dry from the wetted books. 4.41 Theory of method.-The de- acidification agent and the solvents used in the Chicago Process of deacidi- fication meet these two ideal require- ments. This point will be expanded by first considering the deacidification agent and then discussing the solvent system. Many organic and inorganic chemi- cals are effective deacidification agents,
150 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY but both kinds of chemicals have limi- tations that work against their wide application. The advantages of organic and inorganic chemicals are combined in certain metal organic compounds. These compounds are partially organic and partially inorganic. One kind of metal organic compounds is called alk- oxides. Alkoxides are formed by the reaction of alcohols with many metals [75, 76]. Alcohols react with metals and form their own families of alk- oxides just as water forms hydroxides. Many alkoxides are soluble to some de- gree in their parent alcohol and other organic solvents. One characteristic property of alkoxides is their inclina- tion to react with water and form a hydroxide and the parent alcohol. Magnesium methoxide is an alkoxide which readily reacts with water. It is commercially available3 and can be pro- duced in the laboratory [77-82]. Solu- tions of magnesium methoxide in meth- anol are stable up to concentrations of 8 percent by weight and metastable from 8 to 11 percent. Nonaqueous deacidification treat- ments using magnesium methoxide in- troduce the same chemicals into paper as are found in stable papers produced in the seventeenth and eighteenth cen- turies. Magnesium methoxide reacts immediately with moisture to form magnesium hydroxide. Magnesium hy- droxide, more familiarly called milk of magnesia, has been known to improve the stability of acidic paper since 1935 [83, p. 437]. Practically speaking, there is no difference between the chemicals produced in paper by the Gear [68] or the Barrow Laboratory [69] aqueous magnesium bicarbonate treatments and my nonaqueous magnesium methoxide deacidification treatment. Magnesium bicarbonate, carbonate, and hydroxide are not stable in paper. The equilibrium compound is a complex mixture of these chemicals and water. Magnesium sulfate, better known as Epsom salts, is a major reaction product on the neu- tralization of paper, and its effects are not dangerous. It may be concluded, therefore, that the equilibrium de- acidification products that result from the introduction of magnesium meth- oxide meet or exceed the specified ideals. There are other alkoxides that could be used for deacidification work, but they will not be considered at this time. The selection of a nonaqueous solvent system will be discussed next. Methanol has advantages as an alco- hol because it is the smallest and most volatile of all alcohols. Unfortunately, methanol has many of the undesirable properties of water. In addition, it is flammable and toxic and dissolves ink, paper dyestuffs, and pyroxylin. On the other hand, magnesium methoxide is soluble in methanol, and the hazards of flammability, toxicity, and solubility can be circumvented. The chlorofluorohydrocarbons are nontoxic and about as nonreactive as an organic material can be. As liquefied gases, they are used as foodstuff propel- lants and in refrigeration. The bigger chemical relatives of these gases are liquids that retain these benign proper- ties and are widely used for dry clean- ing greasy dirt from delicate fabrics. Chlorofluorohydrocarbon solvents and methanol are completely soluble in one another, and the hazards of methanol fall off as the proportion of methanol in the mixed solvent is reduced. For ex- ample, a solution containing seventy- five parts of a chlorofluorohydrocarbon solvent and twenty-five parts of meth- "From Callery Chemical Co., Callery, Pennsyl- vania 16024; Morton Chemical Co., 110 North Wacker Drive, Chicago, Illinois 60606; and Stauffer Chemical Co. 380 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10017.
NEW APPROACHES TO PRESERVATION 151 anol will not support combustion. The vapor from the solution in an open con- tainer can be ignited under appropriate conditions, but it is nonexplosive and self-extinguishing. The Chicago Process is aimed at the deacidification of whole books. The re- quirements for this are more compli- cated than for single sheets of paper, and the use of pressure vessels is es- sential for efficient treatment. Chloro- fluorohydrocarbon solvents containing a small quantity of methanol do not affect most book components like paper and boards; cotton thread, tape, and cloth; hide glues; or inks composed of linseed or tung oil and carbon black. Difficulties with soluble book com- ponents are evaded through the use of liquefied gases as the major com- ponent of the organic solvent. Leather bindings fall into a special category. Either they are worthless and can be discarded, or the book's binding is valu- able and special handling to maintain the integrity of such books is essential. The time of immersion and the point of solvent evaporation are essential considerations when deacidifying whole books. Minimizing the time of immer- sion protects soluble plastics, such as the cellulose nitrate in pyroxylin-coated book cloths, because they must soften and swell before going into solution. Many soluble resins in binding-cloth coatings are also protected from solvent attack during impregnation of the treatment solution by a tight layer of grime. After impregnation, stainina is minimized because the liquefied gases evaporate rapidly throughout the book. The liquefied gas solvent, including the methanol, evaporates from in and on the fibers and other components of the leaves and binding. The soluble dyestuffs in some printing inks and paper as well as the colorants in some binding adhesives are evenly rede- posited throughout the book or practi- cally on the same spot where they were dissolved. Little, if any, staining is apparent. Insofar as I know, the prob- lems which organic solvents can cause are readily observable, and conserva- tors are familiar with them from their use of dry cleaning solvents. The selection of an organic solvent system is dependent upon the kind of material to be deacidified. The treat- ment of single sheets can be accom- plished by immersion, spraying, coat- ing, brushing, sponging, etc., by dilut- ing the methanol solution with methy- lene chloride or, more preferably, with trichlorotrifluoroethane. The deacidifi- cation of whole books is done partly under pressure. Special equipment is required to accomplish the wetting and drying operations. Liquefied refrigerant gases, like chlorodifluoromethane or di- chlorodifluoromethane, form the co- solvents, and the procedure can be ar- ranged so the wet book actually dries itself. The mechanical operations re- quired for all of these treatment modes will be apparent from the following dis- cussion of experimental results. 4.42 Developing the method-My first steps toward a nonaqueous de- acidification process were designed to validate an approach. They have been reported previously [34] and justified my first patent application. Magnesium methoxide was recognized as a better deacidification agent than moderately alkaline salts of weak, volatile organic acids, like magnesium acetate. Never- theless, a solution of magnesium meth- oxide in methanol has limitations. The instantaneous reaction of magnesium methoxide with the adsorbed moisture in the paper produced a thick mag- nesium gel. This gel obstructed impreg- nation of books by the deacidification
152 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY solution and hindered the deposition of milk of magnesia throughout the treated books. The books soaked in methanol solutions swelled, and the leaves and bindings occasionally dis- torted on drying. Inks, dyestuffs, and other colored materials were dissolved, and some bindings and leaves were stained because the methanol trans- ported the colorants to the location where it evaporated. Some of the cellu- lose nitrate in pyroxylin-coated book cloths dissolved, and the bindings of these books were unattractive after dry- ing. These problems and others were resolved through selection of the sol- vents and by control of the time and condition of treatment. I made three major accelerated aging studies evaluating the Chicago Process of nonaqueous deacidification on single sheets of paper according to TAPPI Standard Tests. The six commercial book papers used to evaluate the de- acidification treatments are described in table 1. These book papers were manufactured by reputable paper- makers and represent well-regarded, commercial book papers. Book papers A, B, and C were used in the first study, A and C in the second study, and A, C, D, E, and F in the third study. The test samples for the first or sixty-day accelerated aging study were conditioned as recommended by TAPPI [84] and then exposed to the control and deacidification treatments listed in table 2. Afterward, the wetted samples were air-dried, resting freely on a net of mosquito netting, and con- ditioned [84] before the M.I.T. folding endurance test specimens were cut [85]. The papers treated with aqueous solutions cockled badly. These samples were clamped between sheets of mill- board when the fold test specimens were cut in the machine and cross- machine directions. The fold test speci- mens were used in a sixty-day accel- erated aging test at 1050 C (2210 F) [86]. Table 3 gives the TAPPI cold TABLE I DESCRIPTION OF BOOK PAPERS A, B, C, D, E, AND F pH CODE TYP E Or FIDEl COMMENTS PAPER Cold Hot Extract Extract A ... Letterpress Bleached softwood kraft, 34%; 6.60 4.60 FilIer-25% clay; English bleached hardwood kraft, 66% finish B ... Offset Bleached softwood sulfite, 60%; 6.90 5.65 Ash, 10%; contains sub- bleached softwood kraft, lO%. stantial portion deinked bleached hardwood kraft, 30'O fiber C ... Offset Bleached softwood sulfite, 60%; 5.90 4.40 Ash, 10%; contains sub- bleached softwood kraft, 10%; stantial portion deinked bleached hardwood kraft, 30% fiber D ... Offset Softwood bleached kraft, 20% 6.00 4.98 ......................... hardwood bleached kraft, i04o; groundwood, 70% E ... Offset Softwood bleached kraft, 25% 5.95 5.85 ......................... hardwood bleachedkraft, 75A F ... Offset Softwood bleached sulfite, 5%; 5.85 4.80 ......................... softwood bleached kraft, 20%; hardwood bleached kraft, 75%
NEW APPROACHES TO PRESERVATION 153 extraction pH values [87] for certain test specimens at the beginning and at the end of the test. Two hypotheses were verified by this sixty-day study: (1) Nonaqueous de- acidification treatments can improve the permanence of acidic paper just as efficiently as present-day aqueous de- acidification treatments. (2) Mag- nesium methoxide and its reaction prod- ucts are not detrimental to paper per- manence. The loss of folding endurance [85] with aging for book paper C is sum- marized in figure 3 as an example of the data from this sixty-day test. The regression lines of folding endurance on time were computed according to Brownlee [88, pp. 338-42] from the averages of the logarithms of the fold- ing endurance data and time of aging. The heavy solid lines represent non- aqueous deacidification treatments, and the heavy broken lines represent aqueous deacidification treatments. The light lines represent the untreated standard or controls. The M.I.T. fold- ing endurance data were obtained for each of the times noted on the base line of figure 3. The data for each time represent a minimum of ten measure- ments in the machine direction of the paper. Treatment 8 used a 7 percent solu- tion of magnesium methoxide in meth- anol to fill and encrust book paper C with magnesium compounds. The high retention of folding endurance follow- TABLE 3 TAPPI COLD EXTRACTION pH VALUES FOR THE FOLDING ENDURANCE SPECIMENS OF FIG- URE 3 BEFORE AND AFTER SIxrY DAYS OF AGING pH VALUE TREATMENT Before After Aging Aging 1 and 2 (joint sample) 5.30* 4.80 6 . .7.85 8.10 7 . . 8.00 7.60 8 . .10.00 10.00 9 . .10.00 10.00 1. 8.30 8.00 * The fact that this pH value is 0.6 pH units below the pH value of 5.90 given in table 2 may be due to experimental error or to acidic degradation products. A period of twenty-one months divides the two pH measurements. TABLE 2 FIRST AGING STUDY-THE DEACIDIFICATION TREATMENTS Immersion Treatment Treatment Soiution Time (Minutes) 1 . Standard-no treatment 0 2 . Standard-no treatment 0 3 . Control-deionized water, air dried 40 4 . Control-methanol, air dried 20 5 . Control-methanol-trichlorofluoromethane (1: 15 20 parts), air dried 6 . Barrow's calcium hydroxide and calcium bicarbonate 40 treatments using deionized water, air dried 7 . Gear's magnesium bicarbonate treatment using de- 20 ionized water, air dried 8 . 7% magnesium methoxide in methanol, air dried 12 9 . 7% magnesium methoxide in methanol, wringer and 12 air dried 10. 7% magnesium methoxide in methanol-trichloro- 12 fluoromethane (1:3 parts), air dried 1 . 7% magnesium methoxide in methanol-trichloro- 12 fluoromethane (1:15 parts), air dried
154 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY ing Treatment 8 indicates that an excessive amount of magnesium meth- oxide is not deleterious to paper per- manence. Treatment 9 was the same as 8 except that the wet paper was placed between two sheets of millboard on removal from the treatment solu- tion. This sandwich was immediately passed through an electric washing machine wringer to squeeze out the excess liquid. Treatments 6 and 7, the Barrow two-stage and the Gear aque- ous-immersion processes, improved sta- bility somewhat less than Treatments 8, 9, and 10. Treatment 10 consisted of diluting one part of the maginesium methoxide solution with three parts of trichlorofluoromethane. This 1:3 parts solution was selected because, when ignited in an open pan, it is self- extinguishing. Treatment 11 consisted of diluting one part of the magnesium methoxide solution with fifteen parts of trichlorofluoromethane. This 1:15 di- lution was selected to deposit between two and three times the maximum quantity of deacidification agent theo- retically required. The findings of this sixty-day aging study are impressive because the re- sults with book papers A and B support the findings given in figure 3 for book paper C. However, Treatments 9 and 11 did not improve the stability of book paper A as much as Treatment 8 did. I believe this anomaly with Treatments 9 and 11 originated in the experimental procedure, which followed established practices oriented toward aqueous rather than nonaqueous procedures. The choice of an immersion time of twelve minutes was arbitrary, and it was necessary to obtain data on the effect of immersion time. These prob- lems were investigated in a subsequent nine-day accelerated aging study. In this second study, the effect of soaking time was investigated by im- mersing book papers A and C in a solu- tion composed of seventy-five parts of .0 2.0 ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~100 c 0 ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~~~~~~~~5 2 10 _ ~0 0 0. 0~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 2.5 vO 0 c5 0 .0 0~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 0 36 912 18 24 30 36 48 60 Days of heat aging at 105 0C. FIG. 3.-First aging study: effect of deacidification on the folding endurance of book paper C
NEW APPROACHES TO PRESERVATION 155 methylene chloride and twenty-five parts of 7 percent magnesium meth- oxide in methanol. The test papers were immersed in the solution for periods varying from a few seconds up to thir- ty-two minutes. The laboratory procedures followed in this nine-day study were more rig- orous than the procedures used in the sixty-day study. The test papers and specimens were randomly selected. Treatments 2-11 were dried at 730 F (200 C) in 11 percent relative humidity for twenty-four hours before treatment. The possibility of a weakening effect from condensation of atmospheric mois- ture was minimized by maintaining a nitrogen-rich atmosphere over the treat- ment solution and by quickly drying the treated sheets of paper between a num- ber of infrared lamps. After drying, the test papers were conditioned [84] before the M.I.T. folding endurance test specimens [85] were cut. Next, the test specimens from Treatments 2-10 were exposed to 95 percent relative humidity at 730 F (200 C) for twenty-four hours and then dried prior to dry-heat aging at 1000 C (2120 F). After heat aging, all samples, with the exception of Treatment la, were conditioned at 730 F for twenty- four hours in relative humidities of 95 percent, 11 percent, and 50 percent, re- spectively, to relax dried-in strains be- fore the folding endurance test was made. In general, the test was con- ducted according to the TAPPI Stan- dard [85], but the M.I.T. fold tester was run through 2,000 or more cycles to provide more constant conditions at the test site. The findings of this nine-day accel- erated aging study indicate: (1) Non- aqueous deacidification solutions are not deleterious to paper when nominal precautions are taken to control mois- ture effects. (2) The time required for a nonaqueous deacidification treatment is determined by constraints of the equipment and the process rather than by the soaking time. Figure 4 summarizes the data from book paper C with regression lines of folding endurance versus time. The low- er group of lines are the control stan- dards. The la, ib, and ic lines repre- sent untreated controls. The apparent increase in the folding endurance strength of lb and lc compared with la is a natural consequence of humidity cycling. The fluctuation in the adsorbed moisture relaxes dried-in or other resid- ual strains, and the paper appears to be stronger. (Similar effects occur from aqueous spray and immersion treat- ments.) Treatment 2 consisted of soak- ing the samples for thirty-two minutes in the organic solvent and indicates the solvent is not detrimental to paper per- manence. Treatment 3 consisted of dip- ping the samples into the deacidification solution and withdrawing them as rap- idly as possible. In Treatment 4, the samples were soaked for thirty seconds, in Treatment 5 for one minute, in Treatment 6 for two minutes, and so on up to thirty-two minutes in Treatment 10. There is no apparent explanation for the gain in strength in Treatment 3 (wetted only) or the more rapid loss of strength in Treatment 4 (immersed for thirty seconds). I believe these lines are extreme examples of the types of fold- ing endurance loss that occur during short-term test periods. If the test had been continued, the rate of decay for Treatment 3 would have temporarily increased and the rate of decay for Treatment 4 would have temporarily decreased. The findings with book pa- per A were similar to those for book paper C, and this study clearly indi- cates that the time of immersion has
156 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY little effect on the quality of stabiliza- tion. The conclusions regarding require- ments for nonaqueous deacidification systems using magnesium methoxide from this nine-day accelerated aging study are: (1) The amount of moisture adsorbed in paper and the ambient at- mosphere must be minimized and rig- orously controlled. (2) The paper un- dergoing deacidification must be thor- oughly wetted with the treatment solu- tion. (3) The migration of the deacid- ification agent must be minimized through rapid and controlled drying. In the third or fifteen-day accelerated aging study, an immersion period of five minutes was selected because this length of time was required for a drying cycle. Three additional book papers D, E, and F (see table 1) as well as A and C were used in this dry-heat aging study to evaluate refinements in both the aqueous and nonaqueous treatment procedures. The treatments for these book papers are given in table 4. The saturated aqueous solutions of calcium and magnesium bicarbonate solutions were prepared using cold car- bonated water (soda water) as a modifi- cation of Schierholtz's suggestion to use carbon dioxide under pressure when concentrated bicarbonate deacidifica- tion solutions were desired [54]. These solutions were prepared by discarding a small quantity of carbonated water from bottles of Canada Dry soda water and then adding calcium or magnesium carbonate in excess. The bottles were then sealed, shaken gently, and re- placed in a refrigerator. The refrigera- tor was opened and these carbonated water suspensions agitated from time to time during the next hour. Then the bottles were removed, and the clear, saturated aqueous solutions of the al- kaline earth bicarbonates decanted in- to the treatment pans. During the c ~~~~~~~~75 0 1.2 CAI \ ic~~ 0 ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~.l 0 3 6 9 DaYS of heat aging at 10000 FIG. 4.-Second aging study: effect of immersion time on the folding endurance of book paper C
NEW APPROACHES TO PRESERVATION 157 twenty-minute immersion periods, these aqueous deacidification solutions were covered with plastic sheets to maintain a high carbon dioxide atmosphere above the solutions. The high concentration of carbon dioxide in the solution was also maintained by placing the pans contain- ing the treatment solution in an ice bath. The data do not indicate whether calcium or magnesium bicarbonate pro- duces a better stabilization. The mag- nesium bicarbonate ice bath contained salt and was cold enough to freeze ice in and on the papers undergoing treat- ment. This ice may have affected the folding endurance of the frozen papers. In general, this fifteen-day acceler- ated aging study followed the experi- mental and analytical procedures out- lined above for the nine-day study. The findings confirm the results obtained in the earlier nonaqueous deacidification studies and indicate that water carbon- ated under pressure is both a conve- nient and an outstandingly efficient sol- vent for calcium and magnesium bicar- bonates. The data for book paper C are summarized in figure 5 as the regression lines of folding endurance on time of aging. The heavy broken lines represent the Canada Dry soda water treatments, and the heavy solid lines represent non- aqueous treatments. The light regres- sion line represents the untreated stan- dard. Treatment 6, a saturated solution of calcium bicarbonate, produced the greatest improvement in folding endur- ance strength, but its rate of deteriora- tion is the most rapid of the deacidifica- tion treatments. The magnesium meth- oxide Treatments 9 and 10 appear su- perior to the magnesium bicarbonate Treatment 7. Treatment 9 appears to produce the best results because it has the lowest rate of deterioration. The results with book papers A, E, and F follow the same general pattern as book paper C and therefore will not be re- ported at this time. The results with book paper D, given in figure 6, are worthy of note because 70 percent of the fiber furnish in book paper D is groundwood. The perma- nence of book paper D, as measured TABLE 4 THIRD AGING STUDY-THE DEACIDIFICATION TREATMENTS Immersion Treatment Treatment Solution Time (Minutes) 1. Standard-no treatment 0 3. Control-Canada Dry soda water, air dried 20 4. Control-methanol, wringer-infrared dried 5 5. Control-methanol-methylene chloride (1:3 parts), 5 infrared dried 6. Saturated solution of calcium bicarbonate in cold 20 Canada Dry soda water, air dried 7. Saturated solution of magnesium bicarbonate in cold 20 Canada Dry soda water, air dried 8. 7% magnesium methoxide in methanol, wringer-in- 5 frared dried 9. 7% magnesium methoxide in methanol-methylene 5 chloride (1:3 parts), infrared dried 10 . 7% magnesium methoxide in methanol-methylene 5 chloride (1: 15 parts), infrared dried
158 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY by folding endurance retention, com- pares favorably with that of book pa- per C, as well as many other 100 per- cent chemical wood pulp papers, both before and after deacidification. The results with Treatment 3 indicate that Canada Dry soda water is naturally an aqueous deacidification solution because it contains a significant quantity of moderately alkaline salts. The results from the other treatments are similar to those with book paper C and will not be discussed at this time. The book papers in this fifteen-day .? 2.0 100 c-~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 75 i2U) dR 1.2p\|1 :3~~~J 0 ? 1.0 _ -o 1.6 0 15 0~~~~~~~~ 10 7 z n O ~3 6 9 12 15 Days of heat aging at 100 C. FIG. 5.-Third aging study: effect of deacidification on the folding endurance of book paper C 0~~~~~~~~~~0 c ~~~~~~~~~5 a ?n 1.0 _ lO qoz 0~~~~~~~~~~~ 0.8 , 0 1. - 2 1 15 10 0~~~~~~~~~~~ Days of heat aging at 100 C. FIG. 6.-Third aging study: effect of deacidification on the folding endurance of book paper D
NEW APPROACHES TO PRESERVATION 159 accelerated aging study were tested for resistance to photochemical attack by exposure to a carbon-arc light (Fade- ometer). The deacidification treatments either improved the stability of the pa- pers or had no detrimental effect on them. There were three major conclusions from the accelerated aging studies on single sheets: 1. Nonaqueous deacidification treat- ments can improve the stability of acid- ic paper just as efficiently as, if not more efficiently than, present-day aqueous deacidification processes. Magnesium methoxide and its reaction products are not detrimental to paper permanence as determined by accelerated heat and light aging. 2. The time required for a deacidifi- cation cycle is determined by process and equipment constraints rather than by immersion time. 3. The requirements for successful nonaqueous deacidification treatments include (a) control of the amount of water capable of reacting with the mag- nesium methoxide, (b) thoroughly wet- ting the paper with the deacidification solution, and (c) drying to deposit the deacidification agent throughout the treated paper. Conservators presumably will come to use this deacidification process in a manner rather similar to those de- scribed in the above tests. Libraries, ar- chives, and other depositories of single- sheet documents could mechanize the process to reduce costs. Presumably, sheets can be laid upon an endless mov- ing belt and dried, deacidified, and dried again as they pass through a tunnel chamber. The deacidification solution could be applied by means of rollers, spray guns, or immersion tanks in a mechanized operation for single sheets. 4.43 Deacidifying whole books.-The problems of wetting and drying make the deacidification of whole books more complicated than that of single sheets. The use of pressure vessels (autoclaves) is essential. Figure 7 lists the major 1. Take books from library bookshelf. 4, 2. Place books in nd seal autoclave. 9. Raw materials: 4, fmagnesium methoxide in methanol, 3. Remove adsorbed moisture from books liquefied gas solvent, biological by drying or freezing. agent. 4. Add enough deacidification solution to- < 10. Prepare deacidification solution. autoclave to cover books. 5. Warm deacidification solution and books. 6. Remove deacidification solution and-* 11. Reclaim deacidification solution and evacuate vapors from autoclave. solvents for recycling. 7. Open autoclave and remove books. 12. Discard waste. 8. Return deacidified books to library bookshelf. FIG. 7.-Flow chart conception of whole-book deacidification
160 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY steps in the Chicago Process of deacidi- fication for whole books. The essential steps of the deacidification treatment proper are noted, as well as the stages required to prepare, reclaim, make up, and recycle the deacidification solution. There has been no experimental work on reclaiming the solution, but there are no foreseeable difficulties in clean- ing and recycling it. The importance of recycling the solution cannot be under- estimated because the low-cost-per-unit concept of the Chicago Process requires an efficient recovery system. The fol- lowing experiments and data speak to the commercial and technical feasibility of deacidifying whole books. Three copies of Cooking the Greek Way by Maro Duncan (London: Spring Books, 1964 [printed in Czechoslo- vakia]), were placed standing top down in an autoclave made from eight-inch- diameter pressure pipe and flanges. A cotton wrapping cord was placed be- tween the fly and text leaves close to the spine. Otherwise, the books were kept closed. The books were set upon one- quarter-inch glass tubing to facilitate drainage on emptying the autoclave. The autoclave was sealed, immersed in boiling water, and the books were vacu- um dried for four hours at about five millimeters of mercury. Then, the auto- clave was removed from the boiling water and allowed to cool overnight. The next day the deacidification solu- tion was prepared in a ten-pound pro- pane bottle. First, 500 cubic centimeters of a 7 percent solution of magnesium methoxide in methanol were syphoned into the bottle. Then, the solution was diluted with ten pounds of chlorodifluo- romethane (Freon 22, a liquefied refrrig- eration gas). The liquefied gas flows into the propane bottle more rapidly when the pressure in the propane bottle is substantially lower than the pressure in the refrigeration gas bottle. There was no suitable pump available, so the pressure differential was obtained through cooling the propane bottle by placing dry ice around it. A similar situ- ation existed between the propane bot- tle and the autoclave. Consequently, the autoclave was cooled by packing it in dry ice and insulating it with a poly- urethane foam pad and cotton toweling. The cooling caused a substantial pres- sure differential, and the deacidification solution flowed rapidly into the auto- clave through its lower inlet. (This sud- den cooling when the deacidification solution entered the autoclave was a good practical check on its stability.) The next step was to warm the de- acidification solution and books by im- mersing the autoclave in hot water. This warming served two purposes: ( 1 ) the increase in temperature introduced enough heat energy for the book to dry itself, and (2) the higher pressure in- sured impregnation by the deacidifica- tion solution throughout the book. The pressure in the autoclave rose rapidly to about 300 pounds per square inch (psi). The bath water temperature was reduced to 1000 F to give an autoclave pressure of about 200 psi. After one hour of immersion, the autoclave was removed from the water bath. The de- acidification solution was blown out of the autoclave through the lower outlet on the vessel and discarded. The top outlet was opened when only gas was exhausting from the lower outlet. About ten to fifteen minutes after opening the first valve, the autoclave lid was re- moved and the books were found to be substantially dry. In a second test, three copies of Cooking the Greek Way were placed in the autoclave as above. This time, how- ever, the adsorbed water was not re- moved from the books by drying. In
NEW APPROACHES TO PRESERVATION 161 this second test, the autoclave was packed in dry ice and the adsorbed water was frozen. The preparation and charging of the deacidification solution was accomplished as in the above test except that twelve pounds of dichloro- difluoromethane (Freon 12) was substi- tuted for the chlorodifluoromethane. The deacidification solution and the books were warmed by squirting the autoclave first with cold and then with hot water. The pressure was about 150 psi and the temperature was about 1000 F one hour after charging the deacidification solution. The autoclave was emptied and opened as before, and the books again were found to be sub- stantially dry. Before discussing the results, it is ap- propriate to consider why Cooking the Greek Way was selected for experimen- tation. The book was the right size for the autoclave, available in quantity, and inexpensive as a remnant, and it contained colored materials that were soluble in the solvents I wanted to use. These colored materials included blue dyestuffs in the paper, in the stain on the head margin, and in the printing ink, as well as a yellow-brown material in the binding, presumably the softener in the binding adhesive. Moreover, the paper was uncoated and had a fiber content of about 50 percent ground- wood and 50 percent softwood sulfite. The quantity of deacidification solu- tion charged into the autoclave was con- trolled to fill the autoclave about half the height of the books undergoing treatment. Wetting the books halfway up is more informative than complete immersion. First, the liquid-gas inter- face is the point where the solvent is most likely to attack the book; and sec- ond, I wanted to know the degree to which the solution would wick up the leaves. The drying under high vacuum caused some of the boards to warp, but the freezing appeared to have no effect. The drying action did not appear to em- brittle the paper or otherwise work against its usability. The bowed boards straightened within a few days as they regained moisture from the air. The milk of magnesia powder was more tightly bound in the dried copy than in the frozen copy. The dried book had only a small quantity of powder de- posited on its binding. Considerably more was deposited on the binding of the frozen copy. A cloud of powder came from the frozen books if they were opened and smartly clapped shut. No powder came from the dried book under similar conditions. There was lit- tle, if any, noticeable difference between the immersed and unimmersed portions of the leaves, and no trace of the liquid- gas interface line. The spines were straight, and the apparent loss of title legibility could easily be fixed with a thin coating of lacquer or varnish. (I believe that the bibliographic data on library books would be more legible and more durable after experiencing the Chicago Process than before.) The books were standing in the au- toclave top edge down in the deacidifi- cation solution. Some of the stain on the top edge was dissolved. There appeared to be no damage at the spine and no sign of any dissolved adhesives, etc. The back cover of the dried books did ex- hibit several faint yellowish marks, and one book had a light bluish streak on the endpaper. The books were a little bulkier after treatment than before, but this effect disappeared a day or so after the books were placed back on the shelves. The dyestuffs in the ink ex- hibited themselves as strike-through. In other words, the impression to the read- er would be that the paper had less abil- ity to hide the type face images on the
162 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY verso of the pages. (Many ordinary books exhibit a greater degree of strike- through than I produced in Cooking the Greek Way.) There was some staining on a few leaves of the books, but it did not appear to be of a serious nature. My belief is that practically all library books could be deacidified in a pressure system and that the ordinary reader or librarian would be unable to tell they had been treated. In the other instances, I do not believe the usefulness of the book as an information source would be impaired. It is remarkable that a book composed of materials like those in Cooking the Greek Way was treated as has been described and that, for prac- tical library purposes, no damage oc- curred. The contact pH values at various po- sitions on page 128 of an untreated copy of Cooking the Greek Way are compared in table 5 with pH values for identical positions in randomly selected copies of a dried and a frozen book from the preceding tests. The contact method of measuring pH is reviewed elsewhere [10;89, pp. 158-59] and has been found to give pH values compara- ble [12] with those obtained by the TAPPI cold extraction test [87]. The locations where measurements were made are described in table 5. The pH values for the paper in the untreated copy were 4.3 or 4.4 and indicate the paper would be impermanent. The top halves of the other two books were im- mersed during the treatments. The pH values for the immersed portion of the dried copy were 9.15, 9.8, and 9.05; at the margin of the nonimmersed end values were 7.8 and 7.2. The contact pH values for the frozen copy were 10.4, 10.5, and 10.3 in the immersed portion, and 7.55 and 5.59 at the mar- gins of the nonimmersed end. The fact that some of the deacidification solution traveled vertically up the leaves by capillary action is important. This trav- el or wicking action verifies the stabil- ity and workability of the solution and, together with the pressures of impreg- nation, guarantees that the treatment solution reached the innermost parts of the book. Figure 8 presents the results of an accelerated aging study on the stabiliz- ing effect of these deacidification treat- ments. The same leaves from all three books were aged according to the TAP- PI Standard Test [86], and the change in M.I.T. folding endurance value [87] was observed for the immersed portions of these leaves. Both deacidification treatments were effective in promoting the permanence of the treated books. However, the data are insufficient to de- cide whether the drying or the freezing TABLE 5 CONTACT pH VALUES FOR PAGE 128 FROM TREATED AND UNTREATED COPIES OF Cooking the Greek Way Dried and Frozen and Contact pH Value at Position: Unoptrted Deacidified Deacidified Coy Copy Copy In top margin at center of page ................ 4.4 9.15 10.40 Near fore-edge margin, halfway down page .... . 4.3 9.80 10.50 Near spine, halfway down page ................ 4.3 9.05 10.30 Near fore-edge margin, at tail of page ..... ..... 4.3 7.80 7.55 Near spine, at tail of page .................... 4.3 7.20 7.95
NEW APPROACHES TO PRESERVATION 163 method of removing moisture is prefer- able. I believe the more economic of the two methods should be selected but do not have sufficient data on which to make a decision at this time. Deacidification is the basic tool of preservation work, but a deacidification treatment is no panacea. A more com- plete preservation program can justifi- ably be considered once deacidification is accomplished. In addition to non- aqueous deacidification, the Chicago Process will consider protection against living organisms, paper strengthening, and prolonged storage. 5. PROTECTION FROM LIVING ORGANISMS The possibility of paper being at- tacked by living organisms increases as an acidic paper becomes moderately al- kaline. A majority of fungi, insects, and rodents prefer to eat neutral or moder- ately alkaline paper. One consequence of book deacidification, if poor storage conditions exist, is the increased proba- bility of attack by living organisms. Protection against such attacks can be obtained simply and at practically no expense. A biostat or biocide can be deposited during the deacidification treatment. Commercially available mer- curic and tin antibiological agents are soluble in organic solvents, compatible with alkoxides, benign at the required levels of dosage, and presumably effec- tive for many years. The costs would be limited to the chemical itself and to the expense of maintaining the proper dos- age level in the deacidification solution. Two sets of books were prepared for exposure. One set used fifteen copies of the book entitled The Italian Girl, and the other used thirteen copies of The 1.6 40 0 c \C_ 35 o 350 Frozen and cn dcleacidif ied D1.5 \ i 30 [n o \ E Ln ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~0 -1. _I 2 0 3 6 _ D~~~ried 0 ~1.4 an 25a oIG.8.-Effectof deacidifiido e ~0 0 Untreated 0 0 1.3 -200 d 0 ~~~~~~~z Oh 0 1.2 L 0 3 6 9 Days of heat aging at 100 0C. FiG. 8.-Effect of deacidification on the folding endurance of leaves from Cooking the Greek Way
164 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Quiller Memorandum. Bis (tri-n-butyl- tin) oxide4 was used as the biostat [90- 98] in five of the copies from each set. The other copies acted as untreated con- trols or were treated with solvents or de- acidified for purposes of evaluating in- teractions. The books were exposed to insect and fungus attack in Singapore for five months." After their return, they were examined for insect attack at the Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago, Illinois.6 The treatment was designed to impregnate the minimum usual dosage of 100 parts per million of bis (tri-n-butyltin) oxide. The actual dosage was below this recommended minimum dosage because the books were evacuated at less than one milli- meter of mercury for one hour after drying in an effort to simulate poor pro- duction conditions. The binding cloth of these books contained substantial quan- tities of protein [99] and starch [100] and presumably was appetizing to fungi and insects.7 In Singapore, the books were ar- ranged in alternate sequence, first a copy of The Italian Girl in a dust jacket and then a copy of The Quiller Memo- randum without a dust jacket. Fungi attack occurred on all of the books which were exposed. Insect remains were found on The Quiller Memoran- dum copies, but there were no signs of insect attack. The remains of only one insect was found from all the copies of The Italian Girl. Again, there was no evidence of insect attack. This lack of insect attack is strange because fungi and insect attack normally occur to- gether. The greatest fungi attack oc- curred on the deacidified copies with- out protection. The degree of attack was substantially less on the deacidified copies protected with bis (tri-n-butyl- tin) oxide. The degree to which these results were a result of bis (tri-n-butyltin) oxide cannot be established because the untreated controls were not attacked in a markedly different pattern. The ex- planation probably is that the experi- mental procedure did not prevent the bis (tri-n-butyltin) oxide from protect- ing the control standards. I believe these results are encouraging, and the litera- ture on bis (tri-n-butyltin) oxide is im- pressive [90-98; see also n. 4 above]. However, further study is necessary to establish a recommended procedure. 6. PAPER STRENGTHENING Interest in strengthening paper through treatment with nonaqueous so- lutions containing a resin strengthening agent and an organic solvent began over seventy years ago. Grove [101, pp. 369- 72] summarized the initial efforts made by American librarians between 1900 and 1918 to strengthen paper by dip- ping, spraying, or painting the paper with cellulose nitrate lacquers (Cellit or Zampone). Cellulose nitrate lacquers had poor qualities of permanence dur- ing the early twentieth century. The breakthrough in producing our relative- ly stable pyroxylin lacquers did not oc- cur until 1927 [102, p. 214]. Gear [68, p. 293] relates that the Li- brary of Congress and the National Bureau of Standards rejected immersion and spray treatment with cellulose ace- tate and nitrate resins in the early 1930s. They found that these cellulose 'M & T Chemicals, Inc., Rahway, N.J., pub- lishes informative literature on "bioM&T TBTO," their bis (tri-n-butyltin) oxide. ' D. Koh, higher library officer of the National Library of Singapore, was responsible for testing in Singapore. 'R. L. Wenzel, curator of insects at the Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago, DI., exam- ined the books. 'W. A. Wozniak, chief chemist of the Chicago Paper Testing Laboratory, Chicago, Ill., tested the binding cloths for protein and starch.
NEW APPROACHES TO PRESERVATION 165 ester resin coatings did not produce the degree of strengthening which they de- sired. Experimentation continued, but on lamination with cellulose acetate films. Recommendations were made in 1934, and in 1936 the National Archives established the first laminating opera- tion. A mass production hydraulic press with a heated die was installed and remains in operation today. Barrow [103] was granted a patent for his con- tributions to lamination technology in 1942. Kathpalia [ 104] and Langwell [105-107] have proposed cold laminat- ing processes. All of these laminating processes are efficient in strengthening single sheets, but they are not applica- ble to treating aggregates of single sheets like books. L. Skivianek, head of the Conserva- tion and Restoration Department of the State Library of the Czechoslovak So- cialist Republic in Prague, recently wrote to me giving a general description of a nonaqueous combination deacidi- fying, biocidal, and strengthening treat- ment. Complete details were not avail- able because patent applications are pending on this process for treating whole books. One combination of in- gredients for books published before 1900 consisted of magnesium acetate as the deacidification agent, a polyvinyl acetate copolymer as the resin strength- ening agent, parachlormetacresole as the biocidal agent, and a lower aliphatic alcohol and butylaldehyde as the sol- vent components. The immersion pro- cedure appeared straightforward, but the drying operations suggest that indi- vidual attention might be required for many books. This would work against mechanization of the process. The test- ing data and methodology were not pro- vided, and I believe more information is essential before the process can be recommended. The leaves of books can be strength- ened using the same equipment and in much the same way as deacidification takes place in the Chicago Process. Acrylic resins are considered stable resin strengthening agents and are solu- ble in many organic solvents. I made a number of experiments with different resins dissolved in liquefied gas solvents. These strengthening solutions were compounded to deposit 3-5 percent of the resin by weight throughout the treated book. In one experiment, I treated copies of Cooking the Greek Way with a 75:25 ratio of low-molecu- lar-weight acrylic resin and ethyl hy- droxyethyl cellulose. The M.I.T. fold- ing endurance strength (one kilogram tension) [85] increased from 7.9 folds to 32.3 folds in the machine direction and from 2.8 to 9.1 in the cross direc- tion after deacidification and strength- ening. After heat aging under dry venti- lated conditions at 1050 C for five days [86], the untreated leaves had a folding endurance of 5.6 while the treated leaves had a value of 7.6 in the machine direction. The cross-machine values were 2.2 and 5.0, respectively. The rather sharp decrease in folding endur- ance retention on aging could be ex- plained by (1) the poor heat stability of the plasticizer, ethyl hydroxyethyl cellulose, or by (2) the 50 percent groundwood content in the paper's fur- nish. The leaves in the strengthened books were not bonded together because the escaping gases kept them apart as the book dried and the resin was deposited. After treatment, the paper had a char- acter somewhat similar to that of a sheet heavily sized with gelatin. This strengthening process is pres- ently envisioned as applicable to books whose paper is not embrittled. Papers which snap or break when they are bent
166 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY or creased require more support, such as that provided by tissue reinforcement in lamination [103]. The sizing action of resin strengthening agents and a pre- sumable drop in the rate of acidic gas pickup are useful fringe benefits of this strengthening treatment. 7. PROLONGED STORAGE The final stage of the Chicago Pro- cess is conceived as an inexpensive means of providing superior storage conditions over prolonged periods of time. The idea is to store infrequently used books as individual units in cheap, transparent, and disposable containers. The book itself will provide the struc- ture of the unit. The container will con- sist simply of a clear plastic film wrapped around the book and heat sealed. Cellulose acetate laminating film, polyethylene film, and polyester- polyethylene laminates have properties worthy of consideration. The interested reader can identify the book number and/or title through the transparent film before breaking the seal, and a new wrapper can easily be applied after the book is used. The plas- tic film will protect the book from at- mospheric pollution, dust and dirt, acci- dental water damage, and the mechani- cal wear and tear caused by fluctuations in relative humidity. Chemicals could be incorporated into the plastic film during its manufacture to provide pro- tection against biological and photo- chemical attack. 8. SUMMARY In this presentation, I have attempted to outline the problems involved in pre- serving library materials, to describe an ideal preservation program, to review the several kinds of deacidification treatments which have been developed, and to describe in more detail the non- aqueous deacidification treatment that I have developed in Chicago. In addi- tion, I have tried to describe briefly my ideas about protecting books from fun- gi, insects, and rodents; about strength- ening books; and about storing little- used books in research libraries. REFERENCES 1. Cerny, J. Late Rameoside Letters. Biblio- teca Aegyptica, vol. 9. Brussels: Fonda- tion egyptologique Reine Elizabeth, 1939. (Unpublished translation by K. Baer, Oriental Institute, University of Chi- cago.) 2. Wente, E. F., trans. Late Rameoside Let- ters. Oriental Institute Studies in Ancient Oriental Civilization. Chicago: Univer- sity of Chicago Press, 1967. 3. Tsien, T. H. Written on Bamboo and Silk: The Beginnings of Chinese Books and Inscriptions. University of Chicago Studies in Library Science. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1962. 4. Shakespeare, William. The Works of Shakespeare, edited by W. A. Wright. 2d ed. vol. 9. London: MacMillan & Co., 1893. 5. Voorn, H. "In Search of New Raw Ma- terials." Paper Maker (U.S.) 21 (Sep- tember 1952) :1-14. 6. Chapman, J. A. "An Enquiry into the Causes of the Perishing of Paper." Cal- cutta Review, n.s. (July 1919), pp. 301-7. 7. Chapman, J. A. "The Perishing of Paper, II." Calcutta Review, n.s. (July 1920), pp. 233-46. 8. Chapman, J. A. "The Imperial Library, Past and Future." Calcutta Review, 3d ser. 2 (March 1922) :447-57. 9. American Pulp and Paper Association. The Dictionary of Paper including Pulp, Paperboard, Paper Properties, and Re- lated Papermaking Terms. 3d ed. New York: American Pulp & Paper Associa- tion, 1965. 10. Browning, B. L. "The Nature of Paper." Library Quarterly 40 (January 1970): 18-38.
NEW APPROACHES TO PRESERVATION 167 11. Wessel, C. J. "Environmental Factors Affecting the Permanence of Library Materials." Library Quarterly 40 (Janu- ary 1970) :39-84. 12. Smith, R. D. "A Comparison of Paper in Identical Copies of Books from the Lawrence University, the Newberry, and the New York Public Libraries." Manu- script. June 24, 1969. Available from author. 13. Kathpalia, Y. P. "Deterioration and Con- servation of Paper. IV. Neutralization." Indian Pulp and Paper 17 (October 1962) :245-51. 14. Wilson, W. K. "Discussion of New Ap- proaches to Preservation." Library Quarterly 40 (January 1970):171-75. 15. Wilson, W. K., and Hebert, R. L. "Evalu- ation of the Stability of Record Papers." TAPPI 52 (August 1969):1523-29. 16. Barry, V. C., and Mitchell, P. W. D. "Properties of Periodate-oxidized Poly- saccharides. I. The Preparation of Poly- meric Substances Containing Nitrogen from Oxidized Starches." Journal of the Chemical Society, pt. 4 (1953), pp. 3610-12. 17. Barry, V. C., and Mitchell, P. W. D. "Properties of Periodate-oxiddized Poly- saccharides. II. The Structure of Some Nitrogen-containing Polymers." Journal of the Chemical Society, pt. 4 (1953), pp. 363 1-35. 18. Benn, M. H., and Jones, A. S. "Reaction of Aldoses with Urea." Chemistry and Industry, August 1, 1959, pp. 997-98. 19. Burton, H. S.; McWeeny, D. J.; and Biltcliffe, D. 0. "Sulfur Dioxide and Ketose-Amino Reactions." Chemistry and Industry, April 27, 1963, pp. 693-95. 20. Corbi, J. C. "Oxidation of Cellulose and Color Reversion." Ph.D. diss., University of Toronto, 1963. For abstract, see Dis- sertation Abstracts 3 (September 1964): 1561. 21. Corbi, J. C., and Rapson, W. H. "Color Reversion of Nitrogen Dioxide-oxidized Cellulose." Pulp and Paper Magazine of Canada 65 (November 1964):T467-72. 22. Danehy, J. P., and Pigman, W. W. "Re- actions between Sugars and Nitrogenous Compounds and Their Relationship to Certain Food Problems." Advances in Food Research 3 (1951):241-90. 23. Fletcher, A. P.; Marks, G. S.; Marshall, R. D.; and Neuberger, A. "Carbohydrates in Protein. V. Procedures for the Isola- tion of Glycopeptides from Hen's Egg Albumin and Their Oxidation by Perio- date." Biochemical Journal 87 (May 1963) :265-73. 24. Lewis, V. M.; Esselen, W. B., Jr.; and Fellers, C. R. "Nonenzymatic Browning of Foodstuffs: Production of Carbon Dioxide." Industrial and Engineering Chemistry 41 (November 1949) :2587- 91. 25. Lewis, V. M.; Esselen, W. G., Jr.; and Fellers, C. R. "Nonenzymatic Browning of Foodstuffs: Nitrogen-free Carboxylic Acids in the Browning Reaction." In- dustrial and Engineering Chemistry 41 (November 1949) :2591-94. 26. Lewis, V. M., and Lea, C. H. "A Note on the Relative Rates of Reaction of Several Reducing Sugars and Sugar De- rivatives with Casein." Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 4 (February 1950): 532-34. 27. Luner, P. "Paper Permanence." TAPPI 52 (May 1969):796-805. 28. Ogate, Y.; Kawasaka, A.; and Okumura, N. "Kinetics of the Condensation of Urea with Acetaldehyde." Journal of Organic Chemistry 30 (May 1965): 1636-39. 29. Rapson, W. H., and Hakim, K. A. "Car- bonyl Groups in Cellulose and Colour Reversion." Pulp and Paper Magazine of Canada 58 (July 1957):151-57. 30. Rapson, W. H.; Anderson, C. B.; and King, G. F. "Carbonyl Groups in Cellu- lose and Color Reversion. 2. Hypochlorite Bleaching and Color Reversion." TAPPI 41 (August 1958):442-47. 31. Rapson, W. H., and Corbi, J. C. "Colour Reversion Caused by Degradation Prod- ucts of Oxidized Cellulose." Proceed- ings of the Canadian Wood Chemistry Symposium 1 (September 1963):27-40. 32. Rapson, W. H., and Corbi, J. C. "Colour Reversion Caused by Degradation Prod- ucts of Oxidized Cellulose." Pulp and Paper Magazine of Canada 65 (Novem- ber 1964) :T459-66. 33. Spinner, I. H. "Brightness Reversion: A Critical Review with Suggestions for Further Research." TAPPI 65 (June 1962) :495-514. 34. Smith, R. D. "Paper Deacidification: A Preliminary Report." Library Quarterly 36 (October 1966): 273-92.
168 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 35. Wachter, A., and Skei, T. Vapor-Phase Corrosion Inhibition with a Mixture of Inhibitors. U. S. Patent no. 2,711,360. Washington, D.C.: Patent Office, June 21, 1955. 36. Hill, R. O., Jr. "Cellulose Esters, Or- ganic." Encyclopedia of Polymer Science and Technology: Plastics, Resins, Rub- bers, and Fibers. Vol. 3. New York: Interscience Publishers, 1965. 37. Sadler, F. S. Thermally Stabilized Cellu- lose Materials for Electrical Insulation. U.S. Patent no. 3,135,627. Washington D.C.: Patent Office, June 2, 1964. 38. Millington, J. E. Thermostable Dielec- tric Material. U.S. Patent no. 3,316,178. Washington D.C.: Patent Office, April 25, 1967. 39. Gaines, R. C. "An Investigation into the Ability of Morpholine to Stabilize Cellu- lose against Heat." Manuscript. March 14, 1966. Available at the Institute of Paper Chemistry, Appleton, Wis. 40. Volgenau, L. "The Effect of Amines on the Thermal Stability of Cellulose." Manuscript. March 12, 1965. Available at the Institute of Paper Chemistry, Appleton, Wis. 41. Langwell, W. H. "The Permanence of Papers." British Paper and Board Makers' Association, Technical Section: Proceedings 29 (February 1952): 21-82. 42. Langwell, W. H. "The Vapour Phase De- acidification of Books and Documents." Jouirnal of the Society of Archivists 3 (April 1966):137-38. 43. Ede, J. R., and Langwell, W. H. "Sulphur Dioxide and Vapour Phase Deacidifi- cation." In 1967 London Conference on Museum Climatology, edited by G. Thomson. London: International Insti- tute for Conservation of Historic and Artistic Works, 1968. 44. Process Materials Corporation. Vapor Phase Deacidification of Books and Doc- uments (Langwell Method). Carlstadt, N.J.: Process Materials Corp., 1968. 45. DuBois, K. P. "Cyclohexylamine." In Nonnutritive Sweeteners: An Interim Report to the U.S. Food and Drug Ad- ministration, Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. Washington, D.C.: Ad hoc Committee on Nonnutri- tive Sweeteners, National Academy of Sciences-National Research Council, 1968. 46. Stecher, P. G. The Merck Index of Chemicals and Drugs. 8th ed. Rahway, N.J.: Merck & Co., 1968. 47. Sax. N. I. Dangerous Properties of In- dustrial Materials. 3d ed. New York: Reinhold Book Co., 1968. 48. "Toxicology. HEW Bans the Cyclamates." Time, October 24, 1969, pp. 84-85. 49. Callaway, S., and Crichton, D. Toxic Ef- fects of Cyclohexylamine Carbonate (Ptn/CQ.1101/476/56). Porton: Royal Air Force, 1956. 50. Lemonova, G. V. "Toxicity of Cyclo- hexylamine and Dicyclohexylamine." Gi- giena Truda i Professional'nye Zabole- vaniya 7 (1961):5156. English transla- tion available in Federation Proceedings: Translation Supplement 24 (January- February 1965): T96-98. 51. Lucas, A. Ancient Egyptian Materials and Industries. 3d ed., rev. London: Ed- ward Arnold & Co., 1948. 52. Plenderleith, H. J. The Conservation of Antiquities and Works of Art: Treat- ment, Repair, and Restoration. London: Oxford University Press, 1966. 53. Barrow, W. J. Manuscripts and Docu- ments: Their Deterioration and Restora- tion. Charlottesville: University of Vir- ginia Press, 1955. 54. Thomas, J. J. "Alkaline Printing Papers: Promise and Performance." Library Quarterly 40 (January 1970) :99-107. 55. Byrne, J., and Weiner, J. Permanence. Institute of Paper Chemistry Biblio- graphic Series no. 213. Appleton, Wis.: Institute of Paper Chemistry, 1964. 56. Kantrowitz, M. S.; Spencer, E. W.; and Simmons, R. H. Permanence and Dura- bility of Paper: An Annotated Bibli- ography of the Technical Literature from 1885 A.D. to 1939 A.D. U.S. Govern- ment Printing Office Technical Bulletin no. 22. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1940. 57. Rafton, H. R. Paper Manufacture. U.S. Patent no. 2,115,747. Washington, D.C.: Patent Office, May 3, 1938. Rafsky, H. R. (former name of H. R. Rafton). White Pigment, description of early al- kaline-filled paper. U.S. Patent no. 1,415,391. Washington, D.C.: Patent Office, May 9, 1922. Rafsky, H. R. Paper,
NEW APPROACHES TO PRESERVATION 169 description of early alkaline-filled paper. U.S. Patent no. 1,595,416. Washington, D.C.: Patent Office, August 10, 1926. 58. Rawling, F. G. Method of Producing Sized Papers. U.S. Patent no. 2,114,809. Washington, D.C.: Patent Office, April 19, 1938. 59. Reichardt, G. "The Durability of Paper." Library Quarterly 8 (October 1938): 510-20. 60. Kimberly, A. E., and Scribner, B. W. Summary Report of National Bureau of Standards Research on Preservation of Records. U.S. National Bureau of Stan- dards Miscellaneous Publication M154. Washington. D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1937. 61. Wilkie, J. B. "Laundry 'Winter Dam- age.'" U.S. Bureau Of Standards Jour- nal of Research 6 (April 1931):593-602. 62. Smith, R. D. "Paper Permanence as a Consequence of pH and Storage Condi- tions." Library Quarterly 39 (April 1969) :153-95. 63. Schierholtz, 0. J. Process for the Chemi- cal Stabilization of Paper and Product. U.S. Patent no. 2,033,452. Washington, D.C.: Patent Office, March 10, 1936. The British Patent was issued to the Ontario Research Foundation. Improvements in Processes for the Chemical Stabilization of Paper and Product. Patent no. 443,534. London: His Majesty's Stationery Office, March 2, 1936. 64. Barrow, W. J. "Deacidification and Lam- ination of Deteriorated Documents, 1938-63." American Archivist 28 (April 1965) :285-90. 65. Church, R. W., ed. Deterioration of Book Stock: Causes and Remedies, Two Studies on the Permanence of Book Paper Conducted by W. J. Barrow. Virginia State Library Publication no. 10. Richmond: Virginia State Library, 1959. 66. Barrow, W. J. The Barrow Method of Restoring Deteriorated Documents. Rich- mond, Va.: W. J. Barrow, 1965. 67. Barrow, W. J. Procedures and Equip- ment Used in the Barrow Method of Restoring Manuscripts and Documents. Richmond, Va.: W. J. Barrow, 1965. 68. Gear, J. L. "Lamination after 30 Years: Record and Prospect." American Archi- vist 28 (April 1965):293-97. 69. W. J. Barrow Research Laboratory. Permanence/Durability of the Book. Vol. 3. Spray Deacidification. Richmond, Va.: W. J. Barrow Research Laboratory, 1964. 70. W. J. Barrow Research Laboratory. Permanence/Durability of the Book. Vol. 5. Strength and Other Characteristics of Book Papers 1800-1899. Richmond, Va.: W. J. Barrow Research Laboratory, 1967. 71. Pravilova, T. A., and Istrubsina, T. V. "Preservation of Paper Documents by the Buffering Method." In Preservation of Documents and Papers, edited by D. M. Flyate and translated by J. Schmo- rack. Jerusalem: Israel Program for Scientific Translations, 1968. Available from U.S. Department of Commerce, Clearinghouse for Federal Scientific and Technical Information, Springfield, Va., as TT 67-51400, and in Chemical Ab- stracts 62 (1965):2911. 72. "Report of the Committee for Paper Problems." Bulletin of the American Group-The International Institute for Conservation of Historic and Artistic Works 9 (October 1968):29-30. 73. Langwell, W. H. "Methods of Deacidify- ing Paper." Journal of the Society of Archivists 3 (April 1969) :491-94. 74. Baynes-Cope, A. D. "The Nonaqueous Deacidification of Documents." Restau- rator 1 (1969) :2-9. 75. Anderson, A. R., and Thomas, I. M. "Alkoxides, Metal." In Encyclopedia of Chemical Technology, edited by R. E. Kirk and D. E. Othmer. Vol. 1. 2d ed. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1963. 76. Bradley, D. C. "Metal Alkoxides." In Metal-organic Compounds. American Chemical Society Advances in Chemistry Series no. 23. Washington, D.C.: Ameri- can Chemical Society, 1959. 77. Browning, B. L. Methods of Wood Chemistry Vol. 1. New York: Inter- science Publishers, 1967. 78. Cohen, C. A. Process for Producing Magnesium Alcoholates. U.S. Patent no. 2,287,088. Washington, D.C.: Patent Office, June 23, 1942. 79. Hunter, E. A. Preparation of Magnesia. U.S. Patent no. 2,570,058. Washington, D.C.: Patent Office, October 2, 1951. 80. Kimberlin, C. N. Process for Producing Magnesia. U.S. Patent no. 2,593,314.
170 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Washington, D.C.: Patent Office, April 15, 1952. 81. Lund, H., and Bjerrum, J. "Eine einfache Methode zur Darstellung wasser-freier Allkohole." Berichte der Deutchen Che- mischen Gesellschaft 1, pt. B (1931): 210-13. 82. Suchoff, L. A. Method of Forming an Adherent Film of Magnesium Oxide. U.S. Patent no. 2,796,364. Washington, D.C.: Patent Office, June 18, 1957. 83. Richter, G. A. "Relative Permanence of Papers Exposed to Sunlight. II." Indus- trial and Engineering Chemistry 27 (April 1935) :432-39. 84. Technical Association of the Pulp and Paper Industry. TAPPI Standard Test T 402 m-49: Conditioning Paper and Paperboard for Testing. New York: Technical Association of the Pulp & Paper Industry, 1949. 85. Technical Association of the Pulp and Paper Industry. TAPPI Standard Test T 423 m-50: Folding Endurance of Paper. New York: Technical Association of the Pulp & Paper Industry, 1950. 86. Technical Association of the Pulp and Paper Industry. TAPPI Standard Test T 453 ts-63: Relative Stability of Paper (by Effect of Heat on Folding Endur- ance). New York: Technical Association of the Pulp & Paper Industry, 1963. 87. Technical Association of the Pulp and Paper Industry. TAPPI Standard Test T 509 su-68: Hydrogen Ion Concentra- tion (pH) of Paper Extracts-Cold Ex- traction. New York: Technical Associa- tion of the Pulp & Paper Industry, 1968. 88. Brownlee, K. A. Statistical Theory and Methodology in Science and Engineer- ing. 2d ed. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1965. 89. Browning, B. L. Analysis of Paper. New York: Marcel Dekker, Inc., 1969. 90. "A Review of Organotin Compounds in the Control of Pests." Tin and Its Uses: Quarterly Journal of the Tin Research Institute 66 (1965):1-5. 91. Arnold, M. H. M., and Clarke, H. J. "The Evaluation of Some Fungistats for Paint." Journal of Oil and Colour Chemists' Association 39 (December 1956):900-908. 92. Blum, M. S., and Bower, F. A. "The Evaluation of Triethyl Tin Hydroxide and Its Esters as Insecticides." Journal of Economic Entomology 50 (February 1957) :84-86. 93. Negherbon, W. 0. "Triethyl Tin Hydrox- ide and Its Esters; Insecticidal Activity." In Handbook of Toxicology. Vol. 3. In- secticides. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1959. 94. Fahlstrom, G. B. "Organo-Tin Com- pounds: Evaluation of Preservative Properties by Soil-Block Techniques." Journal of American Wood-Preservers' Association 54 (1958):178-84. 95. Hartmann, E.; Hardtmann, M.; and Kiimmel, P. Process for Protecting Wool, Fur, Rugs, and the Like against the Attack of Moths and Products Thereof. U.S. Patent no. 1,744,633. Washington, D.C.: Patent Office, January 21, 1930. 96. Hirshland, H. E., and Banks, C. K. "Organotin Compounds." In Metal- Organic Compounds. American Chemical Society Advances in Chemistry Series no. 23. Washington, D.C.: American Chemi- cal Society, 1959. 97. Ingham, R. K.; Rosenberg, S. D.; and Gilman, H. "Organotin Compounds." Chemical Reviews 60 (October 1960): 459-539. 98. Lewis, W. R., and Hedges, E. S. "Appli- cations of Organotin Compounds." In Metal-organic Compounds. American Chemical Society Advances in Chemistry Series no. 23. Washington, D.C.: Ameri- can Chemical Society, 1959. 99. Technical Association of the Pulp and Paper Industry. TAPPI Standard Test T 417 os-68: Proteinaceous Nitrogenous Materials in Paper (Qualitative). New York: Technical Association of the Pulp & Paper Industry, 1968. 100. Technical Association of the Pulp and Paper Industry. TAPPI Standard Test T 419 su-68: Starch in Paper. New York: Technical Association of the Pulp & Paper Industry, 1968. 101. Grove, L. E. "Paper Deterioration-an Old Story." College and Research Li- braries 25 (September 1964) :365-74. 102. Haynes, W. Cellulose: The Chemical That Grows. New York: Doubleday & Co., 1953. 103. Barrow, W. J. Method for Preserving Documents and the Like. U.S. Patent no. 2,301,966. Washington, D.C.: Patent Office, November 17, 1942.
NEW APPROACHES TO PRESERVATION 171 104. Kathpalia, Y. "Hand Lamination with Cellulose Acetate." American Archivist 21 (July 1958):271-74. 105. Langwell, W. H. "The Postlip Duplex Lamination Processes." Journal of the Society of Archivists 2 (October 1964): 471-76. 106. Langwell, W. H. Improvements in or Relating to the Preservation of Docu- ments in Storage. Great Bnrtain Patent no. 1,000,981. London: Her Majesty's Stationery Office, October 22, 1965. 107. Langwell, W. H. "Recent Developments in Postlip Lamination Processes." Jour- nal of the Society of Archivists 3 (April 1966) :360-61. DISCUSSION WILLIAM K. WILSON Records research in the last few years has been on the upswing and is being conducted in many laboratories over the world. I am aware of work in progress at the following institutions: (1) Graduate Library School, the Uni- versity of Chicago; (2) the Institute of Paper Chemistry, Appleton, Wiscon- sin; (3) W. J. Barrow Research Labo- ratory, Richmond, Virginia; (4) Brit- ish Museum Research Laboratory, London; (5) Biblioteca Nazionale Centrale, Florence; (6) Empire State Paper Research Institute, Syracuse; (7) institutions in Poland, Rumania, and Russia; (8) Imperial College, Lon- don; (9) Timber Research Unit, Coun- cil for Scientific and Industrial Re- search, Pretoria, South Africa; and (10) U.S. National Bureau of Stan- dards, Washington, D.C. Two journals devoted to records preservation are (1) Restaurator, edited by Poul Christiansen, University Library, Copenhagen, Denmark, and (2) Mitteilungen der Internationalen Arbeitsgemeinschaft der Archiv-, Bib- liotheks-, und Graphik-Restauratoren, Freiburg im Breslau, West Germany. During a recent discussion of re- search on the stability of paper and the preservation of records, it was pointed out that the records of the future are not likely to be made on paper. This certainly is partly true, as many record materials other than paper are in use today. The production of printing and writing papers has in- creased steadily, and its growth rate has not seemed to reflect the impact of these newer materials. The annual need for about 15 million tons of print- ing and writing paper is not likely to disappear overnight. Now I should like to make some remarks concerning the data Smith pre- sented in his paper and to discuss some implications of the data, and where he might go from here. Smith has presented data showing that nonaqueous deacidification is ef- fective on single sheets of unprinted book paper. These data are convincing. He has shown that books can be deacidified by a nonaqueous procedure in a pressure system. The data from these tests, while indicating that the procedure was effective, are limited, as he restricted his work to one title that did not degrade as rapidly as expected. Further work with a more acidic book, including a comparison with an aque- ous deacidification procedure, might be desirable. Assuming that this qualification is met or that one accepts his work on single sheets as meeting the need for comparison, the next step would be to
172 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY design a pilot apparatus, similar to that which might be used in a library, in order to develop information on: (1) effectiveness of various solvent sys- tems, (2) optimum time of treatment, (3) cost per unit of deacidified mate- rial, (4) effect of solvents on various materials used in books, and (5) methods for recovering and recycling solvents. The design, construction, and testing of a pilot apparatus is not a small task. It is difficult to set precise time limits on this kind of investigation be- cause all of the problems cannot be anticipated, and Smith will probably want to evaluate a variety of treatment procedures. A nonaqueous pressure system should be useful for the mass- production deacidification of archival and library materials. I should like to offer the following as opinions: 1. Any problems that might occur should develop from the solvent and not from the magnesium methoxide. The latter would end up as magnesium carbonate in the paper. Some of the same types of solvents that Smith used are recommended for cleaning of docu- ments. 2. Any difficulties would be likely to occur immediately and not a year or more later. 3. Many sizing materials would be soluble. 4. A water deacidification method might be preferable in those cases where the paper must be wet anyway for cleaning, bleaching, or repair. 5. Although I feel that moisture should play a greater part in a labora- tory aging method for paper, it is very unlikely that the use of a method in- volving moisture would have resulted in different conclusions. Smith used a standard method, and indeed he would be open to criticism if he had not. 6. Humidity cycling (95 percent, 11 percent and then 50 percent relative humidity) is a preferred procedure prior to physical testing. Smith has utilized this technique in his more rig- orous work. Smith's study of aqueous deacidifi- cation methods is timely, and I hope this work will be pursued. Most pro- cedures, I believe, consume entirely too much time. Some data obtained about two years ago indicate that a major part of the pick-up of magnesium bi- carbonate occurs in the first five min- utes. If this is true for most papers, soaking time could be drastically reduced. This may be academic, as the time of soaking may not be the rate- determining step in the procedure. As part of the overall study, boundary conditions and preferred procedures should be worked out for all methods of deacidification. Much of this informa- tion is available and waiting to be assembled. Smith has found differences in per- formance of several of the deacidified papers with time of aging. Although these differences are real, I doubt if they are significant. I should prefer to lump the deacidified papers together and conclude that, in the absence of an exhaustive study of deacidification methods, all of them appear to serve the purpose. The variables are endless, and we do not have all of the information. Smith would have a more dramatic story to tell if he had used papers that were more acidic. He proved his point but made his task a little more difficult. Presumably it will be desirable to dry paper to a low moisture content prior to nonaqueous deacidification. Paper is more susceptible to damage
NEW APPROACHES TO PRESERVATION 173 from handling at low moisture contents because it is less flexible. This is a matter of degree rather than kind, but paper that already is weak must be handled very carefully. During aqueous deacidification the wetted paper re- tains only a small fraction of its dry strength and is even more susceptible to damage from handling. The heats of vaporization of the chlorofluorohydrocarbon solvents are low enough that their removal from paper should be easy and economical. The heat of vaporization of water is almost 600 calories per gram (2.5 megajoules per kilogram), methyl alcohol requires 2 63 calories per gram (1.10 megajoules per kilogram), and the chlorofluorohydrocarbon solvents range from thirty-five to fifty-six calo- ries per gram (0.15-0.23 megajoules). Now I should like to leave Smith's paper and make a few remarks con- cerning research on preservation of rec- ords in general. The first point I wish to emphasize is that we really do not understand everything that happens when a sheet of paper deteriorates. Some of the pos- sibilities have been discussed by Luner [1]. The second point is that the evalua- tion of materials and processes should be done on a continuing basis. New materials and new processes are con- stantly appearing on the market. A prime example is the revolution that has occurred in the past twenty years, or even in the past ten years, in office copying machines. The third point is that cooperation is needed among manufacturers, re- search laboratories, libraries, printers, and publishers. An excellent example of informal cooperation is Smith's work. The University of Chicago, the Institute of Paper Chemistry, the Council on Library Resources, Inc., and the Chicago Testing Laboratory, as well as industry and overseas insti- tutions, have contributed to his re- search. The fourth point is that specifications for stable papers are needed. Manu- facturers and consumers, with specifi- cations, can communicate in quanti- tative language. Now I should like to make a few comments concerning accelerated or laboratory aging. Laboratory aging represents a compromise, and we should never expect the full story from any accelerated aging procedure. How- ever, this is the only practical approach to evaluating the relative stability of various materials. How does one select samples of paper for aging studies? It one writes down all of the variables, a program of such magnitude emerges that it would require a staff of ten people working for the next ten years. In the mean- time, newer materials would be on the market, and modifications in the manu- facture of the papers being studied might have occurred. Smith mentioned that laboratory ag- ing had indicated that sodium bicar- bonate was not a good material, for de- acidification. He also pointed out that sodium bicarbonate apparently had come into contact with cloth in which some mummies were wrapped, and after several thousand years this cloth was still in excellent condition. This is an example of a material that per- formed well in normal aging but not in accelerated aging. Situations like this call for the utmost in knowledge and judgement in order to avoid errors. Laboratory aging methods must be developed to suit the material. Several
174 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY years ago one of my colleagues and I developed the information necessary to write specifications for a stable lami- nating film formulated from cellulose acetate [2]. We concentrated on oxida- tive degradation, as cellulose acetate is degraded principally by an oxidation process. At the end of an induction period during which little measurable degradation occurs, the degradation 2.5 I I I I j 2.0 h. 0 MOIST OXYG/N uZ l,o A DRY OXYGEN i 0 J t 3 4 5 S Tnit OAYS FIG. 1.-Degradation of a plasticized cellulose acetate film (one mil) in moist and dry oxygen at 1100 C. rate greately increases. Data on the degradation of film aged in moist oxygen and in dry oxygen at 1240 C are plotted in figure 1 [2]. This plot shows why one should not rely on a one-time one-temperature aging meth- od. A three-day test would show little difference between the two aging con- ditions, but a four-day test would indi- cate that dry oxygen caused much more degradation than moist oxygen. Different papers may react differ- ently with respect to additives that con- tribute to the bonding of the fibers. One additive might be susceptible to oxidative degradation but not to hydro- lytic degradation. Another additive might be susceptible to hydrolytic deg- radation but not to oxidative degra- dation. One of the best ways to obtain in- formation on stability is to examine the characteristics of an artifact that has survived for a long time. Hanson's work at the Institute of Paper Chemis- try in the late thirties was a very significant contribution in this area [3]. Numerous studies have shown that there is a correlation between pH and stability, but some examples have been selected to show that there are excep- tions to this relationship. The pH of these examples was measured accord- ing to the TAPPI cold extraction pro- cedure [4]. Data on the decrease in fol.ding endurance of four papers dur- ing aging at 90? C and 50 percent rela- tive humidity and plotted in figure 2. 5000 Q 0 1000 5.8 o' A 0 0_ 135 70 10 5 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 TIME OF AGING,DAYS FIG. 2.-Change in machine-direction folding en- durance (M.I.T., 500 grams tension) with time of aging at 90? C and 50 percent relative humidity; pH values, TAPPI Standard T 509, are indicated on plots. The papers with pH values of 5.6 and 5.8, respectively, have the same fiber furnish but degrade at greatly different rates. These two papers were sized differently, and the sizing materials apparently affected the rates of deg-
NEW APPROACHES TO PRESERVATION 175 radation differently. This difference in rate of deterioration or the stability of the paper with a pH of 5.8 would not be anticipated on the basis of a knowledge of pH alone. The paper with a pH of 7.2 contains an alkaline filler, and the paper with a pH of 7.0 is an acid paper with an alkaline coat- ing. Therefore, although there is a cor- relation between pH and stability, these data show that pH alone is not the final answer. Data on the change in folding en- durance with time of aging at 90? C and 50 percent relative humidity of a group of manifold papers are plotted in figure 3. Number 104 is an alkaline paper, number 107 is a neutral paper, and the others are acid papers. As ex- pected, the rate of degradation of num- ber 104 is very low. The rate of deg- radation of number 107 is about what one would expect in relation to the alkaline paper and the acid papers. There is some indication that the rate of degradation of number 107 increases with time, but it is possible that this increase would not occur during normal aging. This may be similar to the situa- tion mentioned earlier where sodium bicarbonate appeared to contribute to stability during normal aging but did not perform well during laboratory aging. These examples show that labo- ratory aging data must be interpreted carefully. j I 1 , I 104 4.o 107 A C9 3.0 0 10 0 03 of a groupofmanifoldpap102s106 o00 0 2.0- 101 1.0 0 20 40 60 TIME OF AGING, DAYS Fio. 3.--Changes in machine-direction folding endurance (M.I.T., 500 grams tension) with time of aging at 9Q' C and 50 percent relative humidity of a group of manifold papers. REFERENCES 1. Luner, Philip. "Paper Permanence." TAPPI 52 (February 1969) :796-803. 2. Wilson, W. K., and Forshee, B. W. Preser- vation of Documents by Lamination. U.S. National Bureau of Standards Monograph no. 5. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1959. 3. Hansen, Fred S. "Resistance of Paper to Natural Aging." Paper Industry and Paper World 20 (February 1939):1157-63. 4. Technical Association of the Pulp and Paper Industry. TAPPI Standard Test T509 su-68: Hydrogen Ion Concentration (pH) of Paper Extracts-Cold Extraction New York: Technical Association of the Pulp Industry, 1968.