NOTABLE MATERIALS ADDED TO NORTH AMERICAN LIBRARIES, 1948-49. II CARL W. HINTZ mi_His is the second of two papers re- porting on notable materials added I to North American libraries, IC948- 49. The purpose and the method of re- porting are described in the first article and need not be repeated here. The pre- vious paper covered general works and the humanities. The material which fol- lows relates primarily to acquisitions in the social sciences, science, and tech- nology. SOCIAL SCIENCES United States history: general.-The es- tablishment of the Oral History Project at Columbia is of major significance from the standpoint of resources. Under this program Columbia is securing, for per- manent preservation, the memoirs of living men and women who have been prominent in public affairs and whose knowledge in matters of historic impor- tance might not otherwise be set down. Interviews, carefully guided along pre- viously determined lines, are transcribed on a wire recorder, enabling the person being interviewed to produce a memoir on selected topics with a minimum of effort. The text is later transcribed, repe- titions and redundancies are eliminated, needed amplifications noted, and the whole is returned to the one interviewved for further attention. The project is un- der the direction of Allan Nevins and has a staff of interviewers trained in history. The Bancroft Foundation funds, under which it began operation, have since been supplemented from other sources, and the project is growing rapidly. Its scope has been expanded to include all aspects of the American scene, and plans are un- der way for geographic expansion beyond the New York City area. Among the per- sons already interviewed are the follow- ing: Bainbridge Colby, John Foster Dulles, Edward J. Flynn, Will H. Hays, Herbert H. Lehman, Henry L. Stimson, Norman Thomas, Mrs. J. Borden Harri- man, James W. Gerard, Walter Lipp- mann, Alice Roosevelt Longworth, and Vito Marcantonio. From the library of the late Cyrus H. McCormick, his widow, Mrs. Marshall L. Brown, presented to Princeton 140 books in general Americana. Although a comparatively small group, it contains many items of prime importance, such as the copy of the second Plannck edition of the Columbus letter (Rome, 1493), which was exhibited on the Freedom Train; the rare Globus mundi (1509); Vadianus' Habes lector; hoc libello (I5 I5), only four other copies of which were lo- cated by Sabin; and the Hoe copy of Hakluyt's Principal Navigations (1599- i6oo), with the Wright-Molyneux map in the first state. Princeton has continued to enlarge its Woodrow Wilson collection by gifts and purchases. Notable among recent gifts are a group of over ioo letters from President Wilson to the late Cleve- land H. Dodge, presented by the family of Mr. Dodge, and 73 shorthand note- books of speeches, interviews, etc. com- piled by Charles H. Swem while he was acting as secretary to President Wilson and given to the university by him. The research collection on Benjamin Franklin 267
268 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY formed by the late George Simpson Eddy was presented to Princeton by Thomas H. Eddy, Thomas H. Eddy, Jr., and Donald Simpson Eddy. It is described as primarily a scholar's rather than a col- lector's collection. The New York State Library is com- piling a checklist of published Fourth of July orations. It has increased its original listing of 2,600 by some 400 new titles and has added 47 items to its previous holdings of 1,200. Cornell reports the receipt of the Nicholas H. Noyes collection of histori- cal American documents, of which a manuscript copy of the Thirteenth Amendment, signed by President Lincoln and all members of Congress who voted for the amendment, and a manuscnrpt copy of the Gettysburg Address are the principal items. The Library of Congress also received a copy of the Thirteenth Amendment. Yale added the Victor Hugo Paltsits collection of Nathan Hale material, comprising many folders of in- formation about Hale, photostats and copies of original letters, many pam- phlets and other publications, and an un- published biography of Hale written by Cyrus Parker Bradley in the middle of the nineteenth century. The most impor- tant items are 9 unpublished autograph letters to Hale. The Seward papers at Rochester were augmented by some i6o letters, mostly written by William H. Seward, Thurlow Weed, and James Wadsworth and dating from I831 to 1849. Rochester also ac- quired the David Jayne Hill papers, con- sisting of the original manuscripts of his addresses and articles. Dr. Hill was presi- dent of Bucknell University and of the University of Rochester and held several important posts in the diplomatic serv- ice, including that of ambassador to Germany. The recently published Annual Report on Historical Colkctions, University of Virginia Library, which covers the two- year period from July, 1947, through June, I949, records accessions of I,250,- ooo manuscripts by purchase, by depos- it, or by gift from 447 donors. A very large proportion of these deal with Vir- ginia and the other southeastern states and include significant additions to the material in connection with Thomas Jefferson, James Madison, and John Randolph of Roanoke. The largest single collection was that of the papers of the late Senator Carter Glass, numbering well over 250,000 pieces. These are rich in material on the creation of the Federal Reserve System and on many other as- pects of state and national affairs in the first third of the twentieth century. The Tracy W. McGregor Library at the Uni- versity of Virginia received by gift from Dr. A. S. W. Rosenbach, of Philadelphia, a group of about 50 of the printed docu- ments of Thomas Jefferson's administra- tion. Indiana received a Lafayette collection of over 8,500 items from an anonymous donor. Containing many original letters and documents, this group provides source material illustrating the history of Colonial America, the early United States, and relations with France and England from the birth of George Wash- ington to the death of Lafayette. Indiana also secured some 700 official War of i 8I 2 papers of the command of Jacob Kings- bury, officer in charge of troops and garri- sons on the seacoast of Rhode Island and Connecticut. California (Los Angeles) added a col- lection of about 3,000 pamphlets for the study of American history, especially the period of the Civil War and the area of southern history. Oberlin augmented its extensive antislavery collection by 24
MATERIALS ADDED TO AMERICAN LIBRARIES 269 items, of which Pitt's famous speech de- livered in the House of Commons on April 2, I792, was the earliest. Southern California added a group of 34I pam- phlets dealing with the political aspects of slavery and the slave trade. Several libraries reported the addition of microfilm copies of manuscript papers in the Library of Congress: Alexander Hamilton by Columbia, Chicago, and Ohio State; Andrew Jackson by Colum- bia, Chicago, and Florida; Nicholas Biddle and Martin Van Buren by Chi- cago and Columbia; Henry Watterson by Columbia; Robert Todd Lincoln, Ly- man Trumbull, and Jeremiah Sullivan Black by Columbia and the Huntington Library. Columbia also secured micro- films of the Timothy Pickering papers in the National Archives. California (Berke- ley) added microfilm of the papers of Zachariah Chandler, Edwin M. Stan- ton, and Benjamin F. Wade, totaling approximately 20,000 exposures. Chicago secured microfilms of a major portion of the Draper manuscripts in the Wisconsin State Historical Society Li- brary, among them the Daniel Drake pa- pers on Ohio; the Forsyth papers relating to the Sauk and Fox Indian Agency; the General William Henry Harrison reports to the secretary of war and miscellaneous papers; a series of letters concerning Illi- nois pioneers; original papers dealing wth the early history of Kentucky; the Avery and McDowell papers relating to North Carolina; the Preston papers re- lating to Virginia and Kentucky; and the John Cleves Symmes papers on the Northwest Territory and the Miami purchase. The Library of Congress acquired col- lections of manuscripts and papers to an extent which makes description impos- sible within the bounds of this report. Particularly outstanding groups, as de- scribed in the Library of Congress Quar- terly Journal of Current Acquisitions, in- clude the personal papers of Ray Stan- nard Baker (Vol. V, No. 4 [August, 1948], 3-9; the General Spaatz collection (Vol. VI, No. 3 [May, 19491, 23-56); the pa- pers of Major Jedediah Hotchkiss, Mabel T. Boardman, John G. Nicolay, John Hay, John Bassett Moore, Albert J. Beveridge, Judge Ben Lindsey, Josephus Daniels, Raymond Clapper, George H. Dern, and Harold Frederic (Vol. VI, No. 3 [May, I949], 83-9I); the Oscar S. Straus papers (Vol. VII, No. 2 [February, I950], 3-6); and the Moreton Frewen pa- pers (Vol. VI, No. 4 [August, I949], i5- 20). Receipt of the papers of William Gibbs McAdoo was announced in the Library of Congress Information Bulletin, October 11-17, I949, p. 9. The New York Public Library secured one of the two original engrossed manu- scripts of the Olive Branch Petition of I775. This was the petition to George III, signed by members of the Continental Congress on July 8, x 775, asking the king to direct his ministers to repeal the acts restricting colonial trade and to cease trying to collect taxes by force of arms. Some of the larger aggregations of ma- terial received by the New York Public Library in the area of general United States history include the letters on na- tional problems from Silas Wright to Senator Benjamin F. Butler; the late Sol Bloom's congressional office files and sev- eral hundred letters to him from impor- tant personages; and the personal papers and correspondence of Joseph C. Walsh, principally relating to Irish-American matters from I914 on. The New York Public Library also reports that, of 1,300 military-unit histories of World War II, some goo have been acquired during the last two years. A checklist is scheduled to appear in I95I.
270 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY The John Carter Brown Library, as in previous years, added a number of choice items in the general field of Americana. These are described in detail in the An- nual Reports of the John Carter Brown Li- brary (1947-48 and 1948-49). United States history: state and regional. -The New York State Library acquired a group of materials bearing on the Eng- lish title to the New Netherlands. The main body of 30 titles was assembled by the famous bibliographer and bookseller Henry N. Stevens and is described in a catalog published in a limited edition in 1947 by his son, Henry Stevens. To this nucleus 54 rare items have been added from other sources. Other additions in this area by the New York State Library indude a portfolio of 40 manuscripts-in addition to printed matter and pictures -relating to General Nicholas Herkimer and the important Revolutionary War engagement at Oriskany; a collection of papers of Malcolm and Thomas H. Can- field, primarily on transportation in New York State and Vermont via the Hudson River, Champlain Canal, and the rail- roads; the original volumes of laws of New York for the period I82o-48, sup- plementing the volumes for the Colonial and early-statehood period (I683-I820) already in the library; and a collection of over 4,000 volumes and pamphlets from the estate of Sarah B. Tibbits, among them first editions, rare United States and New York State documents, and pamphlets on early New York State history. Rochester reports that the Wadsworth papers (1793-Ii873), consisting of family and business letters, account books, and land records in the possession of James W. Wadsworth and William P. Wads- worth of Geneseo, New York, were mi- crofilmed. (The manuscripts were re- turned to the owners.) Columbia secured the extensive records of the Citizens Un- ion of New York, which provide excellent source material for New York city and state political history since the last quar- ter of the nineteenth century; and the New York Public Library added the pa- pers of Richard W. G. Welling relating to New York civic problems and political campaigns. Dartmouth received over 4oo letters written by Professor and Mrs. Olive P. Hubbard, of Hanover, to Mrs. Hub- bard's parents, Professor and Mrs. Silli- man, of Yale. These give a picture of Hanover, New Hampshire, life between I829 and I864, with the greatest empha- sis on the forties and fifties. Princeton received from the library of the late Cyrus H. McCormick a collec- tion of 73 of the rarest and most impor- tant books relating to the early history of Virginia, as well as a group of over 40 autograph letters and documents of Vir- gin'ia governors. This group supplements impressively the material on the early history of Virginia in the library's Gren- ville Kane Collection. Additions to the George Washington Flowers Collection (southern Americana) at Duke totaled approximately 385,000 manuscript pieces, 877 books and pam- phlets, 5,357 newspaper issues, and 92 broadsides. Of special note are the papers (ca. 20,000 items, I86i-66) of Joseph F. Boyd, chief quartermaster of the Army of the Ohio; the William Patterson Smith papers (22,357 items, I79I-1943), includ- ing material on almost every aspect of economic, political, and social life in tide- water Virginia from I820 to I865; and the letters and papers of Josiah W. Bailey (ca. 200,000 items, I900-1931), late senator from North Carolina, supple- menting his Washington papers (193I- 46) received earlier.5 North Carolina added many impor- s Other collections in this area are described in the annual reports of the librarian, Duke University.
MATERIALS ADDED TO AMERICAN LIBRARIES 271 tant titles, too numerous to list in(li- vidually, in the fields of North Caro- liniana, Confederate imprints, and south- ern manuscripts and pamphlets. The Southern Historical Manuscript Collec- tion reports 314 acquisitions, ranging in size from a single paper or manuscript book to groups of io,ooo and 38,ooo items each. Of this number, 242 are new listings, and 72 represent significant addi- tions to previously listed collections. The following are of particular interest: the papers of Marcus J. Wright (i83 I-I922), lawyer, Confederate officer, and histori- an; of John Y. Bassett, a physician of Huntsville, Alabama, during the period i822-66; and of Elijah Fuller, general merchant and pension agent in Fayette- ville, North Carolina. An outstanding block of material ac- quired by Texas was the Vandale Collec- tion-primarily a research library de- voted to the history of Texas and to the West in general. Containing about 8,ooo books and pamphlets, 35,000 pages of manuscript, and I,OO0 miscellaneous items, it represents the most complete body of information about Texas ever as- sembled by one individual. In his reading Mr. Vandale followed the westward movement of the frontier and, after I925, began to trace the history of the area of the Texas Panhandle. Finding little written, he supplemented his collection of printed works by making records of interviews and encouraging the writing of reminiscences. Several hundred inter- views with early settlers were recorded and preserved. The collection also in- cludes material on explorers of the South- west from Coronado to the outbreak of the Civil War, more than 200 volumes on annexation, practically every known county history, and much ephemera filed by the counties. A second notable group of material reported by Texas was the gift of the papers of Major William Alon- zo Wainwright. These papers represent an accumulation by Major Wainwright as assistant quartermaster at Fort Brown, Texas, from i868 to I870 and add useful matter to the sources for the history of the lower Rio Grande Valley. The most important addition reported by the American Antiquarian Society is the Donald McKay Frost collection of printed materials relating to the dis- covery and exploration of the West. Its chronological range extends from a Cabeza de Vaca of I555 to Chivington's defense of the Sand Creek massacre, printed at Denver in I865. It includes al- most every edition of every journal or narrative appearing in book and pam- phlet form, a number of rare periodicals, and the "Arrowsmith" series of maps from I796 to I824. From various other sources the society obtained a number of very rare tracts printed in early Ken- tucky, Tennessee, and Alabama or relat- ing to the opening of this region. Some of these are described in the reports of the librarian printed in the Proceedings of the society.6 The Midwest Manuscript Collection at the Newberry Library added papers of Floyd Dell, author; Charles L. Hutchi- son, banker; Howard Vincent O'Brien, columnist; and William Morton Payne, educator and writer. The Sherwood An- derson papers, referred to in the preced- ing report in this series, are now stated to number I4,000 items and have been described in the Newberry Library Bul- letin (December, 1948). Material added to the Western Historical Manuscripts Collection of the University of Missouri indude the papers of several governors of Missounr, the papers and account books of two large lumbering companies, and various family papers and diaries of 6 American Antiquarian Society, Proceedings, LVIII, Part II (1948), 233-46, and LIX, Part II (I949), 205-24.
272 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY the later nineteenth century. The Bancroft Library, University of California (Berkeley), continues to buy heavily in the field of western Americana and Mexicana. Purchases during the last two years indude an extens'ive collection of Mexican, New Mexican, and Texan broadsides of historical importance; sev- eral early overland guides and manu- script diaries; three of the earliest manu- script maps of San Francisco, made by William A. Richardson, Jean Jacques Vioget, and W. M. Eddy, respectively; rare files of California newspapers; and as nearly complete a coverage of current publications in the field as possible. Out- standing among the many gifts received are the field notes and journals (21 vols.) of William H. Brewer, of the United States Geological Survey of California, and transcripts of his letters, I860-64; the papers of Chester H. Rowell, indud- ing correspondence, editorials, and re- ports; I21 letters from California, I849- 53, by Robert Smith LaMotte and his brother, Harry Didler LaMotte; and the correspondence and miscellaneous papers of Theodore H. Hittell and John S. Hittell. California (Los Angeles) acquired the Archibald Hamilton Gillespie papers (I845-59), consisting of 75I items of pri- mary importance to the study of the American conquest of California. Hunt- ington secured a large portion of the Californiana collection of the late Perry Worden, including more than 250 books and pamphlets, 400 manuscripts, 300 photographs, and many maps and litho- graphs. Northwestern was presented with a collection of some 2,400 volumes pertain- ing to the expansion and development of the West, consisting mostly of substan- tial basic works but including some rare items as well. Journals, society publica- tions, early travels, personal narratives, and maps make up the bulk of the collec- tion, which constituted the major por- tion of the personal library of Ralph Budd, chairman of the board of the Chi- cago Transit Authority. Minnesota re- ceived as a gift the C. C. Webber collec- tion of several hundred volumes relating to the Plains and the Rockies, including a first edition of Parkman's The Oregon Trail and some Frederick Remington material. Columbia reports the strength- ening of its previously rather limited holdings in the field of western Ameri- cana with the purchase of 500 carefully selected items. Yale acquired the final portion of the William Robertson Coe collection of western Americana, men- tioned in the preceding report in this series. The Department of Archives, Louisi- ana State University, accessioned a total of I43 private manuscript collections, consisting of 59,463 unbound items and 749 volumes, largely papers of Louisiana families. Louisiana also acquired the private library of the late Senator John H. Overton, comprising 280 volumes and 20 linear feet of papers pertaining prin- cipally to navigation and flood control in the Mississippi Valley. The Burton Historical Collection, De- troit Public Library, added many groups of manuscripts and papers, of which only two will be mentioned here: Three lots of the papers of Colonel Jacob Kings- bury, commandant in Detroit (I809-I2), were received as a gift from the Friends of the Detroit Public Library, and the papers of James McMullen, Detroit in- dustrialist and United States senator, were presented by the McMillen estate. Indiana received several manuscript collections: The Polke-Niles-Scott papers present a picture of one family's part in Indiana history for the period I809-
MATERIALS ADDED TO AMERICAN LIBRARIES 273 I924; the Samuel Williams manuscripts, some 3,000 letters and papers of Samuel Williams (1786-i859), chief clerk in the office of the surveyor-general of the Northwest Territory, and of his son, Samuel Wesley Williams, relate to the Methodist church, Ohio schools, and family affairs; and 300 papers of Jacob Bartholomew, of Ohio and California, in- clude his overland diary to California (i85o) and papers of the South Feather Water Company of Forbestown, Cali- fornia, of which he was part owner. Chicago added to previous holdings about i,ooo town and county histories and atlases and now has histories for ap- proximately 8o per cent of the counties listed by Peterson as having written his- tories. Chicago also secured the manu- script letters and papers of the late Frank 0. Lowden, a former governor of Illinois. Canadian history.-Many important additions were made to Harvard's collec- tions in the field of Canadian history and literature under the guidance of Dr. Wil- liam Inglis Morse. One group, the Charles Chadenat collection of 126 man- uscripts, contains material of prime im- portance. Latin America.-North Carolina re- ceived a group of about 4,000 volumes from the library of Josephus Daniels, which included his collection of materials relating to Mexico. Missouri acquired al- most complete files-part original, part microfilm-of the Diario oficial of Mexi- co and the various series of the Diario de los debates of the Mexican congress. Duke strengthened its Peruvian holdings by the acquisition of I90 volumes of the Diario de los debates of the congress (both chambers), and of the Diario de los deba- tes (193I-36) of the Congreso constitu- yente in 22 volumes. California reports sustained buying in the general field of South American history, with special em- phasis on Brazil. English history.-Minnesota added the Fitzwilliam collection of I I5 Queen Anne tracts and 744 tracts of the Hanoverian period and enlarged its Stuart tract col- lection by approximately i,ooo items, thereby bringing its holdings in this field to about 8,ooo separate titles. Minnesota also acquired the Holland House collec- tion of 659 volumes on English history and politics of the last half of the eight- eenth and the first half of the nineteenth century, from the library of the third Lord Holland, whose notes and auto- graphs many of them bear. Missouri con- tinued its purchases of sixteenth-, seven- teenth-, and eighteenth-century English political and religious pamphlets, adding approximately i,ooo items. Duke ac- quired a collection of 562 seventeenth- century English pamphlets, and the Cleveland Public Library strengthened an already important section of its hold- ings with the addition of I 2 Jacobite tracts. The William Andrews Clark Memorial Library, University of California (Los Angeles), secured a collection of 72 books and pamphlets about the flight of Charles II after the Battle of Worcester (i65I) and his refuge at Boscobel and subse- quent escape to France, all from the li- braries of the "Boscobel" bibliographers and historians, F. L. Mawdesley and A. M. Broadley, to supplement holdings on this period already available; the li- brary also added about i,ooo seven- teenth- and eighteenth-century political and religious tracts to a collection which now totals over 7,000 items printed be- tween I640 and I750. Indiana acquired a group of 9I letters, I 7' I-i6, written by Horatio Walpole while on a diplomatic mission from Great Britain to The Hague, relating to the
274 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY difficulties preceding the signing of the Barrier Treaty of I 715 and the Triple Al- liance of I717. The Newberry Library added a collection of I,200 English po- litical caricatures of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. European history.-The Beauharnais Archives, which have been on deposit at Princeton for a number of years, were presented to the library by Andre de Coppet. These papers comprise some 30,000 documents which were once in the possession of Eug&ne de Beauharnais, Napoleon's stepson and his viceroy in Italy. Pennsylvania added more than i,ooo pamphlets of the French Revolution, and the Newberry Library reports that its collection of French political pamphlets, mentioned in the preceding article in this series, has now been listed.7 The New York Public Library acquired i6,ooo contemporary broadsides and pamphlets and 38,305 numbers of periodicals of the French Revolutionary period. North- western added about I00 seventeenth- century pamphlets dealing with contem- porary European affairs. Written chiefly in German, the majority center on Louis XIV's aggressions and the Franco-Dutch war in the I670's, with particular atten- tion to the situation in the German states. The Clark Library, California (Los Angeles), secured a collection of approxi- mately 575 Mazarinades. The term "Ma- zarinades" applies to the entire body of pamphlets in prose and verse published in France during the Fronde, the name given to the conflict waged first between Cardinal Mazarin and the parliament and later between the cardinal and the princes, which lasted approximately from I648 to I653. This mass of material, in- cluding not merely the satires and lam- poons directed against Mazarin but offi- cial documents of all sorts, might be compared with the English pamphlets of the Civil War period and, like the latter, is of considerable historical and biblio- graphical importance. California (Los Angeles) added a collection of I58 broad- sides of the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic periods, as well as a group of French newspapers pertaining to the period of the revolution of I848. Florida acquired several important runs of French material, namely, Biblio- the'que de l'&cole des chartes, revue d'erudi- tion, consacrie specialement d l'dtude du moyen age (io8 vols.); Assembl6e natio- nale, Collection generale des d&crets rendus par l'Assemblee nationale, I1789-i804 (88 vols.); Assembl6e nationale constituante, Proces-verbal de l'Assemblee des communes et de l'Assemblee nationale, 1789-i (75 vols.); Journal officiel de la Rdpublique Franfaise, 187o-1907 (350 vols.); Archi- ves parlementaires de 1787 d I86o: Receuil complet des debats Ugislatifs et polittiques des chambres franfaises (Ist ser., Vols. I-LXXXII; 2d ser., Vols. XX-CXXVII; and the publications in octavo of the So- ciett de l'histoire de France, I834-1944 (332 vols.). Southern California added 2I7 vol- umes of the Dtbats parkmentaires of the French chamber of deputies, and Loui- siana completed its sets of the Journal officiel de la Republique Franfaise. Cali- fornia (Berkeley) acquired a small but interesting collection of French cartu- lanes, comprising 54 titles in 75 volumes. Wisconsin reports a complete file of the Senograftcheskoe otchety of the Rus- sian Duma, a large collection of Russian underground material, and many distin- guished sets in Russian, induding several of the Archeographical Commission. 7 Doris Varner Welsh (comp.), Check List of French Politica Pamphlets in the Newberry Library, z560o-644 (Chicago, z950).
MATERIALS ADDED TO AMERICAN LIBRARIES 275 Illinois received as a gift from the Albert H. Lybyer estate some 5,ooo books, pamphlets, and periodicals, es- pecially strong in the history of the Balkans and the Near East; and, from John N. Chester, several hundred vol- umes on Napoleon, his family, and the Napoleonic era, many of them rare and in fine bindings. Colorado reports its Central European history collection as now being of major importance. During the period under re- view, about 600 titles were added, prin- cipally in the Czech, Polish, and Magyar languages. The collection is not restricted in period and deals with various aspects of Central European culture. Yale re- ceived approximately 2,600 volumes from the library of Dr. Sussheim, an eminent historian formerly of Munich and recent- ly a professor of Ottoman history at the University of Istanbul. Nearly 2,000 v01- umes are in either old or modern Turk- ish. Yale also added the Kiderlen-Waech- ter manuscript material collected by I)r. Ernest Jackh for his biography of Kiderlen. The Newberry Library acquired the William B. Greenlee collection on the history of Portugal and of the Portuguese empire to I820, consisting of some 4,000 books and periodicals. The Hoover Li- brary of War, Revolution, and Peace (Stanford) reports the addition of the James A. Healy collection on Irish his- tory, comprising over 8oo volumes on the history of Ireland from the eighteenth to the twentieth century. The New York Public Library secured the unpublished manuscript of Baron Gustav Monteuf- fel's "History of Livonia," completed about I908. The addition of standard source ma- terials was reported by a few libraries: Northwestern and Louisiana State- Muratori, Rerum Italicarum scriptores; North Carolina-Monumenta Germaniae historia; Florida and Wisconsin-Colec- ci6n de documentos ineditos para la histo- ria de Espana. World War II and its origins.-South- ern California acquired a large collection of German newspapers, documents, post- ers, pamphlets, and other ephemeral ma- terial issued during the years of Hitler's rise to power. Northwestern reports sig- nificant increases in its holdings of Dutch, Danish, and Norwegian under- ground publications and the acquisition of a collection of about goo documents, in typescript, illustrative of the propa- ganda of Norwegian Nazis during the oc- cupation period. Harvard purchased a collection of about i,Ioo items, including much ephemeral propaganda material, all of it gathered in Sweden during World War II. Columbia added 26 out-of-print and rare Spanish volumes dealing with the Spanish Cievil War (936-39) and its origins; and Harvard received a gift to purchase three Spanish newspapers of the civil war period. The Hoover Library (Stanford) se- cured microfilm copies of over 4,000 items from the papers of General Wladyslaw Sikorski, dealing with the Polish army in World War II, and ex- tensive collections relating to under- ground activities during hostilities in Belgium, the Netherlands, France, Italy, and Poland. Maps.-Columbia reports the addi- tion of a collection of maps of Russia, based upon Russian sources, prepared for the German army in I941-42. Those of the battle areas have incorporated the re- sults of German aerial photography. Some are quite detailed, with scales as large as I-5,000 to I-25,000 for city plans and harbors. In general, the em- phasis is upon features of significance
276 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY for military geography. The expanding map collection at Vir- ginia, now comprising more than 70,000 maps, added by gift a special group of 70 items collected by the late John Calvin Doolan, of Louisville, Kentucky. These include several rare and historically interesting maps of Kentucky and Vir- ginia, among them a copy of the Filson map of Kentucky (Paris, I785) and a copy of the Fry and Jefferson map of Maryland and Virginia (I775). Minnesota augmented its map collec- tion by the addition of six important items. Pomponius Mela's Cosmographia (Venice, I482), Ptolemy's Geographie (Strassburg, I513 and I545 eds.), Or- telius' Theatrum orbis errarum (Ant- werp, 1573), Rudbeck's Atland eller Manheim (Upsala, i689-98), and Da Montalboddo's Newe unbekanthe landte . erfunden (Nuremberg, 1508). Illinois acquired the Freeman collec- tion of early maps relating to America. It includes over 300 maps, mostly of the sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth centuries, and five atlases. Especially notable are the I600 Tatton map of the Pacific (Maris pacifici quod vulgo mar del zur cum regionibus circumiacentibus), Mitchell's Map of British and French Do- minions in North America, I755, and a Wit Atlas of i688. Map-makers repre- sented in the collection include Homann, Blaeu, Speed, Bellin, Mercator, Hondius, Ortelius, Anville, and Sanson. The i6oo Tatton map was also received by the Li- brary of Congress, as one of a group of five sixteenth-century maps presented by Lessing J. Rosenwald, and by the John Carter Brown Library. The Library of Congress secured the maps, diaries, correspondence, and pri- vate papers of Major Jedediah Hotch- kiss. A topographical engineer in the Confederate States Army, Hotchkiss was also an educator and a promoter of Vir- ginia's natural resources. Economics and business.-Princeton received from Mrs. Edwin W. Kemmerer and Donald L. Kemmerer the papers and reports of the late Professor Edwin W. Kemmerer, first director of the Inter- national Finance Section of Princeton University, who served as financial ad- viser to many countries and formed numerous commissions of experts to in- vestigate and report on currency and fiscal reforms. The collection consists of Professor Kemmerer's own copies of the reports of fourteen commissions, together with 200 pamphlet boxes of reports and memorandums used by the commissions. Columbia acquired the Carleton Fox collection of taxation material, a practi- cally complete legislative history of Unit- ed States federal taxation from I9I6 to the present. Temple added a number of interest- ing books and manuscripts illustrating phases of business or economic history, of which the following are particularly noteworthy: Paccioli, Summa de arithme- tica, geometria proportioni & proportio- nalita (Venice, I494), and Het groote tafereel (1720). These and other acquisi- tions in this area are described in detail in the Temple University Library Bulletin, Volume I, No. 4 (January, I950). Northwestern secured a collection of approximately 750 pamphlets and re- ports pertaining to early American rail- roads (I840-80), originally assembled by the late Frank F. Towle, covering the key phases of the early history of road- ways, railways, and canals, with data re- lating to their organization, financing, and administration. Virginia received by gift from Thomas W. Streeter of Morris- town, New Jersey, the part of the Street- er Railroad Collection covering the re- gion south of the Potomac and Ohio riv-
MATERIALS ADDED TO AMERICAN LIBRARIES 277 ers and east of the Mississippi for the period beginning I841. The publications, 6i5 in number, concern I65 different railroads and include many apparently unique items, many of them antedating the Civil War. California (Los Angeles) acquired the complete business records of Dawson's Book Store, antiquarian booksellers who have operated continu- ously in Los Angeles since 1909, and the business records and correspondence, in excess of ioo,ooo items, of the Pinal Dome Oil Company, an early concern (ca. I895-I914) of Santa Barbara Cotun- ty, California. The Harvard Business School pur- chased a library of German economic mia- terial collected by Paul Wallich, a Berlin banker, consisting of about I,5oo books dealing with business, histories of busi- ness enterprises, etc., extending from the early sixteenth century down to the twentieth. Over 90 per cent of this ma- terial is not in the Library of Congress, and probably two-thirds of it is not in any other American library. New York University made extensive additions to its "Corporation Records Section," first established ten years ago. Through the aid of Mr. David S. Roswell a substantial portion of the extensive files of a large private investment house was acquired, with the understanding that the Commerce Library would or- ganize, maintain, and expand this col- lection as a research center for advanced studies in economics, investments, cor- poration finance, and business history. The collection has become one of the few important depositories of corporation records in the country and now contains financial reports for over five thousand corporations, domestic and foreign. The Joseph Schaffner Library of Northwest- ern reorganized and expanded by about 6,ooo items its holdings of corporation reports. Harvard added some 3,ooo an- nual reports of corporations to its Cor- porations Collection, which now totals over 8oo,ooo pieces, and acquired also a collection of the data supplied by rail- road companies to the Rand McNally Company which served as basis for their maps of the American railroad network from I890 through I945. Wisconsin added a large collection of material on Communist labor unions in Russia and a file of Die Links-Kurve (I929-30), of which no other complete set is recorded in the Union List of Serials. Duke continues its interest in the revolu- tionary social movements and has ac- quired the following sets: Die Fackel (Vienna, I899-i936), Nieuwe tijd; revo- lutionair-socialistisch half-maanderlijksch tijdschrift (Amsterdam, i896-i92i), and Sozialistische Monatshefte (Berlin, I897- I920). Political science. Illinois received as a gift from the estate of the late Professor John A. Fairlie several thousand vol- umes, pamphlets, and periodicals, mainly in political science, collected during Pro- fessor Fairlie's long teaching career. His personal papers and correspondence files were included. Charles H. Mcllwain gave his collection of 4,500 books, consisting primarily of works on the history of Western political institutions and the his- tory of political theory, to Princeton. This group is distinguished by the large number of early treatises on law. Cali- fornia (Berkeley) secured some I,600 vol- umes from the library of the late Chester Harvey Rowell, dealing chiefly with in- ternational relations and civic, political, and economic affairs throughout the world. Sociology.-City College (New York) received approximately 8o per cent of the Russell Sage Foundation Library as a gift from the foundation. Consisting of
278 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY some 40,000 volumes, the collection will offer substantial support to work in sev- eral areas of the social studies. It includes more than ioo,ooo reports of local, state, national, and international conferences relating to social work. The New York Public Library added files of material on economic justice, antilynching cam- paigns, Negro achievements, and other aspects of race relations, gathered by George Edmund Haynes as secretary emeritus of the Race Relations Commit- tee of the Federal Council of the Churches of Christ. Education.-Constant additions to the collection of college and university cata- logs at Columbia have brought it to the point where it now consists of over go,oo0 information bulletins from degree-grant- ing institutions throughout the world. The Clark Memorial Library, Califor- nia (Los Angeles), acquired 3oo rare books and pamphlets relating to educa- tion of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries from the library of Sir Michael Sadler, distinguished English educator. Pennsylvania secured by gift from Dr. Thomas Woody approximately 3,000 volumes on the history of education. Anthropology, archeology, and folklore. -By virtue of its membership in the Human Relations Areas Files, Inc., Southern California is receiving much important material in anthropology and related social sciences. Other significant items are files of Anthropos and the T'oung Pao Archives. The State Universi- ty of Iowa received by gift from the es- tate of the late Harvey Ingham a collec- tion of 500 volumes dealing primarily with North American Indians. The Cleveland Public Library pur- chased 5I new items on Dutch folklore and added 2I medieval and chivalric ro- mances, many of them of the sixteenth century. Negroana.-The Ernest R. Alexander collection of Negroana, at Fisk Universi- ty, acquired a collection of 245 songs, published between I874 and I9I6, of which either the words or the music or both were written by Negroes. Fifty of them belong in the minstrel era before 1895 and the remainder in the ragtime age. The library of the Julius Rosenwald Fund, part of which had been received by Fisk at the time of the preceding report in this series, has now been assimilated into the general and Negro collections of the library. The areas of strength coin- cide with the interests of the fund in the South, i.e., Negro education, health, race relations, and the American Indian. Howard added a four-volume compila- tion of patent certificates issued to Ne- gro inventors, I834-1900, taken from the original certificates issued by the United States Patent Office, and the manu- script diary (August 6, I79i-March I7, I792) of John Clarkson's mission to re- move Negroes from Nova Scotia and New Brunswick and settle them in Sierra Leone. Law.-The Robert Ruffin King Collec- tion of American Law, numbering 2,300 volumes, was acquired by North Caro- lina. Texas added the original correspon- dence and record files of members of the Rules Committee of the Texas Civil Ju- dicial Council since its organization. These files are basic to any studies or re- search on rules of procedure in the civil courts of Texas. Northwestern reports a systematic strengthening of its foreign-law collec- tions, with more than 5,ooo volumes added in this category during the period under review. Several complete sets of foreign law journals, not widely held in the United States, are included in the group. In addition, two notable collec- tions were received: the collection on criminology and penology from the li- brary of Comte Alberto de Foresta, pro-
MATERIALS ADDED TO AMERICAN LIBRARIES 279 cureur general du Tribunal de Rome, consisting of 264 titles and particularly rich in rare eighteenth- and nineteenth- century European pamphlets; and more than i,ooo volumes, by gift from Mlr. Joseph L. Shaw, on Roman, medieval, French and German law, including a number of works by medieval jurists in sixteenth- and seventeenth-century edi- tions and an excellent selection of nine- teenth-century German works on Pan- dektenrecht. Several libraries added substantial quantities of "war-crimes" materials. Columbia secured a transcript of the twelve American Tribunal trials held at Nuremberg, which, unlike the Inter- national Military Tribunal transcripts, has not been published. It is augmented by a large collection of related material presented by former members of the American prosecution staff, by the "Staff Evidence Analyses" papers, and by other unpublished materials. Harvard states that it acquired tremendous collections of material-perhaps the most complete in the world-dealing with the German and Japanese war-crimes trials. Califor- nia (Los Angeles) added complete tran- scripts of the Nuremberg trials, and Washington (Seattle) the record of the International Military Tribunal of the Far East. North Carolina received the Judge John J. Parker collection of official transcripts of proceedings of the Inter- national Military Tribunal at Nurem- berg. It includes documents, exhibits, briefs, office communications and memo- randums, forms, rulings, procedures, pho- tographs, photostats, and press releases, totaling 1,030 items. War-crimes trials material added by the Library of Con- gress is described at some length in the Quarterly Journal of Current Acquisitions (Vol. V, No. 4 [August, I9481, 29-3I). SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY Science.-The University of Toronto acquired the hundred-year-old library of the Royal Canadian Institute, which was particularly strong in scientific periodi- cals. Added to previous holdings, it prob- ably makes Toronto's collection of scien- tific journals larger than that of any oth- er Canadian library. The New York State Library added a number of herbals to its collection, in- cluding works by Brunfels, Dodoens, Gerard, and Roeslin. Louisiana acquired the library of the late Dr. B. F. Lutman, formerly professor of plant pathology at the University of Vermont, comprising a collection of herbals and a group of modern botanical works. Among the herbals are works by Gerard, De l'Itcluse, Parkinson, Bauhin, and Grew. Cornell reports important acquisitions in the history of science, including many seventeenth- and eighteenth-cen- tury monographs and significant serial and encyclopedic works, among them a complete set of the Archivio veneto, and a group of journals and comprehensive works on ornithology, dealing particu- larly with the birds of several of the smaller European countries. Illinois ac- quired a fine set of the elephant folio edition of Audubon's Birds of America by purchase from the Brooks School at North Andover, Massachusetts. Northwestern secured a collection of about 7,ooo reprints and pamphlets, pro- viding particularly good coverage on the foundations of geometry, typology, and group theory, originally assembled by Professor Max Dehn during forty years of academic activity in Germany. Illi- nois bought the private library of Dr. Egon Ritter von Oppolzer, a noted Aus- trian scientist. It includes a number of very rare mathematical items, among them a collection of 5 2 I logarithm books
280 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY published from the seventeenth to the nmeteenth century. Illinois also added several works of major importance in the history of geology, of which Hutton's Theory of the Earth in three volumes (I795-99) is outstanding. The Clark Library, California (Los Angeles), added sixteen Robert Boyle items and now owns what is believed to be the largest Boyle collection in the re- gion. Stanford received i6o volumes and 175 pamphlets for its Newton collection from Dr. Frederick E. Brasch. The most valuable single collection ev- er purchased by the University of Wis- consin is the Chester H. Thordarson col- lection of scientific and technological literature, consisting of about io,ooo volumes. California (Berkeley) states that the most important addition to its research material in the life-sciences resulted from the reproduction by microphotography of a great many items in the Gray Her- barium library at Harvard. Representa- tive titles included Cornut, Canadensium plantarum (I635); Ruiz Lopez, Flora Pe- ruviana (I798-I802); and Vahl, Eclogae Americanae (I796-i807). Stanford added a copy of Bonardo's La Minera del mondo (Venice, 1585), one of five in the United States, and two early aeronautical items-a first edition of Jeffries' A Narrative of the Two Aerial Voyages of Dr. Jeffries with Mons. Blanchard, 1784, 1785 (London, 1786) and Walker's A Treatise upon the Art of Flying (Hull, i8io). Medicine.-The Army Medical Li- brary augmented its holdings of fif- teenth- and sixteenth-century editions by the purchase of numerous books, but chiefly through the acquisition of micro- film copies. Microfilms of 120 incunabula in the British Museum and 71 in the Bibliotheque Nationale were acquired, together with 55 copies of sixteenth-cen- tury items in the British Museum, other British libraries, and the BibliothEque Nationale. The compilation made by K. F. Russell from the STC and pub- lished in the Bulletin of the History of Medicine (November-December, I949) served as the basis of the want list. This library also acquired the Hakusho Kimu- ra collection of Japanese medical books, consisting of 555 items (I,6o9 vols.) from the seventeenth, eighteenth, and nine- teenth centuries. Kimura was a disciple of Sohaku Asada (i84-94), one of the greatest doctors and scholars of Japanese medicine in the Meiji era. This collection is one of the most famous in its field, ranking with the privately owned Naka- no collection in Osaka and the Kyoto University collection. Individual titles of special interest and rarity added to the library were the first edition of the Lili- um medicinae of Bernardus de Gordonio (Naples, 1480), of which only four other copies are known (none in this country), and the Trattado Unico da Constitukcam Pestilencial de Pernambuco by Joam Ferreira da Rosa (Lisbon, I694). The latter is of outstanding importance as the first scientific description of yellow fever. The establishment of a medical school at the University of Washington (Se- attle) in I945 has resulted in the devel- opment of a rapidly growing medical li- brary, with nearly I i,ooo volumes added during the two years under review. New York University secured the Weinberger Dental Collection formed by Dr. Bernard Wolf Weinberger. His inter- est in the origins and development of dentistry, which he maintained through- out his active professional life, resulted in this unusual collection and in his author- ship of An Introduction to the History of Dentistry, published in I948. The collec- tion contains about 250 volumes, includ-
MATERIALS ADDED TO AMERICAN LIBRARIES 28I ing many of the rare and early works on dentistry. Wisconsin augmented its already out- standing collection of pharmacopoeias by some 30 volumes, and Chicago ac- quired a collection of about 70 eight- eenth- and nineteenth-century pharma- copoeias, principally from Europe, with a few from Asia. Very few of these are represented elsewhere in the Chicago area. The New York State Library secured a copy of Ambroise Pare's Les (Euvres (Paris, I575), a work which greatly in- fluenced the surgery of that day. Stanford acquired a large collection of manuscripts and notes made by Dr. L. L. Stanley during his tenure as medical di- rector of San Quentin prison. Technology.-The Detroit Public Li- brary added to its automotive-history collection several hundred scarce cata- logs and manuals of automobile manufac- turers covering the period I900 to I929. It also received a considerable group of early French and German publications on the automobile, such as Fladrich's Die leichten und billigen Motorwagen (Berlin, I907) and Goebel's Automobil- Motoren (Vienna, I905). A particularly interesting gift is a manuscript by Oc- tave Uzanne, entitled "Un Rave: Le fu- tur centenaire de l'automobilisme (I889- I989)." The papers of Orville and Wilbur Wright were given to the Library of Con- gress by the executors of the estate of the late Orville Wright. The collection pro- vides a unique and comprehensive docu- mentary record of the early careers of the Wright brothers and indudes ma- terials previously not accessible. The Li- brary of Congress was permitted to mi- crofilm for its collections an extensive scrapbook collection maintained for al- most half-a-century by the Wright broth- ers; it also secured the General William Mitchell papers. AREA COLLECTIONS Slavic countries.-Columbia's new Russian Institute, first mentioned in the preceding report in this series, strength- ened its resources considerably by pur- chasing three major collections. The Bernstein Russian Underground Collec- tion consists of approximately 2,500 books, brochures, and broadsides, a large number of periodicals (printed mostly outside Russia by the Bolshevist, So- cialist, anarchist, and other political groups), and a large collection of news- papers published in Russia from i9io to I925 by various parties. Among the un- usual items are 2 onrginal letters of Lenin and first editions of 58 of his works. The Alexinsky Collection comprises about I,400 unpublished papers relating to the Russian State Duma and the activrities of the Bolshevist party and also the rec- ords of the Social-Democratic School for Agitators and Propagandists conducted under the auspices of Maxim Gorky on the island of Capri in I909. The third group, a collection of Polish materials, consists of more than 4,000 items, includ- ing the 37 volumes of Polish bibliography by Estreicher and the Chronica Polono- rum (I52i) by Maciej z Miechowa. To these were subsequently added some 3,000 volumes in Russian, dealing with both the current and the pre-revolu- tionary period, and about 350 volumes of Czech books, primarily in philology, literature, and history. Washington (Seattle) added about 2,500 volumes in the Russian language, covering all fields. Many of the titles are no longer available and include works on the smaller nations, such as Georgia, Kirghiz, Tajik, and Uigur. A particularly interesting item is an edition by D. A.
282 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Khvolson, entitled Izvestiya o Khazarakh, of a rare and early work on the Magyars, Slavs, and Bulgars by Ahmad b. Umar b. Rustah, a tenth-century author. Duke secured over 200 volumes through par- ticipation in the Library of Congress co- operative program for the acquisition of Russian publications. Although they are primarily in the fields of political econo- my, social construction, and national economy of the U.S.S.R., there is some material in the natural sciences and mathematics. Africa.-Northwestern materially in- creased its holdings of Africana south of the Sahara. Over i,ooO volumes of news- papers, periodicals, legislative proceed- ings, and government reports relating to Negro Africa were received by gift from the University Museum of the Univlersity of Pennsylvania. In addition, some 300 volumes, including a number of unusual items, were purchased from funds made available through a Carnegie Corpora- tion grant to support the African re- search program directed by Northwest- ern's department of anthropology. The Near East.-The Hoover Library acquired the Heyworth-Dunne collection of over 7,000 volumes in Arabic, Persian, German, French, and English relating to Saudi Arabia, Lebanon, Syria, Palestine, Iraq, Iran, Turkey, and North Africa. One of the most important additions to the Library of Congress was the Moritz Library of Arabica and Islamica, once the property of the famous Arabic schol- ar and book-dealer Bernhardt Moritz. The Far East.-Columbia received, through the United States Army's Civil Affairs Division1, some 4,ooo books and 6,ooo issues of periodicals published in Japan between I946 and 1948 and, through the dispersion of the Japan In- stitute collection and through the Li- brary of Congress Japanese sorting proj- ect, approximately 7,500 Japanese and 2,500 Western-language volumes, dupli- cating Library of Congress holdings. Co- lumbia's present emphasis in this area is on the social sciences and the humanities. Northwestern secured, through the Li- brary of Congress sorting project, about 6,ooo volumes in Japanese dealing chiefly with the politics, government, and eco- nomics of Japan. Cornell reports the addition of an ex- tensive collection of books and journals in English on India (its history, religion, culture, politics, and economics) and a significant number of monographs and serials on China, Siam, the Dutch East Indies, and Southeast Asia in English and other Western languages, as well as in Chinese. Pennsylvania received, as part of the South Asia program of the university, a large group of newspapers, periodicals, and books in Indic languages or pertaining to the study of the region and a virtually complete set of the publi- cations of the University of Osmania (Hyderabad) Press. Minnesota added the Otto Fischer col- lection of 750 volumes, mostly in Euro- pean languages, on Chinese literature, history, art, travel, and early Christian missions. Harvard secured a large collec- tion of materials gathered in the Philip- pines during and after World War II and consisting of newspapers, monographs, periodicals, and a good deal of ephemera. California (Berkeley) received two special grants for postwar purchases in China and Japan, and two members of the East Asiatic Library staff were sent to the Orient to buy rapidly from desid- erata lists. As a result, about 45,000 vol- umes were acquired, covering a variety of fields. About 200 ts'ung-shu, i65 gazet- teers from the provinces of Fukien, Kwangtung, and Kwangsi, and 175 pub- lications in art and archeology were
MATERIALS ADDED TO AMERICAN LIBRARIES 283 among the most notable items found in China. In Japan, outstanding acquisi- tions included many local histories, full files of such journals as Kogei and Minkan densho, and a complete set of the Sonkeikaku Sokan (facsimiles of 63 rare books in the Sonkeikaku Library, lo- kyo). A copy of the rare sixteenth-seven- teenth-century movable-type edition of Taikeiki was discovered, and the Mura- kami collection of Meiji literature, in- cluding many first editions, was pur- chased. Chicago added photographic repro- ductions of the Ming shi lu (authentic record of the Ming Dynasty, I365-644) in 500 Volumes and of the Ta Ch'ing Ii ch'ao shih lu (authentic record of suc- cessive generations of the Ch'ing Dy- nasty, I644-I9I ) in I,220 volumes. Both are extremely important sources for research. A third major item is the Hsiuan lan t'ang ts'ung shu. With one exception, this collection consists entirely of rare printed books and manuscripts which had their origin in the Ming period (I368-I644)-the exception being 35 Chuan of the Ta Yuan ta i-t'ung chik (general gazetteer of the Yuan Dynasty), of which only a small part is now extant. The 52 items, reproduced in the two series of I20 volumes each, are in the National Central Library, Nankikng. A third instalment of I20 volumes is in preparation. This item was also reported by the Library of Congress. Stanford reports the addition of 7,500 Chinese-style volumes and 270 Western- style volumes on Chinese literature, his- tory, and culture; and Southern Califor- nia received some 8oo miscellaneous Japanese imprints. The Library of Congress received as a gift from Professor Otto Karow his valu- able library of Japanese materials. More than half of the approximately 3,200 volumes is devoted to linguistics, litera- ture, and related subjects. Latin America.-The Latin-American collection added by North Carolina dur- ing the previous report period was strengthened by the addition of several fine editions of works by Argentine art- ists. Princeton received by gift from Robert Garrett the collection of Mayan manuscripts formed by the late Dr. Wil- liam Gates. The group consists of about 265 volumes, all written in Latin script, in many dialects of the Maya language and on many subjects, dating from the sixteenth to the nineteenth century. Other areas.-A special collection on Dutch history, art, literature, and cul- ture, called the "DeRuiter Collection" after the donor, was begun at Southern California. A number of rare Dutch im- prints were secured during the period un- der review. Yale received the Welsh col- lection formed by Henry Blackwell, anti- quarian, consisting of over 4,ooo books and pamphlets relating to all phases of the cultural history of Wales. MISCELLANEOUS The State University of Iowa received a notable collection of approximately 6,ooo cartoons drawn by Jay N. Darling ("Ding Darling") as editorial cartoons for the Des Moines Register and newspa- per syndicates. In addition to the edi- torial cartoons, there were some which were drawn for leading magazines, such as Collier's and the Saturday Evening Post. The collection is unique and will appeal to historians, commercial artists, and people in related fields. Temple re- ceived some 50 letters written by Russell H. Conwell, founder of Temple Universi- ty, to his congregation while on tour in the early part of this century. Conwell was the most famous lecturer of his time
284 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY and an outstanding attraction on the Chautauqua circuits. Yale acquired from Carl Van Vechten more than 330 volumes and numerous prints, photographs, and other material to found the Anna Marble Pollock Me- morial Library of Books about Cats; it also added to its mnemonics collection some i,ooo volumes, manuscripts, and pamphlets collected by Bernhard Zufall. Minnesota reports the addition of the Frank K. Walter collection of 700 Vol- umes of American humor, particularly that of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Mr. Walter was li- brarian of the University of Minnesota from I921 to 1943. The Cleveland Public Library added 382 new volumes to its already outstand- ing collection on chess, 112 volumes to the collection on Dutch heraldry, and 20 volumes on German and Swiss heraldry. Among outstanding acquisitions at California (Berkeley) is the Holl Li- brary-a gastronomy collection of well over i,ooo cookbooks in Latin, Greek, Spanish, English, French, Italian, and German and some 400 winebooks. The collection was cleverly reviewed in Bo- kemian Life for September, I949. The Arents Collection on Tobacco of the New York Public Library, which purchases manuscripts, letters, etc., al- luding to tobacco or smoking, secured holographs of Queen Elizabeth, Sir Wal- ter Raleigh, Sir Francis Drake, Thomas Jefferson, D. G. Rossetti, George Wash- ington, and others. Duke added more than 200 volumes on tobacco, supple- menting the previously reported gift from Mr. George Arents. CONCLUSION There is little change from the pattern of previous reports in this series, in that the major acquisitions in nearly all fields were made by relatively few libraries. It is evident, however, that smaller libraries can and do develop important collections in limited areas. Geographically, the ma- jor acquisitions tend to be concentrated in the Northeast and the Middle West, although the Pacific Coast libraries are steadily gaining stature in this respect. On the other hand, the South, the South- west, and the Great Plains-Rocky Moun- tain region are represented by only a few isolated libraries. It has been necessary to deal summari- ly with much detailed information in or- der to compress into a limited space the record of two years of accessions. The author's sincere thanks go to all those who submitted material, together with his regrets that much had to be eliminated.