LCSH AND PRECIS IN MUSIC: A COMPARISON' Paula Beversdorf Gabbard2 By studying examples of their applications by the two major English language bibliographic agencies, this article compares the strengths and weaknesses of PRECIS and LCSH as regards books about music. Quantitative analysis reveals that the number of PRECIS subject statements exceeds LC subject headings except with more generic works. Qualitative analysis reveals serious problems with the terminology in both systems. LCSH frequently fails to combine unre- lated subjects into a single heading, while subject statements in PRECIS are sometimes so long that significant aspects of the work cannot be adequately integrated. If the strengths of the selected subject entries of each system were combined, the result could be an improvement over each system alone, especially in an online catalog with the capability of single and random word order searches. Introduction Most researchers, librarians, and staff in American academic libraries have grown familiar but not satisfied with many aspects of the Library of Congress Subject Headings. Although PRECIS never appeared to be a panacea, it did seem to promise more than LCSH currently offers. This article investigates how well the British Library's application of PRECIS, as compared with the Library of Congress's use of their subject head- ings, deals with music subjects, a previously neglected area of research. In fact, of the articles that deal with single subjects at all, the majority are in the natural or social sciences. The remainder address the visual arts, (including the printed index of the National Film Board of Canada), and these provide few hints of how PRECIS approached music [1-31. 1. This article grew out of research done while I was attending Columbia University School of Library Service. I wish to thank both J. Stevens and J. Kaufman for their encouragement and help in the writing of this article. 2. Music Library, State University of New York, Stony Brook, New York, 11794. [Library Quarterly, vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 192-206] ? 1985 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-25 19/85/5502-0005$0 1.00 192
LCSH AND PRECIS IN MUSIC 193 Research Any thorough comparison between applications of LCSH and PRECIS must follow an exposition of the fundamental differences between the two systems. Unlike LCSH, PRECIS is not simply a vocabulary list; rather it is a methodology for organizing subject statements. By contrast, LCSH "lacks any true theoretical foundation" [4, p. 2011. LCSH has a controlled vocabulary that has grown so unwieldy that changes have become problematic. Consequently, much of its language is antiquated, especially for the average user. PRECIS, by contrast, has no vocabulary limitations per se: the indexer or cataloger simply constructs his string of terms from the list of terms that have been used before, or if necessary he can develop his own terms. Every PRECIS term and cross-reference is assigned a number, which makes word changes quite simple when the system is online. E. Svenonius and H. Schmierer explain that PRECIS is capable of describing multielement works, while LCSH tends to be capable of describing only multitopic works. "A multitopic work treats a number of discrete subjects, each of which may be denoted specifically by a separate index term. A multielement work, on the other hand, treats of subjects which are not discrete but are so intimately bound together that a string of interconnected terms is required to denote the work specifically. One of the criticisms leveled at LCSH is that the nature of its index terms is such that multielement works must be treated as multitopic works" [5, p. 338]. In my own findings, the British Library's application of PRECIS could not be accused of the converse, but it did frequently ignore the multiplic- ity of multitopic works. Perhaps the indexers and catalogers of the British Library preferred not to assign more than one string to a single work. PRECIS descriptors are usually more specific than their LCSH counterparts, which are frequently so ill-defined as to inspire students at Yale to complain that LC subject headings are frequently too general to help them find material on needed topics [6, p. 65]. On the other hand, PRECIS can be guilty of excessive specificity. Weintraub suggests that PRECIS's detail could make a generic search problematic [7, pp. 114- 15]. It is important to remember that undergraduates and nonscholars are the heaviest users of subject catalogs in libraries. Several studies have shown that there is an inverse relationship between the dependence on subject searching and the user's level of expertise [8, p. 8]. The frequent Victorian terminology in LCSH is unfamiliar to the typical subject searcher. In contrast, the Brtitish Library's application of PRECIS uses current language that would more likely occur to most searchers. Only a few obscure Britishisms appear in the British Library's use of PRECIS to
194 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY baffle the American user. Frequently the LCSH "Red Book" is placed on or near subject catalogs in libraries. It is rarely used by anyone other than the library staff. As a result, the convenience of LCSH's controlled vocabulary is ignored. The scholars, I discovered, usually agree that PRECIS is an im- provement over LCSH, but some are more guarded in their enthusiasm. Many feel that there is an urgent need for a readily available thesaurus [9, p. 27]. Some others have expressed concern over the bulkiness of the system, and they have concluded that it is unsuitable for a manual catalog or index [10, p. 173]. Still others believe it is a complex system too difficult for everyone to master and too expensive to adopt [11, p. 154]. But most scholars laud PRECIS. Cook writes, for example: "PRE- CIS pre-coordinates in a rather elegant way a sophisticated combination of natural language and controlled vocabulary, and through its reliance on the syntax of language provides a logic not hitherto found in a general system of subject analysis" [12, p. 188]. Weintraub looks to the day when PRECIS is online so that we can have a record of all search attempts and can then "learn from such data more than we presently know concerning the appropriate lead terms and forms of subject names" [7, p. 115]. Someday we will also know how well the subject vocabulary matches users' search vocabulary. Up to this point, any evaluative analysis of the choice and order of terms selected by using LCSH and PRECIS can be only subjective. This article undertakes to compare how subject entries for works about music have been established through LCSH as opposed to how they have been established by the British Library's application of PRECIS. For the sake of brevity, I will simply use the word PRECIS when referring to its application by the British Library. Methodology3 I began my research by gathering a group of cataloged entries dealing exclusively with music from works found in the 1981 British National Bibliography [BNB]: Index under "music" and in the 1981 BNB: Subjects in the 780 Dewey class field. In choosing 1981, I was able to compile a relatively current group of works that were not so current as to fail to be in the desired American bibliographic sources. With each document, I noted the bibliographic information as well as the PRECIS string(s). I 3. I am greatly indebted to P. Richmond for her methodology and organization. I have relied on her work in this and the following two sections [13, pp. 104-5].
LCSH AND PRECIS IN MUSIC 195 then tried to find cataloging for the same documents with Library of Congress subject headings. Quantitative Analysis Of the 477 appropriate works in the 1981 BNB, 188 had been cata- loged by the Library of Congress at the time of my search. For these 188 works there are 322 LC subject headings and 449 PRECIS entires.4 One hundred forty-five subject entries shared by PRECIS and LCSH are so similar that if both were combined in a single catalog or index, they would almost be redundant. Table I can be compiled by borrowing Phyllis Richmond's method of breaking down the quantitative differ- ences between PRECIS and LC subject entries [13, p. 104]. TABLE 1 N % Group 1 (LCSH exceeds PRECIS) 23 12.2 Group 2 (both equal) 59 31.4 Group 3 (PRECIS exceeds LCSH by 1) 67 35.7 Group 4 (PRECIS exceeds LCSH by 2 +) 39 20.7 Total 188 100.0 Well over half of the documents have twice as many PRECIS entries as LCSH entries. Almost one-third are equal in number, and only one- tenth of the documents have fewer PRECIS entries than LCSH entries. The more broad and generic a work, the lower the number of PRECIS entries. Of the 22 generic works (e.g., class 780.0), 6 have more LC subject headings than PRECIS, and 12 have the same number of LCSH and PRECIS entries. Books dealing with specific places (organizations, institutions, cities, etc.) have the highest number of PRECIS entries compared with LCSH. PRECIS often assigns lead terms to the specific places themselves (museums, schools, opera houses, etc.), as well as to the places' city, borough, state, or country. Quantitatively, PRECIS leads LCSH. 4. Each subject analysis system has its own preferred terms for what LCSH calls subject headings. Other terms are "subject entry," "subject statement," "descriptor," "identifier," and "access point." Whenever it is too difficult to do otherwise, this article will use the term "subject entries."
196 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Qualitative Analysis For qualitative analysis the small sample of 188 works provides good examples of the strengths and weaknesses of both PRECIS and LCSH. Example 15 A (B,LC): Race, Steve T: Dear music lover D: 780 PRECIS: 1. Music LCSH: 1. Music-Addresses, essays, lectures 2. Music-Anecdotes, facetiae, satire, etc. Several works have only one term in PRECIS. This is peculiar since the additional information provided in example I by LCSH proves helpful. PRECIS could have added "-personal observations," as it has in other examples. This would have made the focus of the work cited more understandable, and it would likely have been remembered by the typical subject searcher. On the other hand, by attempting to avoid single-term headings, LCSH frequently resorts to phrases that lose their value by being overused (for example, "-History and criticism") or, at worst, are unlikely to be consulted by the untrained user (for example, "Anecdotes, facetiae, satire, etc."). Example 2a A: (editor: Stanley Sadie) T (B,LC): The new Grove dictionary of music and musicians D: 780.32 1 PRECIS: 1. Music-Encyclopaedias LCSH: 1. Music-Dictionaries 2. Music-Bio-bibliography Example 2b A (B,LC): Roche, Jerome T: A dictionary of early music: from the troubadours to Monteverdi D: 780.90203 PRECIS: 1. Music, 1000-1643-Encyclopacdias LCSH: 1. Music-Dicionaries-English PRECIS frequently has dates following the lead term. In theory dates should be helpful, but in practice entries with dates (example 2b) cannot be interfiled with equivalent entries without dates (example 2a). If a catalog, index, or database grew large, the distance between "Music- Encyclopaedias" and "Music, 1000-1643-Encyclopaedias" would make ac- 5. A = author, UT = uniform title, T = title, D = Dewey classification number, B = main entry according to BNB, LC = main entry according to LC cataloging.
LCSH AND PRECIS IN MUSIC 197 cess to both entries unlikely once one had been found. The Wollongong report expresses concern over this problem. It illustrates a situation in which a student searched under the term "Victorian" and found nothing in the PRECIS catalog [14, p. 55]. The decision made by the creators of PRECIS to avoid this sort of terminology may prove troublesome. If a reference structure from names of historic periods to their corre- sponding dates were included, the problem might be alleviated some- what; yet each group of dates used in PRECIS strings is unique to the book described, which makes it unlikely that such cross-references would take care of the entire problem. The span of dates needed by the searcher would not always match those of the book PRECIS is describ- ing. The searcher more likely would try to accommodate his dates to some sort of numerical or historical logic. Unfortunately, with PRECIS, this logic does not work. PRECIS's approach to dates differs radically from LCSH's approach. When using chronological subdivisions, LCSH names historic periods in its cross-reference structure and then divides dates by century. Lest we forget, however, LCSH is flawed in these examples (2a and 2b) as well. Why do they distinguish only one dictio- nary as English when they are both in English? For that matter, why has LCSH decided that instead of dealing with the distinction between dictionaries and encyclopedias, they simply never use a form subdivision "-Encyclopedias" even though this is certainly what any student un- familiar with LC's peculiarities would think to look under. For such a searcher, trying to predict what subject headings LC will assign a work is frequently more difficult than predicting the weather. Example 3 A (LC): American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers T (B): ASCAP biographical dictionary D: 780.922 PRECIS: 1. Music. United States Composers. Organizations: American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers. Members -Biographies 2. Composers. Music. United States Organizations: American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers. Members-Biographies 3. American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers. Members-Biographies LCSH: 1. American society of composers, authors and publishers -Biography 2. Music-United States-Bio-bibliography Every PRECIS entry makes it explicitly clear what this book is about: biographies of ASCAP members. The first LC subject heading, on the other hand, leaves room for confusion. One might imagine that it is a
198 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY biography of ASCAP founding members. The second LC subject head- ing fails to define the book's biographic scope beyond geographic limits. But we must not forget that LCSH was designed for a one-step search process. Consequendy, the full citation usually exists in card catalogs under each LC subject heading. However, with an online catalog, each search would probably become a multiple-step process exposing the ambiguities of many LC subject headings. If PRECIS were used, the online searcher could rely on the subject entry alone for his initial decision as to whether the work is what is needed. Example 4 A(B): National Trust A(LC): Russell, Raymond T: A catalogue of early keyboard instruments: the Benton Fletcher Collection D: 786.207402 142 PRECIS: 1. Fenton House Exhibits: keyboard string instruments. Collections. Benton Fletcher collection-Catalogues 2. Keyboard instruments. Exhibits. Fenton House Keyboard stnrng instruments. Collections: Benton Fletcher collection-Catalogues 3. Benton Fletcher collection. Exhibits. Fenton House- Caalogues 4. London Camden (London Borough). Houses. Fenton House Exhibits: keyboard string instruments: Collections: Benton Fletcher collection-Catalogues 5. Camden (London Borough) Houses: Fenton House. Exhibits: keyboard string instruments. Collections: Benton Fletcher collection- Catalogues LCSH: 1v Keyboard instruments-Catalogs and collections 2. Benton Fletcher collection The large group of PRECIS entries in example 4 may be more helpful to an Englishman than to anyone else. People who seek, for example, exhibition catalogs of early keyboard instruments would not look under Camden, and perhaps not even London, during their subject search. However, those who want, for example, to find all information on what has been exhibited at the Fenton House would have easy access through this PRECIS subject entry, which is not duplicated in the LC subject headings. Example 5a A (B,LC): Strauss, Richard, 1864-1949 UT: Correspondence. English
LCSH AND PRECIS IN MUSIC 199 T: The correspondence between Richard Strauss and Hugo von Hofmannsthal D: 780.924 and 831.912 PRECIS: [First-string headings] 1. German music Strauss, Richard-Correspondence, diaries, etc. 2. Strauss, Richard. German music -Correspondence, diaries, etc. 3. Music. German music. Strauss, Richard -Correspondence, diaries, etc. [Second-string headings] 1. Poetry in German. Hofmannsthal, Hugo von -Correspondence, diaries, etc. 2. Hofmannsthal, Hugo von. Poetry in German -Correspondence, diaries, etc. LCSH: 1. Strauss, Richard, 1864-1949 2. Hofmannsthal, Hugo Hofmann Elder von, 1874-1929 3. Composers-Germany-Correspondence 4. Authors, Austrian-20th century-Correspondence Example 5b A (B,LC): Fenby, Eric, 1906- T: Delius as I knew him D: 780.924 PRECIS: 1. English music Delius, Frederick-Personal observations 2. Delius, Frederick. English music -Personal observations 3. Music. English Music. Delius, Frederick -Personal observations LCSH: 1. Delius, Frederick, 1862-1934 2. Composers-France-Biography 3. Fenby, Eric, 1906- Examples 5a and 5b would be most useful in a catalog or index if the PRECIS and LCSH entries were combined and the overused and less specific LCSH personal name entries were dropped in favor of the personal name entries given in PRECIS. Here, unlike in example 3, PRECIS chooses not to use "composers" as a lead term or "Fenby" as a part of any string. LCSH, on the other hand, uses both. Example 6a A (B,LC): Harrowven, Jean T: The origins of rhymes, songs, and sayings D: 398.8 and 784 PRECIS: [First-string headings] 1. Songs in English to 1980. Origins
200 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 2. Origins. Songs in English, to 1980 [Second-string headings] 1. Rhymes in English to 1980. Origins 2. Origins. Rhymes in English, to 1980 LCSH: 1. Folk-lore-Great Britain 2. Folk-poetry, English-History and criticism 3. Folk-songs-Great Britain Exampk 6b A (BLC): Baum, Harold T: The Biochemists' songbook D: 784.68574192 PRECIS: 1. Songs in English Special subjects: Biochemistry. Words-Texts 2. Biochemistry. Special subjects. Songs in English -Texts 3. Words. Biochemistry. Special subjects. Songs in English -Texts LCSHI: 1. Songs, English 2. Biological chemistry In example 6a PRECIS uses the strange lead term "origins" and does not include the related, implicit aspect of folklore as does LCSH. Again, combining the two would be much more useful. Example 6b provides a beautiful example of LCSH's multitopical treatment of a multielement work as explained in Svenonius and Schmierer's article [5, p. 338]. The results here approach the hilarious. Example 7a A (B,LC): Goossens, Leon, 1897- T: Oboe D: 788.709 PRECIS: 1. Oboe music, to 1980 2. Oboe playing 3. Oboes LCSH: 1. Oboe-Instruction and study Example 7b A (B,LC): Norman, Herbert T: The organ today D: 786.62 PRECIS: 1. Musical instruments. Pipe organs to 1979 2. Pipe organs. Musical instruments to 1979 3. Organs. Musical instruments Pipe organs to 1979 LCSH: 1. Organ.
LCSH AND PRECIS IN MUSIC 201 PRECIS gives a much more thorough analysis of the works, and it presents usable search terms in examples 7a and 7b. LCSH, on the other hand, gives the absolute minimum. Example 8a A (B,LC): Ammer, Christine T: Unsung: a history of women in American music D: 781.773088042 PRECIS: 1. Music American music. Role of women, 1790-1980 2. Women Role in American music, 1790-1980 3. American music Role of women, 1790-1980 LCSH: 1. Women musicians 2. Women composers 3. Musicians-United States Example 8b A (B,LC): Sampson, Henry T., 1934- T: Blacks in Blackface: A source book on early black musical shows D: 782.8108996073 PRECIS: 1. Musical shows featuring coloured artists American musical shows featuring coloured artists, 1900-1940 2. American musical shows featuring coloured artists, 1900-1940 LCSH: 1. Musical revues, comedy, etc.-United States 2. Afro-American entertainers Example 8c A (B,LC): Handy, D. Antoinette, 1930- T: Black women in American bands and orchestras D: 785.0922 PRECIS: 1. Bands. Music. United States Negro women instrumentalists, to 1979 2. Orchestras. United States Negro women instrumentalists, to 1979 3. Negro instrumentalists. Bands and orchestras Music. United States Negro women instrumentalists, to 1979 4. Women instrumentalists. Bands and orchestras Music. United States Negro women instrumentalists, to 1979 LCSH: 1. Afro-American women musicians In these examples, PRECIS exhibits serious problems. In example 8a, when it is not in the lead term, "women" is hidden alphabetically behind
202 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY the words "role of" or "role in." There are many entries under the term "music," and yet one of the most important subject terms in this entry (women) is alphabetically hidden behind four words other than "music." The problem is not much better in the entry beginning with "American music." A similar problem is evident in example 8b, but added to that is a problem with terminology. Example 8b uses the term "coloured," but 8c uses the term "Negro." In example 8c there are no lead terms that have "Negro" and "women" next to each other, even though they are among the most important terms in the work. These examples demonstrate one of PRECIS's biggest problems: with long entries certain terms of significance are separated and can never be recombined in any order of importance. Consequently, when the entries are alphabetically filed, some import4nt words are rendered insignificant because of their posi- tion. The LCSH entries in examples 8a-8c are sometimes too few in number, but, except for "Musical revues .. . ," they are reasonable. Example 9a A (BLC): Herman, Gary T: Rock'n'roll babylon D: 784.540922 PRECIS: 1. Rock music. Stars 2. Stars. Rock music LCSH: 1. Rock music-History and criticism Exampk 9b A (B,LC): John, Elton T: The Elton John tapes D: 784.500924 PRECIS: 1. Pop music English pop music. John, Elton-Interviews 2. John, Elton. English pop music -Inteviews LCSH: 1. John, Elton 2. Rock musicians-Interviews The peculiarities in the PRECIS terms here may simply be a result of Britishisms. It seems as if "pop music" and "rock music" are used in different circumstances but for reasons that are obscure. Is "stars" more a British term than an American one? On the other hand, LCSH is too vague. There are several examples throughout this study like the one shown in the first LC entry of example 9b: the names are alone without any further distinguishing terms. Why does LCSH choose not to add more distinguishing words or phrases, such as "Interviews" or "Corre- spondence, diaries, etc.," to personal names?
LCSH AND PRECIS IN MUSIC 203 Example lOa A (B,LC): Sears, Richard S. T: V-discs: a history and discography D: 016.789912 PRECIS: 1. Music V-disc sound discs-Discographies 2. Sound discs. Music V-disc sound discs-Discographies 3. V-disc sound discs. Music -Discographies LCSH: 1. Music-Discography 2. World war, 1939-1945-Music and the war Example lOb A (B,LC): Ruppli, Michel T: The Savoy label: a discography D: 016.789912 PRECIS: 1. Music Savoy sound recordings-Discographies 2. Sound recordings. Music Savoy sound recordings-Discographies 3. Savoy recordings. Music Savoy sound recordings-Discographies LCSH: 1. Music, popular songs, etc.- United States-Discography 2. Jazz music-Discography 3. Savoy Record Company Example IOc A (B,LC): Ruppli, Michel T: The Prestige label: a discography D: 016.789912.542 PRECIS: 1. Jazz Prestige sound recordings-Discographies 2. Sound recordings Prestige sound recordings. Jazz -Discographies 3. Prestige sound recordings. Jazz Discographies LCSH: 1. Jazz music-United States-Discography 2. Blues (Songs, etc.)-Discography 3. Gospel music-United States-Discography Example lOd A (B,LC): Hodgins, Gordon W., 1943- T: The Broadway musical: a complete LP discography D: 016.789912.281
204 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY PRECIS: 1. New York (City) Broadway. Musical shows in English, to 1979. Long playing sound discs-Discographies 2. Broadway. New York (City) Musical shows in English, to 1979. Long playing sound discs-Discographies 3. Musical shows in English. Broadway. New York (City) to 1979. Long playing sound discs-Discographies 4. Sound discs. Musical shows in English, to 1979 Broadway. New York (City) Long playing sound discs-Discographies 5. Long playing sound discs. Musical shows in English, to 1979. Broadway. New York (City)-Discographies LCSH: 1. Musical revues, comedies, etc.-Discography In these examples, PRECIS uses terms that are confusing if not unnecessary. There is no clear distinction between "sound discs" and "sound recordings." One would assume that "sound recordings" encom- passes cassettes as well as discs, but this is not consistently reflected in the PRECIS strings; compare examples lOc and lOd. The Prestige label produced only discs, yet "sound recordings" is used here. Example lOa shows still another case where, if PRECIS and LCSH were combined, the results would be helpful to any user. Why does the PRECIS string in example lOb not include 'jazz"? Prestige and Savoy are both jazz labels. Why does the PRECIS string in example lOc not include "Gospel music" or at least "blues"? In the examples, PRECIS inadequately describes multitopical works, just as LCSH in earlier examples inadequately de- scribes multielemental works. Conclusions It is impossible to draw tidy conclusions from this study. Nevertheless, it is certain that PRECIS-I will continue to use this term to refer to the British Library's application of the system-has potentials for online catalog use that LCSH could never hope to have in its present state. First, PRECIS's language as established by the British Library is current, and when PRECIS goes online, its terminology will be easy to keep current. Second, online subject searches have been, and I suspect will continue to be, two-step processes. PRECIS has been designed for this probability. LCSH, which was designed before computers existed even in our dreams, would prove inadequate if, as it exists now, it were to be used in two-step searches. For that matter, any type of LCSH catalog or index that would not have full bibliographic information attached to each subject heading would not be a very useful means of subject access. Subject searchers still rely heavily on the bibliographic information that
LCSH AND PRECIS IN MUSIC 205 accompanies LC subject headings in traditional card catalogs. Third, in a world where interdisciplinary research is growing ever more common, LCSH will become progressively more problematic because of the reluc- tance of LC to add multielement headings to its thesaurus. PRECIS, on the other hand, adjusts itself easily to interdisciplinary studies. If PRECIS were purged of its language inconsistencies and redundan- cies, if it would allow for random word searches from all the words in its string so that the arrangement of words in longer strings would not be a problem, if a thesaurus were readily available, and if American ter- minology were exchanged for British, then it would be a grand system for online catalogs in American libraries. However, as it stands now, PRECIS would not be a much better solution than LCSH when used in card catalogs or in any catalog where full bibliographic information accompanies each subject entry. However, there are still some areas where PRECIS would be an improvement over LCSH even in such card catalogs. For example, LCSH and PRECIS often have the same lead terms in their subject entries. Yet while PRECIS frequently chooses to define the statement further, LCSH often overuses these lead terms as the complete subject statement. In these cases searches through PRECIS would be more productive. The extremely long PRECIS strings, on the other hand, which by their length obscure their major subject elements, would be frequently less satisfying than their LCSH counterparts during a subject search. If the strengths of each system were efficiently com- bined to be used for single step searches, the result would be an im- provement over either system alone. Ideally the two subject approaches could be combined so that the strengths of each system could complement each other. LCSH could make multielement works accessible, and PRECIS could make mul- titopic works accessible. If combined in an online catalog with single and random word order search capabilities, LCSH's problems of unpredict- able word inversions as well as the problems with PRECIS's longer strings would be alleviated. This, combined with title terms, was recom- mended in the Wollongong Report [14, pp. 150-5 1]. It is an exciting but expensive suggestion. REFERENCES 1. Fawcett, Trevor. "Subject Indexing in the Visual Arts." Arts LibrariesJournal 4 (1979): 5-17. 2. Dykstra, Mary. "A Complete Delivery Service for Canadian Non-Print Media." Cana- dian Journal of Information Science 3 (May 1978): 190-98. 3. Dykstra, Mary. Access to Film Information: An Indexing and Retrieval System for the National Film Board of Canada. Halifax, Nova Scotia: Dalhousie University, 1977.
206 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 4. Janke, Richard V. "Time for an Alternative." Ontario Library Review 63 (September 1979): 200-205. 5. Svenonius, Elaine, and Schmierer, Helen P. "Current Issues in the Subject Control of Information." Library Quartey 47 (July 1977): 326-46. 6. Lipetz, Ben-Ami. User Requirements in Idntfying Desired Works in a Large Library. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Library, 1970. ED 042479 7. Weintraub, D. Kathryn. "An Extended Review of PRECIS." Library Resources and Technical Serices 23 (Spring 1979): 101-15. 8. Mandell, Carol A. Sutbect Access in the Online Catalog. Washington, D.C.: Council on Library Resources, 1981. ED 212286 9. Peters, Helen. "User Reactions to PRECIS in the British Education Index." Education Libraries Index 24, Pt. 2 (whole no. 71) (1981): 27. 10. Bakewell, K. G. B. "Indexers' Reactions to PRECIS." Journal of Documentation 35 (September 1979): 164-78. 11. Library of Congress Information Bulktin (March 3, 1978), pp. 154-55. 12. Cook, C. Donald. "The Practical Possibilities of PRECIS in North America." In The PRECIS Index System: Principles, Applications and Prospects, edited by Hans H. Wellisch. New York: H. W. Wilson, 1977. 13. Richmond, Phyllis A. "PRECIS Compared with Other Indexing Systems." In The PRECIS Index System: Pinciples, Applcato and Prospects, edited by Hans H. Wellisch. New York: H. W. Wilson, 1977. 14. Hunt, Roslyn, et al. PRECIS, LCSH, and KWOC: Report of a Research Project Designed to Examine the Applicabity of PRECIS to the Sutbect Catalogue of an Academic Library. Wollongong: University of Wollongong Library, 1976-77.