F R OM TH E E D I T O R SAftermath of the 2016 US Presidential Election for Libraries: Axioms, Foxes, and the Urgencies of Now Paul T. Jaeger, Ursula Gorham, Natalie Greene Taylor, and Karen Kettnichhe 2016 presidential campaign in the United States, the outcome of that campaign,T and the policies that have been implemented since the 2017 inauguration pose somany challenges for the roles and activities of libraries and archives that an excoria- tion of these challenges could begin in many different places. For example, one could focus on the “othering” and dehumanizing of so many populations—racial, ethnic, and religious minor- ities; people with disabilities; immigrants and refugees; people living in poverty; the “nasty women”—who have long struggled for equity and inclusion in society. The institutions of our field have long devoted efforts to promoting the inclusion of each of these populations (Jaeger, Taylor, and Gorham 2015; Gorham, Taylor, and Jaeger 2016; Jaeger and Sarin 2016a, 2016b). As such, the discourse surrounding the 2016 presidential campaign was a strike at the essence of our institutions. If so many of the people who rely on our institutions—pop- ulations whose rights our institutions have often been at the forefront of advocating—are not valued, then most assuredly our institutions are not valued either. A razor-sharp example of these contrasting values about inclusion can be found in the in- clusion of persons with disabilities. Libraries were the first societal institution to regularly treat people with disabilities as people and to include them in the mission of the institutions; some libraries have continually had special collections and services for people with disabilities since the mid-1800s (Bertot and Jaeger 2015; Wentz, Jaeger, and Bertot 2015). However, in the 2016 presidential campaign—despite 2015 being the twenty-fifth anniversary of the landmark Americans with Disabilities Act—the eventual winner of the presidency only referred to dis- ability when blaming people with disabilities for violence, mocking people with disabilities, and claiming that he never mocked people with disabilities despite video clearly showing him doing so (Cork et al. 2016). Perhaps more pragmatically, one could focus instead on the financial challenges facing the institutions of our field. Such challenges are not new, as demonstrated by the ongoing erosionLibrary Quarterly: Information, Community, Policy, vol. 87, no. 3, pp. 189–194. © 2017 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-2519/2017/8703-0001$10.00 189
190 • The Library Quarterlyof the public sphere at the hands of the neoliberal economic philosophy for nearly the past 4 decades (Buschman, 2003, 2012; Jaeger et al. 2014). A flurry of recent activity, however, has created additional concerns. The Republican Study Committee, an influential source of policy ideas among conservatives, is advocating the defunding and closure of multiple federal agen- cies that support libraries and archives, including the Institute for Museum and Library Ser- vices, the National Endowment of the Arts, and the National Endowment for the Humanities. Emboldened by overwhelming conservative victories at the national and state levels, many county and city officials are beginning to target the closure of public and school libraries as part of antitax platforms (such challenges and the responses of our field are chronicled by the vital EveryLibrary organization). The federal hiring freeze could significantly affect the Library of Congress, the National Archives and Records Administration, the Smithsonian Insti- tution, and countless other federal libraries and archives. The new secretary of education has no experience in public schools and, during her confirmation hearings, demonstrated a desire to shift funds to voucher programs. The implementation of these new policies and initiatives will have short- and long-term adverse impacts on public schools, public libraries, and other institutions that serve the public good. Another approach could be to focus on how broader policies will affect information insti- tutions and information professionals. The George W. Bush administration, the most recent previous US presidential administration with a strong belief in neoliberal economics, offloaded many government responsibilities—especially helping residents with online government forms and services—onto the institutions of our field (Jaeger, Bertot, and Gorham 2013). It also cre- ated many laws and policies—most notably the USA PATRIOT Act and the Homeland Security Act—that directly shaped the operations of the institutions of our field. We stood up to many intrusions into the privacy and freedom of expression of patrons and worked to educate the public about these intrusions. It seems likely that the very conservative and activist new ad- ministration will produce similarly lively policy impacts. The new administration’s relentless criticism of any media organization that disagrees with the president demonstrates a lack of respect toward such values as freedom of expression that are central to the information pro- fessions. Turmoil in the political arena also creates issues related to the services provided by infor- mation institutions, particularly to those most in need. As the social safety net erodes in var- ious ways, more people will need our institutions. We lived through this experience less than a decade ago. At the height of the Great Recession, usage of our institutions spiked as more peo- ple had greater needs for Internet education and access and for materials they could no longer afford to purchase (Jaeger, Gorham, Sarin, and Bertot 2013; Jaeger et al. 2014). Unfortunately, the budgets and infrastructure of many institutions have yet to recover from the large usage increases during the Great Recession. Furthermore, the voices of the populations who most rely on our institutions, because they are those being othered and dehumanized by the new
From the Editors • 191administration, will not likely carry much weight in political discussions about the impor- tance and contributions of our institutions. The unfortunate reality is that all of these perspectives are intertwined. Financial support may well plummet, political headwinds will likely accelerate to hurricane strength, and many of the key populations we serve seem likely to face increasing discrimination and isolation. But we will still be there to serve our communities. We must endure. We must persist. The ines- capable question is how to survive and adapt without losing the utterly unique nature of our profession, our institutions, and our contributions to our communities and society as a whole. This issue of Library Quarterly and the next issue are twinned special issues titled “After- math: Libraries, Democracy, and the 2016 Presidential Election,” featuring essays by a variety of scholars, educators, and advocates who we believe will make valuable contributions to the ongoing discussions about the meaning of the 2016 presidential election to our profession and our institutions. Across these two issues, you will find many insights, perspectives, and sugges- tions as to what our profession and our institutions can and should do next. The Two Issues In this issue, we present eight articles that touch on many of the themes and topics related to the role of libraries and other information institutions in society that LQ often addresses: eq- uitable access to information, information literacy, and diversity and inclusion. These articles, taken together, paint a vivid picture of the challenges and opportunities that lie ahead of us. The issue opens with two articles that clearly articulate why ongoing discussions about “fake news” are of such importance to our profession at this moment in time: “Alternatives to Apathy and Indifference: Civic Education in Public Libraries” by Jenny S. Bossaller and “Posttruth, Truthiness, and Alternative Facts: Information Behavior and Critical Information Consumption for a New Age” by Nicole A. Cooke. These ongoing discussions, at their core, are about information literacy, and we are pleased to present a range of articles that highlight the intersection of information literacy and (1) race (“Teaching to Dismantle White Supremacy in Archives” by Michelle Caswell and “Remotivating the Black Vote: The Effect of Low-Quality Information on Black Voters in the 2016 Presidential Election and How Librarians Can Inter- vene” by Andrew P. Jackson [Sekou Molefi Baako], Denyvetta Davis, and Jason Kelly Alston); (2) ethnicity (“Information Sources of Latin American Immigrants in the Rural Midwest in the Trump Era” by Denice Adkins, Heather Moulaison Sandy, and Jorge Derpic); and (3) class (“From the One-Mule Tenant Farmer to the Hillbilly Highway: How Librarians Can Support the White Working Class” by Kathleen de la Peña McCook). These articles offer some insight into how libraries and archives can serve their communities during these uncertain times, but many questions remain about what libraries can and should do now. And so this issue closes with two articles that reflect on the core values of librarianship that serve to reinforce why it is so important—now more than ever—that we remain committed to these values: “Opposing
192 • The Library QuarterlyCensorship in Difficult Times” by Emily J. M. Knox and “November 8, 2016: Core Values, Bad Faith, and Democracy” by John Buschman. Our second of these paired special issues, coming in October 2017, will continue the lines of inquiry introduced here. It will explore such topics as cross-cultural Canadian–American teach- ing, modes of combating otherness and promoting empathy, LIS education focused on com- munity engagement and empowerment, responses in youth and children’s services, teaching information literacy in the university library, and drivers of change in LIS. The Librarian's Axiom Throughout the history of the modern library movement, politics and economics have created many challenges for the institutions of our field. It is so well established that economic down- turns led to increases in demand on the institutions of our field that the relationship is simply known as the “ librarian’s axiom”—a bad economy means less funding and greater usage. Stud- ies have established this relationship in many times of economic challenge (e.g., Nyquist 1968; James 1985, 1986; Berman 1998; Lynch 2002; Davis 2009, 2011), but the Great Depression of the 1930s may be the starkest example. During the Great Depression, library services and materials were “eagerly sought” and “contributed something to the lessening of social ills” (Herdman 1943, 334) during a difficult period. The demand for library books and for reference services skyrocketed; between 1930 and 1932, circulation at libraries around the country jumped by 25% to 30% annually, although those average increases were down to 14% by 1935, as libraries had fewer intact materials left for patrons to borrow (Waples, Carnovsky, and Randall 1932; Herdman 1943). The increased demand coupled with budget decreases left many libraries with decimated collections by the end of the Depression (Kramp [1975] 2010). A lack of funds drove libraries to stop buying materials and hiring new employees—a whole generation of library school graduates had to take jobs without pay for several years simply to be able to work in their chosen fields (Shera 1933). Yet, the needs of patrons during this time also led to expansions of services for unemployed adults and for children, creating “a broader concept of community service” (Ennis and Fryden 1960, 253) that continues to this day. So, during the Great Depression, our institutions were balancing greatly increased usage, decimated collections, eviscerated budgets, and even librarians working without pay. And what did we do when confronting these seemingly insurmountable challenges? We used the crisis to establish innovative new services that define our field today. The situation encapsulated within the librarian’s axiom can be seen as the summation of awful conditions or as a badge of honor celebrating the ability of our field to find ways to help others regardless of what is happening to our institutions. We are clever, we are adaptable, and we are dedicated to the public good, even when there is not much interest in either the public
From the Editors • 193or the good by political leaders. Over the coming years, this will be an important lesson to keep in mind. Sharp as a Whip, Tough as an Ox We have faced many economic and political challenges over the past 2 centuries and found ways not only to survive but to expand our contributions. Based on this unique ability, we have previously argued that our field is one of foxes, based on the classic metaphor of the hedgehog and the fox (see Jaeger et al. 2014). In the seventh century BCE, Greek poet Ar- chilochus wrote, “The fox knows many things, but the hedgehog knows one big thing.” Foxes “pursue many ends, often unrelated, and even contradictory,” and hedgehogs “relate every- thing to a single central vision” (Berlin 1953, 3). In the natural world, foxes—amazingly adapt- able in habit, diet, and living quarters—have flourished in both urban and rural environments, whereas the population of hedgehogs, who keep to established behaviors, is declining quickly. Our field could not be more foxlike, metaphorically speaking. Foxes are intellectual gath- ers—adapting to changes, taking many approaches to a problem, seeing many possible out- comes, dealing well with uncertainty and complexity, practicing self-reflection, and examining problems in a multidisciplinary manner. Our field perpetually changes and innovates to meet community needs as they arise, continually redefining what we do for our patrons. Our insti- tutions collect a wide assortment of multidisciplinary information sources and materials to meet a broad range of information needs, repeatedly taking stands in support of freedom of expression and freedom of access to diverse perspectives and opinions. Based on a track record of overcoming challenges and finding new ways to succeed in our mission, the fox will survive whatever is next in politics and economics. But the people who rely on our institutions—many of whom are targets of the current political discourse—will need the services and support of our field more than ever. We may not be able to turn the entire world around in the next few years, but we will be able to help many individuals and many communities—and maybe even help shape the public discourse about these chal- lenges. The articles in this issue and the next of Library Quarterly will hopefully be of great service as we work to meet the many “urgencies of now” faced by our patrons, our commu- nities, and our field. References Berlin, Isaiah. 1953. The Hedgehog and the Fox: An Essay on Tolstoy's View of History. New York: Simon & Schuster. Berman, Sanford. 1998. “On My Mind—Libraries, Class, and the Poor People’s Policy.” American Libraries 29 (3): 38. Bertot, John C., and Paul T. Jaeger. 2015. “The ADA and Inclusion in Libraries: Libraries Have Been and Continue to Be Champions for Access.” American Libraries, October 15. http://americanlibrariesmagazine .org/blogs/the-scoop/ada-inclusion-in-libraries/.
194 • The Library QuarterlyBuschman, John E. 2003. Dismantling the Public Sphere: Situating and Sustaining Librarianship in the Age of the New Public Philosophy. Westport, CT: Libraries Unlimited. Buschman, John E. 2012. Libraries, Classrooms, and the Interests of Democracy: Marking the Limits of Neoliberalism. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow. Cork, Stephanie J., Paul T. Jaeger, Shannon Jette, and Stefanie Ebrahimoff. 2016. “The Politics of (Dis)infor- mation: ‘Crippled America,’ the Twenty-Fifth Anniversary of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), and the 2016 United States Presidential Campaign.” International Journal of Information, Diversity, and Inclusion 1. http://publish.lib.umd.edu/IJIDI/article/view/273. Davis, D. M. 2009. “Challenges to Sustaining Library Technology.” Public Libraries 48 (4): 12–17. Davis, D. M. 2011. “Public Library Funding: An Overview and Discussion.” In Public Libraries and the Internet: Roles, Perspectives, and Implications, edited by J. C. Bertot, P. T. Jaeger, and C. R. McClure. Westport, CT: Libraries Unlimited. Ennis, Philip H., and Floyd N. Fryden. 1960. “The Library in the Community: Use Studies Revisited.” Library Quarterly 30 (4): 253–65. Gorham, Ursula, Natalie G. Taylor, and Paul T. Jaeger. 2016. Perspectives on Libraries as Institutions of Human Rights and Social Justice. London: Emerald. Herdman, Margaret M. 1943. “The Public Library in Depression.” Library Quarterly 13 (4): 310–34. Jaeger, Paul T., John C. Bertot, and Ursula Gorham. 2013. “Wake Up the Nation: Public Libraries, Policy Making, and Political Discourse.” Library Quarterly 83 (1): 61–72. Jaeger, Paul T., Ursula Gorham, John C. Bertot, and Lindsay C. Sarin. 2014. Public Libraries, Public Policies, and Political Processes: Serving and Transforming Communities in Times of Economic and Political Constraint. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield. Jaeger, Paul T., Ursula Gorham, Lindsay C. Sarin, and John C. Bertot. 2013. “Libraries, Policy, and Politics in a Democracy: The Four Historical Epochs.” Library Quarterly 83 (2): 166–81. Jaeger, Paul T., and Lindsay C. Sarin. 2016a. “All Librarianship Is Political: Educate Accordingly.” Political Librarian 2 (1): 17–27. http://openscholarship.wustl.edu/pllib/vol2/iss1/8. Jaeger, Paul T., and Lindsay C. Sarin. 2016b. “The Politically Engaged Public Library: Admitting and Em- bracing the Political Nature of Libraries and Their Goals.” Public Library Quarterly 35 (4): 325–30. Jaeger, Paul T., Natalie Greene Taylor, and Ursula Gorham. 2015. Libraries, Human Rights, and Social Justice: Enabling Access and Promoting Inclusion. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield. James, Stephen E. 1985. “The Relationship between Local Economic Conditions and the Use of Public Li- braries.” Library Quarterly 55 (3): 255–72. James, Stephen E. 1986. “Economic Hard Times and Public Library Use: A Close Look at the Librarians’ Axiom.” Public Library Quarterly 7 (3–4): 61–70. Kramp, Robert Scott. (1975) 2010. The Great Depression: Its Impact on Forty-Six Large American Public Libraries. Duluth, MN: Library Juice. Lynch, Mary Jo. 2002. “Economic Hard Times and Public Library Use Revisited.” American Libraries 33 (7): 62–63. Nyquist, Ewald B. 1968. “Poverty, Prejudice, and the Public Library.” Library Quarterly 38 (1): 78–89. Shera, J. H. 1933. “Recent Social Trends and Future Library Policy.” Library Quarterly 3 (4): 339–53. Waples, Douglas, Leon Carnovsky, and William M. Randall. 1932. “The Public Library in the Depression.” Library Quarterly 2 (4): 321–43. Wentz, Brian, Paul T. Jaeger, and John C. Bertot. 2015. Accessibility for Persons with Disabilities and the Inclusive Future of Libraries. London: Emerald.