Profiles of Constituent Groups Indicators of Effectiveness of Schools of Library and Information Studies Rebecca Watson-Boone and Darlene E. Weingand This article is the first in a series of reports on the indicators and dimensions of effectiveness that constituents of American Library Association (ALA)-accredited programs of library and information studies (LIS) believe are useful for evaluating the host schools. Members of the four constituent groups were surveyed: senior academic administrators, ALA's Committee on Accreditation (CO A), employers of alums, and alums. The distinct nature of each constituent group is profiled by focusing on the preference each gives to the placement of seventy effectiveness indicators. In addition, brief description is given of twenty-four indicators upon which the constituent groups exhibit their greatest agreement. SLIS programs do not exist because they independently decide to do so. Gate- keepers of various kinds determine the existence of both the schools and their programs. When senior academic ad- ministrators decide that a school is not essential to the mission of the institu- tion, then employer, alum, and profes- sional association agitation may not be sufficient to reverse the decision.1 Fur- ther, when COA ascertains that a pro- gram does not meet accreditation stand- ards, the school may suffer enrollment and placement declines - jeopardizing its continuation. This may also be the case when employers or prospective students come to believe that a school does not adequately prepare graduates for work or careers, or that it no longer interacts effectively with the practitioner field. Even though one might suspect that academic administrators and employ- ers rely on different criteria or stand- ards to assess the effectiveness of LIS schools, no empirical research has been carried out on this question. The crite- ria used by academic administrators and COA in initiating and conducting program reviews and in deciding issues of program continuance have not been compared - yet these two groups are major gatekeepers. And although em- ployers and alums may differ somewhat on the value of the education received, published comment by these groups may not relay all the criteria on which they base their opinions of schools. 1 04 Volume 36, Number 2
Profiles of Constituent Groups 1 05 About the Authors Rebecca Watson-Boone is President, Center for the Study of Information Professionals, and Dartene Weingand is Professor at the University of Wisconsin-Madison SLIS. This article presents a portion of the research conducted under the 1992 ALISE Research Award. Previous Studies of LIS Programs Previous studies relating to LIS pro- grams have focused, in large part, on what the employer and graduate con- stituencies believe is needed to run a successful library/information agency. The value of the programs has been based on whether the employers of graduates believe they are receiving qualified workers; that is, whether the graduates demonstrate the knowledge and skills to which the employers be- lieve their agencies are entitled.2 Within the academy, studies of the institutional "fit" of LIS programs in- clude Herbert S. White's perception pieces on the quality and ranking of schools in terms of faculty teaching and research, and their attractiveness to prospective students.3 In addition, nu- merous studies have been reported in the literature on how libraries and/or librarians are viewed by non-LIS fac- ulty.4 The few articles and speeches produced by senior academic adminis- trators have focused on libraries, not on LIS schools.5 And although in her dis- sertation research Paris includes senior administrators, she gained their reac- tions after their LIS schools had closed.6 While various publications have looked at libraries and the image of librarians, the constituent literature relating directly to LIS schools is lim- ited. The schools have not been studied with a positive frame, within the con- text of effectiveness. The Childers/Van House Effectiveness Study However, effectiveness has been used as a lens through which to view public li- braries. In 1988-1989, Thomas Childers and Nancy A. Van House conducted a national survey of public libraries' con- stituent groups.7 Their intention was "not to assess the effectiveness of libraries or to identify libraries that were effective, but to help define [emphasis added] ef- fectiveness for public libraries."8 The research of Kim Cameron and others on organizational effectiveness served as background for the study, with Childers and Van House noting that "different constituent groups may adopt different definitions or models of effectiveness, or may have different pri- orities and preferences within the same effectiveness model."9 The Childers/Van House study is notable in that it asked respondents directly about the useful- ness of various criteria (or indicators) and allowed for the comparison of sev- eral key constituent groups. As they noted, the inclusion of constituents "provided perspectives on the public library that are new and important for the library's relationship with its envi- ronment."10 In addition to proving valuable in the public library arena, the methodol- ogy had the potential to be transferable to other settings and was selected as a model that could be adapted for this study. Spring 1995
106 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Project Objectives The objectives of this 1992 ALISE-sup- ported project have been the following: 1. To identify indicators and dimen- sions of effectiveness that are de- scriptive of ALA-accredited LIS programs and that are believed by the schools' constituents to be useful in evaluating the schools' effectiveness 2. To ascertain the similarities and differences in the concepts and in- dicators underlying LIS school evaluations across the constituencies 3 . To see if the results suggest avenues for strengthening current schools, as well as for viewing the future of schools of library and information studies Methodology The Childers/Van House effectiveness research model (1989) was adapted to serve the objectives of this study. The fundamental research question was "What are the indicators and dimen- sions of effectiveness that are descrip- tive of schools with ALA-accredited LIS programs, and that are believed by their constituents to be useful in evaluating the schools' effectiveness?" Literature Review An extensive review was conducted of the literature focusing on LIS schools and programs. Sources included ERIC, LISA, accreditation standards, bibliog- raphies, research reports, and texts. A comprehensive list of six hundred de- scriptive words and phrases was devel- oped, based on the same assumption that guided Childers and Van House: that such "a comprehensive list derived from prior work should diminish the imposition of criteria by investigators and the reflection of their own defini- tion of effectiveness and preferences for dimensions and indicators."11 From the initial indicators, the list was collapsed into progressively smaller, more general sets, using the constant comparative method. The final set con- sisted of seventy statements. These state- ments were formatted into a four-page questionnaire and were arranged alpha- betically in order to deter the clustering of related statements. Questionnaire Design The questionnaire was pretested by rep- resentatives of the constituent groups. The question that served as introduc- tion to the seventy statements was "In describing the effectiveness of a school of library & information studies to a person in a position comparable to yours [emphasis in original], how im- portant would it be for you to know each of the following about that school?" A five-point Likert scale was pro- vided, ranging from 1 ("not important to know") to 5 ("essential to know"); a "no opinion" option was given. Each par- ticipant was asked to rate each of the indicator statements by circling the number that "reflects your opinion." Additional comments were invited. Participants were instructed that they were not rating a particular SLIS, and they were urged not to delegate their response to others. Eligible Programs The fifty-nine ALA-accredited pro- grams comprised the population.12 Pro- grams were then excluded if one or more of the following conditions pertained: ■ The school had been slated to close and the program discontinued. Volume 36, Number 2
Profiles of Constituent Groups 1 07 ■ Restructuring was in process or had been announced. ■ There was not a permanent head (dean/director) of the school. ■ The school/program was under ex- traordinary review. ■ Any of the above conditions oc- curred during data collection. These restrictions reduced the uni- verse of qualified schools to forty-eight. A few schools declined to participate; others did not respond in time. The fi- nal N was thirty- fi ve: 59 percent of all ALA-accredited programs and 73 per- cent of the qualified schools. The Constituent Groups COA Members and Officers from 1986-1991: The Committee on Accredi- tation is a standing committee of the American Library Association and re- ports to the ALA Council. The formal COA charge is "to be responsible for the execution of the accreditation program of ALA, and to develop and formulate standards of education for librarianship for the approval of Council." COA is supported by the director of the ALA Office for Accreditation. The twelve committee members holding two-year staggered terms are "persons of suffi- cient maturity, seasoned judgment, per- sonality, and professional prestige to qualify them as competent visitors and consultants."13 Senior Administrators: Each par- ticipating institution's president, aca- demic vice president, head of the gradu- ate school/college, financial vice president, and the officer to whom the head of the SLIS reported. In some in- stitutions, one individual served in more than one of these roles. Contact information was provided by the par- ticipating schools. These administrators encompass those at the highest levels within the institution who are responsible for aca- demic programs. Their decision-mak- ing authority ranges from initiating the proposal to establishing, reviewing, re- structuring, and retaining or discon- tinuing degree programs/schools. Alumni/ ae of the Schools (Alums): A random sample from the classes of 1980, 1985, and 1990. Schools provided the class lists; where such information is considered confidential, schools were provided with questionnaire ma- terials and conducted the mailings for the researchers. Employers: A representative sam- ple of school, public, academic, and special library/information agency heads from within a two-hundred- mile radius of each participating school. Names of employers were pro- vided by the schools or identified through the 1992 American Library Di- rectory. For school and special libraries, the "employer" listed was generally a principal or CEO, respectively, rather than an individual with the designation "librarian." Although not part of the original research design, the deans/directors of participating LIS schools were sur- veyed. Receipt of the questionnaire also alerted the deans/directors to what their senior administrators were being asked to consider. Questionnaire Distribution Two mailings were conducted between July and October 1992. Distribution in- cluded thirty-four U.S. states, Guam, the West Indies, and five Canadian provinces. Responses were received from thirty-one states (91 percent) and three provinces (60 percent). ■ COA: 29 sent, 79 percent response ■ ADM: 137 sent, 57 percent response ■ ALM: 363 sent, 46 percent response Spring 1995
108 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science ■ EMP: 160 sent, 58 percent response ■ Deans: 35 sent, 83 percent response (Discussion of the dean's results will be provided in a separate article.) Findings To paraphrase Robert Hutchins' com- ment on universities14: The only way you can criticize a school of library and information studies, the only way you can appraise it, the only way you can determine whether it's good or bad or medium or indifferent, is to know what it's about, what it's supposed to be doing. If you don't know these things, you haven't any standards of criticism. The seventy statements (indicators) are what Childers/Van House call "pref- erence questions." Ratings applied by a constituent group reflect "the value that the respondents place on each indica- tor - the informativeness of each indica- tor in describing the effectiveness of libraries."15 The scale for each indicator ranged 1-5 with "no opinion" scored as zero. The scale has three clusters: ■ 1 and 2 equate with the phrase "not important to know" ■ 3 with "important to know" ■ 4 and 5 with "essential to know" In the remainder of the text, the wording of each indicator has been in- corporated into the text where appro- priate, rather than being continuously offset by quotation marks. General Agreements across Constituent Groups The constituent groups share general agreement on the value of twenty-four (34 percent) of the seventy indicators (appendix). "Essential to Know" The four groups post an average of one- third of all seventy indicators to this category, which means it encompasses the first two septiles of each group. All four groups place accreditation status, faculty awareness of new developments in the field, the reputation of the school, and how employers view the school's graduates among their Top 10 (first sep- tile) indicators. They also focus on the goals and objectives of the school, the reputation of its faculty, and the direc- tion the school provides to professional practice. Six other indicators receive equivalent ranking by three of the four groups. "Important to Know" Fifty-seven percent of the indicators are placed here. Because of the large num- ber of indicators in this mean category and to gain a clearer sense of the ranking given to the indicators, the mean is di- vided into high (3.50-3.99) and low (3.00-3.49). Only "involvement of the school's faculty in professional associa- tions" is ranked high by all four groups; only "recruitment information" is ranked low by all four. A mixture of three of the constituent groups gives nine other indicators equivalent rank- ing. "Not Important to Know" The four constituent groups agree on none of the final 10 percent of the sev- enty indicators. Three are shared by three of the groups and are in the Bot- tom 10 septile of all four groups: ■ Involvement of faculty from other departments in thesis committees within the school ■ Availability of small group activities in the curriculum ■ Number and type of support personnel Each of these indicators deals with a detail or an internal issue connected Volume 36, Number 2
Profiles of Constituent Groups 1 09 with a school. A subsequent article will explore how the constituent groups compare with each other across all three categories. Profiles within Each Constituent Group Within each constituent group, a slightly different set of indicators is pre- ferred. COA focuses on administrative and alum/employment issues and sec- ondarily on those related to faculty, the curriculum, and resources. Administra- tors initially emphasize administrative and selected recruitment issues, follow- ing with ones related to the curriculum, faculty, students, and resources. Alums believe that curricular issues are as im- portant as administrative ones. They consider continuing education, stu- dents, recruitment, and faculty con- cerns to be secondary. Finally, employ- ers place alum/employment and administrative topics first, and curricu- lar, continuing education, recruitment, and faculty issues second. Committee on Accreditation The work of COA is guided by the Standards for Accreditation, which note that "each of the Standards repre- sents an essential component of mas- ter's degree programs in library and in- formation studies."16 The standards address mission, goals, and objectives; curriculum; faculty; students; admini- stration and financial support; and physical resources and facilities. When asked what they consider most important to know about a school of library and information studies, the COA respondents selected the follow- ing as their Top 10 indicators - given in descending order of mean value: ■ Faculty awareness of new develop- ments in the field ■ Reputation of the school (e.g., within the institution, within the profession) ■ Reputation of the faculty (e.g., on campus, in other LIS schools, within the profession) ■ Accreditation status ■ Ability of dean/director to represent the school to institutional administrators ■ Relationship of curriculum to the school's goals and objectives ■ Faculty involvement in teaching (e.g., competency, areas, load, advising) ■ The school's responsiveness to the needs of the profession ■ Speed with which new technologies are incorporated into the curriculum ■ Employers' view of the school's graduates Theoretically, to a large extent the reputation of the school is composed of the Top 10 indicators of each constitu- ent group. "Essential to Know" COA places topics in this category that focus on issues related to administra- tion, faculty, alums and their employ- ment, and the curriculum. Administrative effectiveness is based on indicators that reflect two dif- ferent roles: that of the school and that of its dean/director. Although the ac- creditation status of the school is very important, COA members look first at the reputation of the school as identi- fied by its institution as well as by the profession. They are concerned with the goals and objectives of the school and the relative priorities it gives to teaching, research, and service. For COA there is little difference between concern that the school be responsive to the needs of the profession and that it provide direction to professional prac- tice. The ability of the dean/director to Spring 1995
1 10 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science represent the school to institutional ad- ministrators is combined in importance with the visibility and involvement of that individual on campus and within the profession. Of all seventy indicators, COA members want first to know how aware faculty are of new developments in the field. Secondarily, they focus on the reputation of faculty as viewed by the campus, other SLIS, and the profession. Faculty involvement in teaching is of concern: competency, areas of teaching, teaching load, and advising of students. Knowing if faculty are receptive to change is extremely important. Faculty involvement in research covers the quality of that research, the areas re- searched, and general faculty produc- tivity. Last, COA believes the relation- ships between faculty and students, and faculty and practitioners, influence the effectiveness of a school. It follows that the curricular con- cerns of COA members connect with their administrative and faculty foci. COA seeks to identify a connection first of all between the curriculum and the school's goals and objectives. The speed with which new technologies are incor- porated into the curriculum supports COA's interest in faculty awareness of new developments in the field. And COA wants to know the orientation of the curriculum in terms of whether it is competency or theory based. COA's concern for current students focuses on intellectual, personality, leadership, and involvement charac- teristics. Their interest in the charac- teristics of graduates centers on in- volvement in professional associations, national recognition as leaders, gradu- ates' commitment to service, and their involvement in continuing their educa- tion. The flexibility exhibited by gradu- ates of a school and the ability of gradu- ates to handle change are valued by COA. This constituent group also must know the extent to which graduates think beyond the immediate job needs to larger issues and their ability regard- ing problem solving and decision mak- ing. And COA finds employers' views of the school's graduates to be crucial. High "Important to Know" Almost 60 percent of the COA "impor- tant to know" indicators are in the "high" subcategory (3.50-3.99), with curricular and faculty issues of singular importance. The program level and its requirements are central to COA inter- est. These are followed by concerns about the curriculum's rigor, its unity, and the mixture of theory and practice provided in courses. This group needs information about the extent of interdis- ciplinarity within the master's program. Then COA turns its attention to the availability of courses on specific top- ics, including fieldwork, internships, and practica. For COA the diversity of faculty backgrounds leads all of the "impor- tant" indicators: ethnicity, gender, area(s) of specialization, degrees. In terms of administrative issues, COA sees strong value in knowing about fac- ulty involvement in governance (e.g., within the school, institution). Other indicators refer to faculty involvement in professional associations and their sense of satisfaction with the school. The size of the school's faculty is an important indicator of effectiveness, as is the extent of interdisciplinarity in faculty teaching and research. This group is less interested in the relationship between the school's mis- sion and the mission of its institution, as well as the relationship between the school and the institution's libraries. Three resource-related indicators are valued: ■ Relationship between the school's Volume 36, Number 2
Profiles of Constituent Groups 1 1 1 budget and its academic program needs (instructional and support) ■ Filling of faculty vacancies ■ Management by the school of its cur- rently available resources The appearance of "Extent gradu- ates are fully trained for their first pro- fessional job" in this subcategory puts it a half category below the "essential" placement given it by administrators, alums, and employers. For COA, infor- mation about alums' involvement with the school (e.g., financial, political, ac- tive alum association) is very useful. Admission standards are impor- tant: GPA, undergraduate institution course and skill prerequisites, and con- sistency of standards with other aca- demic units on campus. Applicant in- formation is found here: number, quality, diversity, acceptance/rejection rate, and undergraduate majors and preparation. And COA uses enrollment information about student-body size, the number of students by specific pro- gram, and diversity in terms of ethnic- ity, race, and gender. Low "Important to Know" Two faculty issues are of lesser impor- tance: faculty experience as practition- ers and the use of adjunct faculty and guest lecturers. COA respondents have little inter- est in salaries and in funding availabil- ity for students. The ratio of faculty to students is also put here, and the "Physical facilities of the school" indi- cator just avoids being placed in the Bottom 10 of this constituent group. The number and type of support person- nel, and the topics of external fund-rais- ing, and receipt of such, are in the COA Bottom 10. Indicators about the assessment programs used by the school and the organizational "location" of the school within its institution also are of lesser importance. The last indicator related to al- ums/employment is found here: place- ment of graduates (e.g., type of agencies, level of position). In addition, informa- tion on enrollment trends over the past five years has little value for COA, nor does this group want to know much about recruitment programs and activi- ties or about targeted special groups. Of note is the placement of "Com- petency of students in core courses" as not just of low importance but also the first indicator in this constituent group's Bottom 10. COA demonstrates a higher need to know more about pro- grams, of which core composition is one part, than to know how well students perform in those core courses. With the exception of the "Placement of gradu- ates," COA gives all alum/employment indicators high "important" or "essen- tial" placement. This suggests that they may use the views of employers, rather than current student performance, to determine a school's effectiveness. "Not Important to Know" Five indicators are found here. COA is not interested in the involvement of fac- ulty from other departments in thesis committees within the school - prob- ably reflecting the use of such commit- tees more at the doctoral than master's level. The two curricular indicators re- fer to the duplication of course content and the availability of small-group ac- tivities in the curriculum. These are de- tails in a school's curriculum, and their placement here conforms to COA's con- cern about larger, more encompassing curricular issues. COA's lack of interest in the avail- ability of continuing education units (CEUs) and in the availability of a vari- ety of formats for such programs may reflect the fact that its formal purview does not extend to continuing educa- tion programs or courses. Spring 1995
1 1 2 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Summary The impression gained from the alloca- tion of indicators by COA is that issues associated with the administration of the school, its curriculum, and its fac- ulty are central. These are followed by issues concerned with alums and their employment. COA does not see itself in need of much material on resources in order to assess a school - possibly because its judgment can have little effect on those indicators. As a con- stituent group, COA is less interested in both current and future students and is not at all in need of information regarding continuing education. The general placement of indicators con- forms with the "indicative, not pre- scriptive" nature of the Standards for Accreditation. Administrators This group is not at all reticent about prescribing, for as Etzioni points out, "Administration assumes a power hier- archy."17 Administrators use these Top 10 in- dicators in assessing the effectiveness of a SLIS: ■ Reputation of the school (e.g., within the institution, within the profession) ■ Accreditation status ■ Reputation of the faculty (e.g., on campus, in other LIS schools, within the profession) ■ Faculty awareness of new develop- ments in the field ■ Faculty involvement in research (e.g., quality, areas, productivity) ■ Goals and objectives of the school ■ Relative priorities given by the school to (1) teaching, (2) research, and (3) service ■ Admission standards (e.g., GPA, un- dergraduate institution, course and skill prerequisites, consistency of standards with other academic units on campus) ■ Employers' view of the school's graduates ■ Faculty involvement in teaching (e.g., competency, areas, load, advising) Where COA is diversified and in- cludes indicators relating to the dean/director and the curriculum, ad- ministrators focus on the largest issues of administration, on faculty, and on what students have to have to get in and how good they are perceived to be when they get out of the school. There is a 60 percent agreement between COA and administrators in their respective Top 10 lists. "Essential to Know" The reputation of the school within its institution and within the profession receives the highest mean given by the administrators: 4.51 out of 5. They then want to know about the accreditation status, the goals and objectives of the school, and the priorities given to teach- ing, research, and service. Administra- tive concerns regarding the school's leadership are demonstrated through interest in the ability of the dean/direc- tor to represent the school to institu- tional administrators. The addition of "Direction the school provides to pro- fessional practice" to this category indi- cates that administrators are seeking signs that the school is carrying its weight as a unit within its nationally recognized "leader" university. This is confirmed by administrators' placement of the relationship between the school's mission and the mission of its institution in this same "essential" category. Four indicators concerning faculty are in the administrators' Top 10. Effec- tiveness is assessed through considera- tion of the reputation of the faculty on Volume 36, Number 2
Profiles of Constituent Groups 1 1 3 campus, in other LIS schools, and within the profession. Administrators want faculty who are aware of new de- velopments in their field and who are involved in both research and teaching. Other faculty indicators will fall in the administrators' high "important to know" category. However, the fact that these four indicators are the only ones in the "essential to know" category, and that all four are in the Top 10, denotes their crucial nature. Administrators evaluate a school's effectiveness at least partially through the quality of its product as seen by employers. "Employers' view of the school's graduates" heads the indica- tors focused on graduates and their em- ployment. Three other indicators focus on qualities of graduates: ■ The extent to which graduates are fully trained for their first profes- sional job; ■ Placement (e.g., type of agencies, level of position); and ■ Characteristics (e.g., involvement in professional associations, continu- ing education; national recognition as leaders; commitment to service). Where COA is concerned with the behavior of alums as librarians, admin- istrators focus on what the graduates suggest about the standing of the school. The administrators' ranking of "Employers' view of the school's gradu- ates" and "Placement of graduates" in- dicates they may use these indicators to tap employers' views. Administrators share placement of "Extent to which graduates are fully trained for their first job" with alums and employers: all be- lieve it belongs within "essential," and two of the four attributes associated with the characteristics of graduates again could be seen to reflect on the overall "leader" reputation of the school and of the institution. The last Top 10 indicator is related to recruitment: admission standards. It fits with an indicator on the rigor of the curriculum. Together they suggest that this constituent group seeks to know how difficult it is both to enter the school and to handle its program. An- other recruitment indicator found here is applicant information. Its attributes of "number, quality, diversity, accep- tance/rejection rate, and undergraduate majors and preparation" support the view that the strength of the school can be ascertained by considering its poten- tial students as well as its graduates. Administrators also stress knowing the relationship between the school's budget and its academic program needs, although a related indicator on how the school manages that budget is found later under "high importance." The ra- tio of faculty to students and the exter- nal funding received by the faculty round out the resource-related indica- tors in this category. Of all four groups, only administrators consider the exter- nal funding indicator to be essential to know. The emphasis in this category is on indicators representing the reputati onal strength of the school. It suggests that the higher the school's standards asso- ciated with these indicators, the stronger the reputation of the school and, possibly, the closer it matches the institution's image of itself. High "Important to Know" As with the COA, almost 60 percent of the indicators are in this subcategory. The majority pertain to faculty, admini- stration, and resources. Some indica- tors relating to students and a few relat- ing to curriculum are also ranked here. Administrators place in this sub- category two different kinds of indica- tors related to faculty. The first cluster clearly reflects administrative concerns: ■ Diversity of faculty backgrounds Spring 1995
1 14 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science (e.g., ethnicity, gender, area of spe- cialization and degrees) ■ Size of the school's faculty The second cluster carries no auto- matic administrative prescription. It seems to signal areas where administra- tors are interested in the decisions of the individual faculty member or per- haps in a school's general philosophy: ■ Receptivity of faculty to change ■ Relationship between faculty and students ■ Satisfaction felt with the school by its faculty ■ Involvement of the school's faculty in professional associations ■ Relationship between faculty and practitioners In contrast, recall that the faculty indicators under "essential" focused on broader institutional issues: the fac- ulty's reputation and its role in research and teaching. Administrators do want to know about a school's programmatic offer- ings, including the requirements of each, and they use information on the relationship of the curriculum to the school's goals and objectives. The speed with which new technologies are incor- porated into the curriculum is also of high importance. The management by the school of its currently available resources is found here and can be coupled with the school's ability to engage in external fund-raising. Administrators use schol- arship and fellowship availability in their assessment of the effectiveness of a school. The filling of faculty vacancies is clearly of less concern. Administrators are the only group to place the school's responsiveness to the needs of the profession in other than an "essential" category. Following it in high importance is the visibility and involvement of the dean/director on campus as well as within the profes- sion. Then this constituent group is in need of assessment information from the school. Lastly they want to know about the relationship between the school and the institution's libraries. Regarding graduates, administra- tors are interested in their ability to handle change. This is followed by the extent to which graduates think beyond the immediate job needs to larger issues such as planning, client needs, and community involvement. However, ad- ministrators place the orientation of graduates regarding problem solving and decision making in the low "impor- tant" subcategory. In this regard, they agree with all the groups that it is more telling to know if a school is equipping its graduates to handle the "macro" over the more "micro" picture. Any indicator relating to already enrolled students is of high impor- tance - including the competency of students in core courses, which COA placed in their Bottom 10. Also in this high subcategory are enrollment trends and enrollment information and infor- mation about the intellectual, personal- ity, leadership, and involvement char- acteristics of students. Low "Important to Know" Administrators agree with COA that faculty experience as practitioners is of low importance, as is the school's use of adjunct faculty and guest lecturers. This constituent group is much less in- terested in the extent of interdiscipli- narity in faculty teaching and research. They give involvement of faculty from other departments in the school's thesis committees a Bottom 10 position. Low importance is given to those indicators that reflect the internal work- ings of the curriculum. Included here is the curriculum's unity, its orientation toward competencies or theory, and the mixture of theory and practice found in Volume 36, Number 2
Profiles of Constituent Groups 1 1 5 courses. Administrators are not much interested in the availability of field- work, internships, and practica, and they value knowing about specializa- tions even less. Only alums agree with administrators that concern over the duplication of course content within both the school and other academic units on campus ought to be in the "im- portant to know" category at all. Administrators place here the sal- ary comparability of the dean/director and the faculty with regard to counter- parts on campus and in other LIS schools. The physical facilities of the school merit not only low importance, but also inclusion as the first indicator in the administrators' Bottom 10. Where COA gives the issue of fac- ulty involvement in governance high importance, administrators do not find it of much value in identifying an effec- tive school. They place it last in their "important to know" category, which also merits it a place among their Bot- tom 10 indicators. They are also not very interested in the involvement of alums with the school - be that financial, political, or as an otherwise active association. This indicator rests just above the beginning of the administrators' Bottom 10. Infor- mation on recruitment programs and ac- tivities, and on targeted special groups, is also of little importance to administrators. "Not Important to Know" Although administrators place the or- ganizational location of the school (e.g., independent or within a college) here, it is at the top of the category (mean = 2.99). The number and size of support staff merit no consideration. Curricular indicators refer to very specific compo- nents: the availability of distance edu- cation, courses on specific topics, and small-group activities within courses. Likewise, the availability of CEUs for CE courses and the offering of a CE pro- gram through a variety of formats are not important to administrators. For this constituent group, the strength of the school and its importance to the institution will have been determined through the "essential" and the high "important" categories. That assess- ment will at least partially shape the answer to whether the school should be a stand-alone or part of a larger, related unit. Summary Administrators focus on reputational and administrative issues. They stress status, goals, priorities, and standards. Productivity is ascertained through the perceived worth of faculty and gradu- ates. The more an indicator relates to the internal workings of a school, the less use administrators have for it. To judge effectiveness, this constituent group selects indicators that combine to reflect an internal institutional per- spective in conjunction with an exter- nal perspective on a school from those outside it. Alums This group's literature tends to focus on downgrading the master's education while suggesting that, although it is per- ceived as minimal, most practitioners believe they are adequately prepared for their first professional position.18 In descending order of mean, the Top 10 indicators of the alums in this study of LIS schools are: ■ Accreditation status ■ Faculty awareness of new develop- ments in the field ■ Availability of courses on specific topics ■ Reputation of the school (e.g., within institution, within the profession) ■ Extent graduates are fully trained for their first professional job Spring 1995
1 1 6 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science ■ Availability of fieldwork, intern- ships, practica within curriculum ■ The school's responsiveness to the needs of the profession ■ Program offerings (e.g., undergradu- ate, specialist-6th year, doctoral, joint) ■ Employers' view of the school's graduates ■ Speed with which new technologies are incorporated into the curriculum Consistent with that literature, al- ums focus on the curriculum. They demonstrate a 60 percent agreement with COA and a 40 percent agreement with the administrators on their Top 10 indicators. "Essential to Know" Alums are concerned with both broad and very specific curricular topics. The narrower front is where they place three Top 10 indicators: ■ The speed with which new tech- nologies are incorporated into the curriculum ■ Availability of courses on specific topics ■ Availability of fieldwork, intern- ships, practica A fourth Top 10 indicator is part of the broader group: program offerings (e.g., undergraduate, specialist-6th year, doctoral, joint). Program require- ments are found here. The competency- or theory-based orientation of the cur- riculum and the mixture of theory and practice provided in courses are in this "essential" category. In concert with ad- ministrators, alums want to know about the rigor of the curriculum. They give Top 10 placement to ac- creditation status, reputation of the school, and the school's responsiveness to the needs of the profession. They focus on the direction the school pro- vides to professional practice and on the relationship between the school and the institution's libraries. Alums stress the need to know both the goals and objectives of the school and the relative priorities given to teaching, research, and service. Only one faculty indicator is ranked in the alums' Top 10: awareness of new developments in the field. Oth- erwise, alums evaluate schools based on the reputation of the faculty and their involvement in teaching (e.g., competency, areas, load, and advising). Faculty experience as practitioners is essential for alums to know, as is the relationship between faculty and stu- dents. Faculty receptivity to change is also placed in this category. Alums relate the quality of the school to particular alum/employment measures. Two indicators are in their Top 10: ■ Extent graduates are fully trained for their first professional job ■ Employers' view of the school's graduates The final alum indicator is the placement of graduates in terms of type of agencies and level of position. Alums also need some resource information on scholarship and fellowship availability and on the ratio of faculty to students. Finally, their other student-related is- sue in this category is one that is simi- larly ranked by administrators as essen- tial: admissions standards. High "Important to Know" Alums' concerns regarding faculty are in this subcategory. They range from the relationship between faculty and prac- titioners to use of adjunct faculty and guest lecturers. In between, alums evaluate a school based on the satisfac- tion felt with the school by its faculty and on faculty involvement in research and in professional associations. Alums want to know the size of the school's Volume 36, Number 2
Profiles of Constituent Groups 1 1 7 faculty and the diversity of faculty backgrounds. Lastly, their judgment in- cludes the extent of interdisciplinarity in faculty teaching and research. Information on the relationship of the curriculum to the school's goals and objectives and the unity of the curricu- lum is needed by this constituent group. They also want to know the extent of interdisciplinarity within the master's program. Student level of knowledge in one or more specializations and the availability of the program via distance education fit into this subcategory, per- haps indicating concern with the breadth of the program. Placement of two continuing edu- cation indicators in this area adds strength to alums' desire to know about the breadth and availability of program- matic elements: ■ Availability of CEUs for continuing education courses ■ CE program offered through a vari- ety of formats Alums give these indicators a higher placement than any of the other groups. Yet 59 percent of the seventy indicators are of more concern to alums than these two particular ones. Alums treat assessment programs used by the school (e.g., student pro- gress, curriculum, faculty) as their high- est administrative issue. It is followed by two indicators that involve the school's dean/director: the ability of that individual to represent the school to institutional administrators and the visi- bility/involvement of the dean/director on campus and within the profession. In terms of funding and resources, alums do want to know the relationship between the school's budget and its aca- demic program needs. And they are concerned with the management by the school of its currently available re- sources. The remaining three indicators that are considered of high importance refer to alums and employment: ■ Extent graduates think beyond the immediate job needs to larger issues ■ Ability of graduates to handle change ■ Orientation of grads regarding prob- lem solving and decision making Low "Important to Know" Alums do not assume that knowing about potential, current, or graduated students is especially helpful in assess- ing the effectiveness of a school. These include indicators referring to charac- teristics of graduates in terms of their involvement in professional associa- tions and their national recognition as leaders, and current or past enrollment information. They see little need to know about the competency of students in core courses or even the charac- teristics of students. In addition, they consider recruitment and applicant in- formation to be of low importance. Alums consider the availability of small-group activities in the curriculum to be of low enough importance to place it among their Bottom 10 indicators. Information on the duplication of course content within the school as well as with other campus academic units barely escapes the same location. They consider three administrative issues low enough for Bottom 10 place- ment: ■ Relationship between the school's mission and the mission of its insti- tution. ■ Organizational "location" of the school within its institution (e.g., independent or within a college) ■ Faculty involvement in governance (e.g., within the school, institution) Two resource indicators ("Filling of faculty vacancies" and the "Physical fa- Spring 1995
1 1 8 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science cilities of the school") are given little value. These five suggest alums are least interested in the relationship of the school to its institution and find more useful those indicators that describe the school's connection with the profession. "Not Important to Know" This group does not believe it is neces- sary to know about alums' involvement with the school, nor about the involve- ment of faculty from other departments in thesis committees within the school. Although they believed it essential to know about the availability of fund- ing for students, alums find it unneces- sary to know about the external funding received by the faculty or about the school's ability to engage in external fund-raising. Likewise they don't want to know the salary comparability of the dean/director and faculty with counter- parts on campus and in other LIS schools, and they do not believe they need to know the number and type of support personnel in order to gauge the effectiveness of a school. Summary Along with COA and administrators, al- ums focus on aspects of administration, faculty, and curriculum. Not altogether unexpectedly, they view continuing education components as more impor- tant than do these other two constituent groups. Employers In their literature, employers focus al- most exclusively on the skills they re- quire of librarians. Schools are cri- tiqued in terms of lists of courses that employers believe should be offered. Since this study asked them what they use to determine the quality of a school (and did not list courses), these findings are broader than those of the typical employer study. Of the fifty-seven indi- cators placed in the "essential" and the "important to know" categories, em- ployers drew 65 percent from areas con- cerning faculty, curriculum, and ad- ministration. The Top 10 indicators of employers are: ■ Accreditation status ■ Faculty awareness of new develop- ments in the field ■ Reputation of the school (e.g., within institution, within the pro- fession) ■ The school's responsiveness to the needs of the profession ■ Goals and objectives of the school ■ Speed with which new technologies are incorporated into the curriculum ■ Extent graduates are fully trained for their first professional job ■ Employers' view of the school's graduates ■ Reputation of the faculty (e.g., on campus, in other LIS schools, within the profession) ■ Ability of graduates to handle change There is a 70 percent agreement with COA and alums, and 60 percent with administrators, on the "essential" nature of these ten indicators. "Essential to Know" Employers share nine of their Top 10 indicators with two or all three of their sister constituent groups. Along with administrators, employers are very fo- cused. Both groups place the fewest number of indicators in this category. On curricular issues, employers and alums share some concerns, al- though there are statistically significant differences between the two. For exam- ple, alums rank these higher than do employers: ■ Availability of courses on specific topics Volume 36, Number 2
Profiles of Constituent Groups 1 1 9 ■ Availability of fieldwork, intern- ships, practica ■ Program offerings (e.g., undergradu- ate, specialist-6th years, doctoral, joint) Both agree equally on three other indicators: ■ Rigor of the curriculum ■ Mixture of theory and practice pro- vided in courses ■ Program requirements (e.g., foreign language, core composition, spe- cializations offered, length) In their Top 5, employers place three indicators that relate to the broad definition of the school: accreditation status, its reputation, and its goals and objectives. Two more administrative is- sues are part of this category and con- nect the school with the profession at large: ■ The school's responsiveness to the needs of the profession ■ Direction the school provides to professional practice This group considers that knowing about these two indicators is essential in assessing the effectiveness of a school. Employers and LIS schools function similarly to nations in a global economy: needing each other to be fully profitable, yet not being entirely com- fortable with the other's perceived inde- pendent power. Employers need to know the extent graduates are fully trained for their first professional job, and also how other employers view a school's graduates. After these Top 10 indicators, employ- ers focus on those that may describe their most valued employees or their own greatest need from graduates: ■ Ability of graduates to handle change ■ Extent graduates think beyond the immediate job needs to larger issues (e.g., planning, client needs, com- munity involvement) ■ Orientation of grads regarding prob- lem solving and decision making The final "essential" category topic concerns faculty and includes broad and specific concerns. Employers want to know both the awareness of faculty regarding new developments in the field and the general reputation of the faculty. These latter two indicators re- flect employers' unique connections with faculty members. That is, employ- ers are the practitioners who provide faculty with the latter's own practition- er experience. High "Important to Know" While employers place the ability of graduates to handle change and faculty- practitioner relations in their "essen- tial" category, in this subcategory they stress the receptivity of faculty to change and the faculty-student relation- ship. They also use information on fac- ulty involvement in teaching, in research, and in professional associations. They value knowing about the ori- entation of the curriculum (e.g., compe- tency or theory based), its unity, and its relationship to the school's goals and objectives. And they are concerned about student level of knowledge in one or more specializations. Only employ- ers and administrators give high impor- tance to knowing about the competency of students in core courses. Employers use admission stand- ards and the placement and charac- teristics of graduates in their assess- ment of a school. But they include only two indicators that connect the school to its institution: ■ Relative priorities given by the school to teaching, research, and service ■ Relationship between the school and the institution's libraries Spring 1995
1 20 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Indicators related to resources are equally split between the "important" and the "not important" categories. Only one merits high importance: "Ra- tio of faculty to students." Low "Important to Know" Other than the ratio of faculty to stu- dents, all resource-related indicators are found here or in the employers' Bot- tom 10. This constituent group does not concern itself with the availability of scholarship and fellowship funds or the relationship between the school's budget and its academic program needs or with how the school manages its currently available resources. In line with this, employers have little interest in the re- cruitment or enrollment of students - or in what kinds of students apply. Regarding faculty, this group be- lieves there is little value in knowing about the filling of faculty vacancies and whether faculty are satisfied with the school. Remaining faculty issues ranked here are demographic in nature: ■ Diversity of faculty backgrounds (e.g., ethnicity, gender, area of spe- cialization, degrees) ■ Size of the school's faculty ■ Extent of interdisciplinarity in fac- ulty teaching and research ■ Use of adjunct faculty, guest lectur- ers Three administrative issues are put here, with employers evidencing low interest in the ability of the dean/direc- tor to represent the school to institu- tional administrators or in his or her visibility/involvement on campus and within the profession. Information on the school's assessment programs is of limited value. The extent of interdisciplinarity within the master's program and the availability of programs via distance education are of small concern to em- ployers, along with both continuing education indicators: the availability of CEUs and format variety. "Not Important to Know" Employers rank more indicators in this category than any other constituent group. Although "Physical facilities of the school" is given little importance by all four groups, only employers place it in their "not important" category. A number of resource indicators are found in the employers' Bottom 10: ■ School's ability to engage in exter- nal fund-raising ■ External funding received by the faculty ■ Salary comparability of dean/direc- tor and faculty to counterparts on campus and in other LIS schools ■ Number and type of support person- nel Employers do not want to know about the relationship between the school's mission and the mission of its institution; nor are they concerned about the organizational location of the school or with faculty involvement in governance. Two curricular indicators are also in their Bottom 10: the availability of small group activities, and the duplica- tion of course content within school or with other academic units on campus. The single faculty indicator in this category concerns the involvement of faculty from other departments in thesis committees within the school. COA and alums also place this indicator under "not important to know." Finally, employers consider two alum and student indicators to be unim- portant for assessing a school. They give "Enrollment trends over the past five years" a slight edge above the Bottom 10 ranking they give to "Alums involve- ment with the school." Volume 36, Number 2
Profiles of Constituent Groups 1 2 1 Summary Although employers and alums agree on many of the indicators in the "impor- tant to know" category, they differ more substantially in the "essential" and "not important" categories. Employers agree with COA that all recruitment issues fall into the "important" category. Em- ployers are in close agreement with ad- ministrators on the split of faculty issues between "essential" and "important" categories. Of all four constituent groups, employers are the most willing to say an indicator is not important in evaluating a school. Conclusion When asked to identify indicators that are most useful in evaluating the effec- tiveness of a LIS school, all four con- stituent groups place accreditation status, faculty awareness of new devel- opments in the field, the reputation of the school, and how employers' view the school's graduates among their Top 10 (first septile) indicators. They also focus on the goals and objectives of the school, the reputation of its faculty, and the direction the school provides to pro- fessional practice. Beyond these, each constituent group prefers a slightly dif- ferent set of indicators. COA focuses on administrative and alum/employment issues, and secon- darily on those related to faculty, the curriculum, and resources. Administra- tors initially emphasize administrative and certain recruitment issues, follow- ing with ones related to the curriculum, faculty, students, and resources. Alums believe that curricular issues are as im- portant as administrative ones. They consider continuing education, stu- dents, recruitment, and faculty con- cerns to be secondary. Finally, employ- ers place alum/employment and administrative topics first, and curricu- lar, continuing education, recruitment, and faculty issues second. This article has profiled each con- stituent group in order to gain a clearer sense of the standards used by each. Additional analysis will be undertaken to identify the areas of agreement and disagreement between pairs of constitu- ent groups. References 1. Marion Fans, Library bcnool Closings: Four Case Studies (Metuchen, N.J.: Scare- crow, 1988). 2. Maurice P. Marchant and Nathan M. Smith, "The Research Library Director's View of Library Education," College & Re- search Libraries 43 (1982): 437-39; Patricia M. Battin, "Developing University and Re- search Library Professionals: A Director's Perspective," American Libraries 14 (1983): 2-25; William R. Eshelman, "The Erosion of Library Education," Library Journal 108 (1983): 1309-12; Maurice P. Marchant and Nathan M. Smith, "The Public Library Director's View of Library Education" (paper presented at 1984 ALISE conference, Chicago, 111.); Herbert S. White and Marion Paris, "Employer Preferences and the Library Education Curriculum," Library Quarterly 55 (1985): 1-33. 3. Herbert S. White, "Perceptions by Educa- tors and Administrators of the Ranking of Library School Programs," College & Re- search Libraries 42 (1981): 191-202; Herbert S. White, "Perceptions by Educators and Administrators of the Ranking of Library School Programs: An Update and Analy- sis, "Library Quarterly 5 7 (1987): 252-68; Herbert S. White and Sarah L. Mort, "The Accredited Library Education Program as Preparation for Professional Library Work," Library Quarterly 60 (1990): 187- 215. 4. George Walter Whitbeck, The Influence of Librarians in Liberal Arts Colleges as Demonstrated by Their Role in Selected Areas of Decision-Making (Ph.D. diss., Rutgers University, School of Library Service, 1970); M. Kathy Cook, "Rank, Spring 1995
1 22 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Status and Contribution of Academic Li- brarians as Perceived by Teaching Fac- ulty at Southern Illinois University," College & Research Libraries 42 (1981): 214-23; John Budd and Patricia Coûtant, Faculty Perceptions of Librarians: A Sur- vey (Washington, D.C.: ERIC Document Reproduction Service, ED 215 697, 1981); Thomas G. English, "Administrators' Views of Library Personnel Status," Col- lege & Research Libraries 45 (1984): 189- 95; Gaby Divey, Ada M Ducas, and Nicole Michaud-Oystryk, "Faculty Per- ceptions of Librarians at the University of Manitoba," College & Research Libraries 48 (1987): 27-35; Larry R. Oberg, Mary Kay Schleiter, and Michael Van Houten, "Faculty Perceptions of Librarians at Al- bion College: Status, Role, Contribution, and Contacts," College & Research Li- braries 50 (1989): 215-30. 5. Robert M. O'Neil, "The University Ad- ministrator's View of the University Li- brary," in Priorities for Academic Libraries, ed. Thomas Galvin and Beverly P. Lynch (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1982), 5-12; Gresham Riley, "The College Viewpoint," in Academic Libraries: Myths and Realities, Proceedings of the Third National Conference of the Asso- ciation of College and Research Libraries (Chicago: ALA, 1984), 12-14; Joe B. Rush- ing, "The Community and Junior College Viewpoint," in Academic Libraries: Myths and Realities, 14-16; Paul Olum, "The University Viewpoint," in Aca- demic Libraries: Myths and Realities, 16- 20; David W. Adamany, "Research Libraries from a Presidential Perspec- tive," in Issues in Academic Librarian- ship: Views and Case Studies for the 1980s and 1990s, ed. Peter Spyers-Duran and Thomas W. Mann, Jr. (Westport, Conn.: Greenwood, 1985): 5-20; Gregory O'Brien, "A University Library Looks at Its Chancellor and the Chancellor Looks Back," Journal of Educational Media & Library Sciences 26, no. 1 (1988): 1-7. 6. Paris, "Library School Closings." 7. Thomas Childers and Nancy A. Van House, The Public Library Effectiveness Study: Final Report (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Education, 1989). 8. Thomas Childers and Nancy A. Van House, "The Grail of Goodness: The Ef- fective Public Library," Library Journal (Oct. 1,1989): 45. 9. Thomas Childers and Nancy A. Van House, "Dimensions of Public Library Ef- fectiveness," LISR 11 (1989): 275. 10. Ibid. 11. Ibid., 278. 12. September 1991 COA listing. 13. Accreditation of Programs of Education for Librarianship (Chicago: ALA Commit- tee on Accreditation, 1988), 1; ALA Handbook of Organization and Member- ship Directory (Chicago: ALA, 1990), 9; Organization and Functions (Chicago: ALA, 1987), 1. 14. "Interview with Robert Maynard Hutchins," in The Chronicle of Higher Education 14 (1977): 5, as quoted in Kim Cameron, "Measuring Organizational Ef- fectiveness in Institutions of Higher Edu- cation," Administrative Science Quarterly 23 (1978): 609. 15. Childers and Van House, Public Library Effectiveness Study, 31. 16. Standards of Accreditation, 1992 (Chi- cago: ALA, 1992), introduction. 17. Amitai Etzioni, "Administrative and Pro- fessional Authority," in ASHE Reader on Organization and Governance in Higher Education, ed. Marvin W. Peterson (Needham Hts., Mass.: Ginn, 1989), 29. 18. Ronald R. Powell and Sheila D. Creth, "Knowledge Bases and Library Educa- tion," College & Research Libraries 47 (1986): 16-27; Ronald Rodriguez, "Li- brary School Education in Retrospect: One Latino Graduate's View," in Library Education and Employer Expectations (Binghamton, N.Y.: Haworth, 1990); Lisa Spillers and Doug Bates, "How Library School Prepared Us for the Profession," in Library Education and Employer Ex- pectations. Volume 36, Number 2
Profiles of Constifuent Groups 1 23 Appendix Rank Order and Mean Category of Indicators of Effectiveness within Each Constituent Group Continued Spring 1995 Indicators COA ADM ALM EMP Ability of dean/director to represent school to institution's administration 5E 12E 44H 40E Ability of graduates to handle change 15E 25H 34H 10E Accreditation status 4E 2E IE IE Admissions standards (e.g., GPA. course prerequisites) 29H 8E 16E 23H Alums' involvement with the school 46H 60L 69N 69N Applicant information (e.g., number, diversity) 40H 19E 54L 53L Assessment programs used by the school 52L 31 H 40H 44L Availability of small group activities in the curriculum 69N 70N 64L 66N Availability of Continuing Education Units (CEUs) 70N 67N 42H 55L Availability of courses on specific topics 43H 66N 3E HE Availability of fieldwork, internships, practica 44H 54L 6E 1 7E Availability of program via distance education 64L 69N 36H 54L CE program offered in variety of formats 68N 68N 48L 51 L Characteristics of graduates (e.g., professional involvement) 14E 18E 52L 27H Characteristics of students (e.g., intellectual) 23E 39H 56L 38H Competency of students in core courses 61 L 40H 51 L 37H Direction school provides to professional practice 22E 15E 18E 14E Diversity of faculty backgrounds (e.g., gender, degrees) 25H 30H 41 H 45L Duplication of course content (e.g., in school) 67N 59L 59L 67N Employers' view of the school's graduates 1 1 E 9E 9E 8E Enrollment information (e.g., size, diversity) 47H 34H 60L 56L Enrollment trends over past 5 years 57L 29H 58L 60N Extent grads are fully trained for first professional job 35H 14E 5E 7E Extent grads think beyond immediate job to larger issues 1 6E 46H 32H 1 2E Extent of interdisciplinary within master's program 42H 53L 33H 42L Extent of interdisciplinarity in faculty teaching/research 38H 52L 45H 49L External funding received by the faculty 62L 20E 70N 65N Faculty experience as practitioners 50L 49L 1 5E 1 5E Faculty involvement in governance 33H 63L 63L 63N
1 24 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Indicators COA ADM ALM EMP Faculty involvement in teaching (e.g.. competency, areas) 7E 10E 20E 31 H Faculty involvement in research (e.g., quality, areas) 13E 5E 35H 35H Faculty awareness of new developments in the field IE 4E 2E 2E Filling of faculty vacancies 34H 45H 53L 57L Goals and objectives of the school 17E 6E 12E 5E Involvement of the school's faculty in professional assns. 28H 42H 39H 34H Involvement of faculty from other departments in thesis com. 66N 62L 65N 62N Management by the school of its currently available resources 39H 24H 49H 52L Mixture of theory and practice provided in courses 31 H 50L 14E 16E Number and type of support personnel 65L 65N 66N 70N Organizational "location" of school (e.g., independent, in college) 56L 64N 62L 61 N Orientation of the curr. (e.g., competency or theory based) 21 E 51 L 24E 25H Orientation of grads re problem solving/decision making 24E 48L 37H 21 E Use of adjunct faculty, guest lecturers 59L 57L 50H 50L Physical facilities of school (e.g., footage, conditions) 60L 61 L 57L 58N Placement of graduates (e.g., agency type, position level) 49L 1 7E 1 7E 26H Program requirements (e.g., language, core, length) 32H 38H HE 18E Program offerings (e.g., 6th year, doctoral) 30H 22H 8E 19E Ratio of faculty to students 54L 16E 27E 33H Receptivity of faculty to change 10E 28H 21 E 22H Recruitment information (e.g., programs) 55L 56L 55L 48L Relationships between school's mission and institution's mission 45H 21 E 61 L 59N Relationship between faculty and students 1 9E 32H 23E 30H Relationship between school's budget and academic program needs 27H 13E 46H 46L Relationship of curriculum to school's goals and objectives 6E 23H 29H 28H Relationship between the school and the institution's libraries 48H 35H 22E 29H Relationship between faculty and practitioners 20E 43H 28H 20E Rei. priorities school gives teaching, research, service 18E 7E 25E 24H Reputation of the school (e.g., in institution, in profession) 2E IE 4E 3E Reputation of the faculty (e.g., on campus, in profession) 3E 3E 13E 9E Rigor of the curriculum 26H HE 19E 13E Salary comparability of dean/director and faculty to counterparts on campus and in other US schools 58L 58L 68N 68N Continued Volume 36, Number 2
Profiles of Constituent Groups 1 25 Indicators COA ADM ALM EMP Satisfaction felt with the school by its faculty 37H 37H 31 H 43L Scholarship and fellowship availability 51 L 36H 26E 39L School's ability to engage in external fundraising 63L 41 L 67N 64N Size of the school's faculty 36H 44H 38H 47L Speed that new technologies are incorporated into curr. 9E 33H 10E 6E Student level of knowledge in one or more specializations 53L 55L 43H 32H The school's responsiveness to needs of the profession 8E 26H 7E 4E Unity of the curriculum (integratedness) 41 H 47L 30H 36H Visibility/involvement of dean/director (e.g., on campus, in profession) 12E 27H 47H 41 L E = Essential to Know (4.00-5.00) H = High Important to Know (3.50-3.99) L = Low Important to Know (3.00-3.49) N = Not Important to Know (1 .00-2.99) Spring 1995