Black Students in Predominantly White Library Schools HELEN E. WILLIAMS This study sought to determine the nature of the educational experiences and so- cial interactions of black students enrolled at predominantly white library schools from 1962 to 1974. A mail survey was conducted among one-half of the persons named in the 1984 membership directory of the Black Caucus of the American Library Association. From the 32.8% response, 19.2 % was used in this analysis. Findings indicate that the majority of respondents were not treated as if they were below standard expectations; neither were their classroom contributions regarded as of less importance than those of other students. The majority also perceived an absence of discriminatory grading practices and required remedial work and felt that their experiences were typical. They did not feel themselves to be on display when it seemed to benefit the school; however, they felt that white students tended to be distant and unfriendly. EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES for blacks in the United States have run the gamut from early prohibition to present open access. Historically, slave holders expressed fear that knowledge passed on to slaves might be used against themselves. The few known colonial and pre-Civil War efforts at educating blacks were minimal and proba- bly concentrated on free persons of color.1 From slavery, through de- cades of enforced servitude, and across a history of separate and grossly unequal educational programs, blacks increasingly persisted and availed themselves of educational opportunities wherever they could. They also insisted that educational circumstances be improved. The structure for separate and unequal education for persons of color was legally maintained, however, until 1954, when the Supreme Court ruled in Brown vs. Board of Education of Topeka that segregation in public schools was ' 'inherently unequal' ' and that blacks who were barred from Helen E. Williams is Assistant Professor, College of Library and Information Services, University of Maryland, Hornbake Building, Room 4105, College Park, MD 20742. Ms. received 3/86; accepted 7/86. A copy of the questionnaire used in this study may be obtained by writing the author. Winter 1987 139
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science attending public schools with white pupils were being denied equal pro- tection under the law as guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment. In 1956, the doctrine oí Brown was extended to state-supported colleges and universities.2 Much of the subsequent research and writing about deseg- regation in education focuses on the preschool to secondary school lev- els, and relatively little has been written about the transition of blacks into graduate programs, including library schools.3 An outstanding contribution to the black experience is Josey's The Black Librarian in America.* This compilation includes an array of personal statements by black librarians about their entrances into the profession through predominantly white library schools. Each contribution chroni- cles an impressive and valiant struggle against segregation and discrimi- nation in the pursuit of education for or employment in librarianship. In most instances, these contributors progressed to provide exemplary pro- fessional services and to serve as role models for new entrants in the pro- fession. In her discussion, Virginia Lacy Jones documents her concern for the small number of black librarians. She cites the findings of her study, which revealed that one-half of the black graduates of accredited library school programs in the United States from 1962 to 1966 graduated from the only predominantly black library school - Atlanta University.5 The American Library Association responded to information of this minimal minority representation within the profession by charging library schools with the responsibility of making their student bodies more rep- resentative of the general population.6 While it is of professional and social significance that blacks be admit- ted to predominantly white library schools, it is equally significant to have an assessment of their subsequent experiences. The documentation of what transpired would provide a valuable historical perspective against which to measure later experiences. Therefore, this study was developed to determine how blacks in predominantly white library schools during the period 1962 to 1974 perceive their educational and social experiences. The 12 years covered by this study embrace astounding changes in the social and political aspects of American society. The 1963 march on Washington, the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the introduction of Great So- ciety programs, the urban riots, the Kennedy and King assassinations, and the protest marches against involvement in the Vietnam War were various statements of our adjustments to new mandates. Still further ad- justments were required of institutions and individuals. Most participants in this study were likely to have experienced total segregation or initial efforts to integrate educational institutions during their pre-college years and are therefore living components of this post- civil rights period. Methodology. The membership directory of the Black Caucus, of the 1 40 Volume 27 , Number 3
Black Students American Library Association was used as an identifiable source of black librarians to survey for this study.7 The Black Caucus membership comprises professionals at all levels of service in all types of libraries and information agencies throughout the United States. Library trustees and publishers who are not librarians are also members of this body and share listing in its directories. A stratified sample was selected from the BC/ALA directory by be- ginning with the seventh listing and choosing every other name until one-half of the names, or 202 persons, was identified. It is recognized that this study did not use a random sample of black American librarians and that the findings cannot be generalized, but only represent a self- selected group with similar interests. The questionnaire was developed from interviews with librarians who were students in predominantly white library schools. A pilot study of the questionnaire was conducted using black graduate library school en- rollees in the Washington, D.C., metropolitan area. A pretest was con- ducted with retired and practicing librarians whose formal library edu- cation was experienced in predominantly white library schools. The questionnaire was mailed to each person whose name was se- lected, and 32.8% were returned. However, only 19.2%, which were completed as requested by persons who were students in predominantly white library schools from 1962 to 1974, could be used in this study. Questionnaires not used included those completed by persons who were faculty or staff persons and those that would have required this investiga- tor to interpret and code narrative data. The data collected were ana- lyzed using frequency and cross-tabulation procedures from SPSS. Findings. Forty-eight respondents, who reflected a 2: 1 ratio of women to men, indicated that they attended 26 library schools. Table 1 shows the distribution. Almost one-half of the respondents indicated that when they attended library school, they were between the ages of 20 and 30. A slightly smaller group reported their age to be between 30 and 40. Stu- dents who were in the 40-to-50 age range constituted the smallest pro- portion of respondents. Due to the small sample size and the subsequent absence of significant statistical levels, this analysis is descriptive with correlations to the gen- der variables. Throughout this discussion, the survey questions are shown with frequency responses outside parentheses and percentage re- sponses inside parentheses. QUESTION: In the classroom setting, were your contributions regarded with less im- portance than those of other-ethnic students? Often Sometimes Seldom Never Uncertain - 9(18.8) 13(27.1) 18(37.5) 8(16.7) Although this survey produced twice as many female as male respon- dents, three times as many females as males indicated that their class- Winter 1987 141
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Table 1 . Representation of Black Respondents and the Library Schools They Attended Library Schools Students University of California-Berkeley 2 Case Western Reserve 2 Catholic University of America 2 University of Chicago 1 Columbia University 2 C. W. Post/Long Island University 1 Drexel University 3 Florida State University 2 University of Illinois 4 University of Indiana 2 Kent State University 1 University of Maryland 3 University of Michigan 1 University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill 1 Northern Illinois University 1 University of Pittsburgh 1 Rosary College 2 Rutgers University 7 Simmons College 1 University of Southern California 1 State University of New York-Geneseo 1 University of Texas 1 Texas Woman's University 1 Vanderbilt University 1 Western Michigan University 1 University of Wisconsin-Madison 3 Total 48 room contributions were regarded as of less importance than those of other ethnic students. This raises a serious question of whether this dis- crimination was the result of race or gender. For these women, however, both variables might have affected the outcome. The potential gratification of admission to library school is seriously eroded when students perceive from faculty speech or behavior that their study efforts and results are relatively inferior because of intrinsic factors beyond their control. One respondent's comment reveals an exchange that illustrates this fact. "At the doctoral level, there were more obvious hints of racism including vague references to 'language problems' which when I explored them suggested that working among '[your] people' would resolve the issue. ' ' QUESTION: Were you subjected to discriminatory grading practices? Often Sometimes Seldom Never Uncertain 2(4.2) 5(10.4) 6(12.5) 22(45.8) 13(27.1) Almost three-fourths, or 72.9%, had no evidence or certainty that they had been unfairly graded. However, comments were made by those who felt discriminated against in this regard. ' 'I had one instructor who 1 42 Volume 27 , Number 3
Black Students was somewhat prejudiced and didn't give me a fair grade. I talked to the Department Chairperson [who] advised me not to take another course from him." QUESTION: Was your ethnicity insulted by racial slurs or other derogatory language from instructors? Often Sometimes Seldom Never Uncertain 1(2.1) 2(4.2) 3(6.3) 39(81.3) 3(6.3) A large majority (81.3%) indicated they never had this experience. Only females expressed uncertainty about whether this happened to them. However, among those who acknowledged having experienced this behavior, there were twice as many males (4) as females (2). A single instance of blatant intolerance is psychologically harmful to students and is clearly in opposition to behaviors considered appropriate within a profession dedicated to serving all of society's groups. By its very nature, library education is more strongly attuned to curriculum than to close attention to the humanitarian concerns of its students. It is therefore gratifying to note from this admittedly small body of evidence that during this early period of integrated higher education, a majority of faculty- student contacts and relationships was not tainted by racist language. QUESTION: Did your advisor deliberately make herself/himself uavailable to you? Often Sometimes Seldom Never Uncertain 5(10.4) - 2(4.2) 33(68.8) 8(16.7) Deliberate unavailability of advisors was indicated by 14.6% of the respondents, who felt that this happened often (10.4%) or seldom (4.2%). Nearly 17%, which reflects an equal number of men and women, were uncertain if their advisors were deliberately unavailable. A majority (68.8%) indicated that their advisors' unavailability was never deliberate. One respondent's comment alludes to the discomfort experienced by a black staff person who was assigned to work with black students: "This situation is somewhat related . . . but in the reverse. I felt that the [Black] advisor to the Black students was too accessible, taking the role of 'big daddy,' although his concern for our success seemed genuine. Not only did he help you plan your course of study, but also proceeded to filling out the class cards as well. When I suggested that I was capable of filling out my own class cards he looked startled." The pressures imposed upon faculties within so-called publish-or- perish institutions may dictate, to an extent, the intentional or otherwise neglected availability of faculty to students. In addition, widely held contentions that graduate students should be able to work through their problems without hand-holding faculty advisors might also have applied in the instances reported in this study. Winter 1987 143
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Another view of this issue was reported in an earlier study of black undergraduates at white colleges. That research found a low level of stu- dent contact with faculty outside the classroom. It also revealed that "some 40 to 45 percent of the students never conferred with a teacher during the course of a semester . . . and 75 percent feel that they get little, if any, help from faculty members and advisors."8 This lack of connection between faculty advisors and students, while less apparent within these library schools than at the undergraduate level discussed here, can be interpreted and justified variously. What emerges from both levels, however, is a discrepancy in perceived faculty respon- sibility to students - a situation that deserves periodic reassessment. QUESTION: Were you required to do remedial work which was unnecessary? Often Sometimes Seldom Never Uncertain - 1(2.1) - 46(95.8) 1(2.1) An overwhelming majority of the respondents (95.8 % ) indicated that this never happened to them. The sole "sometimes" response might suggest a need to have attended more closely to admissions requirements or to the adequacy of quality advisement provided to this student. Both preferential admissions of inadequately prepared students and incompe- tent advisement reflect poorly upon institutions; they also constitute sig- nificant acts of social injustice in that the covert hypocrisy ultimately serves to frustrate and discourage the student unnecessarily. QUESTION: Was your association with the school loudly proclaimed when it seemed to be of benefit to the school? Often Sometimes Seldom Never Uncertain 5(10.4) 12(25.0) 2(4.2) 11(22.9) 18(37.5) An almost equal number of respondents felt sure (19) as felt uncertain (18) that when the fact of their presence at the school was likely to add prestige to the program, that information was touted. This was never the understanding of 22.9% of the students. QUESTION: Was it made clear to you that you were important for the federal funds you generated for the school? Often Sometimes Seldom Never Uncertain - 4(8.9) 2(4.4) 33(73.3) 6(13.3) While a large majority of the respondents (73.3%) indicated that this never happened to them, 13.3 % reported uncertainty despite the seem- ing conflict of being uncertain about whether a position is made clear. An equal proportion of men and women were uncertain while twice as many women as men reported that this had never happened to them or that it had happened seldom and sometimes. QUESTION: From the beginning, were you treated as if you were below the standard expectations for students? 1 44 Volume 27 , Number 3
Black Students Often Sometimes Seldom Never Uncertain 3(6.4) 7(14.9) 7(14.9) 24(51.1) 6(12.8) The largest proportion of respondents (51.1%) indicated that they were never treated in this manner, while three times as many women as men comprised the second largest proportion (36.2%), which reported that this happened often, sometimes, or seldom. Almost 13% indicated their uncertainty about this experience. Another professor wrote on a research paper, for which he had given me an A, ' 'I find it hard to believe that you could have written so erudite a paper from the sources quoted." When I asked him what his comment meant he said, "Oh, nothing." . . . [the Dean of the library school] . . . told me I should not expect to "keep up with students from California colleges' ' (white) since my undergraduate work was done at a Black school (Howard University), which had a "lower academic stand- ing. ' ' She went on to say that I should not be unduly disappointed if I flunked out. She dismissed my cum laude rating at Howard as meaningless. Some faculty could not be pleased and so much as said minorities could not make A's. I graduated with a B. A. in English Summa Cum Laude and a few instructors insisted I could not write a clear sentence. [Low expectations were] subtle [from] individual instructors. Generally there was a feeling that less was expected of me. QUESTION: Were white fellow students distant and unfriendly? Often Sometimes Seldom Never Uncertain 4(8.3) 15(31.3) 18(37.5) 10(20.8) 1(2.1) More than 77% of the respondents indicated this to be true often (8.3%), sometimes (31.3%), and seldom (37.5%). Almost 21% re- ported this never to be the case, while one respondent indicated her un- certainty. Although, white students tended to alienate themselves, this merely brought us [Blacks] closer together. Not invited or included in study sessions by white students. No encouragement to participate in social activities. I received last minute invitations to social functions related to graduation activities. White students generally kept their distance, unless they discovered that you were an outstanding student. Then they wanted you for a study partner. My relationship with white [fellow] students was positive and produced some last- ing friendships. QUESTION: Would you characterize your experience as being typical? Yes No Uncertain 20(42.6) 8(17.0) 19(40.4) Almost an equal proportion were sure (42.6%) as were uncertain (40.4%). An equal number of men and women (8.5%) indicated that their library school experiences were not typical. Other student comments tended to generalize or highlight outstand- Winter1987 145
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science ing experiences. A representative selection appears below: Unfortunately the overall experience with the faculty was marred by the fact that being a westerner, from an area with few Blacks, I did not seem to fit into their stereotypical approaches to dealing with Blacks from the South or large urban ar- eas and they did not know how to respond to me. One professor told me that they had called a faculty meeting to discuss me. One of the most pleasant outcomes of the experience was that it forced me to net- work with other librarians - black, brown and white - who shared my concern on social issues. I had no sense [of] the "school spirit' 'I'd experienced at other schools. Very little was done on the graduate level to foster a bond between the University and the student, particularly the Black student. My experiences were good ones . . . but only because I tend to be a strong person under adverse conditions. It was a very depressing experience and not representative of my accustomed quality of life or existence ... I came to library school right from college with misguided expectations of a lily white environment in which no one cared about me. The overall quality was negative. Summary. Library schools, like many other professional schools, admit a foremost concern with promoting the intellectual character of the pro- fession through their programs, courses, and activities. The preparation of students for the delivery of information and related services to all seg- ments of society implies an appreciable measure of humanistic concern for the advancement of humankind through increased and efficient availability of knowledge and information to all. This focus on graduate educational experiences is important in order to provide information re- garding black students' views of the learning environments that resulted from the recently integrated higher educational opportunities. This study explored the nature, however intentional, of the social and educational conditioning of black graduate students within predomi- nantly white library schools. The period from 1962 to 1974 was chosen because it represented a time during which social and political forces merged to effect increased opportunities for blacks and other minorities to enter the American mainstream. For many of the respondents to this survey, theirs was a first- generation experience of higher education on predominantly white cam- puses. In addition to creating changes in the makeup of campus constit- uents, the presence of blacks provided a degree of special vulnerability for themselves and led to different experiences for the total college com- munity. The findings of this study indicate a variety of experiences that range in quality from excellent to awful, with most students not remem- bering them as being onerous. Majority experiences indicate that these students were not treated as if they were below standard expectations; neither were their classroom 1 46 Volume 27 , Number 3
Black Students contributions regarded as of less importance than those of other stu- dents. The majority did not feel themselves to be on display when it seemed to benefit the school; they also felt that white students tended to be distant and unfriendly. The majority indicated the absence of dis- criminatory grading practices and racial insults by their instructors. They were not required to do remediad work, were not valued solely for the federal funds attached to their enrollment, did not experience delib- erate advisor unavailability, and felt that their experiences were typical. A relatively high degree of uncertainty was indicated overall. How- ever, the structure of the questionnaire did not allow for the determina- tion of how these responses are related to memory lapse, willful avoid- ance, or other coping mechanisms. These findings indicate that the predominantly white library schools reflected in this study were not extremely inhospitable toward their black students. However, within every category explored, respondents re- ported some offensive treatment. This information seems to support the need for continuous and constructive nurturing of attitudes and images by which librarianship, in its quest to clarify and define itself, will ulti- mately be regarded. References 1. Higginbotham, Jr., A. L.: In the Matter of Color (New York: Oxford Univ. Pr., 1978), p. 198-201. 2. Harris, W. H. , and Levey, J. S. : The New Columbia Encyclopedia (New York: Columbia Univ. Pr., 1975), p. 1347. 3. Epps, E. A. : Black Students in White Schools (Worthington, Ohio: Charles A. Jones Pubi. Co. , 1972); Willie, C. V., andMcCord, A. S.: Black Students at White Colleges (New York: Praeger, 1972). 4. Josey, E. J.: The Black Librarian in America (Metuchen, N.J.: Scarecrow Pr. , 1970). 5. Jones, V. L.: "A Dean's Career," injosey, E. J., ref. 4, p. 40. 6. Totten, H. L., "A Survey and Evaluation of Minority Programs in Selected Graduate Li- brary Schools," Journal of Education for Librarianship 18:19 (Summer 1977). 7. Black Caucus of American Library Association: Membership Directory, 4th ed. yan. 1984). 8. Willie and McCord, ref. 3, p.51, 54. Bibliography Boxili, B. R.: Blacks and Social Justice. Totowa, N.J.: Rowman and Allanheld, 1984. p. 1-8. Giddings, P.: When and Where I Enter . . . New York: Morrow, 1984. p.76. Sarratt, R.: The Ordeal of Desegregation. New York: Harper and Row, 1966. Winter 1987 147