Volume 69 January 1999 Number I TUNNEL VISION AND BLIND SPOTS: WHAT THE PAST TELLS US ABOUT THE PRESENT; REFLECTIONS ON THE TWENTIETH-CENTURY HISTORY OF AMERICAN LIBRARIANSHIPI Wayne A. Wiegand2 The twentieth-century American library is one of this nation's most under- studied yet ubiquitous institutions, possessing a rich history of service to mil- lions of users who over the generations have variably appropriated library collections and serices for multiple purposes. For the most part, however, the library and information science (LIS) research community has failed to analyze the deeper meanings of these appropriations or to evaluate their sig- nificance for library users, in large part because it has yet to harness the ideas of many critical theorists whose thinking now dominates so much of the discourse occurring in other professions and academic disciplines. This article constitutes a reexamination of the twentieth-century history of Ameri- can librarianship that is grounded on this thinking. It argues that contempo- rary LIS discourse is plagued with tunnel vision and blind spots that greatly limit the profession's ability to understand the role of the American library in the present accurately, and thus seriously affect the profession's efforts to plan the library's future. 1. Revised version of a lecture originally delivered October 31, 1997, at the Library of Con- gress. The lecture was jointly sponsored by the Center for the Book in the Library of Con- gress and the American Studies Association, which was hosting its own annual conference in Washington, D.C. 2. Professor, School of Library and Information Studies, University of Wisconsin-Mad- ison, Madison, Wisconsin 53706. Telephone 608-263-2914; Fax 608-263-4849; E-mail wwiegand@facstaff.wisc.edu. [Libraty Quarterly, vol. 69, no. 1, pp. 1-32] i 1999 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-2519/99/6901 -0001$02.00 1
2 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Introduction My students have heard it so often they call it my "birdsong." The refrain comes from a set of numbers I carry in my wallet that are gener- ated annually by the American Library Association's Office of Research and Statistics [1 ]. Let me give you just a few for 1996. "There are more public libraries than McDonald's-a total of 15,872 including branches." "More children participate in summer reading programs at libraries than play Little League baseball." "College librarians an- swer 94 million reference questions each year-more than three times the attendance at college football games." Or how about this one: "Americans make 3.5 billion visits to school, public, and college librar- ies each year-about three times the attendance at movie theaters." Impressive statistics by anyone's standards, yet at the end of the twen- tieth century the ubiquitous library featured in these numbers remains one of the most understudied of American institutions. Currently we lack a solid body of scholarship that critically analyzes the multiple roles that libraries of all types have played and are playing in their host com- munities, whether that be in educational institutions ranging from the elementary school to the research university, in civic institutions such as the historical society, the state library agency, or the public library (urban, suburban, or rural), or in private institutions such as insurance companies, hospitals, research institutes, corporations, law firms, semi- naries, art museums, or music conservatories. In each of these cases the library as an information agency has in different ways affected its users-millions of them in the twentieth cen- tury who include Americans of both sexes, all ages, creeds, ethnicities, classes, educational levels, physicalities, and sexual orientations. Al- though all have used libraries over the generations, to this day-unless we extrapolate our own limited experiences to a much larger popula- tion-we do not know very much about why or how. That is unfortu- nate, because without a deeper understanding of the American li- brary's past we cannot adequately assess its present and are thus unable to plan its future prudently. Yet evangelists of newer information technologies foresee a number of futures for libraries as if they are certainties. Twenty years ago F. Wilfrid Lancaster was already predicting "paperless information sys- tems"-especially for scientists-as "inevitable" [2, p. xi]. William Mitchell anticipates a library in which the facade "is not be to con- structed of stone and located on a street .. , but of pixels on thousands of screens scattered through the world" [3, p. 561. To a great extent predictions like these are made more plausible because the body of critical scholarship detailing the historical role and impact of all types
TWENTIETH-CENTURY AMERICAN LIBRARIANSHIP 3 of libraries in the United States offers an inadequate counterpoint. At present, this body of scholarship is too small, too light, too margin- alized within librarianship, and too easily ignored. Perhaps the time is right to apply broader, more interdisciplinary and theoretically rich perspectives on that past in order to focus some attention on what I see as tunnel vision and blind spots affecting plans now being crafted for librarianship's future. The study of history can do that for you. After all, none of us can escape the fact that we are products of our pasts, and as products we bring to the present all of history's successes and shortcomings. Certainly we need to build on the successes, but too often we fail to recognize the shortcomings, in large part because the cultures in which we are immersed-or to which we aspire-tend to control the range of questions we ask about our- selves and our profession. That is why constant reexamination of our past from alternative perspectives has so much value. Like a convex mirror, it can show the parameters of tunnel vision and reveal many of the blind spots. Ken Carpenter ably started this task in a 1995 lecture titled "Readers and Libraries: Toward a History of Libraries and Culture in America," which broadly outlined American library history and its literature through the nineteenth century [4]. In this article, I extend his analysis to the present and in that analysis cover the twentieth-century diversi- fication of American librarianship.3 In some respects, however, Ken had it easier than me. Through 1900 the world of American libraries, which consisted of the services they provided, the cultural forms they collected, and the people who staffed and used them, was much smaller and less diverse than it is today. Librarianship in Progressive America, 1893-1918 I begin coverage in 1893, when the American Library Association (AlA) gathered at the Chicago World's Fair for its annual conference in July. By that time the ALA had functioned for seventeen years as a small but persistent voice for the nation's library community. In 1879 it had adopted a motto-"The best reading for the largest number at the least cost"-which succinctly summarized its goal of making the American library a force for an ordered, enlightened, educated, and 3. Like this article, Ken Carpenter's presentation was also sponsored by the Center for the Book in the Library of Congress. Both are part of an effort to ground planning of a multivol- ume project tentatively titled "A History of Libraries and Librarianship in the United States."
4 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY informed citizenry. In 1893 librarians for the most part agreed on "the best reading." ALA leaders constituted an elite corps of WASP, mostly male, middle-class professionals immersed in the disciplinary and liter- ary canons of the dominant culture. They shared a common ideology of reading bequeathed them by such intellectuals as Sir Francis Bacon [5, p. 342] and Ralph Waldo Emerson [6, p. 78], reinforced by others [7-9], and echoed in standard texts like McGuffey readers [10]. For librarians, that meant "good" reading led to "good" social behavior, "bad" reading to "bad" social behavior, and although they occasion- ally disagreed on individual titles to include in either category (the academy and literary establishment from whom they took their cues often sent mixed signals), once that "good" reading found its way onto library shelves librarians were convinced that by providing access to it they offered a "neutral" service to all Americans [11, pp. 71-73]. At the Chicago conference a significant manifestation of this ideol- ogy of reading was a "Model Library," a 5,000-volume collection of best books recommended for any small public library that a committee consisting of disciplinary authorities and librarians who had screened review journals for expert opinions had recently put together [12]. Compilers suggested a certain balance in subject categories. For exam- ple, 14 percent of the titles cited were classified history, 12 percent biography, 15 percent fiction. The latter contrasted sharply with actual circulation figures, however; most public libraries had been experienc- ing circulation rates of 75 percent fiction since they opened. That trou- bled librarians greatly, and to help them combat this huge discrepancy, the U.S. Bureau of Education promised to publish a bibliography of the Model Library's contents as Catalog of "A.L.A. "Library [13], thus making it available as a government document that, on request, congressmen could distribute free to libraries in their constituent communities. But ALA leaders did not spend much time discussing "the best read- ing" during their conference. That problem, they believed, would take care of itself over time if only they persisted. In 1893, librarians were convinced that by inducing the public to read quality literature and consult reliable information about contemporary issues, the library would inevitably contribute to the nation's progress and social order. Dewey called this the "library faith," an ideology driven by a library "spirit." Because that "faith" had sedimented into a professional m-en- talite by the late nineteenth century, ALA leaders felt it unnecessary to concentrate much conference time on the "best reading." Instead, they showed much more concern for "the largest number at the least cost." For years, Dewey-at the time New York State Librarian and in 1893 the ALA's president-had been pushing libraries across the country to adopt centralized systems such as a common classification scheme and uniform subject headings to increase the utility and effi-
TWENTIETH-CENTURY AMERICAN LIBRARIANSHIP 5 ciency of library management. In addition, he and his allies pressed their colleagues to expand services to more and more Americans, including immigrants, children, women, businesses, and the physi- cally challenged. In 1893 the Dewey forces controlled the ALA [14, pp. 214-19]. As evidence of the ALA's commitment to service "at the least cost," the conference had been carefully structured to consist of presenta- tions on practical matters of library expertise and management that the Bureau of Education agreed to publish later as a "Handbook of Library Economy" [15], another government document novice librari- ans could obtain free of charge through their congressmen. As evi- dence of its commitment to reaching "the greatest number," the ALA hosted meetings for three sections representing more specialized li- brary interests-a college section for academic libraries, a publishing section to push for more bibliographical aids such as the ALA Catalog, and an Association of State Librarians, which met in Chicago only to disband into two new sections, a law library section and a state library section. In 1893 the library profession was already showing signs of specialization that characterized other professions emerging in the Progressive Era [16-18]. The 1893 conference also provides a cameo of the "library science" Dewey and his allies constructed for the library profession, a library science that consisted of four component parts: character, expertise, institution, and authority. By "character" I refer to a sociodemo- graphic profile that tied most late nineteenth-century library profes- sionals into a homogeneous group of WASP, middle-class, largely higher-educated men and women who shared a set of literary and aca- demic canons and a faith in the power of education. By "expertise" I refer to the methods of acquisition, cataloging and classification, refer- ence work, and circulation that mark conventional library services. By "institution" I refer to management of the physical plant, its architec- ture, employees, and services. A good library, ALA leaders believed, was staffed by people of the right character who possessed the expertise to provide reliable information contained in "the best reading," and who had the skills to manage efficiently the institution and building in which all this took place. "Authority" is a different matter, however [19]. Here I refer to the power the dominant culture allocates to certain professional groups- scientists, intellectuals, belles lettres authors, and disciplinary experts in the academy-to identify not only the best reading within their areas of authority but also to define the canons against which any new publi- cations ought to be judged. In the late nineteenth century, librarians were already defined by their character before selecting librarianship as their new profession. As aspiring professionals, they then learned
6 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY library expertise and management either on the job or in one of the few library schools. Except for a few notable exceptions, however, they did not share in decisions about what was "best reading." Instead they selected from among choices already legitimated by others in whom society did invest that power [20, 21]. Ironically, setting up mechanisms to identify those choices at the beginning of the twentieth century turned into a mushrooming indus- try that tended to mask the locus of authority for determining the best reading. Over time, librarians certainly came to "know" good books, but with one exception: that knowledge was the end product of a filter- ing system evolved by U.S. publishers on which that industry depended. For example, in 1901 the H. W. Wilson Company of Minneapolis began publishing indexes such as the Reader's Guide to Periodical Literature, which, in its initial issue, covered twenty periodicals, including Atlantic Monthly, Current Literature, Dial, and North American Review, each of which was edited by literary authorities whose goal was to publish only quality material. Libraries quickly subscribed to Reader's Guide, then began favoring subscriptions to periodicals the Guide covered precisely because they were indexed. For the rest of the century, modification of the Guide's scope came slowly, and over time the momentum of tradi- tion became an obstacle to rather than a facilitator of change [22]. Similarly, within the decade Wilson was also issuing bibliographical aids such as Fiction Catalog and Children's Catalog, both designed to help li- brarians identify the "best reading" [23, 24]. Like the ALA Catalog, the Fiction Catalog took its cues from outside experts, especially those in the New York- and Boston-based literary establishments whose re- views had conveniently appeared in periodicals covered by Wilson in- dexes. Booklist magazine, a monthly the ALA began publishing in 1905 primarily to guide poorly skilled staff members of a mushrooming num- ber of small public libraries with their new acquisitions, mirrored this pattern. By 1908, Booklist had located its editorial offices in Madison, Wisconsin, where it was easy to tap the expertise of University of Wis- consin faculty for reviews of new books [25]. Over time more librarians began to contribute reviews, but their evaluations were generally based on criteria they learned as undergraduates. Unlike Booklist, the ALA, or Fiction Catalogs, however, Children's Cata- log did not grow out of the opinions of outside authorities. That its contents were evaluated largely by librarians reflected a demographic characteristic librarianship shared with few other professions. By 1920, 88 percent of American librarians were women. And in a patriarchal society, men in control of the dominant culture had little reservation about giving female librarians the power to select appropriate materials for children for which their "natural" instincts so well suited them. Collections that resulted from their efforts were established in thou-
TWENTIETH-CENTURY AMERICAN LIBRARIANSHIP 7 sands of public libraries across the nation. There these collections be- came source material for the ubiquitous weekly children's story hour. They also served as a major source of reading materials to which local school children had ready access [26, 27]. By the time Wilson was beginning to publish its catalogs and indexes and the ALA was successfully pushing librarians to adopt the library "science" inherent in the ALA's motto, Andrew Carnegie had begun to give away much of his fortune. Between 1890 and his death in 1919, Carnegie gave $4,282,000 to construct 108 academic library buildings and $41 million to construct 1,679 public library buildings in 1,412 communities in the United States. The sheer size of his philanthropy generated a competition between communities to establish libraries; it also helped create a climate of giving that encouraged other philan- thropists [28-30]. As hundreds of new library buildings went up all over the country, communities were eager to collect the right books, to subscribe to the right periodicals, to organize their collections ac- cording to the latest library science, and to have their new facilities run as efficiently as possible by people of the right character. By the time World War I erupted in 1914, American librarianship had claimed a professional jurisdiction-no matter the type of library, librarians would provide access to "the best reading for the largest number at the least cost"' through "neutral" service. And this jurisdiction was already much broader than that practiced by the generation of librarians preceding it. In 1901, for example, Charles McCarthy had set up a Legislative Reference Library to do re- search and draft bills for Wisconsin state legislators that became a model for other states and the nation a decade and a half later [31]. In the late nineteenth century, a few wealthy philanthropists donated large sums of money to construct and maintain private research librar- ies for people they thought poorly served by most public and academic library collections. In Chicago, for example, fortunes left by Walter Newberry andJohn Crerar established large research libraries, the for- mer in the humanities, the latter in the sciences [32, 33]. In 1919, Henry Huntington founded a library in San Marino, California, and donated to it his substantial collection of rare books [34]. That same year, the Hoover Library on War, Revolution, and Peace opened its doors on the Stanford University campus [35]. Librarianship also branched out in other directions. In 1909, several corporate librarians, including Daniel Nash Handy, organized the Spe- cial Libraries Association (SLA). As director of the Insurance Library Association of Boston (ILAB), Handy had modified the Dewey Decimal Classification scheme to meet his own needs, and started the ILAB Bul- letin to index fire insurance and fire protection/prevention literature. As SLA president in 1913, he initiated projects that eventually led to
8 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY the publication of the Publication Affairs Information Service Bulletin and the Industrial Arts Index, predecessor of the Business Periodicals Index, both of which were eventually published by Wilson [36, 37]. In higher education, some colleges were transitioning into universi- ties. By 1893, many had inaugurated doctoral studies, elective systems, research seminars, and honors and independent study programs. Members of newer professional classes also pressed universities to initi- ate professional programs with curricula that served their interests. Nat- urally, all of these forces placed demands on institutional collections. In response, academic libraries extended hours, greatly expanded col- lections, developed closed reserve services to address the problem of circulating heavily used class-related materials, and evolved better cata- logs and information retrieval systems [38, 39]. But when the United States entered World War I on the Allied side on April 6, 1917, any pretense of a neutral library service disappeared. For example, public libraries circulated materials printed by George Creel's Committee on Public Information and Herbert Hoover's Food Conservation Program, and opened their buildings to all types of war work, including activities of Americanization programs designed to channel loyalties of hyphenates. The ALA Library War Service Commit- tee organized library services for thirty-six training camps set up for the war effort, to which thousands of libraries of all types channeled books and periodicals they had collected for soldiers and sailors. Back home, many librarians used the "Army Index"-a list of sometimes pro-German, sometimes pacifist materials the army did not want in training camp libraries-to purify their own collections. At the same time, they watched these collections accept books that one Minnesota volunteer book collector labeled "decent but not too highbrow" and turned away SIA criticism that camp libraries lacked adequate techni- cal materials. By the end of the war, the typical training camp library collection averaged 65 percent fiction. The latest edition of the ALA Catalog (1911), on the other hand, had recommended that public li- brary collections contain only 10.8 percent fiction [40, 41]. Between the Wars, 1918-45 World War I was a watershed for American librarianship that signaled a modification of the profession's ideology of reading. In large part because an authority as powerful as the federal government found it acceptable to circulate to soldiers and sailors the popular reading mate- rials the vast majority of library patrons wanted anyway, librarians had a difficult time objecting. Besides, much was already circulating in seri-
TWENTIETH-CENTURY AMERICAN LIBRARIANSHIP 9 alized form in the periodicals libraries collected and the Reader's Guide indexed (for example, Saturday Evening Post and Ladies HomeJournal) or in local newspapers edited by men tightly connected to the local elites from which libraries drew their board members. Thus by the 1920s, librarians generally came to accept that the "light" reading they had disparaged for the past half-century fell somewhere between "good" and "bad," and was at most "harmless." Tension surrounding their self-assumed responsibility to provide "the best reading" had been modified by a higher authority, and this effect reduced the pres- sure librarians imposed on themselves to "elevate the popular taste." In her preface to the 1923 edition of what later evolved into the Fiction Catalog, compiler Corinne Bacon noted that "this is not a list of the best 2,350 novels, judged as literature, but a list of the 2,350 of the best novels for public library use. This means," she continued, "it includes novels for highly educated and for comparatively uneducated readers, for those who like the older novels, and for those who want to keep in touch with present day fiction" [42, pp. ii-iii]. Although they contin- ued to push "the best reading" identified by academic and literary elites, librarians quietly began placing more emphasis on extending the "largest number" and serving them "at the least cost." At the same time, however, their model of public library service be- came more comprehensive. Librarians certainly did not abandon their advocacy of the "best reading" reflected in the canons of literatures marking their own socioeconomic group. An informed citizen could still find the "best books" that the library had purchased through cen- tralized systems that filtered acquisition decisions, or tap the counsel of a new library professional-the "reader's advisor"-who was sup- posed to know the "good books" on library shelves and through per- sonal service meet her patrons' individual needs by connecting them to appropriate library materials. But at the same time the patron could now use a maturing system of reference services and reference materi- als to research facts on which to create new knowledge or to base pru- dent decisions to vote, to build, to invent, to purchase [43, 44]. It was the kind of library service Daniel Nash Handy's patrons found so valu- able, the kind "serious" scholars came to expect when they did re- search at libraries such as the Newberry and the Crerar. And because these client groups had more political, social, and economic clout than a black child or a female romance novel reader, the kinds of informa- tion disseminated in reference work and by "reader's advisors" be- came privileged. Both became part of the library's contribution to an adult education movement emerging nationwide [45]. "Entertainment" reading, a type of reading that accounted for most use in public libraries, was relegated to a subordinate status in profes-
10 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY sional thinking and subsequently largely ignored in library rhetoric. When public libraries reported the volume of popular reading materi- als they circulated after World War I, they generally buried it in a larger category labeled "fiction," which lumped Edith Wharton with Mrs. E. D. E. N. Southworth, and HenryJames with Oliver Optic. Over time, the value of library services became closely tied to the clienteles for which they were designed. Services designed to improve access to the information desired by scientists and academics were more valued than services designed to improve access to the information contained in reading materials desired by housewives and children. Differences in salaries earned by librarians serving each of these clienteles reflected these values. In 1928, the University of Chicago opened a Graduate Library School (GLS) with the help of a substantial grant from the Carnegie Corpora- tion. Unlike other library schools, which simply trained students for library practice, GLS was designed to concentrate on research and to admit only Ph.D. students. At the time, the university was a national leader in efforts to make the social sciences more "scientific" by using quantitative methods. And for much of the first decade of its existence, GLS faculty extrapolated from political science, sociology, and educa- tion to concentrate its research on the scientific investigation of read- ing [46]. Its research scope, however, betrayed a cultural bias. Led by Douglas Waples, a social scientist hired from the College of Education, GLS faculty generally disregarded fiction, thus ignoring the kinds of reading the majority of library users obtained at public libraries across the nation [47-50]. Instead, they focused on certain kinds of nonfic- tion information, especially the kinds that reference services were de- signed to provide. However, under the guidance of Louis Round Wil- son, new dean appointed in 1932, GLS shifted its research focus in the 1930s from reading research to studying library management and expertise. As a result, the GLS walked away from an opportunity. On the one hand, it failed to address concerns voiced by Helen Haines, who loudly complained about "the mechanistic non-literary attitude" she thought characterized postwar library practice. In her Living with Books (1935), which became a standard selection text in library school for the next two generations, Haines defended the kind of middlebrow literary tastes public libraries [51] and the new Book-of-the-Month Club [52] patrons wanted [53]. On the other hand, the GLS also ignored newer research on the act of reading. In 1938, Louise Rosenblatt published Literature as Exploration, a pioneering study written for the Progressive Education Association's Commission on Human Relations. In it she argued that because reading was not "a passive process of absorption"
TWENTIETH-CENTURY AMERICAN LIBRARIANSHIP 11 but a "form of intense activity," researchers needed "to find out what happens when specific human beings, with their interests and anxi- eties, participate in the emotional and intellectual life" that reading "makes possible" [54, pp. vi, vii; 55, p. 182]. By then, however, library researchers were not positioned to address her conclusions and extrap- olate from them to the professional world they knew. They had already moved on to other things. In fact, Libraty Literature, the Wilson Com- pany index to "current books, pamphlets, and periodical literature re- lating to the library profession," has no entries for Literature as Explora- tion, and for the remainder of the century, research on reading largely disappeared from the profession's discourse. Instead of pursuing ways to understand what uses most people made of the materials they ob tained from libraries of all types, librarians continued to emphasize and improve professional expertise and management, and persisted in a library faith steeped in high-culture canons that over time were slow to shift. Although the ideology of reading behind "the best books for the largest number at the least cost" was modified after World War I and the model of library service the profession projected to external com- munities extended its focus in the 1920s to encompass the "useful" (and thus privileged) information delivered in reference services, events occurring a continent away in the 1930s created another oppor- tunity for the nation's library community to expand its professional responsibility. As pictures of and news about book-burning events in Nazi Germany began appearing on the pages of American newspapers, some librarians began to ponder their role in intellectual freedom. Then in 1939, a year after the Des Moines (Iowa) Public Library crafted a "Library's Bill of Rights," the ALA adopted a similar document that outlined the library's responsibility to champion intellectual freedom and fight censorship and thus embraced, at least in its rhetoric, the defense of intellectual freedom as a professional imperative [56, 57]. But the new Library Bill of Rights also had a convenient residual effect; it promised to deflect occasional pressure from cultural authorities across the country to justify the social benefits of popular reading, and because intellectual freedom advocacy was so much more compelling in the world of professions, librarians had little reason to read newer research on reading that dealt with people's actual reading practices and behaviors, or with the multiple ways in which library patrons appro- priated their reading materials. As World War II erupted on the European continent in September 1939, the United States was just emerging from the Great Depression in which American libraries had experienced increased demands for their services and collections at the same time they had weathered de-
12 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY creased funding. But in response, librarians had also shown much cre- ativity. In the latter half of the decade they managed to tap federal work programs to build 350 new libraries and other programs to em- ploy students and young adults (7,000 in 1938) to repair and rebind hundreds of thousands of books, to prepare reference materials such as newspaper indexes and bibliographies, and to fund rural library demonstration projects designed to encourage isolated communities to establish or increase support of local library service. By December 1941, when the United States joined the war, librarians had become so adept at exploiting opportunities provided by the federal govern- ment that Works Progress Administration grants accounted for half the increase in expenditures for library services nationwide [58, 59]. Once in the war, however, the entire national library community mobilized to provide services to the nation's fighting forces [60]. During the first half of the twentieth century, the United States also developed several national libraries. Under Herbert Putnam's leader- ship (1899-1939), the Library of Congress pushed to centralize cata- loging for the nation by applying new practices to its own rapidly ex- panding collections, which were largely made possible by the legal deposit requirements of copyright. Early in his tenure Putnam estab- lished a catalog card and distribution service that eventually grew into the National Union Catalog. By 1939, when Archibald MacLeish became librarian, other initiatives had turned the Library of Congress into a national library in fact, if not in name [61-63]. Its experience matched that of several other federal libraries. In 1934, the National Archives opened to collect and make available documents generated by the fed- eral government [64]. In the 1950s, the National Library of Medicine emerged from the Army Medical Library and the National Agricultural Library emerged from the Department of Agriculture [65, 66]. Postwar Expansion, 1945-56 In 1948, the Carnegie Corporation funded a "Public Library Inquiry" (PLI) to closely examine the purpose of the public library and espe- cially the "library faith" on which it was grounded. Led by Robert D. Leigh of the University of Chicago political science department, the project eventually resulted in seven books and five reports. Among the former were landmark studies such as Oliver Garceau's The Public Li- brary in the Political Process [67], Bernard Berelson's The Library's Public [68], and Alice Bryan's The Public Librarian [69], all published by the Columbia University Press. In these publications authors argued that instead of supplying the popular reading desired by larger populations,
TWENTIETH-CENTURY AMERICAN LIBRARIANSHIP 13 public libraries ought to alter the "library faith" and use it as an or- ganizing agent to create a "civic" institution in which the information needs of a smaller but more influential combination of "serious" read- ers, community leaders, and students of adult education became prime beneficiaries. Like GLS researchers in the 1930s, PLI investigators dis- dained popular reading and sought to reduce its monopoly on regular library services. The immediate effect of their findings on public library practice was minimal. Some librarians ignored their recommendations, some criticized the PLI for overlooking the information and reading needs of less powerful groups such as children, and some found fault with methodological inconsistencies in the research [70, 71]. Several things kept conventional librarianship moored. Because it had embraced the Library Bill of Rights as a fundamental professional responsibility, libraries and librarians were projected to the nation's center stage when Wisconsin SenatorJoseph McCarthy accused a num- ber of cultural institutions of spreading communism. Either to protect their jobs or because they agreed with McCarthy's goals, some volun- tarily withdrew controversial materials, others never acquired them. In one study undertaken for the California Library Association's Intellec- tual Freedom Committee, Marjorie Fiske discovered that although li- brarians "expressed unequivocal freedom-to-read convictions," al- most two-thirds of the library book selectors she talked to "reported instances where the controversiality of a book or author resulted in a decision not to buy." Even worse, she reported, "nearly one-fifth" of the librarians she interviewed "habitually avoided buying any material which is known to be controversial or which they believe might be con- troversial." Evidence suggested that many librarians in other states acted no differently [72]. Some, however, fought McCarthy and his supporters on principles outlined in the Library Bill of Rights. In response to pressure from a Senate committee to suppress "immoral books," the American Library Association's Intellectual Freedom Committee (established in 1940) joined the American Book Publisher's Council for a conference in May 1953, out of which came The Freedom to Read statement. A month later, President Dwight D. Eisenhower implored a graduating class at Dart- mouth College not to "be afraid to go in your library and read every book." Later that month ALA president Robert Downs read a letter from Eisenhower at the ALA conference encouraging librarians to re- sist the book burners [57, pp. 77-79]. Academic libraries were also significantly changed by postwar events. Returning GIs flooded campuses across the country, placing new bur- dens on the libraries that served these new students. In addition, cam- pus scholars (especially from the sciences) fought for a share of the
14 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY research and development money being allocated by government and industry to the public sector and in many cases formed partnerships with corporate and industrial America to conduct that research and development [73]. To cope with increased demands as well as per- ceived opportunities, academic libraries worked out cooperative acqui- sitions programs for rare, unique, and expensive materials, including the Farmington Plan (established in 1948), whose aim was to guarantee that at least one of fifty university libraries would obtain at least one copy of every new research-oriented foreign book, and that the Library of Congress would list each work (and its location) in a new edition of the National Union Catalog. In its first twenty-five years, the plan ac- counted for the acquisition of 11 million items to member libraries; many of these items were made available by interlibrary loan practices honed and revised by the ALA since 1917 [74, 75]. Almost all academic libraries experienced significant growth in the 1950s and 1960s, en- abling many to recatalog and reclassify their collections as well as to expand them. When Lawrence Clark Powell became director of the UCLA Library system in 1944, for example, he inherited a collection of 462,327 vol- umes, a book budget of $50,000, fifty full-time staff members, and no branch libraries. That year the system circulated 300,000 items and lent just a few more tides on interlibrary loan than it borrowed. When Pow- ell retired in 1961, the UCLA library system held 1,568,565 volumes, 105,995 of which had been acquired in the previous year. Powell admin- istered a book budget of $381,650, and supervised a staff of 220 full-time people, many of whom worked in the system's sixteen branches. In 1960-61, the library circulated 1,593,204 items, and on interlibrary loan UCLA borrowed 2,619 items, lent 9,185. Powell was also a library leader of another sort. A humanist at heart (he had a Ph.D. in Ameri- can literature), he argued that "books are basic" to librarianship and that to be effective professionals, librarians primarily had to be readers. A substantial fraction of the nation's library community agreed with him [76]. For this "fundamentalist" view of the importance of the book, however, Powell was heavily criticized by many, most notably Jesse Shera, dean of Western Reserve's School of Library Science [77]. In the early 1950s, Shera wanted librarianship to form links with a group of scientists that traced its roots to World War II, when the fed- eral government established an Office of Scientific Research and Devel- opment to accelerate the war effort. In it director Vanevar Bush super- vised 6,000 scientists, many of whom worried about controlling the rapidly expanding body of scientific and technical information with which they had been dealing. Bush anticipated that postwar America would shift the scientific energy generated by wartime efforts to peace-
TWENTIETH-CENTURY AMERICAN LIBRARIANSHIP 15 time uses. He also recognized that newer technologies promised to improve bibliographical control of this increasingly large literature. His foresight proved accurate. In 1950, Congress authorized the establish- ment of a clearinghouse for scientific and technical information, and, after the Soviet Union launched Sputnik in 1957-an event that cata- lyzed the federal government to supplement acquisition funds for most type of libraries-the president's Science Advisory Committee pub- lished a report on the availability of scientific and technical informa- tion in the United States that left little doubt about why it thought the nation was losing the race to space [78]. By that time what Bush had called "science information" was well placed to benefit from an infusion of federal funds, and because scien- tists generally agreed that traditional libraries were not meeting their needs, they began to establish science information centers and initiate their own indexing and abstracting services to more rapidly retrieve the information they needed. Out of these efforts a postwar "information science" was born, which quickly fused with other "science informa- tion" activities in medicine, and allied with the gathering of military and political intelligence [79]. Because it was conceived by a well- supported, relatively powerful group of professionals who sought to serve the immediate information needs of other well-supported groups who wanted to retain or increase their influence, information science in the 1950s and 1960s understandably privileged scientific over other forms of information, especially other cultural forms of information. Upon closer analysis, however, it is obvious that the information sci- ence they crafted grew out of the conventions of traditional library reference service. Information scientists transformed that service, first by harnessing unique languages in particular professional discourses, and second by designing systems tailor-made to control access to the discourses contained in certain privileged literatures in order to serve the specific information needs of particular clienteles who enjoyed po- litical or economic power. Impact of Federal Funding, 1956-65 By the late 1950s, the infusion of federal funds into all sectors of the library community was having significant impact on American libraries. In 1956, President Eisenhower reluctantly signed the Library Services Act (LSA), the first federal legislation intended to fund some library services. The act made it to his desk only because a group of state librar- ians from the South had managed to convince their congressmen and senators (many of whom held crucial congressional committee chairs)
16 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY that passage of the act would not curtail states' rights because state library agencies would have the power to determine the distribution of the funds [80]. Services provided by state library agencies have a unique and diverse history. Although some state library agencies had been established early in the nineteenth century, most did not expand significantly until the early twentieth, when many states created library commissions to promote public library development. Many then consolidated library commissions and state libraries after World War I, and by World War II the consolidated agencies offered a variety of services, including leg- islative reference services and traveling library services to remote parts of the state. Some built on a tradition of research library service (Cali- fornia and New York); others functioned as the center of the state's public library system and provided interlibrary loans and traveling ex- hibits to city and county public libraries. But LSA funds gave state li- brary agencies a new source of power which many used to buy bookmo- biles that traversed the more remote areas of their states previously little served by libraries. Naturally, the bookmobiles-often managed directly by a state library agency, sometimes by a newly structured county or regional library system-were stocked with titles identified in such staple collection guides as Fiction Catalog, Public Libraiy Catalog, and Children's Catalog [81]. The bookmobile constituted yet another example of the library community's commitment to provide "the best reading for the largest number at the least cost." Federal funding also had a significant impact on school library devel- opment, which is largely a twentieth-century phenomenon. At the turn of the century, many newly established elementary and secondary schools had entered into agreements with local public libraries to sup- ply the extracurricular and independent reading needs of their stu- dents. By the end of World War I, however, the National Education Association (NEA) was pressing for more direct control over school library collections; it advocated the creation of separate libraries to be acquired, staffed, and organized by the school system specifically for teachers and students, and specifically in support of the school curricu- lum. In the 1920s, the NEA developed standards for elementary and secondary school libraries, and shortly thereafter some state and local governments started funding school library supervisors, issuing school library handbooks, and publishing recommended book lists. The Great Depression interrupted growth, but in postwar America, school librar- ies began to acquire nonprint media for instruction and many quickly transformed themselves into "instructional materials centers" or "school library and media centers." Then came Lyndon Johnson's 1960s Great Society legislation, including the Library Services and Con-
TWENTIETH-CENTURY AMERICAN LIBRARIANSHIP 17 struction Acts (1964, 1965), the Higher Education Act (1965), and, of particular benefit to school libraries, the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (1965). Influenced by funding from all three, the num- ber of libraries in public schools increased from 50 percent of the total in 1958 (40,000) to 93 percent in 1985 (74,000). At the same time, the average size of book collections in public schools increased from 2,972 in 1958 to 8,466 in 1985 [82-85]. Profile of a Diversified Library Profession, 1965-90 By the time the federal government began accelerating library activity with a heavy infusion of funds in the 1960s, the profession reflected a much more diverse profile. The ALA still functioned as a national voice, but an increasing number of specialized clienteles were being served by an increasing number of specialized librarians, all of which was made manifest in the organization of new groups such as the Medi- cal Library Association (1898), the American Association of Law Librar- ies (1906), the Special Libraries Association (1909), the Catholic Li- brary Association (1921), the Music Library Association (1931), the Association of Research Libraries (1932), the Society of American Ar- chivists (1936), the Theatre Library Association (1937), and the Ameri- can Theological Library Association (1947). In 1967, the American Documentation Institute (1937) changed its name to the American So- ciety for Information Science (ASIS), in part to claim jurisdiction over a rapidly evolving professional field, in part to provide an associational focus to scholars, researchers, documentalists, and bibliographers who shared interests in this new area called "information science." At the same time, the library press had grown significantly, mostly to address the practical needs of the profession, especially in collections acquisition and ready reference information. The ALA stopped pub- lishing its own Catalog by mid-century but continued to issue Booklist. Most public libraries continued to subscribe. Multiple divisions, sec- tions, and round tables within the ALA began issuing their own jour- nals, some of which published applied research aimed at improving library services and management, including the Reference and Adult Services Division's RQ (now Reference and User Services Quarterly), the American Association of School Librarians' Top of the News (now the Journal of Youth Services in Libraries), the Association for Library Collec- tions and Technical Services' LRTS, and the Association of College and Research Libraries' College & Research Libraries. The latter association also issued Choice magazine, a monthly list of books recommended for purchase by academic libraries. Most subscribed to and also continued
18 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY to buy new editions of the more comprehensive Books for College Librar- ies, which had first appeared in 1967. The Society of American Archi- vists began publishing American Archivist in 1937, and ASIS changed the name of itsjournal from American Documentation (1950) to theJournal of the American Society for Information Science (JASIS) in 1970. The H. W. Wilson Company continued to publish Reader's Guide, but supplemented it with an array of other indexes, including Abridged Reader's Guide, Humanities Index, Social Sciences Index, and Applied Sciences and Technologies Index. The company still issued Fiction Catalog and Chil- dren 's Catalog but had evolved Public Library Catalog out of another bib- liographical guide it had begun issuing in the 1930s. Along with Junior High School and Senior High School Library Catalog each was published in quinquennial editions and was updated by annual supplements. Li- braries working in each sector of the library world routinely awaited the arrival of these guides, then checked the contents of their libraries against the citations. Works not represented in their collections were considered for acquisition; works in their collections but not in the guides were considered for weeding. The R. R. Bowker Company, Scarecrow Press, Libraries Unlimited, the ALA, and the Wilson Com- pany (among others) also published numerous monographs, but mostly to address librarians' practical needs. And each publisher also issued hundreds of new reference titles in the twentieth century that were intended to improve essential library services. The most utilized tides (for example, Statistical Abstracts, Oxford Companion to American Lit- erature) found their way onto the reference shelves of nearly all librar- ies; less utilized titles (for example, A Bibliography on Historic Organiza- tion Practices [1975], Guide to Private Manuscript Collections in the Narth Carolina State Archives [1981] ) were acquired mostly by better funded and more comprehensive, larger institutions. Thus, the vast majority of postwar library literature and library re- search continued to address issues of library expertise and institutional management. Not even research journals such as the Library Quarterly, which the University of Chicago Press had been publishing for the GLS since 1931, varied significantly from this pattern. The vast majority of the bibliographical guides aimed at identifying "the best reading" con- tinued to rely on a sophisticated and involved system set up at the turn of the century to profile "quality" work. Peer-reviewed journals and university presses, reputable and authoritative literary periodicals and trade publishers worked together to evaluate newer materials and even- tually form a consensus on a hierarchy classifying the rest. Librarians followed their lead and chose from a pool whose boundaries others had already defined [86]. New professionals coming out of library schools in the 1960s had
TWENTIETH-CENTURY AMERICAN LIBRARIANSHIP 19 little reason to question the judgment of these external authorities. The model of library education they inherited had grown from appren- ticing in the nineteenth century into a training program that by the 1920s was sometimes connected to a major public library, sometimes to a university as an undergraduate program, and finally after 1950 into a professional program located in a university graduate school. Before mid-century, entrance exams tested library school applicants' knowledge of current events, high-culture literature, and political (and largely Western) history. After mid-century, library school applicants generally needed a liberal arts undergraduate degree from an accred- ited institution, where they had already been taught the "best reading" by academic experts. Because library schools generally insisted on good grades (for example, 2.75 on a 4.00 scale) as a condition of matricula- tion, the profession could feel relatively confident that its new recruits would share the right "character" with their predecessors [87, 88, 46]. Once enrolled in library schools they took a core curriculum usually consisting of cataloging and classification, reference, management, book selection, and often a generic "Library in Society" course. The first four addressed institution and expertise; the last was intended to socialize students to the "library spirit" and inculcate the "library faith" by celebrating the library as an institution. Much of this celebration was reflected in the literature of library history that, with a few exceptions such asJesse Shera's The Foundations of the Public Libra?y [891 and Phyllis Dain's The New York Public Libraiy: A History [90], lacked the kind of critical analysis necessary to examine the validity of the library faith. Not until Michael Harris extrapolated from the conclusions of revisionist educational historians and in the early 1970s applied their ideas to an analysis of the origins of the Boston Public Library was the celebratory model significantly shaken [91]. Harris argued that founders, all of whom came from Boston's first fami- lies, set up the institution primarily as a means to exercise control of the city's new immigrants, especially the Irish. His conclusions struck at the heart of the library faith, but they also fit the times. The ALA had just weathered a revolt occasioned by hundreds of its younger members who saw in the principle of "neutrality" most often advo- cated by veteran librarians an excuse not to address inequities in library practice caused by racism, sexism, and homophobia, a rationale not to confront a government bent on conducting an unjust war in southeast Asia, and a mechanism to give the Library Bill of Rights a strict con- struction that rendered it ineffective in the fight to include alternative perspectives in library collections [86]. With the organization of the Social Responsibilities Round Table in 1969, these rebels found a home in the ALA and with the publication of Harris's essay in 1973 and other
20 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY "revisionist" works that followed [92, 93], they found a history that grounded a justification of their own actions. For the next decade, readers of American library history rather simplistically categorized new publications into two camps: pro- or anti-Harris. But for practicing librarians, the quality of American library history scholarship paled in significance compared to developments in library practice. When World War II ended, few library administrators utilized management principles. In subsequent decades, however, library man- agement literature made frequent reference to theorists such as Peter Drucker, Chris Argyris, and Douglas McGregor. In 1970, the Association of Research Libraries established an Office of Management Studies to improve library management through initiatives such as the Management Review and Analysis Project, the Academic Library Development Pro- gram, and the Consultant Training Project [94]. By that time, under Henriette Avram's leadership, the Library of Congress had developed a standard format for machine-readable bibliographic records called MARC (machine-readable cataloging), first for books, later for serials and other formats [95]. In 1967 the Ohio College Association founded the Ohio College Library Center. Under Frederick Kilgour's leadership, little more than a decade later the center had evolved from a local col- lege network into a national bibliographic utility known as the OCLC (Online Computer Library Center, Inc.). Because OCLC adopted the MARC records on which many libraries depended, by 1990 thousands of libraries around the world were using its database for cooperative cataloging. By that time in the United States, thousands of libraries of all types had developed online public access catalogs, adopted pack- aged automated circulation systems, and incorporated use of CD-ROM products into the provision of traditional library services [96, 97]. More specifically, the public library world was affected in other ways. As white flight drained the cities in the 1960s, urban public library circulation decreased, in the largest communities by as much as 16 percent. Because those who stayed did not value the kind of printed cultural forms libraries routinely collected as much as those who left, librarians had to alter traditional practices and devise new ways to ad- dress a different set of information needs [98]. Information and refer- ral (I & R) became one approach, most evident in the Detroit Public Library TIP (The Information Place) Program it initiated in 1971. There librarians developed card file systems listing social and county organizations and the services they provided, their hours, addresses, telephone numbers, and personnel. Many of these files were later con- verted to machine-readable databases. Elsewhere, public librarians took different approaches. One approach to new circumstances was the evolution of federated library systems in which individually governed
TWENTIETH-CENTURY AMERICAN LIBRARIANSHIP 21 libraries volunteered to participate in joint efforts to purchase materi- als and share I & R services. Opportunities brought by improvement in electronic data processing accelerated the process. Another was the emergence of highly successful county library systems, most notably in places such as Broward County, Florida, Hennepin County, Minnesota, and Montgomery County, Maryland [99]. All these developments were reflected in a set of recommendations detailed in The Public Library Mission Statement and Its Imperative forr Service that ALA's Public Library Association issued in 1979. Public libraries should step away from accul- turation, the document argued, and instead become educational, cul- tural, information, and rehabilitative agencies that celebrate and serve the multicultural heritage of their communities in nontraditional ways [100]. Elsewhere in the library world, efforts to prepare different futures met mixed results, some of which were reflected in the experiences of the Council on Library Resources (now known as the Council on Li- brary and Information Resources), which had been established by a Ford Foundation grant in 1956 to facilitate research that had potential for improving library services and collections. In the late 1960s, for example, the council began pouring millions of dollars into MIT's In- formation Transfer Experiment (INTREX) Project-up to that time the largest nonmilitary information research project ever under- taken-in order to reconfigure the research library of the future [101]. Because it was designed primarily by engineers and privileged the infor- mation they considered most valuable, the project ultimately failed to produce the prototypical all-purpose research library for which it was funded. In 1986, however, the council formed a Commission of Preser- vation and Access, produced a very effective film on the deterioration of paper with high acidity called "Slow Fires," and joined with other higher education and scholarly agencies (for example, the Brittle Book Program of the National Endowment for the Humanities) to focus at- tention on the problem that affected the printed materials held by most libraries. In 1990, the federal government passed legislation requiring the use of alkaline paper in government publications [102]. The application of computers to document reference retrieval began in the late 1950s, and by the mid-1960s, online retrieval was widely used by special librarians in government and industry. For example, in 1971 the National Library of Medicine transformed Index Medicus, a paper- copy information retrieval system Surgeon GeneralJohn Shaw Billings originated in the 1870s, into MEDLARS (MEDical Literature Analysis and Retrieval System), a computerized bibliographic system accessible through MEDLINE (MEDLARS on Line) [103]. About the same time the Defense Department's Advanced Research
22 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Projects Agency established a computer network. When several years later the federal government sponsored a program to establish commu- nication protocols to integrate multiple unique networks, the Internet was born. In the 1980s, the National Science Foundation (NSF) funded much of the research to connect selected universities and research in- stitutions through NSFnet to NSF-assisted supercomputers. One re- sponse from the federal government to this emerging "opportunity" was the creation of the National Research and Education Network (NREN) in 1991. In anticipation of NREN, the Association of Research Libraries, the Association for the Management of Information and Technology in Higher Education, and EDUCOM (a networking con- sortium of colleges and universities) created the Coalition for Net- worked Information in 1990 to facilitate scholarship by improving ac- cess to networked information sources [99]. Much of the activity then became subordinate to the National Information Infrastructure initi- ated by the Clinton administration, which as of this writing is still being played out. Recent efforts to merge promising networks into routine library services are indeed exciting, but at the same time it is important to remember that the types of information processed by these networks are not universal and do not encompass information in all its cultural forms. Assessing the Present: Tunnel Vision and Blind Spots So now we stand at the end of one century, looking to prepare for the next. What guidance can the existing literature on the twentieth- century history of American libraries provide? On the one hand, I am cheered by recent developments in American library history, which has begun to mature into a more richly analytical, more deeply contextual- ized literature. Works such asJane Aikin Rosenberg's The Nation's Great Library: Herbert Putnam and the Library of Congress, 1899-1939 [62], Jo- anne E. Passet's Cultural Crusaders: Women Librarians in the American West, 1900-1917 [104], Deanna B. Marcum's Good Books in a Country Home: The Public Library as Cultural Force in Hagerstown, Maryland, 1878- 1920 [105], Abigail Van Slyck's Free To All: Carnegie Libraries and Ameri- can Culture, 1890-1920 [29], and Louise S. Robbins's Censorship and the American Library: The American Library Association's Response to Threats to Intellectual Freedom, 1939-1969 [57], and journals such as Libraries & Culture and the Library Quarterly, under the able editorships of Donald G. Davis andJohn V. Richardson Jr., respectively, hold out much prom- ise for the future. On the other hand, however, I am uneasy about the size of the task
TWENTIETH-CENTURY AMERICAN LIBRARIANSHIP 23 before us. From my perspective, the field is too large for the number of scholars currently giving it scrutiny, its research scope too centered on biography, library expertise, and big library institutions, and its fo- cus largely devoid of analysis of the impact collections and services have had on library users and the ways in which users appropriated both. I am especially concerned that with few exceptions we have not given nearly enough attention to the impact collection guides such as Booklist and Choice have had on perpetuating canons, or to the role libraries have played in the everyday lives of women, children, African, Hispanic, and Asian Americans, and working-class people. Blind spots, all. But even among types of libraries, scanning the literature of Ameri- can library history reveals huge gaps in terms of quality and quantity. For example, in 1990 the United States had 75,000 school and 4,600 academic libraries, yet there is no comprehensive critical history or even a set of solid case studies to help identify their multiple roles and evaluate their impacts on the millions of students and faculty who used their services and collections in the twentieth century. How can the school and academic library communities possibly articulate policy and plan for their futures without knowing what they have done well and poorly in the past? In 1990, every state in America had at least one state library agency that for most of the last half of the twentieth century expended millions of dollars to improve library services, yet there is no comprehensive critical history of state library agencies or even a set of solid case studies to help identify their multiple roles and evaluate their impacts on the millions of citizens affected by those dollars. Again, blind spots. What concerns me even more, however, falls under the jurisdictions of public libraries and what we used to call special libraries but are now more frequently referring to as information agencies. Let me start with the latter first. Here I see a field evolving that is based on the traditional model of reference service that American libraries have sought to pro- vide for most of this century [106]. In it certain types of information valued by business, industry, and government receive most attention, in part because each has invested huge sums of money to improve systems design. Absent from the discourse driving this field, however, are the kinds of questions critical theorists such as Michel Foucault [107], An- tonio Gramsci [108], and Jurgen Habermas [109], and philosophers of science such as Helen Longino [110], MargaretJacob [111], and Sandra Harding [112] ask about connections between power and knowledge, which all agree is never totally objective and never disinter- ested. To illustrate what I mean, I took a cursory glance at the 3,200 citations in the one hundred "research" articles appearing in the 1991 and 1995 issues ofJASIS. In them I found no references to the six criti-
24 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY cal theorists I cite above and only a few to thinkers such as Umberto Eco and Hilary Putnam. Based on this rather unscientific survey, one gets the impression of a profession trapped in its own discursive forma- tions, where members speak mostly to each other and where connec- tions between power and knowledge that affect issues of race, class, age, and gender, among others, are either invisible or ignored. One also gets the impression of a profession much more interested in pro- cess and structure than in people. Tunnel vision and blind spots. I think this also may explain why contemporary "information sci- ence" has generally failed to construct models of a personal "informa- tion economy"4 for individuals of both genders, all classes, ages, ethnic- ities, creeds, and sexual orientations in order to see what information they variably obtain from printed materials of all types, from cultural forms such as music, film, art, and TV, from their neighbors, their school, their church, their libraries, their government, their friends, their family, even from computers, and then to analyze how they appro- priate that information in efforts to make sense of the world around them in their everyday lives [114]. Unfortunately, with relatively few exceptions [115-119], researchers in library and information studies have generally not attempted to harness the kind of critical thinking that would enable them to evolve "personal information economy" models that my colleague Doug Zweizig pointed to in his 1973 disserta- tion, when he argued that for too long our profession has "looked at the user in the life of the library rather than the library in the life of the user" [120, p. 15]. His observation still applies. The "information science" that has developed in the last years of the twentieth century constitutes an arena of study in which the technology to which it is harnessed defines the field. Like general reference work, it is built on "expertise," not "authority," and to the extent that people's "informa- tion economy" does not require use of these technologies within the culture in which they live, current "information science" discourse renders them and their culture(s) invisible largely by ignoring both. Equally unfortunate is that information science and American library historians have not provided much perspective here. All of this constitutes a subtext I read in the words of Pulitzer Prize- winning historian Leon Litwack, who complained loudly about the pri- orities of the library system on his own University of California, Berke- ley, campus. "In our eagerness to implement the new information tech- nology," he wrote in the February 1998 issue of California Monthly, "there is no sense of the need for balance, little or no awareness that 4. I adapt this from Barbara Herrnstein Smith, who talks about the concept of a "personal economy" that comprises an individual's "needs, interests, and resources" [113, chap. 3].
TWENTIETH-CENTURY AMERICAN LIBRARIANSHIP 25 different academic disciplines may have different needs, not all of them fulfilled by the new technology. We find ourselves, instead, embracing that technology uncritically, without considering cost, maintenance, re- liability, and value" [121, p. 12]. Tunnel vision and blind spots. American public libraries (and to some extent school and academic libraries) suffer similar myopia, in large part because LIS research in general, and American library history in particular, has not yet assimi- lated into its research scope the findings emanating from a growing interdisciplinary body of scholarship on reading [52; 122-127], a major means by which people obtain information, whether it comes off the printed page or the computer screen. For the past twenty years, it has been generated by some of the brightest minds in traditional academic disciplines like history and literature, and new interdisciplinary fields such as cultural, women's, ethnic, and American studies, and it has been published by some of the world's most prestigious presses, all of which have exacting scholarly standards. I think our absence as a profession from this mix of voices reflects the tunnel vision of our con- temporary professional discourse and constitutes one of librarianship's major blind spots [128]. This scholarship, for which Louise Rosen- blatt's Literature as Exploration served as a harbinger (the Modern Lan- guage Association published a fifth edition of her work in 1995), at- tempts to shed the rules and regulations by which we have previously judged our reading, and especially the reading of popular fiction pub- lic libraries have been circulating by the millions for most of this cen- tury, in order to look at and understand the contents of those texts through the eyes of the people who read them most. These numbers have not significantly changed in recent times. A U.S. News/Cable Network News poll conducted October 13-16, 1995, revealed that 67 percent of Americans used public libraries in 1994, and of that number 80 percent (140 million people) went to check out some cultural form. Yet without knowledge of reading research, recipients of a Kellogg Foundation grant who met in Washington in 1996 [129] to discuss the future of libraries seemed unable to tease out the broader significance of a Benton Foundation report [130, pp. 27, 30] on a focus group that identified as its top two library services (1) "providing reading hours and other programs for children," and (2) "purchasing new books and other printed materials." And when a member of that same Benton Foundation focus group also criticized libraries for not stocking enough popular titles ("If you want to get the book that everybody is reading right now, it is just not in," she complained), Kellogg grantees and focus-group organizers did not seem to understand what sociologist Elizabeth Long discovered years ago in her research-that reading the same book (even if individually
26 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY done in private) constitutes a community-based information-sharing activity [131]. Tunnel vision and blind spots. On September 25, 1995, Ken Carpenter called for a joint effort be- tween professional librarians and professional historians to study the eighteenth- and nineteenth-century library as a resource shared to varying degrees by hundreds of thousands in America's multicultural society. I welcome this opportunity to echo his call, but also to amplify and extend it for twentieth-century American library history to addi- tional professional communities whose research interests have the po- tential to address huge gaps in our knowledge of one of this nation's most ubiquitous twentieth-century institutions. The task before us is indeed large, but with the help of education, social, cultural, and intel- lectual historians, and scholars from research communities such as American, women, race, and ethnic studies, we can accelerate and aug- ment our effort. Like society in general, every generation of library and information professionals must apply to the past it has inherited a set of questions unique to its time and circumstances in order to better understand its present, so that it can prudently plan its future. Our own generation is no different. Our alternative-to craft a set of tunnel-visioned plans and strategies for the future that carry with them many of the systemic gendered, class, age, occupational, ethnic, and homophobic blind spots marking so much of our past-is, in my opinion, unacceptable. REFERENCES 1. Public Information Office. American Library Association. Library Advocacy Now! Quotable Facts about American Libraries. Chicago: American Library Association, 1996. 2. Lancaster, F. Wilfrid. Towards Paperless Information Systems. New York: Academic Press, 1978. 3. Mitchell, William J. City of Bits: Space, Place, and the Infobahn. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1995. 4. Carpenter, Kenneth E. Readers and Libraries: Toward a History of Libraries and Culture in America. Washington, D.C.: Library of Congress, 1996. 5. Bacon, Francis. "Of Studies." In Essays or Counsels, Civil and Moral, of Francis Bacon, ed- ited by Samuel Harvey Reynolds, pp. 341-44. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1890. 6. Emerson, Ralph Waldo. Society and Solitude: Twelve Chapters. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1860. 7. Harrison, Frederic. The Choice of Books and Other Literary Pieces. London: Macmillan, 1896. 8. Hillis, Newel Dwight. A Man's Value to Society: Studies in Self- Culture and Character. London: Oliphant, Anderson & Ferrier, 1897. 9. Hayes, Kevin H. A Colonial Woman's Bookshely Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1996. 10. Westerhof, John H., III. McGuffey and His Readers: Piety, Morality, and Education in Nine- teenth Century America. Nashville: Abingdon, 1978.
TWENTIETH-CENTURY AMERICAN LIBRARIANSHIP 27 11. Wiegand, Wayne A. "Research Libraries, the Ideology of Reading, and Scholarly Com- munication, 1876-1900." In Libraries and Scholarly Communication in the United States: The HistoricalDimension, edited by Phyllis Dain andJohn Y Cole, pp. 71-87. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1990. 12. Wiegand, Wayne A. "Catalog of 'A.L.A.' Library (1893): Origins of a Genre." In For the Good of the Order: Essays in Honor of Edward G. Hollty, edited by Delmas Williams et al., pp. 237-54. Greenwich, Conn.: JAI Press, 1994. 13. U.S. Bureau of Education, Department of the Interior. Catalog of "A.L.A. "Librasy: 5,000 Volumes for a Popular Library. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1893. 14. Wiegand, Wayne A. Irrepressible Reformer: A Biography of Melvil Dewey. Chicago: American Library Association, 1996. 15. American Library Association. "Papers Prepared for the World's Library Congress." In Report of the Commissioner of Education for the Year, 1892-1893, Parts 1 and 2. Bureau of Education, Department of Interior. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1895. 16. Wiebe, Robert. The Search for Order, 1877-1920. New York: Hill & Wang, 1967. 17. Haskell, Thomas S. The Emergence of Professional Social Science: The American Social Science Association and the Nineteenth Century Crisis ofAuthority. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1977. 18. Bledstein, Burton J. The Culture of Professionalism: The Middle Class and the Development of Higher Education in America. New York: Free Press, 1976. 19. Starr, Paul. "The Social Origins of Professional Sovereignty." In The Social Transformation of American Medicine, pp. 3-29. New York: Basic Books, 1982. 20. Wiegand, Wayne A. "The Socialization of Library and Information Science Students: Reflections on a Century of Formal Education for Librarianship." Library Trends 34 (Win- ter 1986): 383-400. 21. Wiegand, Wayne A. "Perspectives on Library Education in the Context of Recently Pub- lished Literature on the History of Professions." Journal of Education for Library and Infor- mation Science 26 (Spring 1986): 267-80. 22. Biggs, Mary. " 'Mom in the Library': The Readers' Guide to Periodical Literature." In Distin- guished Classics of Reference Publishing, edited byJames Rettig, pp. 198-210. Phoenix: Oryx Press, 1992. 23. Fiction Catalog: A Selected List of about 350 Novels, Cataloged by Author and Title with Annota- tions. Minneapolis: H. W. Wilson, 1909. 24. Potter, Marion E., comp. Children's Catalog: A Guide to the Best Reading for Young People Based on Twenty-Four Selection Library Lists. Minneapolis: H. W. Wilson, 1909. 25. Wiegand, Wayne A. "Forging a Professional Identity: Adjustment and Accommodation, 1901-1909." In The Politics of an Emerging Profession: The American Library Association, 1876-1917, pp. 121-201. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1986. 26. Parker, Alison M. Punyiing America: Women, Cultural Reform, and Pro-Censorship Activism, 1873-1933. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1997. 27. Lundin, Anne. "Anne Carroll Moore." In Reclaiming the American Library Past: Writing the Women In, edited by Suzanne Hildenbrand, pp. 187-204. Norwood, N.J.: Ablex, 1996. 28. Bobinski, George S. Carnegie Libraries: Their History and Impact on American Library Develop- ment. Chicago: American Library Association, 1969. 29. Van Slyck, Abigail A. Free to All: Carnegie Libraries and American Culture, 1890-1920. Chi- cago: University of Chicago Press, 1995. 30. Martin, Robert S., ed. Carnegie Denied: Communities Rejecting Carnegie Library Construction Grants, 1898-1925. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1993. 31. Casey, Marion. Charles McCarthy: Librarianship and Reform. Chicago: American Library Association, 1981.
28 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 32. Finkelman, Paul. "Class and Culture in Late Nineteenth-Century Chicago: The Found- ing of the Newberry Library." American Studies 16 (Spring 1975): 522. 33. Bay, J. Christian. The John Crerar Library, 1895-1944: An Historical RepoTt. Chicago: John Crerar Library, 1945. 34. Dickinson, Donald C. Henry E. Huntington's Libraiy of Libraries. San Marino, Calif.: Hun- tington Library, 1995. 35. Paul, G. N. "The Development of the Hoover Institution on War, Revolution and Peace Library, 1919-1944." Ph.D. diss., University of California, Berkeley, 1974. 36. Christianson, Elin B. Daniel Nash Handy and the Special Library Movement. New York: Spe- cial Libraries Association, 1979. 37. Fisher, William. "Handy, Daniel Nash (1875-1948)." In Supplemnt to the Dictionary of American Library Biography, edited by Wayne A. Wiegand, pp. 32-36. Englewood, Colo.: Libraries Unlimited, 1990. 38. Hamlin, Arthur T. The University Library in the United States. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1981. 39. Shiflett, Orvin Lee. The Origins of American Academic Librarianship. Norwood, N.J.: Ablex, 1981. 40. Young, Arthur P. Books for Sammies: The American Library Association and World War I. Pittsburgh: Beta Phi Mu, 1981. 41. Wiegand, Wayne A. "An Active Instrument for Propaganda": The Amencan Public Library during World War I. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1989. 42. Bacon, Corinne, comp. Standard Catalog: Fiction Section. New York: H. W. Wilson, 1923. 43. Learned, William S. The American Public Library and the Diffusion of Knowledge. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1924. 44. Richardson, John V., Jr. "Teaching General Reference Work: The Complete Paradigm and Competing Schools of Thought, 1890-1990." Library Quarterly 62 (January 1992): 55-89. 45. Monroe, Margaret E. Library Adult Education: The Biography of An Idea. New York: Scare- crow Press, 1963. 46. Richardson, John V., Jr. Spirit of Inquiry: The Graduate Library School at Chicago, 1921- 1951. Chicago: American Library Association, 1982. 47. Waples, Douglas, and Tyler, Ralph W. What People Want to Read About: A Study of Group Interests and Survey Probkms in Adult Reading. Chicago: American Library Association, 1931. 48. Butler, Pierce. An Introduction to Library Science. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1933. 49. Wilson, Louis Round. The Geography of Reading: A Study of the Distribution and Status of Libraries in the United States. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1938. 50. Karetzky, Stephen. Reading Research and Librarianship: A Histoty and Analysis. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1982. 51. Haines, Helen E. Living with Books: The Art of Book Selection. New York: Columbia Univer- sity Press, 1935. 52. Radway,JaniceA. AFeelingforBooks: The Book-of-the-Month Club, Literary Taste, and Middle- Class Desire. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1997. 53. Harlan, Robert D. "Haines, Helen Elizabeth (1872-1961)." In Dictionary of Amenican Library Biography, edited by Bohdan S. Wynar, pp. 223-37. Littleton, Colo.: Libraries Unlimited, 1978. 54. Rosenblatt, Louise. Literature as Exploration. New York: Appleton-Century, 1938. 55. Kaestle, Carl F., et al. Literacy in the United States: Readers and Reading since 1880. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1991.
TWENTIETH-CENTURY AMERICAN LIBRARIANSHIP 29 56. Geller, Evelyn. Forbidden Books in American Public Libranes, 1876-1939: A Study in Cultural Change. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1984. 57. Robbins, Louise S. Censorship and the Amenican Library: The American Library Association's Response to Threats to Intellectual Freedom, 1939-1969. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1996. 58. Stanford, Edward Barrett. "Library Extension under the WPA: An Appraisal of an Early Experiment in Federal Aid." Ph.D. diss., University of Chicago, 1942. 59. Ring, Daniel F., ed. Studies in Creative Partnership: Federal Aid to Public Libraries during the New Deal. Metuchen, N.J.: Scarecrow Press, 1980. 60. Cole, John Y., ed. Books in Action: The Armed Sernnces Editions. Washington, D.C.: Library of Congress, 1984. 61. Mearns, David C. The Story Up to Now: The Library of Congress, 1800-1946. Washington, D.C.: Library of Congress, 1947. 62. Rosenberg, Jane Aiken. The Nation's Great Library: Herbert Putnam and the Library of Con- gress, 1899-1939. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1993. 63. Cole, John Y. For Congress and the Nation: A Chronological History of the Library of Congress. Washington, D.C.: Library of Congress, 1979. 64. McCoy, Donald R. The National Archives: America's Ministry of Documents, 1934-1968. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1978. 65. Miles, Wyndham D. A History of the National Library of Medicine: The Nation's Treasury of Medical Knowledge. Bethesda, Md.: National Library of Medicine, 1982. 66. U.S. National Agricultural Library Associates. The National Agricultural Library: A Chronol- ogy of Its Leadership and Attainments, 1839-1973. Beltsville, Md.: National Agricultural Library, 1974. 67. Garceau, Oliver. The Public Library in the Political Process. New York: Columbia University Press, 1949. 68. Berelson, Bernard. The Library's Public. New York: Columbia University Press, 1949. 69. Bryan, Alice. The Public Librarian. New York: Columbia University Press, 1952. 70. Raber, Douglas. Librarianship and Legitimacy: The Ideology of the Public Library Inquiry. West- port, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1997. 71. "The Public Library Inquiry: Reminiscences, Reflections, and Research." Libraries & Culture 26 (Winter 1994): 1-141. 72. Fiske, Marjorie. Book Selection and Censorship: A Study of School and Public Libraries in Califor- nia. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1959. 73. Geiger, Roger L. Research and Relevant Knowledge: American Research Universities since World War II. New York: Oxford University Press, 1993. 74. Gaines, AbnerJ. "Farmington Plan." In Encyclopedia of Library History, edited by Wayne A. Wiegand and Donald G. Davis, Jr., p. 193. New York: Garland, 1994. 75. Vosper, Robert. The Farmington Plan Survey: A Summary of the Separate Studies of 1957- 1961. Urbana: University of Illinois Library School, 1965. 76. Wiegand, Wayne A. "Lawrence Clark Powell." In Leaders in American Academic Librarian- ship: 1925-1975, edited by Wayne A. Wiegand, pp. 262-87. Pittsburgh: Beta Phi Mu, 1983. 77. Winger, Howard W. "Jesse Hauk Shera (1903-1982)." In Supplement to the Dictionary of American Library Biography, edited by Wayne A. Wiegand, pp. 119-23. Englewood, Colo.: Libraries Unlimited, 1990. 78. Strengthening American Science: Report of the President's Science Advisory Committee. Washing- ton, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1958. 79. Shapiro, F. R. "Coinage of the Term 'Information Science.' " Journal of the American Society for Information Science 46 (June 1995): 384-85. 80. Holley, Edward G., and Schremser, Robert F., eds. The Library Services and Construction
30 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Act: An Historical Overview from the Viewpoint of Major Participants. Greenwich, Conn.: JAI Press, 1983. 81. Wiegand, Wayne A. "The Historical Development of State Library Agencies." In State Library Services and Issues: Facing Future Challenges, edited by Charles R. McClure, pp. 1- 16. Norwood, NJ.: Ablex, 1986. 82. Center for Education Statistics. Office of Educational Research and Improvement. U.S. Department of Education. Statistics of Public and Private School Library Media Centers, 1 985- 1986 (with Historical Comparisonsfrom 1958-1985). Washington, D.C.: Government Print- ing Office, 1987. 83. Cecil, Henry L., and Heaps, Willard A. School Library Service in the United States: An Interpre- tive Survey. New York: H. W. Wilson, 1940. 84. Lemley, D. E. "The Development and Evaluation of Administrative Policies and Prac- tices in Public School Library Service as Evidenced in City School Surveys, 1907-1947." Ph.D. diss., University of Pittsburgh, 1949. 85. Lanier, Gene D. "The Transformation of School Libraries into Instructional Materials Centers." Ph.D. diss., University of North Carolina, 1968. 86. Samek, Antonia D. "Intellectual Freedom and Social Responsibilities: An Ethos of American Librarianship, 1967-1973." Ph.D. diss., University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1998. 87. White, Carl. A Historical Introduction to Library Education. Metuchen, N.J.: Scarecrow Press, 1976. 88. Davis, Donald G., Jr. "Education for Librarianship." Library Trends 25 (July 1976): 113- 34. 89. Shera, Jesse H. Foundations of the Public Library: The Origins of the Public Library Movement in Nev England, 1629-1855. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1949. 90. Dain, Phyllis. The New York Public Library: A History of Its Founding and Early Years. New York: New York Public Library, 1972. 91. Harris, Michael H. "The Purpose of the American Public Library: A Revisionist Interpre- tation of History." Library Journal 98 (September 15, 1973): 2509-14. 92. Du Mont, Rosemary Ruhig. Reform and Reaction: The Big City Public Library in American Life. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1977. 93. Garrison, Dee. Apostles of Culture: The Public Librarian and American Society, 1876-1920. New York: Free Press, 1979. 94. Rosenberg, Jane A. "Library Management." In Encyclopedia of Library History, edited by Wayne A. Wiegand and Donald G. Davis, Jr., pp. 373-77. New York: Garland, 1994. 95. Carpenter, Michael. "Catalogs and Cataloging." In Encyclopedia of Library History, edited by Wayne A. Wiegand and Donald G. Davis,Jr., pp. 107-17. New York: Garland, 1994. 96. Maciuszko, Kathleen L. OCLC: A Decade of Development, 1967-1977. Littleton, Colo.: Li- braries Unlimited, 1984. 97. Smith, K. Wayne, ed. OCLC 196 7-1997: Thirty Years of Furthering Access to the World's Infor- mation. New York: Haworth Press, 1998. 98. Lawson, Rhea. "Organizational Adaptation by the Urban Public Library to Ethnic Tran- sition." Ph.D. diss., University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1998. 99. Molz, Redmond Kathleen, and Dain, Phyllis. The American Public Library in the Information Age. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, in press. 100. Public Library Association. Goals, Guidelines, and Standards Committee. The Public Li- brary Mission Statement and Its Imperative for Service. Chicago: American Library Associa- tion, 1979. 101. Burke, Colin. "A Rough Road to the Information Highway: Project Intrex: A View from the CLR Archives." Information Processing and Management 32 (January 1996): 19-32. 102. Baker,John P. "Conservation and Preservation of Library Materials." In WorldEncyclope-
TWENTIETH-CENTURY AMERICAN LIBRARIANSHIP 31 dia of Library and Information Services, 3d ed., edited by Robert Wedgeworth, pp. 224- 28. Chicago: American Library Association, 1993. 103. Teigen, Philip M. "National Library of Medicine..Bethesda, MD., USA." In Encyclopedia of Library History, edited by Wayne A. Wiegand and Donald G. Davis, Jr., pp. 455-57. New York: Garland, 1994. 104. Passet, Joanne E. Cultural Crusaders: Women Libranans in the American West, 1900-1917. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1994. 105. Marcum, Deanna B. Good Books in a Country Home: The Public Library as a Cultural Force in Hagerstown, Maryland, 1878-1920. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1994. 106. Saracevic, Tefko, and Kantor, Paul G. "Studying the Value of Library and Information Services." Parts I and 2, "Establishing a Theoretical Framework" and "Methodology and Taxonomy." Journal of the Amercan Society for Information Science 48 (June 1997): 527-63. 107. Foucault, Michel. Archeology of Knowledge and the Discourse of Language. New York: Pan- theon, 1972. 108. Gramsci, Antonio. Prison Notebooks. Vol. 1. New York: Columbia University Press, 1992. 109. Habermas, Jurgen. The Theory of Communication Action. Vol. I, Reason and the Rationaliza- tion of Society. Boston: Beacon, 1984. 110. Longino, Helen. Science as Social Knowledge: Values and Objectivity in Scientific Inquiry. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1990. 111. Jacob, Margaret. The Cultural Meaning of the Scientific Revolution. New York: Knopf, 1988. 112. Harding, Sandra. Whose Science? Whose Knowledge? Thinking from Women's Lives. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1991. 113. Smith, Barbara Herrnstein. Contingencies of Value: Alternative Perspectivesfor Critical Theoy. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1988. 114. de Certeau, Michel. The Practice of Everyday Life. Translated by Steven Rendell. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1984. 115. Tuominen, Kimma. "User-Centered Discourse: An Analysis of the Subject Positions of the User and the Librarian." Library Quarterly 67 (October 1997): 350-71. 116. Budd,John Mason. "User-Centered Thinking: Lessons from Reader-Centered Theory." RQ 34 (Summer 1995): 487-96. 117. Radford, Gary P. "Positivism, Foucault, and the Fantasia of the Library: Conceptions of Knowledge and the Modern Library Experiences." Library Quarterly 62 (October 1992): 408-24. 118. Chatman, Elfreda A. The Information World of Retired Women. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1992. 119. Pawley, Christine. "Hegemony's Handmaid? The Library and Information Science Cur- riculum from a Class Perspective." Libraty Quarterly 68 (April 1998): 123-44. 120. Zweizig, Douglas L. "Predicting Amount of Library Use: An Empirical Study of the Role of the Public Library in the Life of the Adult Public." Ph.D. diss., Syracuse University, 1973. 121. "Seeking to Reverse Slide, UC-Berkeley Library Hires Interim." LibraryJournal 123 (May 15, 1998): 12-13. 122. Chartier, Roger. Forms and Meanings: Texts, Perfornances and Audiences from Codex to Com- puter. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1995. 123. Iser, Wolfgang. The Act of Reading: A Theary of Aesthetic Response. Baltimore:Johns Hopkins University Press, 1978. 124. Fish, Stanley. Is There a Text in This Class? The Authority of Interpretive Communities. Cam- bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1980. 125. Boyarin,Jonathan, ed. The Ethnography of Reading. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1993.
32 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 126. Radway, Janice A. Reading the Romance: Women, Patriarchy, and Popular Literature. 2d ed. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1991. 127. Tompkins,Jane. West ofEverything: The Inner Life of Westerns. New York: Oxford University Press, 1993. 128. Wiegand, Wayne A. "Out of Sight, Out of Mind: Why Don't We Have Any Schools of Library and Reading Studies?" Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 38 (Fall 1997): 314-26. 129. "Benton Study: Libraries Need to Work on Message to the Public." LibraryJournal 121 (September 1, 1996): 112. 130. Benton Foundation. Buildings, Books, and Bytes: Libraries and Communities in the Digital Age. Washington, D.C.: Benton Foundation, 1996. 131. Long, Elizabeth. "Textual Interpretation as Collective Action." In [125], pp. 180-21 1.