BINDING PRACTICE AS RELATED TO THE PRESERVATION OF BOOKS HAROLD W. TRIBOLET It has been reported that the work assignments in the western European monasteries before the age of printing were very simple. If a monk could read and write, or possibly just write, he was developed as a calligrapher. Those who did not have writing skills were sent to the garden or were taught bookbinding. This story was probably related by a waggish calligrapher. Nevertheless, the work of the early binder is truly re- markable. He conceived sound con- structional techniques, some of which have survived for 1,000 years. Unmis- takable evidence of his fundamentals and ingenuity remains in much of our binding technology of today, particular- ly in books with rigid covers. As in the past, we conti"nue to secure and hinge the leaves at one edge, a process which enables one to read from one page of text to another in a convenient, rapid manner. Many books have a concave fore edge together with a rounded back- bone, again a reflection of early con- struction. The fiber boards on the sides of a modern binding, inspired by the wooden panels used in the past, give protective support to the less rigid leaves of the book. Finally, although the covering material on the exterior of most of the present-day machine-made books is unlike the leathers used several hundred years ago, its prime purpose remains to protect the underlying con- struction. Shortly after the invention of the printing press, book production grew rapidly in Europe. The binders, unlike the newly trained compositors and pressmen, were not required to master a new craft, for they simply continued the time-consuming traditional tech- niques developed earlier for the binding of manuscript leaves. As the demand for printed books increased, it is appar- ent that the quality of binding suffered because inexperienced help with ques- tionable talent was recruited to supple- ment the output of the skilled binders. Shortcuts followed, and by the eigh- teenth century one can see evidence of these in the construction and materials used for binding. The evolution of the mass-produced binding to its present- day form reflects the continuing struggle of the binder to keep pace with the printing press and the demands of the publishers. Perhaps the most significant breakthrough came with the creation of the case binding, estimated to have oc- curred about 1825-30, shortly after the introduction of cloth for a covering ma- terial. Case binding illustrated the pre- fabrication concept. It involved a group of sewn signatures, glued, rounded, and backed, to be put in a cover or case made of two boards and a covering ma- terial produced as a separate unit- both held together with an adhesive. Although this binding was designed to be produced by hand, it was actually the prototype for the machine-made binding introduced shortly before the turn of this century. It was a departure from the costly hand binding of the past; now books could be made avail- able to the millions who wanted them at reasonable prices; the binder in collab- oration with the engineer had learned 128
BINDING AS RELATED TO PRESERVATION 129 to accept the tools and conditions of an industrial society. But the basic fashion of binding was not changed. Many evo- lutionary variants in binding styles have developed during the past several cen- turies; yet, as Klinefelter reminds us: "If Christopher Columbus were to re- turn to earth today, one of the things in daily use that he would easily recognize would be a book" [1, p. v]. The structural success of a book is dependent upon the satisfactory func- tion of the construction and all of the material involved. An elegant or simple binding on a book made of paper with a very limited life, or with leaves that do not open easily because the paper is rigid or badly sewn, is an inexcusable waste of skill and money. When a new book is being conceived, the binder should be involved in the planning stage, since he is responsible for an im- portant component of the construction. The kind of paper, its thickness, the direction of grain, signature size, di- mension of the gutter margin, type of sewing, edge treatment, style of bind- ing, covering material, and related details should not be the undivided re- sponsibility of the designer. If re- binding or restoration is necessary, it is imperative that the binder or conser- vator fully understand the purpose of his craft in providing a workable exten- sion to the life of the book. In planning a new book, the selection of paper should be made after consulta- tion with a person who knows binding. The paper in existing books that require rebinding or restoration, however, pre- sents another problem; here the mis- takes of the past are frequently seen and must be resolved. The binder must carefully decide whether the leaves re- quire washing, deacidification, sizing, total physical support with a supple- mental material, repair of the folds of the signatures-decisions that he should make after discussing the problems with the owner of the book or the li- brarian, who are best qualified to judge the importance of an item and the man- ner in which it is to be used. Although paper is the most important element of the physical book and the binding is a protective shell, often the binding out- lasts the paper, a condition too fre- quently seen in many books produced during the past century. Middleton, in his thorough book on binding techniques, describes the stab- bing of papyrus leaves with thread through one of the margins as the most primitive form of consolidation [2]. To- day some mechanized sewing is not un- like this early process, and these kinds of curious similarities can be seen in many other variants of the sewing op- eration. Another example of the effect of the past is the raised thong or cord sewing, probably developed in the tenth cen- tury, in which the thread is inside the signatures, parallel to the folds and anchored to the thongs or cords posi- tioned outside the signatures at the backbone. This sewing has stood the test of time and is still used today by many hand binders who are determined to create durable bindings. Further- more, the basic concept undoubtedly in- spired the inventors of the Smyth sew- ing machine and similar ones developed during the latter half of the last cen- tury, which automatically introduce thread to the signatures as in the raised- cord sewing, then knot them together, but without the protruding cords on the backbone. This type of mechanical sewing, used on millions of books being manufactured today, provides strength and flexibility. On heavy books subject to frequent handling, cotton tapes are usually included at the backbone,
130 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY through which the sewing is passed. The tapes, longer than the thickness of the book, are anchored to the inside of the case as part of the endsheet. This sewing is employed in some European countries for rebinding circu- lating books, after the folds of the sig- natures are repaired, because of the flexibility advantages. Library binders in our country have not adopted the process, claiming that the preparatory work on the signatures is too expensive. Prior to the invention of the sewing machine, the pressures of production brought about compromises in sewing that enabled the binder to produce books rapidly, though hand labor was still employed. He found that hand sew- ing a book on a few hemp cords re- cessed in the backbone was faster than sewing on the traditional five raised cords. Frequently the covering material on publishers' bindings sewn in this way was paper or cloth, used as a substitute for the more expensive leather. Some of the present-day hand bind- ers involved in leather binding also fa- vor recessed cord sewing, combined with a hollow backbone. This backbone is a tubelike, partially laminated paper lining, to which are sometimes attached artificial raised bands made of strips of cardboard or leather. The hollow back- bone makes it possible to open a book to the farthest point of the gutter mar- gin, and it also provides a relatively in- flexible area for gold tooling. The advantage of easier opening in the recessed-cord, hollow-backbone con- struction, as in a book with abnormally stiff leaves, is offset by significant de- fects. Saw cuts across the folds of the signatures are necessary to accommo- date the sewing cords, a form of muti- lation that weakens the paper in a criti- cal area. When the book is opened, a severe arch forms at the backbone, op- posed to its normal shape, thus causing a strain on the sewing cords. Then, as the binding ages, the leather wears away in the joint area, followed by the dis- integration of the paper folds of the hollow backbone. Finally, the entire backbone comes loose from the binding, thus creating the need for an immediate major restoration operation. The edition or publishers' binding will withstand normal usage in the pri- vate library, but it suffers when given heavy use in a circulating library. Fre- quently the leaves become detached, the case loosens from the body, and the covering material breaks down. Pro- longing the life of the book is the logical objective in most instances. However, the manner in which this is done re- quires intelligent judgment. If the book is a rarity it should be set aside for special treatment in the hands of a skilled binder, who would have the competence to restore or rebind it. An intermediate category should be recog- nized for those books too significant for the so-called library binding, yet not qualified for the special treatment. The third category should include books that justify simple rebinding. Within each of the three categories mentioned, there are many routes to follow in deciding precisely what should be done with a particular book. Sorting a collection of books in need of atten- tion requires the knowledgeable judg- ment of the librarian, or book owner, who understands the advantages of consulting a qualified binder or conser- vator. Simple rebinding could mean the utilization of the existing sewing, new endpapers of durable, permanent, acid- free paper, the relining of the back- bone, and a strong case binding of cloth
BINDING AS RELATED TO PRESERVATION 131 or a suitable material. If resewing is necessary, overcasting or oversewing is generally used, done by machine or by hand. Here the folds of the signatures are cut away, and thread is introduced through the gutter margins of the leaves, consuming the last one-quarter inch of each leaf. Unless the paper is thin as well as flexible, a binding sewn in this way opens poorly, and one must exert force on the pages during the reading process. It is, however, a strong sewing technique. Side sewing (not to be confused with that used on pamphlets and slightly re- lated to overcasting), used on many new, mass-produced school and refer- ence case-bound books destined for heavy use, is undoubtably the most distinctive innovation in commerical binding. Holes are drilled at high speeds through the gutter margins of the leaves at a ninety-degree angle, and thread is drawn through the entire book in one operation. Again reflecting the traditional form, side-sewn books are frequently rounded and backed. Although the sewing goes through a portion of the gutter margin, books manufactured with this construction in mind are designed with a larger-than- normal binding or gutter margin, so they can be comfortably read. Considering simple rebinding, Grove [3] points out that some binderies use the adhesive binding techinque (also called "perfect," "threadless," "un- sewn," or "flex") rather than overcast- ing, particularly if a book with un- usually narrow gutter margins is being rebound. The folds of the signatures are trimmed off, and the single leaves are then held together with an adhe- sive, applied to the binding edge so that a small amount of it holds each leaf to the adjoining one. In some instances the binding edge is serrated to increase the surface, and hemp cords are placed in saw cuts across the backbone. Addi- tional strength is gained with linings of cloth, paper, or a combination of the two materials. Adhesive bindings can be rounded, backed, and put into covers as a case binding, or treated as the familiar paperback. Flexibility and durability at the backbone can be ex- pected if the paper is pliant and, of course, if the correct adhesive is prop- erly applied. The process has its place, and many new and old books have been successfully bound in this way, but it should not be used on valuable and rare books. Adhesive binding is not new. Over 100 years ago gutta-percha and other rubberlike substances were used on a large number of new books. Some of these were rather elegant publications. By now, most of these books have probably broken apart as the bonding material crystallized. The process was, however, a beginning; its survival is due chiefly to the improved adhesives made available during the past fifty years. Shortly after the turn of the century, the eminent hand bookbinder, Cock- erell, focused attention on the rebind- ing of books in the intermediate cate- gory. He described them as "books of permanent interest, but of no special value, that require to be well and strongly bound, but for which the best and most careful work would be too expensive" [4, p. 94]. Such work must be done by hand, and the materials, which are a minor part of the total cost, should be stout as well as free of injurious ingredients that would short- en the book's life. Books of this kind should be bound to open easily, which excludes overcasting in most instances.
132 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Sewing with linen thread over cotton or linen tapes, combined with split boards on heavy books, is a desirable preliminary treatment. Strong cloth or the most durable leather, or a combina- tion of the two as on a quarter binding, should be considered for the covering material. Unfortunately, too frequently books in this category are subjected to casual treatment at the lowest possible price, resulting in irreversible damage. The rare, valuable book in need of rebinding or restoration in a collection should be given to a professional who not only has the skills to bind well but who fully understands the characteris- tics of all materials involved-those he is asked to work on as well as the ones he will add. He is professionally obli- gated to recognize the great wealth of knowledge gathered over the centuries of good bookbinding and to accept new techniques and materials only after they are carefully tested and proven. Constructional innovations have ap- peared in extra bound books, some of which are excellent, but the traditional laced-in raised-cord, sewn-headband, tight-backbone binding, with a cover- ing of leather free of excessive acid, is generally accepted as best. In some instances, replica or period bindings are produced when none or very little of the original binding exists and it is desirable to recreate the early appear- ance. Here, too, the materials should be carefully selected, the historic con- struction observed, and skilled crafts- manship maintained. Although the uncut deckle edges one sees on some books is usually viewed with appreciation, this irregular sur- face of white paper is the conservator's burden. The edge is not under compres- sion, so dirt and other atmospheric pollutants easily creep into the leaves and cause discoloration. The trimmed edge, burnished, stained, marbled, sprinkled, or gilded, provides a rela- tively solid surface from which dirt can be readily removed, and some of these treatments protect the paper from the penetration of contaminants. The wooden panels used on the sides of early manuscripts and printed books served their purpose extremely well. Their weight and rigidity, together with the fore-edge clasps frequently used, kept the books under favorable com- pression. As books became smaller and were produced in greater numbers, a more manageable and cheaper substi- tute was found in fiber board, which is now used everywhere in most bindings. Today, there are interesting variants of the use of individual boards front and back. Some cases consist of a single board which continues over the back- bone from the sides; another is made of an extruded plastic sheeting which is stiff enough not to require boards; but all give the traditional protection to the leaves of the book. Although, in earliest bindings, the boards did not always extend beyond the leaves, evidence of the intentional square or projecting board was seen by the middle of the fifteenth century, ac- cording to Middleton [2]. This custom has undoubtably survived because the extra dimension of the board provides a degree of protection to the edges of the book. In modern construction, by hand or machine, we should minimize the size of the square, for it creates a problem that affects the life and ap- pearance of the binding. A book placed vertically on a shelf will sag in a clock- wise direction, that is, the leaves at the fore edge will drop the distance of the square until they rest on the shelving, exerting a strain on the joints and the
BINDING AS RELATED TO PRESERVATION 133 backbone. As a result, the backbones of most books become slightly more convex at the bottom than at the top, and the joints of casebindings usually loosen. In the earliest bindings, leather, ei- ther tawed with alum and salt or tanned with vegetable products such as wood and bark, was applied to the book to protect the backbone construction and to serve as a supplemental hinge over the laced-in cords or thongs. The binders sought a flexible material that could be made durable, and it is obvi- ous their choice was excellent, for much of the leather has lasted for centuries. During the last century, tanners made an effort to expedite the process and at the same time gain an unnatural even- ness of color by the application of acids that have proved to be injurious and have resulted in an inferior product. The decline of quality tannage is partic- ularly evident in many bindings pro- duced during the latter half of the nineteenth century. In 1900, the Council of the [Royal] Society of Arts of England established a Committee on Leather for Bookbind- ing to investigate the problem and make recommendations for improved tannage as well as binding techniques. Although this was a commendable be- ginning, it was apparent that further scientific work had to be done. As a result, in 1932, the Printing Industry Research Association and the British Leather Manufacturers' Research As- sociation, with the strong support of R. Faraday Innes, the distinguished English leather chemist, continued the investigation. Briefly, the group deter- mined that protective organic salts found in early vegetable-tanned skins were being washed out in the modern processes, and that potassium lactate should be applied to newly tanned skins. The purpose of the potassium lactate is to prevent the sulphur dioxide absorbed from the urban atmosphere from causing early disintegration in vegetable-tanned leather. While other salts have been found to have good protective characteristics, most binders involved in treating bound books use potassium lactate. The peroxide test was also introduced for determining the durability of leather, and it was pro- posed that skins tanned in the approved way be stamped "Guaranteed to resist P.I.R.A. [Printing Industry Research Association] Test." This superior leath- er is available today. Skins converted into leather by an- other process, known as chrome tan- nage, have had a very limited use in binding. Although it is more resistant than vegetable-tanned leather to fungal growth and deterioration from injuri- ous atmospheric gases, leather created in this way is not easily fabricated. A combination of chrome and vegetable tannage, which is supposed to have the advantages of each, is now being ap- plied to goatskins. Vellum, also made of animal skins, has been a strong and enduring cover- ing material for centuries, although it is sensitive to humidity and tempera- ture variations, which results in warp- ing. It is a hardy material that has a natural resistance to the atmospheric gases and only requires an occasional cleaning with an eraser or saddle soap. Books bound in vellum can be kept more or less compact with fore-edge clasps or ties, but they should also be shelved under moderate pressure. Although various fabrics have been used as book-covering materials for centuries, the popular use of cloth for publishers' bindings developed during
134 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY the early 1820s. This was a woven cot- ton material prepared with a gelatine size or starch to prevent the penetra- tion of the glue used for bonding. The advantages of an inexpensive mass- produced covering material were obvi- ous to the publishers and the binders, and cloth manufacturers soon respond- ed with a variety of textures, finishes, and base fabrics in various weights. Today, we have plain starch-filled cloths that give excellent service, as well as a variety of impregnated and coated fabrics that can be easily washed and are usually resistant to vermin. As a conservation measure, it is important in rebinding or in planning a new binding to select a cloth (if that is the preferred material) with a suit- able base fabric that is strong and will adequately support the book. Currently, nonwoven covering mate- rial's are being used on bindings, but it is too early to judge their lasting prop- erties. One is made of granulated leath- er and paper fibers bonded with latex. Another is composed of impregnated paper fibers. A product that deserves special attention consists of matted polyethylene fibers and is remarkably strong even in its thinnest form. Com- positions of this kind are usually treated with a pyroxylin or the superior acrylic coating, are colored, and can be grained or textured in an unlimited variety of patterns. It is also possible to print or hot-stamp designs on the surface. I have described some of these modern materials science has made possible, for it appears they offer economic advantages and can be made strong. The materials are now on trial, and later we will know more about their permanence. Only recently has the craft of bind- ing restoration been recognized as one that requires the skills of the highly competent hand binder, coupled with ingenuity and a thorough knowledge of materials and constructional tech- niques. Everything possible should be done to retain what remains of the orig- inal, and added materials should be functional, chemically safe, strong, durable, and unobtrusive. I do not support the idea that added materials should be obviously unlike the original, for too frequently this theory becomes the crutch of the haphazard worker who cannot or will not trouble to pro- duce a good restoration. The restorer is interested not in deception, for little can be done that would escape detec- tion, but rather in a sensitive, pleasant result. Should an important book that is disintegrating only be preserved, or should it be restored? Such an item could be wrapped in acid-free paper, or placed in a protective container, which would preserve it somewhat, but it would be little more than a museum piece with a very restricted life. A book, in my opinion, should be made usable, and restoration is the logical solution. If it is important to retain evidence of constructional details, photographs and other records can be made before the repairs are begun, then kept with the book. In addition, such a report should include information regarding the new materials used, the operations performed, the date, and the name of the restorer. First-aid repairs by a well-meaning person unfamiliar with materials and techniques frequently result in serious problems that cause irreversible dam- age to a book. Not many years ago the useful polyvinyl acetate emulsion adhe- sive was advocated for the reattach- ment of loose boards on leather bind- ings. The adhesive was spread over the surface of the leather adjoining the
BINDING AS RELATED TO PRESERVATION 135 joint area, so it included a portion of the backbone as well as the board. Upon drying, it appeared that the hinge had again been made functional and that a minor miracle had been per- formed-but this was a temporary and false impression. Ultimately the adhe- sive peeled away, taking the surface of the weak leather with it, thus making a sophisticated restoration impossible. A parallel illustration involves the famil- iar, handy, pressure-sensitive tape which has also been misused on valuable bind- ings. Many book materials are attractive to vermin and insects, support mold spores and bacteria, degenerate in the presence of ultraviolet light, require favorable humidity and temperature controls, suffer in a polluted atmo- sphere, support combustion, and create major problems if they become wet- yet it is within the scope of human ingenuity to minimize or eliminate these weaknesses. The problems of book conservation are not new, and a multitude of solutions have been pro- posed and developed over the years, but we must learn to reject or accept them with caution. Too frequently the well-meaning scientist, publisher, man- ufacturer, supplier, binder, or conser- vator, or the urgency of the problem, causes to be brought forth a material or a process that has not been thoroughly tested under realistic cir- cumstances. We are, however, in an exciting age of innovations and synthet- ics, and a healthy relationship exists between the scientist and the practi- tioner, all of which should bring us closer to our goal. What can you do, as a conscientious librarian or book owner, to fulfill your responsibility as a custodian? Here are a few suggestions: 1. Should you find evidence of ver- min or insects, enlist the help of an exterminator or entomologist to under- take a professional control program. Poison baits can be used, and you can find reference to many of them, but it is best to employ a specialist. 2. If you suspect or see evidence of the development of mold, initiate plans for an air-conditioning system, with positive control over humidity, tem- perature, and acidic urban pollution. If such a system is not immediately possible, excessive humidity, in some instances, can be reduced with mechan- ical or chemical dehumidifiers. Early sterilization should be considered for important books. Of course, one should not wait for mold to develop to use controlled air, for all materials in the book will live longer in a favorable environment. 3. The problem of ultraviolet light can be diminished by painting over clear glass windows, by installing drapes or blinds over natural light openings, and by using plastic filters on light fixtures or fluorescent tubes with built-in filtration properties. 4. Understand binding, restoration, and preservation techniques, not as a practitioner, but as an informed person who can request intelligent help from the specialist. 5. Become familiar with approved book-cleaning and leather-treatment methods. The booklet Cleaning and Preserving Bindings and Related Ma- terials, by Horton [51, is highly recom- mended.' This is the first of a series of manuals on the conservation of li- brary materials, made possible by a grant from the Council on Library Resources, Inc. Other manuals yet to be produced will be equally useful. 1A selected bibliography of materials on book preservation appears below.
136 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Over the years we have progressed in many areas; books are being pro- duced more efficiently, conservation techniques are becoming more sophis- ticated, but we are also becoming in- creasingly aware of our ignorance. Many questions require the undivided attention of the scientist and the binder/conservator. Finally, we must increase training facilities for the hand craftsman who will continue to estab- lish the quality standards important to those involved in the mass-production of books. REFERENCES 1. Klinefelter, L. M. Bookbinding Made Easy. Milwaukee, Wis.: Bruce Publishing Co., 1960. 2. Middleton, B. C. A History of English Craft Bookbinding Technique. New York: Hafner Publishing Co., 1963. 3. Grove, L. E. "Adhesive Bookbinding: A Practice Reviewed." Library Resources and Technical Services 6 (Spring 1962):143- 60. 4. Cockerell, D. A Note on Bookbinding. London: W. H. Smith & Son, 1904. 5. Horton, C. Cleaning and Preserving Bind- ings and Related Materials. Chicago: American Library Association, Library Technology Program, 1967. BIBLIOGRAPHY Adams, R. G. "Librarians as Enemies of Books." Library Quarterly 7 (1937) :317- 31. Archer, H. R. Rare Book Collections. Chi- cago: American Library Association, 1965. Banks, P. N. "Some Problems in Book Con- servation." Library Resources and Techni- cal Services 12 (Summer 1968) :330-38. Bookbinding Leather Committee. The Causes and Prevention of the Decay of Bookbind- ing Leather. London: Printing Industry Re- search Association and British Leather Manufacturers' Research Association, 1936. Cockerell, D. Some Notes on Bookbinding. London: Oxford University Press, 1929. Cockerell, D. A Note on Bookbinding. Lon- don: W. H. Smith & Son, 1904. Cockerell, S. M. The Repairing of Books. London: Sheppard Press, 1958. Cunha, G. D. M. Conservation of Library Materials: A Manual and Bibliography on the Care, Repair and Restoration of Li- brary Materials. Metuchen, N.J.: Scarecrow Press, 1967. Dutton, M. K. Historical Sketch of Book- binding as an Art. Norwood, Mass.: Hol- liston Mills, Inc., 1926. Gardner, A. "The Ethics of Book Repairs." Library, 5th ser. 9 (September 1954):194- 98. Greathouse, G. A., and Wessel, C. J. Deterio- ration of Materials. New York: Reinhold Publishing Corp., 1954. Grove, L. E. "Adhesive Bookbinding: A Prac- tice Reviewed." Library Resources and Technical Services 6 (Spring 1962):143-60. Harrison, T. "Fragments of Bookbinding Technique." From articles in Paper and Print, n.d. Haselden, R. B. Scientific Aids for the Study of Manuscripts. London: Bibliographical Society, 1935. Horton, C. Cleaning and Preserving Bindings and Related Materials. Chicago: American Library Association, Library Technology Program, 1967. Iiams, T. M., and Beckwith, T. D. "Notes on the Causes and Prevention of Foxing in Books." Library Quarterly 5 (1935) :407- 18. Innes, R. F. "The Preservation of Vegetable- Tanned Leather against Deterioration." In Progress in Leather Science: 1920-1945. London: British Leather Manufacturers' Research Association, 1948. Innes, R. F. "The Preservation of Bookbind- ing Leathers." Library Association Record 52 (December 1950): 458-61. Klinefelter, L. M. Bookbinding Made Easy. Milwaukee, Wis.: Bruce Publishing Co., 1960. Langwell, W. H. The Conservation of Books and Documents. London: I. Pitman, 1957. Lehmann-Haupt, H.; French, H. D.; and Rogers, J. W. Bookbinding in America. New York: R. R. Bowker Co., 1967. Lydenberg, H. M.; Archer, J.; and Alden, 3.
BINDING AS RELATED TO PRESERVATION 137 The Care and Repair of Books. New York: R. R. Bowker Co., 1960. Middleton, B. C. A History of English Craft Bookbinding Technique. New York: Hafner Publishing Co., 1963. Plenderleith, H. J. The Conservation of An- tiquities and Works of Art. London: Oxford University Press, 1956. Plenderleith, H. J. The Preservation of Leather Bookbindings. London: Trustees of the British Museum, 1947. Pollard, G. "Changes in the Style of Book- binding: 1550-1830." Library 11 (June 1956) :71-94. Prideaux, S. R. Bookbinders and Their Craft. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1903. Smith, R. D. "Guidelines for Preservation." Special Libraries 59 (May-June 1968): 346-52. Smith, R. D. "The Preservation of Leather Bookbindings from Sulfuric Acid Deterio- ration." Masters paper, Graduate School of Librarianship, University of Denver, 1964. Weiss, H. B., and Carruthers, R. H. Insect Enemies of Books. New York: New York Public Library, 1937. Wheatley, H. B. Bookbinding. London: W. Trounce, 1880. DISCUSSION KENNETH W. SODERLAND Harold Tribolet has presented a very lucid description of binding practices and the many paths to follow-each with its particular effect on the preser- vation of books. How do these variants affect the practicing librarian who has to make these choices day by day? First, even if the librarian knows a sufficient amount about binding (al- though this is too often not the case, unfortunately), still the type of library, its content, its use, its purpose, greatly influence his choices. My experience has been in research libraries, and I will limit my remarks to the situations encountered in libraries of that type, including larger public libraries. Tribolet has suggested that books to be rebound fall into three broad cate- gories: rare books, those which are "too significant for the so-called library binding," and those where simple re- binding is justified. One can hardly disagree with this, but it may be diffi- cult to identify material in the inter- mediate category. This category may contain on the one extreme a few titles thought to be semi-rare, or which may qualify as rare books fifty years from now. On the other extreme, this cate- gory could include almost any non- current imprint that is the library's only copy. This consideration of copies is important because multiple copies in heavier than average use present a preservation problem different from the one normally meant when we speak of preservation. The danger in this case is wear and tear from use; the strong- est binding (i.e., oversewing) may be the best from all standpoints. When the use has subsided, extra copies will probably be discarded. Since the recommended and approved practice for this intermediate category is hand- work, doing as little damage to the original book as possible, it raises the great economic question. Can libraries with millions of books, or even hun- dreds of thousands, afford to give this better, hand treatment to a very large percentage of its collections? While most people will agree that this inter- mediate category is necesary, the big- gest question in the mind of the librar- ian is how large to make it. Unless a library has a very ample binding budget which can cover the
138 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY costs of hand binding at about four times the rate of machine sewing, it is probably paying more attention to an- other factor, the condition of the paper. Mr. Williams discussed earlier the state of deterioration of library collec- tions. The paper in a great many books has become brittle and no longer has the strength to stand machine sewing. Excluding from discussion those vol- umes which are normally not con- sidered rebindable, one seems to have two choices-either repair and hand sew or use adhesive binding. Adhesive or "perfect" binding, as Tribolet points out, is not new, but it really came into its own seven or eight years ago when new glues were found which remain more flexible and new machinery was developed for better and more efficicent handling. When the binders began promoting adhesive bindings, they advertised them as the answer to binding those paperbacks which lack adequate sewing margins. They looked so good and initial tests were so promising that some librarians began binding a great many other paperbound volumes this way, since the binding is so economical and since many new accessions in research li- braries are not expected to get heavy use. Smaller-than-average volumes, which do not have glossy paper, lend themselves particularly well to adhe- sive binding. Also adhesive binding for those books in which the paper has become brittle has seemed to be a great boon, for it has allowed libraries to keep in circulating condition many volumes which otherwise would have had to be replaced by reproductions. Adhesive bindings also offer a wide selection of cases; one has a choice of gold-stamped cloth casebindings, plastic-covered cases, etc. The quality of materials going into bindings deserves further comment. The quality and permanence of the paper going into books is finally re- ceiving serious attention, but more at- tention should be given to binding materials. Binders seem to be alert to using materials with sufficient initial strength, but who worries about the permanence of these materials? Are the endpapers acid-free and permanent? Is the binding cloth so acidic that it is causing deterioration? Is that why it gives way so soon at the hinges? Does the pyroxylin-impregnated cloth, so popular with library binders now, de- teriorate faster than the starch-filled cloths? Are the presently used glues causing deterioration of the paper? Answers to these and many more re- lated questions are needed. In the ab- sence of scientific answers, some li- brarians have been asking for a wider use of mylar-covered cases, since mylar is reported to be an inert material. Field tests of new materials and new processes should prove satisfactory before one uses them to a great extent, but someone has to do the testing. Mylar was so widely accepted on the paperback bindings that proceeding with mylar cases over sewn bindings seemed worth the risk. The University of Chicago library has been using them for about four years now on a limited quantity of new materials with ap- parently very satisfactory results. The fact that a mylar binding is cheaper than cloth binding is an added induce- ment. Some should be testing the perma- nence of binding materials. At any rate, more librarians should begin to show some concern over these problems, so that the binders will take greater note of what they are doing for libraries.