CARDINAL FRANZ EHRLE IN COMMEMORATION OF A DOUBLE ANNIVERSARY E. HEYSE DUTHTR one hundredth anniversary of Franz Ehrle's birth and the fiftieth I of his entry into the field of library administration received no comment in American library literature. American scholars who have had the privilege of doing research in the Vaticana and who were helped and befriended by the kindly bibliographic genius that was Ehrle would not want his memory to fade. And surely the administrator in the li- brary profession should have an even greater interest in Ehrle, for his name has always suggested eminence not only in scholarship but, above all, in librarian- ship. It is his accomplishments as a li- brary administrator that will be re- viewed at this time. That Cardinal Ehrle was singled out for the directorship of the Vatican Li- brary fifty years ago at the age of fifty was a stroke of good fortune. The diffi- cult position demanded a person who was not only a scholar but also an adminis- trator. Ehrle was both. His sound schol- arship came into evidence especially in the seven volumes of the Archiv fur Literatur- und Kirchengeschichte (I885- I900) and in the Historia bibliotheca Romanorum Pontificum tum Bonifa- tianae tum Avenionensis (I890), impor- tant studies on the Avignon period and directly related to the library scene. To this period of literary productivity be- longs a further enterprise, the nine vol- umes of the Bibliotheca theologiae et scholasticae selecta atque composita a Fr. Ehrle S.J. (i885-94), a splendid monu- ment to Ehrle's bibliographic genius.' It was the Historia, however, which di- rected the attention of Leo XIII to Ehrle. The library-minded pontiff sensed at once that Ehrle had the ability to undertake the reorganization of the Vati- can Library in the manner in which the Pope had designed the project. That Ehrle was properly qualified and really the only one able to execute ad- ministrative plans of the prodigious type projected by Leo XIII was the convic- tion also of every member of the Con- gresso direttivo to which Ehrle was ap- pointed in I890. They felt that the huge task of reorganizing the Vatican Library would meet with success if put in their young colleague's hands. The years im- mediately ahead showed that the faith they had placed in the man who had spoken with authority on the problems awaiting solution at the Vaticana was wholly justified. Ehrle saw clearly that the primary problem demanding immediate attention was the consolidation of the printed ma- terials with the manuscript stock and the setting-up of a reference collection for users of the library and archive. The li- brary board put Ehrle rather than the incumbent prefect, Carini (i889-95), in charge of carrying out these important projects, since this was an undertaking designed for a man of Ehrle's age, energy, scholarship, and practicality. Ehrle's reforms at the Vaticana got I Ehrle's record of publications contains II7 titles for the period I879-1925. 335
336 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY under way in I89o, and when he became prefect in I895, much had already been accomplished. A major accomplishment was that of moving the printed books kept in the Appartamento Borgia and consolidating this collection with the main collection of the Vatican. This sug- gestion stemmed from Ehrle's benefac- tor, Leo XIII, who had given the matter considerable thought. The method of moving the collection, however, as origi- nally suggested, did not find favor with Ehrle. The original plan was to form a line from the Appartamento Borgia to the new location and pass volume after volume from hand to hand down the line. It was thought that the process would require from three to four months. Ehrle believed that a more effective method should be employed. His plan called for fifteen workers. Within the record-breaking time of fourteen days this small crew moved i85,ooo volumes. Although more steps had to be climbed and descended and a larger distance traversed, the Vatican collection was moved faster than those in Vienna, Stuttgart, Kiel, and Cologne had been. Ehrle's reorganization and moderniza- tion of the Vaticana made it possible for him to open the long-locked doors of the library to the research scholar, for whom he also provided a public reference col- lection. Assembling the eighty-thousand volume Biblioteca di Consultazione dur- ing the period from I89I to I894 and setting it up in the Bibliotheca Leonina was wholly the work of Ehrle. The open- ing of the library to the public and the reference library enterprise easily rank as the most important contributions to Vat- ican Library history in the period of Leo XIII. The name of Ehrle is to be linked not only with the Bibliotheca Leonina but also with the various institute libraries in Rome which supplement it. From modest beginnings in i88i they have developed into important collections. When studying Ehrle's successful ad- ministrative career, it is important to remember that the Prefect entered the field of administration as a novice. Ex- perience became his teacher. A study of the great libraries in other countries, with whose administrators he corre- sponded, taught him the art of library administration. He pursued his subject in the professional journals, studied the new library Regolamenti issued by the Italian government, and found it profit- able to learn by actual observation. He made the Bibliotheque Nationale his model. Here Delisle was doing what Ehrle was striving after in Rome-re- organizing the manuscript division to make it more serviceable. Years of fruit- ful contact between Ehrle and Delisle ensued. Delisle's library, however, was not the only one Ehrle visited and studied. The large libraries in Vienna, Munich, Berlin, and London were also on his study itiner- ary. While journeying over land and sea from library to library, Ehrle visualized how one day the Vatican Library would take its place alongside the world's great- est bibliographical institutions. If ever the Vaticana was to attain to high rank as a service center to scholars, Ehrle knew he would have to liberalize at once the rules governing its usage. Con- sequently he inaugurated a new schedule of library hours providing access from nine to one o'clock most of the year and from eight to one o'clock in the summer, permitted use of all catalogs, and cut the red tape with which scholars had had to contend when seeking permission to use the Vaticana's treasures. Even rarities kept in the Riserva were made available by Ehrle, for his library philosophy was
CARDINAL FRANZ EHRLE 337 founded on the belief that "books are for the use of the human race." Relaxation of restrictions brought a large increase of readers, and soon the library's facilities were overtaxed. It took the ingenuity of an Ehrle to solve the vexing problem of space. In I9IO the clever administrator successfully re- shaped the plant. With the removal of the Vatican Press to new quarters, Ehrle took over its former home and remodeled it into a reading-room. This new and spacious room on the ground floor was all the more useful since it was directly connected with the reference library. The three floors directly above served as a stack for the manuscript material. As a result, stack-to-reader service was im- mediately improved. Ehrle's favorite dream of having the archive, reference library, and reading-room on the same floor level and directly connected had at last come true. Thanks to Ehrle, the Vaticana became a leader in the field of manuscript cata- loging. That the short-title entry had certain merits Ehrle never denied, but to him serviceability to the scholar was the foremost consideration in cataloging. He favored the type of descriptive catalog- ing detailed in the programmatic state- ment drawn up at the beginning of his administration and known as the "Leges quas curatores Bibliothecae vaticanae in codicibus latinis recensendis sibi con- stituerunt." Ehrle believed that every effort was to be made to ascertain au- thorship, title, and, if printed, the place of publication of every piece of writing concerning a manuscript. He realized that a program of such an exacting na- ture required accurate and comprehen- sive workmanship and the banishment of speed and haste. Consequently, he was not surprised when during his incum- bency only six volumes of the occidental manuscripts reached completion. He thought that the cataloging project at the Vatican might take from eighty to one hundred years-and according to what has been accomplished thus far, it appears that his estimate was none too conservative. Ehrle was in charge at the Vatican Library at a time when very important collections were being put on the market. The Prefect successfully carried out the transaction whereby the famous Borghese and Barberini libraries passed into the hands of the Vatican. His success in ac- quiring the Borghese and Barberini li- braries was all the more marked in view of the fact that the Prussian government tried hard to gain possession of these treasures. The valuable Chigi collection also found its way into the Vaticana in Ehrle's day. Years before other libraries assisted the cause of scholarship by photography, Ehrle was making materials available by that method. He continued to use pho- tography for the preservation of endan- gered manuscripts in accord with the recommendation of the St. Gall confer- ence (I898). Ehrle, however, did not establish a laboratory for that purpose in the Vatican but commissioned a private photographer, whose charges were rea- sonable, to do the work. A workshop in many respects more unusual at the time than a photographic laboratory was set up in the Vaticana by Ehrle in the early nineties. Far and near, librarians were talking about Ehrle's newest creation, the Restauro dei codici. Here clinical attention was given to the priceless manuscripts of the Vatican Li- brary. Manuscript conservation at Ehrle's library was started before the in- ternational conference at St. Gall took up the subject in I898. By that time various methods of restoration had al-
338 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY ready been tried and approved or dis- carded in Ehrle's clinic. A corps of spe- cialists was constantly at work prolong- ing the lives of manuscripts by highly developed techniques. Manuscripts from every country reached the clinic and re- ceived the same expert attention that the Vatican's own priceless possessions did. Ehrle felt personally responsible for whatever restoration was undertaken. He took a personal interest in every manuscript sent to him, prescribed its " cure," and checked up daily on the progress made. It is known that he did not hesitate to approve radical clinical methods if they meant saving a manu- script of extraordinary value. Conservation of bibliographic riches was uppermost in Ehrle's mind again when secularization swooped down upon Italy and valuable material was rescued and placed in cathedral libraries, ar- chives, etc. Ehrle in I902 sent out a list of instructions dealing with the conserva- tion of this material. Here in eighteen lucid pages we have Ehrle's doctrine of library administration in a nutshell. Known as the Forma di regolamento per la custodia e l'uso degli Archivi e delle Bibliothece ecclesiasticke, these regula- tions became the library law for the ec- clesiastical libraries of Italy. Evidence of modern library thinking in the Regola- mento of 1902 is found especially in the recommendation favoring unrestricted public use of ecclesiastical book prop- erty. Ehrle would also have extended to other church-owned collections the lib- eral policy put into effect at the Vatican. Like his library-minded pontiff, who was unafraid to break with the Vaticana's tradition of library isolationism, Ehrle was convinced that penetrating research would not be injurious to the Catholic church. For him no cleavage between faith and learning existed. Such an atti- tude then could result in only one thing -the establishment of a great service center for scholarship at Rome and sub- sidiary research stations throughout Italy. At the famous research center pre- sided over by Ehrle, patrons soon took note of a change in library etiquette. Ehrle put into practice his belief that there should be a personal contact be- tween the librarian and the reader. The Prefect of the Vaticana stationed himself in the main reading-room of his library, there to welcome patrons, inquire about their research problems, and give freely of his counsel. This he considered one of his most important duties. He filled the role of host admirably and thereby en- hanced the reputation of the Vatican Library immensely. With this innovation Ehrle took a dif- ficult task upon himself. Countless in- quiries of every type were addressed to him daily during the few hours the public had access to the library. Everyone, the novice as well as the seasoned scholar, received friendly attention. Of course, patrons felt that it was a matter of courtesy to confine to a minimum the number of questions addressed to the busy Prefect. It was possible for them to do so because Ehrle's library system, which provided an abundance of refer- ence facilities, enabled the reader to find his own way and serve himself. It must have been a rare kind of schooling to work on Ehrle's staff, which toward the end of his incumbency con- sisted of six scriptores, their six assist- ants, eleven bidelli, and four bookbinders. The scriptores, who when joining Ehrle's staff usually entered upon a lifetime po- sition, busied themselves exclusively with cataloging the manuscript holdings. Their assistants were in charge of the printed books and the reference collec-
CARDINAL FRANZ EHRLE 339 tion. The bidilli were employed in the public service branch of the library. Ehrle, the scholar and self-trained li- brarian, believed that professional train- ing was necessary for librarianship. Per- sonal experience led him to this convic- tion. In his statements on policy concern- ing selection of Vatican personnel he em- phasized that upper-bracket staff mem- bers had to have professional training in library science and proper academic training. Before adopting service measures, all of which were carefully thought through and some of which had their incipiency in the recommendations of patrons, Ehrle listened to the suggestions of his staff and then reached a decision. His policies were liberal, but he brooked no infringement. The strict Prefect dealt promptly and severely with transgres- sors of rules and regulations whether they were patrons or staff members. However, he never wanted others to suf- fer because of the penalty which an indi- vidual transgressor evoked. No library administrator ever held the administra- tive reins more firmly in hand up to the very end than did Ehrle. It was at the request of Pope Pius X that Ehrle did not terminate his administrative career in I9IO, as he had hoped to do, but four years later instead. Regardless of the length of time the research scholar spent in Ehrle's environ- ment, he never failed to take with him certain unforgettable impressions. Even the casual observer would always re- member the upright stature of the Pre- fect, his sharp and eloquent facial fea- tures suggesting strong will power and a keen intellect, the penetrating eyes, the friendly yet dignified manner-in short, a personality compelling respect. Every- one who had contact with him noticed sooner or later that the Prefect was a master of human psychology. It did not require extended observation to recog- nize in him the altruistic type of man, generous and noble, for whom service to his fellow-men is both a duty and a joy. Frequent recognition was accorded Ehrle. In 1922 he was made a cardinal, and by I924 twenty-seven European uni- versities had bestowed upon him their honorary degrees. He was a member of the Institute de France and of such im- portant academies as those of G6ttingen, Berlin, Munich, and Vienna. On the occasion of the Prefect's eight- ieth birthday a testimonial program was arranged in which the Pope participated and which was attended by the College of Cardinals, the diplomatic ambassa- dors to the Vatican, the staff of the Vaticana, representatives of numerous academies and learned societies, and scholars from every country. The climax of the program came when the Pope presented the five-volume Miscellanea Francesco Ehrle, to which eighty-two outstanding scholars, including some of the world's foremost, had contributed. Among library personalities there have been few like Ehrle. Perhaps Leo- pold Delisle is the only modern who can be placed in the same category. Like Delisle, Cardinal Ehrle was a scholar and an administrator, a man of learning and a library technician. He was also more farsighted than those of his German col- leagues who favored the "Bibliothekar im Nebenamt" attitude; he never con- sidered the position of library adminis- trator a part-time one. A German by birth and a Catholic by faith, Ehrle belonged to the whole world of scholars irrespective of nationality or creed. But since his foremost work comes under the heading of librarianship, the library profession can proudly claim him as its own.
340 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY BIBLIOGRAPHY CHRIST, K. "Kardinal Franz Ehrle," Zentral- blatt fiar Bibliothekswesen, LII (I935), I f. EHRLE, F. "Bibliothektechnisches aus der Vati- kana," Zentralblatt fur Bibliothekswesen, XXXIII (i9i6), I97 ff. GRABMANN, M. "Nachruf auf Kardinal Franz Ehrle," Jahrbuch der Bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, LXVII (I933-34), 27 ff. . "Ueber Wert und Methode des Stu- diums der scholastischen Handschriften. Gedanken zum 70. Geburtstag von P. Franz Ehrle S.J.," Zeitschrift fur katholische The- ologie, XXXIX ( I 9 I S), 699 ff . LIETZMANN, H. "Nachruf auf Ehrle," Deutsche Allgemeine Zeitung (March 3I, I934). PELSTER, P. "Franz Kardinal Ehrle als Bibliothekar der Vatikana," Jahrbuch Sankt Wiborada, I (I933), 134 ff.