The Future of Society RALPH C. M. FLYNT* THE HISTORIAN NEVER discards the past, but recreates it for every generation in the light of new evidence and events. In the same manner, the updating of historical forecasts helped to clarify causes and effects as our society evolved from a rural agricultural into an industrial setting. Now that we have reached the threshold of an automated, atomic, space age, projecting into the future is an even more urgent task. The periodic forecasts of the nation's status which originate with the United States Census provide a most important base to launch our plans and adjust our sights to new goals. Almost one hundred years ago on December 1, 1862, Abraham Lincoln, in his Annual Message to Congress recognized the value of statistical projections and took a long look ahead - all the way to 1930. He said, "taking the nation in the aggregate ... we find its popula- tion and ratio of increase, for the several decimal periods to be ... an average of 34.6 per cent It is seen that the ratio of increase, at no one of these seven periods, is either two per cent below or two per cent above, the average thus showing how inflexible, and consequently how reliable, the law of increase in our case is." Going on the assumption of the inflexible increase, Lincoln projected for 1890 a population of 76 million which we actually reached in 1900. However, for the suc- ceeding years his projections were not borne out. He expected, for 1920, a population well in excess of 180 million, which we did not quite reach by I960. For 1930, he assumed a population which we now antici- pate for 1977 or 1978. He observed that there is no reason for the population slowdown because there is "our abundant room - our broad national homestead - our ample resource" and the influx of the foreign ♦ Mr. Flynt is Associate Commissioner, Bureau of Educational Research and Development, United States Office of Education, Department of Health, Educa- tion, and Welfare. His paper was read by John L. Nolan, Assistant Director, Reference Department, Library of Congress. 5
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP born. He could not foresee that the 1890 census would spell out the passing of the American frontier which resulted from the Homestead Acts of the 1860's, and he could not predict the legislation restricting immigration which started in 1882 with the Chinese and by 1920 re- duced the annual influx to 150,000 against the 1907 peak of over 1*4 million. Equally unexpected were the depression and the decreased birth rates in the twenties and thirties, the upsurge in the mid-forties, the affluent society of the fifties with early marriages and growing families, the improvement of health standards, the lowering of the death rate, and the steadily growing number of our senior citizens. The I960 census clarified this population explosion - the greatest in the last 50 years. It also identified other issues - the demise of the great cities and the countryside and the upsurge of suburbia, where two-thirds of the nation's growth occurred. With this geographic shift have come tremendous problems in trans- portation - characterized by the plight of the railroads and urban traffic jams. There has also been a decrease in the use of coal, the expansion of airlines with ever-faster jet flights, and the more extensive use of electricity as a result of automatic equipment in homes, offices, and factories. All of these developments have increased our dependence on technicians to keep the machinery going, and our reliance on banks to provide the credit to purchase it. Now at the beginning of the sixties we are the nation with the most youthful marriages, looking toward a population of 215 million by 1970 and about 260 million a decade later, all with more leisure time, longer periods of good health after retirement, more years of active life for women after the last child has left home. We will be employing for the first time more white- than blue-collar workers and will be losing rapidly the independent small merchant or tradesman as a result of the development of large chains of supermarkets and discount houses. Self-service is replacing people needed for sales, and automated equipment is decreasing the number of unskilled or semi-skilled in factories, offices, and stores. As a result, we are faced with a host of paradoxes: While the popula- tion grows, interpersonal contacts diminish; while demands for the employment of professional and highly skilled technical labor force increases, the unskilled or underskilled remain unemployable; while rural areas and centers of the largest cities decrease, suburbia sprawls endlessly, nearly linking Boston and Baltimore; while the self-employed 6
The Future of Society businessman and farmer diminishes, the skilled white-collar worker and professional finds more demands for his services. The answers to how we are to adjust and to prepare for the expanding multitudes around us and the universe beyond must be found through the educational process, by research and development. Hopefully, the ingenuity and inventiveness which saw us through the last three cen- turies will again come to our aid. The future of our society will depend substantially on our attitude toward the importance of education which, from Presidents Jefferson to Kennedy, has remained surprisingly constant. The third President sum- marized it with this statement: "If a nation expects to be ignorant and free, it expects what never was and never will be." Our 34th President stressed education emphatically when he said that "our progress as a nation can be no swifter than our progress in education." What are some of the important factors that will affect the progress of education in the next ten years? I believe these will be among the most important: There will be continued national economic growth, though not neces- sarily steady and even growth. There will be continued and probably accelerated advancement of scientific knowledge and of technology. The conditions essential to an assured and enduring peace will not be achieved quickly, and thus military security will continue for a long period to be a serious consideration of national policy. The requirements for educated and trained manpower of all sorts will expand even more rapidly than in the past. Manpower require- ments will continue to shift steadily toward greater emphasis upon general education and specialized training, at all levels, with unskilled labor shrinking in proportion. Thus the younger generation as a whole must have considerably more education than any previous generation, and therefore a larger proportion of the nation's gross national product must be devoted to education. There will be a continuing strong and critical need for highly tal- ented, specialized manpower, in virtually all fields, though the need will be especially evident and dramatic in the sciences, mathematics, and engineering. Education will encounter increasingly severe competition in securing well-qualified teachers. There will also be a rapidly expand- ing need for a wide variety of middle-level technicians. To meet the foregoing manpower requirements, the potential human resources of every nation will have to be much more widely and fully 7
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP developed than in the past. This means that avenues of educational opportunities for the entire population must be greatly enlarged. It means also that alternative educational routes and career choices must be kept open for all young people to a later chronological age than has generally been true heretofore. Moreover, opportunities for advanced education will have to be geared to demonstrated intellectual ability, regardless of social or economic status, if serious wastes of human talent and of educational resources are to be avoided. Although the formal educational system must provide each individual with more and better education than ever before, it will provide rel- atively less of the total learning which a person will require in his full lifetime. The frontiers of knowledge and technology will move so rapidly that much of an individual's formal training as a youth will soon become obsolete or inadequate. There must therefore be greatly enlarged arrangements and opportunities for individuals to continue learning after the termination of their formal schooling. While it can be predicted with confidence that the need for highly specialized and talented manpower of all sorts will expand greatly, there will be many unpredictable shifts in the proportions needed of specific categories of such manpower. Thus, it will be important to develop abilities of every sort at every level of the educational system in order to enlarge the total supply of high ability manpower available for all purposes. There will be no serious danger of "over-educating" the younger generation; the greatest risk lies in the opposite direction. Any projec- tions made today of future requirements for highly educated manpower are likely to prove low ten years from now. All of the foregoing conditions will impinge heavily upon educational institutions. To meet this challenge, education will be obliged to grow and change more in the next decade or two than in any previous half century. Traditional curricula must be considerably overhauled to make room for newer and more relevant knowledge, and to provide a greater variety of programs to match the greater variety of career choices that will be open to able individuals. Despite the movement toward greater variety and specialization in educational programs, it will be essential to provide each student with the elements of a good general, liberal education, which will be his best preparation for a life of continued learning beyond formal schooling. 9
The Future of Society Educational institutions as a whole will be obliged to expand their enrollments very considerably. But their main difficulty will be to im- prove quality in the face of expanding quantity, as well as in the face of limitations on resources. To meet this challenge will require not only changes in curriculum, but also other far-reaching changes in procedures and practices, including technological innovations that can make teach- ing and learning much more efficient processes. Educational institutions will also have the obligation to provide help and leadership for the development of educational programs outside the traditional structure of formal education for the benefit of persons who have completed their formal schooling, but for whom continued education is important. The specific challenge of our time is to provide a climate in which each student can develop to the limit of his capacity in the field of his choice regardless of color, creed, financial resources, or geographic location. To make this equal educational opportunity available to our youth requires school and college facilities which are adequately staffed and sufficiently flexible to permit each student the pursuit of a course of study suitable to his unique potentiality. It will not be an easy task to provide a high-quality education for 40 million children now in elementary and secondary schools, and about 4 million students in our colleges and universities, because we are beset by many shortages; for example, shortages of school classrooms (127,000 at present), school teachers (90,000 are not fully qualified), and school library facilities (51 per cent of our elementary schools lack centralized libraries) . In I960, nearly two-thirds of our academic institutions provided less than 5 per cent of their total operating funds for their libraries. As a result, we find that 60 per cent of the four-year and 87 per cent of the two-year institutions had inadequate library collections. Public libraries in many locations have serious shortages of professional staff, book re- sources, and operating expenditures, limiting their educational and informational service functions to their communities. During the next decade alone we expect to have an additional six million pupils in elementary and secondary schools and a doubling of the enrollment in academic institutions. Unless we are prepared for a greater financial effort, education for excellence will certainly not be- come a reality. Further federal leadership must certainly be brought to bear on the 9
JOURKAL OF EDUCATION FOR LlBRARlANSttíP problem. This administration has recommended enactment o£ legisla- tion which would authorize for three years the annual payment of $850 million in grants to states for the construction of public schools, for payment of teachers' salaries, and for operation and maintenance costs. Another administration bill now before Congress would improve the quality of education by making available scholarships to teachers to attend summer institutes which would offer refresher courses in the liberal arts fields to counterbalance a similar program in science, math- ematics, and foreign languages as now provided by the National De- fense Education Act. Fifty million dollars would be used for experi- ments in new classroom methods, including the improvement of libraries and improvement in the teaching of English. There are other bills at various stages of progress which would alleviate shortages in critical areas of professional training of health personnel and remove the financial barriers to medical education. Other financial hurdles which should be removed are those which prevent the world's knowledge - as stored in books, periodicals, reports, in print or on film, on tape or on recordings - from being easily acces- sible to all in search of knowledge. Such a program of library service in depth would not only require a strengthening of existing facilities of school, public, and academic libraries but would depend on far greater cooperation between these libraries, probably supported by assistance from the state level along the lines of the reference and re- search centers now under consideration in the state of New York. Future library service will undoubtedly depend more on mechanical devices and communication facilities, some of which are now being displayed at the "Library 21" Exhibit in Seattle. The introduction of some of these devices into operating libraries will undoubtedly acceler- ate the formation of larger library systems and the pooling of library manpower resources which are now in short supply. v I would like to indicate some of the support we are now giving library development. The ongoing research and statistics program of the Library Services Act does not require introduction. The current expansion of the staff will permit added emphasis on school library service, and entrance into the field of special librarianship including some aspects of documentation and automated information storage and retrieval. The Office also has supported a pilot educational research information project which is being conducted through a contract with the Center for Documentation and Communication Research of the School of Library Science at Western Reserve University. Most relevant 10
The Future of Society to this institute is our financial support of the Postcensal Study of Pro- fessional and Technical Manpower, which came about as a joint recom- mendation of the Advisory Panel of the National Science Foundation and the President's Committee on Scientists and Engineers. The sug- gested program was a direct survey of a large sample of persons recorded in the I960 census enumeration as college graduates, to de- termine relationships between training and subsequent occupation. Demographic, economic, social, and professional characteristics of the persons surveyed were to be included. In I960 the National Science Foundation started to work on this project with the National Opinion Research Center, a University of Chicago affiliate. Various government agencies, including the Office of Education, were asked to supply assist- ance in its development. Of the $25,000 which the Office could allocate, $10,000 will be used to collect data on school and public librarians. The Library Services Branch is responsible for liaison functions of this part of the study. We are all agreed that the progress of education will depend signif- icantly and increasingly on research. I know that the current amount of library science research and statistical work is limited, and that library education is the least studied of the fields relating to librarianship. Between July, 1956, and December, 1961, the Office of Education (through the Library Services Act) made available for research close to $270,000. This research, however, had to be relevant to rural public library service, not library education. The Cooperative Research Branch, during the same period, awarded grants amounting to over $127,000 for library research projects. While these studies are of great signifi- cance, none deals with library education. Between July, 1958, and December, 1961, the Educational Media Branch made over $158,000 available, and only one project represents an investigation that falls broadly into the area of library education. We believe, in the Office of Education, that the advances of librar- ianship depend largely on the programs of library schools, and that these educational programs should lead rather than follow professional practice. We hope that the deliberations of this institute will identify the scope and direction which library education should take. We are looking forward to learning about your conclusions and hope that we may assist in the solution of some of the areas which this institute will explore. 11