Introduction In The System of Professions, Andrew Abbott suggested that earlier sociological studies on professionalization were misleading because, in focusing on the parallels in organizational development across professions, they ignored interprofessional competition [1, pp. 1–2]. Competition—both interprofessional and interdepartmental—is intensifying across higher education institutions offering preparation for the information professions. Abbott further argues that the professions make up an interdependent system, within which “each profession has its activities under various kinds of jurisdiction. Sometimes it has full control, sometimes control subordinate to another group. Jurisdictional boundaries are perpetually in dispute, both in local practice and in national claims. It is this history of jurisdictional disputes that is the real, the determining history of the professions” [1, p. 2]. Today, information technology (IT) professionals and information technology degree programs are at the crossroads of a hotly contested terrain. Neither computer scientist nor librarian, IT professionals must acquire the knowledge and abilities historically taught in the programs leading to what Abbott described as the qualitative information professions (e.g., librarians, law reporters, and journalists), while at the same time demonstrating mastery of the entirely different knowledge and skill sets historically the focus of Abbott’s quantitative information professions (e.g., cost accountants, management engineers, statisticians, operations researchers, systems analysts, and computer programmers) [1, p. 217]. It is no surprise, then, to find these two domains, as represented by the disciplines of computer science and information studies, competing for control over the educational programs for this potentially lucrative workforce sector. Nor should it come as a surprise that how the competition plays out is likely to have consequences for the future of the educational programs from which these competing disciplines were initiated. This article uses Abbott’s theory of the system of professions as a lens through which to view and understand how jurisdictional contests were resolved in the past in the disciplines of information studies (formerly library science) and computer science and to apply that understanding to speculating about the likely outcome of the impending dispute over information technology education. The article posits answers to the following questions: How might the different sets of values held by computer science and information studies manifest themselves in the development of a legitimatizing process for information technology education such as accreditation? What effect might these value differences have on the future development of information technology degree programs offered within schools of information studies? Is it likely that the stability that ALA has enjoyed as a mediator between librarianship and the discipline of information studies will be challenged? Finally, what are the likely consequences for the status of the profession of librarianship? Abbott loosely defines professions as “somewhat exclusive groups of individuals applying somewhat abstract knowledge to particular cases” [1, p. 318]. In this article, we examine the differing roles that the structure of accreditation has played in the development of the two academic disciplines from which information technology programs have emerged—computer science and information studies—in order to speculate about the impact that these emerging programs may have on the professional status of librarianship and, to a lesser extent, the disciplinary identity of information studies. There are many different trajectories the emerging competition might take and, therefore, many different consequences that might result. To investigate these possible trajectories and determine which is likely to transpire, this article first examines the role of accreditation in the history of professionalization of each, then applies Abbott’s theory of the system of professions to the analysis of possible outcomes of their interaction in the development of IT education on the future of education for the profession of librarianship. Will librarianship’s jurisdiction be affected by the shifting of the boundaries between the qualitative and quantitative information professions? Will librarianship retain full control, subordinate itself to the emerging IT professions, or act collaboratively to erase old boundaries and give birth to something new? According to Abbott, there are three reasons that professionalism matters: first, “because our market‐based occupational structure favors employment based on personally held resources, whether of knowledge or of wealth. Such employment is more secure, more autonomous, and usually more remunerative, partly because it is organized in ‘careers,’ a strategy invented in the nineteenth century to permit a coherent individual life within a shifting marketplace.” This was clearly an important motivation for the professionalization of librarianship, but less so for computer science. The second reason is that “nearly all kinds of knowledge are recognizable as common resources for a body of individuals.” Therefore, the knowledge of a profession must be organized enough to make it difficult to commodify, successful enough to generate continual demand, and “be abstract enough to survive small market shifts, but not so abstract as to prevent monopoly” [1, p. 324]. Computer science has clearly emphasized abstract knowledge but with the intent of building a discipline rather than educating for a profession, while information studies has historically had an ambiguous relationship with abstract knowledge, pulled by its professional ties toward a less disciplined, more pragmatic knowledge base that carries with it the danger of commodification. Abbott’s third reason for professionalization may be the most implicated by the apparent trajectory of information technology education. In the late 1980s, when The System of Professions was first published, professionalism was holding its own in the face of competing forms of institutionalization, including commodification and organization, but Abbott suggests that over time it might lose out to organization, and he specifically mentions that “the new hiring patterns of the major information firms and the loose form of organizational professionalism point to a much weaker control of work by the professions themselves” [1, p. 325]. As we will see, the emphasis on abstract knowledge and disciplinary identity that characterizes computer science’s development has weakened the interest in professionalization by the information technology workforce (ITWF). It appears that this may have a profound influence on the trajectory of information technology education. The Role of Accreditation in Information Studies The history of accreditation of library and information studies is much longer and richer than that of computer science degree programs.3 Although these histories intertwine and influence one another at various points, they are treated separately here. The account of this history begins in 1915 with the activity that led to the establishment of the Board of Education for Librarianship and the first standards for accreditation in that field. Abbott argues that industrialized societies institutionalized expertise through professionalization [1, p. 323]. Librarianship’s foray into professionalization occurred at the height of industrialization. The efforts that established the Board of Education for Librarianship and the 1925 Minimum Standards for Library School were directed at advancing the status of librarianship from craft to profession. While a major component of the proposed change was the establishment of curricula within educational institutions rather than apprenticeship/training programs in libraries, the primary spokesperson, Charles C. Williamson, as well as the training programs in question, focused their efforts on educational affiliation to promote professional status for librarianship. This focus began to shift only as the emergence of the discipline of information science during World War II promoted the development of a disciplinary identity apart from the established professional identity librarianship had garnered. With the emergence of a potential competing discipline, library science crystallized a disciplinary identity that had heretofore been lacking. This identity remained closely tied to professional practice and practical knowledge, as reflected in the 1951 Standards for Accreditation, and instigated the cycle of standardization and curricular experimentation that prevailed from 1940 through the 1960s [2, 3]. The 1972 standards are the culmination of this era of dynamic expansion. By 1982, library science’s domination of the qualitative information domain was further tested, both by a growing internal awareness that the diversification of the field was not adequately represented in the accreditation standards and by the emergence of computer science as a competitor in the preparation for professional information work [4]. The 1992 ALA standards (still in effect) are the realization of the efforts to recognize the diversification of the field (as reflected in the change of title) but do not fully acknowledge the transition from the values of an industrial society to an information society. They are outcomes oriented and show an increasing recognition of the place of specialized accreditation in the larger arena of educational accreditation but are still focused on the goals of professionalization. They encourage curricular experimentation but are perhaps not responsive enough to the rapidly changing, ambiguously defined terrain of the information professions and the organization of information work. 3.  This account relies on Carroll’s (1977) chronological structure through the mid‐1970s [2]. The later periods are based on personal observations of the authors except where sources are specifically cited. From Craft to Profession (1915–39) The involvement of ALA in accreditation of library education began in 1923. The first ALA standards were published in 1925. From 1915 to 1925, the ten charter members of the Association of American Library Schools (AALS) voluntarily organized themselves under a constitution that included an agreement to maintain the following standards: “A four‐year high school course, or its equivalent, for admission; a course of at least thirty‐four weeks of technical instruction in preparation for general professional library work; and not less than two full‐time instructors with at least two instructors who are graduates of a library school having such standards” [2, p. 43]. Admission of new schools was by two‐thirds vote of all members and could be revoked at any time with a similar two‐thirds vote if the school in question did not continue to meet the standards, with the provision for reinstatement at such time that proof of compliance was offered by the affected program. As Williamson noted in 1921:4 It scarcely seems possible that any institution willing to call itself a professional library school could fail to meet the extremely simple standards fixed by the Association, yet it has been suspected that compliance on the part of certain schools has been no more than nominal, at least. Having once organized without applying proper standards to its charter members, the Association is now helpless either to enforce the existing inadequate requirements or to make necessary advances. Motives of self interest and personal relationship effectively block any attempt to enforce its standards, except perhaps in their application to new schools; and unpleasant feelings are easily aroused by demanding of applicants for admission standards not being maintained by charter members. If there is to be any effective supervision over the standards of library school, it must come from outside the Association. [5, pp. 121–22] It is important to recognize that at the time of the survey reported by Williamson (1920–21), most library training programs emphasized technical training exclusively and were more often affiliated with libraries than educational institutions following the model established by Dewey at Columbia College (1887) and refined when he moved to the New York State Library in Albany (1889). To speak of a discipline of library science, or even of a profession of librarianship, was premature. What was at issue was whether librarianship should be treated as a craft, for which technical training accomplished largely through apprenticeship would be appropriate, or as a profession, which would require a broader, more general curriculum and affiliation with established educational institutions. The qualification of librarians at the time of the report included both certification of completion of a course of training as well as four‐ and five‐year bachelor's degree programs. Williamson’s recommendations included standardization to a four‐year broad, general education, “plus at least one year of graduate study in a properly organized library school” [5, p. 136], uniform admission standards, increasing salaries to raise the quality of instruction, and organization of library schools as departments in universities [3]. Finally, and most important for this discussion, Williamson noted that library schools and other training agencies are in need of a representative and authoritative body to assist them not only in formulating standards, but particularly in enforcing standards agreed upon. The Association of American Library Schools cannot be expected to perform this function. The proposed national certification board could serve also as a standardizing agency for library schools, having authority to enforce its decisions through its power of certifying with examination the graduates of approved schools. Besides its functions in certification of librarians and accrediting of library schools, the board would naturally become an effective central agency for the promotion of all types of library training. [5, p. 145] Williamson’s recommendation that certification of individuals be implemented in addition to accreditation of programs reflected contemporary sociological thought on professionalization [5, pp. 9–20]. While the proposed functions related to accreditation of programs were put into operation with the Minimum Standards for Library School in 1926, those related to certification of graduates remain unimplemented to this day. The lack of a certification process has often been included in the factors that have contributed to the low salaries and low status typically associated with librarianship [2]. Williamson’s recognition that the American Association of School Librarians (AASL) could not effectively administer the accreditation process because the interdependent relationship between the organization and its member programs undercut any authority it might have exerted to ensure that the standards were upheld is perhaps even more important. In 1925, ALA was a reasonable choice. Its mission and that of the educational programs it would evaluate were sufficiently differentiated at the time. The 1925 standards were expected to serve as quantitative measures that a school had met one of four sets of requirements, each for a different class of library school: junior undergraduate library schools (one year of college work required for admission; connected with a library or educational institution; certificate), senior undergraduate library schools (three years of college work required for admission; connected with an approved, degree‐granting institution; bachelor's degree), graduate library school (requiring a bachelor's degree for admission; connected with an approved, degree‐granting institution; certificate), and advanced graduate library school (bachelor's degree and one year of approved professional curriculum required for admission; master’s for one year of further professional study; PhD under university regulations for granting of that degree). In 1932, these were reorganized as “types” rather than “classes” of library schools, including Type III schools (one full year of library science; not requiring four full years of college work for admission); Type II schools (one full year of library science; requiring four years of applicable college work for admission); and Type I schools (one or more full year[s] of library science; requiring bachelor's degree for admission). While James L. Wyer, Chairman of the Board of Education for Librarianship noted that the 1932 revisions were qualitative rather than quantitative because “they stipulate what, rather than how much, should go into a curriculum” [2, p. 49], later accounts correctly identify them as minor revisions to the quantitative measures that preceded them [6], the most significant difference being that accreditation was no longer offered to schools that did not require four years of college work prior to admission and thus, effectively, to schools that prepared school librarians. Thus, the 1932 revisions can be interpreted as promoting jurisdictional conflict within the profession, in this case between school librarians and other librarians. This tension still persists today, with many school library education programs receiving accreditation from the National Council on Accreditation of Teacher Education (NCATE) rather than ALA. The 1932 revisions are also the first clear indication that the Board of Education for Librarianship (BEL) had accepted Williamson’s assumption—based on contemporary sociological thought—that to be successful, the professionalization of librarianship would require that the accrediting body be affiliated with a national organization willing to adopt the norms of other professions for educational preparation, thus requiring preparation beyond the minimum for the bachelor’s degree. 4.  The Williamson report was the result of a survey on library education conducted by the trustees of the Carnegie Corporation from 1920 to 1921. Because of its importance, the corporation agreed to publish it in 1923. Publication served to hasten the adoption of many of the recommendations, including those related to accreditation. Disciplinary Awareness (1940–51) World War II focused attention on an emerging discipline initially called documentation but later renamed information science. During WWII, and through the cold war, librarians and scientists were recruited, and the practices of librarianship were repurposed to guide the development of more efficient storage and retrieval mechanisms to support the war effort. Microfilm, the initial preference, was replaced over time by computer technology. As computerization developed, the qualitative information practices associated with librarianship and documentation gradually separated from the quantitative information practices [7, p. 6]. The former were institutionalized as special librarianship, while the latter became associated with computer science and engineering. The extent to which the jurisdiction remains contested is evident in the persistence to this day of the designation of educational programs in both areas as “information science” (e.g., library and information science vs. computer and information science). Initially, the emergence of the new discipline and the split between qualitative and quantitative orientations had several important implications for the professional jurisdiction of librarianship. First, the war and the draw to information science escalated the feminization of the profession of librarianship. Although the number of men enrolled in library schools increased somewhat after WWII, these increases were nowhere near those seen in other professional educational programs [1, pp. 127–28; 2, pp. 59–60]. As mentioned above, a burgeoning of opportunities for librarians with advanced education in science and related fields to serve in specialized libraries was a more positive outcome of this development. Second, the collaboration between information scientists and other scientists during the war effort led the developing discipline of information science to begin to codify principles, establish practices, and develop theories of much broader scope and general applicability than those that had been developed by the professionally focused library science, leading to a blossoming of research and publication in both disciplines and to the development of doctoral programs. In the late 1940s, the universities of Illinois and Michigan joined Chicago in offering the PhD degree. During the following decade, Columbia, Berkeley, Western Reserve, and Rutgers universities doubled these ranks. Since many of the early information scientists were recruited from the ranks of librarianship, and because many of the principles and theories were grounded in or derived from library science, especially those related to the organization and classification of information, the perception of internal jurisdictional conflict was slow to develop within the profession. Many of the early PhD programs, such as those at Western Reserve and Rutgers, included well‐recognized information scientists on their faculties by the mid‐1950s, which may have served to further delay the perception of internal jurisdictional conflict. The graduates of these programs formed the faculties that oversaw the expansion of library education in the 1960s. “Prior to 1951, the three schools with doctoral programs had awarded twenty‐seven degrees; in the next decade eighty‐three students earned doctorates” [3, pp. 125–26]. Disciplinary Consolidation and Dynamic Expansion (1952–81) The 1951 Standards for Accreditation “dropped the last of the quantitative aspects of the earlier standards and emphasized qualitative evaluation rather than evaluation based solely on the number of inputs into the program (library collection, financial resources, students/faculty ratio, number of credit hours offered, etc.)” [6, pp. 110–11]. More important, this set of standards established the master’s degree as the appropriate first professional degree and moved from accreditation of library schools to that of master’s degree programs. The former was clearly a continuation of the professionalization process and found its strongest opponents among the Type I schools that had developed advanced graduate programs, the most outspoken spokesman being J. P. Danton, the dean at the University of California, Berkeley. Danton’s opposition was motivated by the equalization of status among the three types of schools that would occur once the master’s degree became the norm. Although the ALA had always insisted that the types of schools were not to be interpreted as rankings, clearly even the schools themselves viewed them as such. Changing the standards and focusing accreditation on degree programs did not have the desired effect of unifying librarianship under a single banner nor of reducing interprofessional competition, in part because these actions were taken without sufficient recognition of the extent to which the emergence of information science as a competing discipline would impact professional status [2, pp. 123–27]. The 1951 standards also encouraged the development of PhD programs at schools other than the designated graduate school (the University of Chicago) by excluding such programs from the accreditation process altogether, thus increasing awareness of library science as a discipline as distinct from librarianship as a profession. By 1956, a reorganization of ALA had split the functions served by BEL between two other agencies, the Library Education Division (LED) and the new Committee on Accreditation (COA). The jurisdiction of school librarianship continued to be contested. While the 1951 standards applied only to master’s degree programs, the ALA council approved standards for undergraduate programs in 1959 “to ‘guide’ teacher education programs, most of which were seeking accreditation by the National Council for Accreditation of Teacher Education” [3, p. 124]. During the 1960s, interest in library education reached new heights. The ALA Office for Library Education was established in 1966 in response to an alleged shortage of trained library personnel that had been an active concern since the beginning of the decade. The Higher Education Act of 1965 “provided funding for assistance in professional study, aimed primarily at prospective library school faculty members, and for the support of short institutes, aimed primarily at practitioners. … Federal encouragement through financial support coincided with the establishment of doctoral programs at eleven new schools between 1961 and 1971” [3, pp. 127–28]. The rise of special librarianship focused curriculum reform on innovation and relevance through new courses dealing with information science and behavioral sciences, and the implementation of developing teaching strategies and educational technology [3]. Re‐entrenchment (1972–81) The 1972 Standards for Accreditation clearly reflected the excitement of a period of economic growth and strong federal interest in social programs that had already begun to decline by the time of their implementation in 1973. For the first time, the standards “identified discrimination based upon age, race, color, creed, religion, physical disability, or sex in recruitment, admissions, or financial aid as violations” [8] and promoted sensitivity to the role of the librarian in a multicultural society. Also for the first time, the jurisdictional claim of the academic institutions housing these programs was recognized, as was awareness of the contributions of other disciplines. “Programs were to be evaluated against their own and their institution’s objectives which were stipulated by the standards.” In addition to requiring that the school demonstrate consistency with the general principles of librarianship and library education, the standards promoted “responsiveness to the needs of the constituency with [sic] the school seeks to serve” [8, p. 2]. With the implementation of the 1972 standards came extensive changes to the ALA accreditation process. A self‐study document prepared by the program seeking accreditation became the mechanism through which COA would decide whether to conduct a site visit. With the national economy on the decline and information technology on the rise, the projected librarian shortage did not materialize, and enrollments in master’s programs dropped accordingly. By the early 1980s, schools in Oregon, New York, Ohio, Minnesota, Colorado, California, Georgia, Tennessee, Illinois, and Michigan had closed. By 1993, the closing of an additional thirteen schools with accredited master’s programs followed [9, p. 13]. The Information Professions (1982–2005) By the mid‐1980s, the accreditation process in information studies began to come under fire, in part because of the expense to the shrinking programs. The introduction of library automation systems in the 1970s and personal computers in the 1980s contributed to significant changes in the roles of librarians and the expectations for their educational preparation. The library community was not totally unaware that efforts to accredit computer science programs might heighten contests over the library automation terrain. Many schools changed their names to include some reference to information, and some dropped all reference to library science or studies, although most of these continued to offer the master’s degree. The University of California, Berkeley, renamed its program (School of Information Management Systems) in 1995 and, in 1998, elected to no longer pursue accreditation by ALA. In 1997, Pennsylvania State University created a new school of information sciences and technologies that has neither included professional preparation for librarianship nor sought accreditation by ALA. In 1988, COA created an advisory subcommittee that recommended revision of the standards, and another subcommittee was appointed to begin this work in 1989. By 1992, the subcommittee had completed the work that resulted in the 1992 Standards for Accreditation. A major issue confronted by COA during the two‐year period immediately following the adoption of the standards was the perception of many schools “that the process had become too intrusive, focused on matters of detail rather than significance and [that it] was far too time consuming and costly” [8, p. 4]. Over the next several years, COA made significant changes in the conduct of accreditation procedures in an effort to reduce the cost and ensure that intrusiveness was kept to a minimum. During this period, a persistent theme in the history of education for the information professions reasserted itself with a new twist. What F. William Summers characterized as the “tension between the needs for practitioners and the expectations of the academy that its schools be concerned with the discovery and transmission of new knowledge” [8, p. 10] was heightened by a trend toward standardization on research as the most important criterion in tenure and promotion decisions for professional school faculty, as well as those of academic departments. This trend began in research universities and was quickly adopted by those schools with doctoral programs, reaffirming latent perceptions of program quality ranking along the professional/disciplinary divide. The COA’s attempts to be responsive to the complaints of the schools regarding cost and intrusiveness only served to heighten the professionals’ perceptions that the standards and procedures were out of sync with the needs of libraries. Congresses and professional meetings have repeatedly raised the question as to whether the nonprescriptive, outcomes‐oriented standards met the needs of employers of information professionals—specifically libraries—for certification that graduates are prepared for professional practice. This internal jurisdictional debate occupied the attention of Association of Library and Information Science Educators (ALISE), the successor to the AASL, to the extent that a split emerged between the disciplinary‐focused schools (primarily those with doctoral programs located in research universities) and the professional schools (those with professional master’s programs only, most often located in comprehensive and graduate universities and colleges). The dividing line, however, has been perceived most often as falling between “information” schools and “library” schools; the confusion is clearly evident in the 2004 announcement that a group of deans had formed an organization of i‐Schools, building upon the somewhat fluid and informal alliances many of the institutions involved had developed over the past few decades. During the late 1990s, many of the disciplinary‐focused schools extended their purview to include undergraduate programs in information studies and information technology, usually to solidify their positions within their institutions. In part because of the extension of mission that this entailed, these schools were sometimes perceived as having abandoned libraries and librarianship for information technology. Contrary to this perception, only one (Berkeley) has elected to forgo accreditation by the ALA, and none have played a significant role in developing accreditation for information technology programs.5 5.  This is discussed further in the “Contested Terrain, 2000–2005” section below. The Role of Accreditation in Computer Science The path to professionalization of computing work did not proceed as directly to either affiliation with educational institutions or accreditation of degree programs as did the path to professionalization of library work. There were nonetheless similarities in the early stages of each. For example, education for computing work was first accomplished through apprenticeship and in‐house training, similar to the in‐house training programs provided for librarians in libraries. The two professions faced very different challenges with regard to labor supply and demand, which contributed to a very different trajectory for the professionalization of computer work. Efforts to professionalize computer work, initially including data processing and computer programming, were met with considerable resistance from practitioners during the mainframe era of computing. As computing expanded, true workforce shortages contributed to inflated salaries and tolerance of virtuosic behavior by a large segment of the workforce. A 1968 study by the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) reflected the chaos that had resulted from the uncontrolled attempts to address preparation to meet workforce shortages, but the Data Processing Management Association’s (DPMA) initiative to establish certification procedures foundered as the industry’s focus began to shift from mainframe to personal and distributed computing. The situation remained in flux until 1982 when ACM and the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. (IEEE) joined forces to appoint the Computing Sciences Accreditation Board (CSAB) to establish accreditation criteria and procedures. In 2002, the Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology (ABET) assumed responsibility for accreditation of computing degree programs and, in 2003, began the process of establishing criteria for accreditation of information technology degree programs. From Craft to Discipline (1930–62) The military underwrote most of the development costs for computing machines between 1930 and the end of WWII and was first to develop systematic programming techniques and programmer instruction. “The people who designed the circuitry of the military’s new computers by necessity also designed the command system for the machines and passed on what they knew to their trainees and successors. But it was obvious even before the ENIAC machine had performed its first official calculations early in 1946 that on the job training of programmers could turn out only a fraction of the people needed to operate the machines already being built” [10, p. 35]. Nonetheless, the centralized nature of mainframe computing meant that the majority of computer workers were employed as government contractors for defense or aerospace work, or by computer manufacturing firms. Only the largest of the companies that used computers, such as banks, employed their own data processors before the late 1960s. Computer manufacturers and government contractors quickly developed dual strategies to meet their rapidly growing needs for a trained labor pool: the hardware manufacturers developed in‐house programs to train the programmers necessary to make their products salable, and both the companies that manufactured computers and the government “began to lure people away from the sciences, often offering unlimited flexibility in their work as well as comparatively high wages” [11, p. 15]. The in‐house training programs varied greatly depending on the skills of the instructors, the hardware, the kinds of computation problems to be solved, and the capabilities of the students [10, p. 36]. Curiously, the lack of standardization did not appear to curtail mobility or decrease competition for the labor pool. As Joan Greenbaum states: “Programmers, in particular, were like virtuosos in high demand, who could jump from job to job, being granted demands to match their expectations. Almost all were quite young, and they sought independence and creativity in a field that promised status as well as high pay” [11, p. 15]. This segment of the computing workforce, in other words, had little motivation to unionize or seek professional status and, in fact, resisted early efforts at standardization of educational requirements for certification. According to Nathan Ensmenger, “scientists who left ‘respectable’ disciplines for the uncharted waters of computing faced self‐doubt, professional uncertainty, and even ridicule” [12, p. 56] but were reassured by familiar institutions such as research laboratories and institutes, professional conferences and societies, and technical journals. The presence of these institutions might also be interpreted as a sign that the groundwork for professionalization had been laid, yet throughout the 1950s and 1960s, articles in trade journals such as Datamation and the EDP Analyzer expressed dismay at the lack of professional status and respect accorded to computer programmers by the general public and, in 1967, just five years after the establishment of the first degree program in computer science at Purdue University, the U.S. Civil Service Commission designated data‐processing personnel as nonexempt employees, which effectively branded computer programmers and other computer specialists as technicians rather than professionals.6 The centralized model familiar from mass production that characterized mainframe computing throughout this period and for the next two decades may have influenced the government’s judgment of the nature of computing work, to which the lack of educational standardization and the resistance of the workers themselves to certification efforts probably contributed. Several historians, including Philip Kraft [10] and Greenbaum [11], among others, have asserted that commodification was at work here—that professionalization efforts were promoted most often by management in the attempt to control the flexibility and salary benefits that computer programmers and other data processing employees had become accustomed to demanding. Ensmenger, however, cites contemporaneous concerns by computer programmers themselves that, if left unregulated, an influx of narrowly trained practitioners could do significant damage to the status of their profession [12]. Throughout the 1950s, conventional management methods had little effect on the development of the computing workforce and, until the late 1960s, the perception predominated that computer programming was a creative activity. 6.  During this same time period, librarians were classified as exempt in recognition of their professional status. Defining the New Discipline (1962–82) By 1962, the demands for computer programmers and software expertise coalesced in the establishment of the first computer science degree program at Purdue University. By 1967, the University of California, Berkeley; University of Illinois, Urbana‐Champaign; and Carnegie‐Mellon University had established degree programs, and others quickly followed to fill the exponentially growing need to educate computer programmers and systems analysts. An influential 1967 report commissioned for the Council for Economic and Industrial Research noted that while the contemporary computer programmer labor force stood at 100,000, an additional 50,000 were needed immediately [13]. To meet this demand, employers resorted to desperate measures. For example, in 1966, IBM provided training to 100,000 programmers for a cost of between $90 and $100 million. In addition to academic degree programs, private data‐processing schools and vocational programs sprang up to meet the need. This open and eclectic approach failed to provide a sufficient labor pool and brought with it a host of additional problems. A 1968 study by ACM’s Special Interest Group on Computer Personnel Research (SIGCPR) cautioned that “the ranks of the computer world are being swelled by growing hordes of programmers, systems analysts, and related personnel. Educational, performance, and professional standards are virtually nonexistent and confusion grows rampant in selecting, training, and assigning people to do jobs” [14, p. 366]. The obvious candidates for establishing standards for programming competency were the universities, but academic computer scientists were occupied with establishing a disciplinary identity to distinguish their field from others that had been engaged in computing endeavors since the 1950s, including departments of mathematics, business, and economics; library science; physics; and electrical engineering. Their academically oriented agenda relied on the then‐familiar model of professional advancement. Control of abstract knowledge was expounded in the sociological literature as the key to professional and disciplinary status. “As a profession becomes mature it realizes that the science (not technology) needed by the profession must continually be extended to more basic content rather than restricted only to the obvious applied science” [14, p. 367]. The academics focused on developing a rigorous and theoretical program of study that the workforce meanwhile criticized for being out of touch and insufficiently practical to prepare computer programmers and software engineers for employment. The primary alternative to this path was the plan advocated by the Data Processing Management Association (DPMA), based on the model of the certified public accountant.7 The DPMA’s Six Measures of Professionalism Program, announced in 1962, included certification, standards, continuing education, public service, and the development of a professional code of ethics [12]. A national certification examination known as the Certificate in Data Processing (CDP) examination was the pivotal feature of this program. The examination was open to anyone who completed a prescribed course of academic study, had at least three years experience in punched card or computer installation work, and demonstrated “high character qualifications” [12, p. 66]. The educational requirements were waived for the first administration of the examination in 1965. In its first three years, the number of applicants more than quintupled, indicating that working programmers welcomed this strategy toward achieving professional status. Of the six measures proposed by the DPMA, however, “only the CDP program achieved even moderate industry acceptance” [12, p. 66]. In 1966 and 1967, when the DPMA sought to enforce the educational requirements for the examination, applications dropped by 85 percent and never fully recovered despite concessions implemented in 1968. A 1970 announcement that a baccalaureate degree would be required to sit for the examination in 1972 effectively ended both the exam and the leadership role that the DPMA had enjoyed.8 By the end of the 1960s, however, there was general agreement that some educational training should be required for professional status in computer programming; the questions were of which kind and how much. The ACM’s consistent affiliation with and support of academic educational efforts probably played an important role in refocusing the initially disdainful attitudes of computer programmers toward educational preparation. By 1964, ACM had established a curriculum committee on computer science. In 1965, this committee began to assemble topics and, three years later, published the first curriculum recommendations (Curriculum ’68) [4, p. 5]. Included were such statements as “computer science is concerned with information in much the same sense that physics is concerned with energy” [12, p. 86]. Issues at stake were definition of the field and the role that professionals might play within it. Ensmenger cites a contemporary description from the trade journal Datamation of a “growing breach between the scientific and engineering computation boys who talk Algol and Fortran … and the business data processing boys who talk English and write programs in Cobol” [12, n. 128]. In 1978, ACM published updates to the curriculum guidelines (Curriculum ’78), but the rancor and bitterness that characterized the relationship between the DPMA and the ACM in the late 1960s persisted throughout the period of centralized mainframe computing, with little progress in establishing standards for professionalization. The bitter arguments did nothing to establish confidence in the business world that either of the two organizations understood their needs and could develop a method that would help them to identify qualified employees. With the collapse of the CDP, attention turned gradually from certification of working programmers to accreditation of academic programs. 7.  The DPMA was known as the National Machine Accountant’s Association (NMAA) until after the announcement of the national examination in 1962. 8.  The authors surmise that the shift to an emphasis on the importance of education is due to the lack of qualified trained personnel to fill the available positions. The early workforce was dominated by personnel who had their foundational training in the military. Military service afforded early retirement and entry into the civilian workforce. These programmers became senior‐level personnel and managers of computer and networking operations. Those who earned their knowledge through military training and experience may have viewed a shift in emphasis to educational preparation as a threat. Having an influx of workforce qualified by educational degree rather than based predominantly on practical experience spoke to a conflicting set of values held by the established workforce. The Emergence of Information Technology Education (1982–2005) Change finally came in 1982 when the IEEE and the ACM combined forces to establish CSAB and to charge it with preparing accreditation criteria. A year later, the IEEE Computer Society published its own guidelines for computer science and engineering programs but continued to work cooperatively with the ACM on the development of joint guidelines published in 1991 (Computing Curriculum ’91; [4, p. 5]). The CSAB criteria for accreditation that finally appeared in 1985 were unsurprisingly more reactive than proactive in meeting the challenges of the new model of distributed personal computing that was already gaining ascendancy over the waning centralized mainframe model. While the accreditation standards for librarianship had become increasingly nonprescriptive and employed nonquantitative measures, the first criteria for computer science were prescriptive in orientation, quantitative in measurement, and privileged the computer science research orientation exclusively over emerging areas of practical application, such as software engineering. The first accreditation self‐studies and visits were conducted in 1985–86, with twenty‐one programs being granted accreditation in 1987. Between 1986 and 1995, the criteria underwent continual improvement. Language was clarified, some of the criteria were made less prescriptive, and standards for the inclusion of social and ethical implications of computing in society were developed [4]. In 1995–96, CSAB embarked on a major effort to modernize the criteria. The Criteria Committee, appointed in 1996, was charged to retain the strengths of the existing criteria, incorporate positive aspects from other approaches, clarify existing ambiguities, recognize the criteria is a statement of the minimum standards for accreditation, and rewrite prescriptive statements unless they are required for expressing necessary minimums [15]. Six years later, following a merger with ABET, the criteria were approved. Meanwhile, jurisdictional complications surfaced reflecting the continued growth and diversification of the information technology workforce, as well as the emergence of information technology educational programs in disciplines other than computer science. Contested Terrain (2000–2005) Although commonalities can be found at both the most abstract and most concrete levels in the roles that accreditation has played in information studies and computer science, they are essentially disparate because of differences in underlying motivations. In the case of librarianship, the development of educational programs began during the period of industrialization and was inextricably tied to the needs of a specific workforce and its desire for professional status. Conflict arose first as information science sought to establish a unique disciplinary identity and more intensely as the missions of the educational programs expanded to include other information professions without a change in accrediting authority. In the case of computer science, accreditation efforts coincided with the growth of the information society, and the role of accreditation was always more closely tied to validation of the body of abstract knowledge that defined the discipline than to efforts to ensure professional status for a specific workforce. The computing workforce, especially as exemplified by computer programming, has always exhibited an ambivalent attitude toward professionalization. While ACM and IEEE have exerted some “control” over the discipline of computer science, the extent of this control has been limited and its exertion, weak. However, even as information studies programs have expanded their missions, they have remained committed to accreditation as a legitimizer of professionalism rather than an arbiter of disciplinary identity, perhaps at the expense of the development of that identity. Although some overlap existed by the mid‐1980s between the types of positions sought by graduates of information studies master’s programs and those of computer science bachelor’s programs, it was so limited as to be insignificant and remained substantially so until the entreé of information studies into undergraduate information technology education in the 1990s. Until this point, the qualitative (information studies) and quantitative (computer science) educational programs were well differentiated. The emphasis on storage, retrieval, and transfer of information that was brought about by the emergence of personal computers in the 1980s and the Internet in the 1990s played a significant role in blurring the distinctions between qualitative and quantitative information professions at the turn of the century. In addition, by 2000 national recognition of impending shortages in the information technology workforce added new complications to this jurisdictional complexity, and by 2003 any claim to domination over the information profession(s) was unquestionably compromised. Between 2000 and 2005, three organizations began to give formal definition to information technology education: The IT Deans Group, ACM Special Interest Group for Information Technology Education (SIGITE), and the i‐Schools. The IT Deans Group was initially organized at a Computing Research Association (CRA) meeting but quickly expanded its membership across the quantitative/qualitative dividing line. At about the same time, a group of five information technology programs began meeting to discuss the development of a professional organization to coordinate efforts to accredit undergraduate IT degree programs.. Three years and three successful conferences later, the group became the ACM special interest group on information technology (SIGITE). The third and most recently formalized group is the i‐Schools, which began as a loosely organized group of ALA accredited information studies programs. Each of these groups retains a connection to an organization that has been associated to some degree with professionalization and has the potential to influence the direction that the emerging information technology educational programs take. The IT Deans Group At the CRA Biennial Conference, July 9–11, 2000, Peter Freeman, with the support of CRA Executive Director William Aspray, convened a group of leaders from schools of computing and information technology to discuss educational preparation for work in the IT sector. Following this initial meeting, invitations to a subsequent meeting to be held in Atlanta, Georgia, in March 2001 were extended to academic units whose faculty are focused on information technology construed broadly at the top level of a university’s organization and whose head reports directly to the provost or other chief academic officer [15].9 In this early phase of self‐definition, the group was more inclined toward inclusiveness than disciplinary‐based representation.10 No attempt was made to balance representation from the competing disciplines; in fact, interdepartmental competition does not appear to have been a concern. Aspray recalls several early conversations with Freeman regarding the extent to which the group should look outside the CRA constituency for membership: “It was clear that he [Freeman] felt the IT Deans group was representing a new constituency that would be better served by a new organization than by trying to shoe‐horn the group’s interests into an existing group.”11 The agendas of the early meetings support this reading of the group’s vision. Under Peter Freeman’s leadership, the group spent as much, if not more, time discussing issues arising from institutional reorganization as those arising from the development of new curricula or disciplinary identity. In these early meetings, the phrase “Big IT” was adopted to distinguish discussions of the development of colleges or schools of information technology (with departments including computer science, computer engineering, information systems, information science, etc.) from “Little IT,” which was reserved for discussion of curricula differentiated from computer science, software engineering, information systems, information science, and so forth. The focus of the discussions began to shift and the terminology to change at the July 2003 meeting held in conjunction with the Biennial CRA meeting in Snowbird, Utah. For the first time, disciplinary identity was explicitly included as an agenda item. During small group discussions, participants cordially discussed disciplinary issues that might contribute to interdepartmental competition. This was followed by a tactical issues session listed on the agenda as “approaches for fostering collaborative, interdisciplinary research (and curriculum) between IT schools and a) other schools and colleges at the same university; b) Engineering colleges in particular” [16].12 The idea that collaborative, interdisciplinary research might mitigate interdepartmental competition has resurfaced at several subsequent meetings but with little evidence of tangible results [17]. While the expressed motive for including the deans of traditionally qualitative information studies degree programs was a simple recognition that IT curricula were being developed within the schools they represented, the effects were much more complex. Participation in the discussion led to greater understanding of the differences and similarities of programs and approaches being developed in these two contexts. Issues such as faculty recruitment, diversity and gender, and research focus were unifying forces, while curricula and accreditation were more problematic. Accreditation of IT degree programs was first discussed relatively late in the sequence of meetings (July 2003 and February 2004). At the July 2003 meeting in Portland, Oregon, Stuart Zweben presented an overview of the general computing criteria shortly to be approved, and Edith Lawson, active in both the IT Deans and SIGITE, discussed an early draft of specific criteria for information technology that would be discussed at the ABET annual meeting in October. Zweben agreed to carry back to the drafting subcommittee concerns raised by some of the participants regarding the wording of the mathematics requirements. An update was provided at the February 2004 meeting. A brief discussion followed [16]. For the first several years, “Big IT” issues were at the core of the IT Deans discussions. Academic reorganization, fund‐raising, and, to a more limited extent, collaborative approaches to grand challenges in research were the pragmatic manifestations of the group’s evolving concern with abstract knowledge as the quintessential foundation of disciplinary identity. Since 2003, the discussions have focused almost exclusively on the issue of disciplinary identity as the group has explored various methods for characterizing trends in development from multiple, perhaps fractured, approaches in search of unifying themes. In retrospect, it is clear that curricula and accreditation were always peripheral to the interests of the IT Deans. Discussion of these issues was generally led by members who were also active in the organization that would develop into SIGITE, where they were discussed in much more depth and with more substantive outcomes. The interests and strategies of the IT Deans reflect the roots of the group in academic computer science, which also emphasized the development of a discipline through definition of abstract knowledge rather than of a profession through other means. As a group, the IT Deans have not demonstrated interest in or concern for interprofessional competition. There is no evidence that the formation of this group acknowledged that the multidisciplinary development of IT degree programs might foster interdepartmental or interprofessional competition. 9.  Eight administrators from schools of Information Studies (with ALA accredited master’s degree programs) were among those in attendance at the March 2001 meeting: Drexel University, Florida State University, University of Illinois at Urbana‐Champaign, Indiana University, University of Michigan, University of Pittsburgh, Syracuse University, and University of Washington. 10.  In response to a query from one of the authors as to why he had invited information studies deans, Peter Freeman stated, “I never explicitly considered ‘information studies deans’” (e‐mail from Peter Freeman to Kathleen Burnett, July 5, 2005, re: founding of IT Deans Group). 11.  As of March 2005, the forty‐eight members of the IT Deans Group were predominantly deans of computer science and computing units, followed by deans of information technology schools. Information studies deans from ALA accredited programs represented about 20 percent of the membership. Information systems program representation was approximately equal to that of information studies. Also included were several deans of informatics, applied science, and technical programs (e‐mail from William Aspray to Kathleen Burnett, July 6, 2005, re: founding of IT Deans Group). 12.  For many years, computer science has struggled with differentiating itself from computer engineering. While colleges of engineering were referenced in the agenda entry, it is Kathleen Burnett's recollection that no discussion of this topic took place at this session, even though it had come up persistently in previous meetings. This meeting was a significant turning point for the group in many ways, not the least of which was that the group began to realize its own disciplinary disciplines and to focus on these rather than on the older relationship between computer science and computer engineering. ACM SIGITE In July 2003, SIGITE was formally established as a special interest group of ACM. This organization got its start nearly three years earlier with an invitational conference meeting in November 2001. The first Curriculum in IT Conference (CITC) was held in Provo, Utah, under the sponsorship of Brigham Young University, and included approximately 40 participants representing existing IT programs, ACM, IEEE Computer Science (IEEE‐CS), and ABET. Curriculum, accreditation, and establishment and future affiliation of an organization devoted to IT education were the primary issues discussed. In April 2002, Georgia Southern University sponsored a second, open registration conference, Curriculum in IT Conference (CITC‐2). At this meeting, the attendees agreed to form an organization and call it the Society for Information Technology (SITE) and to pursue affiliation with ACM as a SIG. Committees were formed, including two‐year and four‐year curricula committees and an accreditation criteria committee. A third conference, Curriculum in IT Conference (CITC‐3), was held in Rochester, New York, under the sponsorship of Rochester Institute of Technology. In addition to reports from the curriculum and accreditation criteria committees, this conference included technical papers and panel presentations. The committees were reorganized to enable them to work more closely together. In October 2003, the last of the university‐sponsored CITC conferences was held in West Lafayette, Indiana, under the sponsorship of Purdue University. The presentation of technical papers and panel presentations continued to develop, and committee reports were made, again focusing on curriculum and accreditation. The IT degree programs that contributed to the development of SIGITE have, from the beginning, invested heavily in accreditation as a means of legitimization, which is particularly interesting given their roots in academic computer science where, as we have seen, concern for professionalization has been secondary to the establishment of a disciplinary identity. It is not clear whether a common interest in professionalization distinguished this group from their colleagues’ preoccupation with disciplinary identity and, if so, what effect this might have on the future direction of IT degree programs. Notes taken at the first two conferences indicate that it was suggested that ABET’s Technology Accreditation Commission (TAC) should be explored as well as the Computing Accreditation Commission (CAC), but no reason was recorded, so it is difficult to determine whether terminological confusion or mission differentiation was behind this suggestion. In any case, the commission that was approached was CAC, which currently has responsibility for accrediting programs in information systems and software engineering, in addition to computer science. As a result, information technology programs seeking accreditation will need to satisfy the general computing criteria as well as the IT specific criteria, thereby facilitating the persistence of abstract knowledge and disciplinary identity rather than professionalization as central motivations for legitimization. i‐Schools The i‐Schools group was the most recent of the three groups to formalize. The core of this group consists of a small number of information studies deans who met on and off for more than a decade to discuss issues they had in common—undergraduate education, large enrollment management, research funding, and public relations—that did not always appear on the agendas of their ALA accredited colleagues. The most obvious impetus to formalize this developing alliance was to establish jurisdiction for a relatively small group of large, research‐oriented information studies programs through differentiation from their more traditionally oriented ALA accredited counterparts. Most of the deans involved were active participants in the IT Deans Group as well and, therefore, had some stake in establishing jurisdiction in the IT education arena, especially following ABET, Inc.’s decision to proceed with accreditation of IT programs, a move that i‐Schools members have given little indication of favoring.13 By 2003, the proto i‐Schools group had grown from five to ten programs, including just one non‐ALA affiliated program (Pennsylvania State University School of Information Sciences and Technology). In 2005, when the first conference of the IT Deans community was announced, the membership had expanded to seventeen, including five non‐ALA accredited schools—all members of the IT Deans Group.14 It is not clear what motivated the group to extend its membership so dramatically beyond its initial constituency nor is it yet possible to do more than speculate regarding the likely effects.15 Organizational structure, conference planning, and public relations issues dominated the early agendas. While it is clear that the membership of this group has a greater stake in the continuing welfare of librarianship as a profession than either SIGITE or the IT Deans Group, and a greater stake in undergraduate IT education than its ALA affiliated colleagues, it is as yet unclear what kind of influence they may exert on either professionalism or disciplinary identity. 13.  Only two information studies programs (SUNY Buffalo and Florida State University) sent representatives to the 2003 ABET annual meeting where IT accreditation was introduced. 14.  The University of California, Berkeley, School of Information Management and Systems; University of California, Irvine, Don Bren School of Information and Computing; Georgia Institute of Technology College of Computing; and Indiana University School of Informatics were listed in addition to Penn State. 15.  It has been suggested that recruitment outside of the ALA accredited schools was largely motivated by the desire to include more women among the member deans. During the early phases of development, the group had included as many as three women (Toni Carbo, Pittsburgh; Joanne Marshall, North Carolina; and Jane Robbins, Florida State). Two returned to faculty positions, and one retired by the end of 2004. Each of the new members meets the explicit guidelines for membership. Conclusions In the early twentieth century, at the height of industrialization and philosophical pragmatism, librarianship turned to accreditation as a means of legitimizing its status as a profession. The market‐based occupational structures of this era favored employment based on personally held resources. The accreditation process was designed to lend credence to librarianship’s claim to a unique body of somewhat abstract, albeit practical, knowledge. If Abbott’s theory of the system of professions holds, what librarianship needed to demonstrate through the accreditation process was that this body of knowledge could be organized as a common resource, required organized judgment that rendered it uncommodifiable, was successful enough to generate continual demand, and attained a level of abstraction that assured that it could survive small market shifts without endangering the profession’s ability to claim its uniqueness. Challenges have arisen in each of these areas. Library practitioners and information studies educators have debated the relative value of conceptual and practical knowledge throughout the history of the profession and the discipline. The emergence of information science during WWII challenged library science’s claims to both the abstractness and the uniqueness of its knowledge base. Distributed personal computing has further challenged several fundamental assumptions regarding the claims made by librarianship to control of and access to information. Distributed personal computing has also challenged librarianship’s claim to the uncommodifiability of organized judgment in control of and access to information. In the face of these challenges, however, the occupation of librarianship has successfully survived small—and in some cases, not so small—shifts in the market economy. Within its own small world, librarianship has established and maintained itself as a profession but to little advantage of its practitioners and with little effect in the larger market economy. The public may believe that libraries are a public good, but rarely is there a public outcry regarding the need for librarians and, even more rarely, support for improving salaries or status. Computer science, however, approached accreditation as a means for legitimizing its status as a discipline rather than a profession. Like librarianship, the discipline of computer science laid claim to a unique body of knowledge. To establish its disciplinary status, computer science emphasized the abstractness of its knowledge base, without reference to the occupations that it educated its students to practice or the institutions in which that practice would take place. Occupationally oriented subfields, such as information systems and software engineering and, more recently, information technology, developed. So far, the discipline has been successful in retaining these subfields as congruous with the discipline through the institution of general accreditation criteria that ensure that the abstract knowledge base is perpetuated in each of its offshoots. The early interest by information technology educators and the ACM SIGITE in accreditation was not inspired by a desire to attain professional status for their graduates nor was it a rejection of computer science’s emphasis on abstract knowledge; in fact, quite the contrary. Instead, it is a further instantiation of the weak organization trend that Abbott had already noted was developing in the hiring patterns of the major information firms by the late 1980s [1, p. 325]. During the mainframe era, and through the dot‐com boom, employers developed organizational structures to compensate for employees’ lack of practical knowledge and skills. This was necessary not only because of the disciplinary emphasis on abstract knowledge of the computer science programs that were educating the workforce but also because practical computing knowledge and skills became obsolete over very short time spans. Computer science’s emphasis on disciplinary identity and abstract knowledge was not only fortuitous—it was probably responsible for its survival. Information technology has allied itself with the disciplinary strategy of computer science. If the experiences of this subfield align with those of its parent discipline and the subfields of information systems and software engineering, emphasis on an abstract knowledge base will be essential to its survival. If the i‐Schools wish to capitalize on this success, they will need to adopt a similar strategy to ensure the survivability of their information technology degree programs and to ensure a place for their graduates in an evolving market economy in which professionalization may be a thing of the past. The answer to our first question (“How might value differences manifest themselves in the development of a legitimatizing process for information technology education,” such as accreditation?) is fairly clear. In taking the initiative early, the ACM SIGITE membership has tipped the scales in favor of the values of abstract knowledge and disciplinary identity. On the opposite end of the continuum, the traditional library degree programs remain firmly committed to the values of place, institution, and professionalism. These differences themselves will most likely magnify as the accreditation process for information technology education develops and matures, concurrently widening the gap between education for librarianship and education for the information technology workforce. The i‐Schools have already taken the first steps away from the values of place and professionalism toward those of abstract knowledge and disciplinary identity. The effect of these value differences on the future development of information technology degree programs offered within schools of information studies addressed in our second question is less clear. To continue to educate simultaneously for the profession of librarianship and the information technology workforce, i‐Schools will need to develop strategies to cope with the structural complexities of managing multiple accreditation processes and, more important, with disciplinary fractalization.16 Ultimately, they will need to either clearly articulate a body of abstract knowledge that the two extremes hold in common or abandon one extreme or the other. The existence of the discipline of information science is clear evidence that this body of knowledge does in fact exist but is obscured by the bifurcation between the values of professionalism and disciplinary identity. The answer to our third question (“Is it likely that the stability that ALA has enjoyed as a mediator between librarianship and the discipline of information studies will be challenged?”) is both yes and no. Yes, because the discipline of information studies will change as the i‐Schools locate their position on the continuum between professional and disciplinary identity, and that position will ultimately curtail the ALA’s jurisdiction. Within the narrower jurisdiction of the discipline of library science, however, ALA’s role as mediator is likely to continue as long as universities continue to see accreditation as viable. The answer to our final question (“What are the likely consequences for the status of the profession of librarianship?”) suggests a plan of action. The future of librarianship is seriously implicated not by interprofessional competition as Abbott’s theory suggested but by the demonstrated inability of the discipline of information studies to move beyond a set of professionalization goals for what has become a subfield (library science) to establish its claim to a unique body of abstract knowledge. If the discipline of information studies is to retain control of education for the library workforce while simultaneously participating in education for the information technology workforce, it will need to rethink its basic assumptions to better serve a society grounded in an information market economy in which organization and not professionalism is the locus of power. 16.  The fractal processes involved in disciplinary development are discussed by Abbott in The Chaos of Disciplines, which provides the theoretical framework for a forthcoming examination of the information disciplines by Bonnici and Burnett titled “Contested Terrain: The Development of the Information Disciplines.”