THEORY OF BIBLIOGRAPHIC CONTROL IN LIBRARIES Doralyn J. Hickey The phrase "theory of bibliographic control" evokes considerable interest among librarians, partly because they are not sure that any theory exists and partly because they wish that it did. The skepticism which young American librarians often express concerning bibliographic theory may be typical of those who have witnessed the development of elaborate cataloging systems, observed their contradictions and inconsistencies, and concluded that librari- anship, in the United States at least, is "long" on bibliographic control and woefully "short" on theory. The thesis of this paper is that American librarianship suffers not from a lack of bibliographic theory but from a multiplicity of theories. Further, it is contended that these theories reflect the history and social setting of the United States. In order to present this point of view systematically and com- ment upon it, this paper will address itself, first, to the distinctively American context out of which our current bibliographic systems emerged; second, to the dual structure of library catalogs and published bibliographies which characterizes American attempts to control materials; and, third, to some contemporary questions, the answers to which may help in the development of a coherent theory of bibliographic control in the United States. American Commitment to Free Education Despite the American mythology which suggests that all colonists were patri- ots, it is clear that the American Revolution did not eliminate all loyalists, any more than it eradicated all memories of the Anglo-European back- grounds of its participants. Whether they were aware of it or not, the colonists brought with them a heritage of experience with educational systems which conditioned their early history. In many ways, these earlier traditions con- flicted quite radically with the subsequent commitment of the country to the ideal of freedom for self-education. It has taken the United States the better part of 200 years to sort out all of the consequences of this kind of freedom: to build a system of publicly supported schools and libraries not reserved for the intellectually or financially elite. [Libraty Qyzrterly, vol. 47, no. 3, pp. 253-731 @1977 by The University of Chicago. All right reserved. 253
254 DORALYN J. HICKEY Although the danger of oversimplification is always present in such an analysis, at least three traditions can be highlighted as coming to the United States from England and Europe which had to be challenged before freedom for self-education could become a reality. One of these was the concept of an intellectual aristocracy-a naturally endowed small group of potential lead- ers who should be educated for the public benefit and served by those less gifted. Under this concept, resources and materials of learning need be made available only to this small group; and the general public, far from requiring access to these resources, could quite possibly be harmed by them. Under this concept, it could be expected that library access would be restricted and the collections carefully preserved for the intelligentsia of the present and the future. A second Anglo-European tradition was the privilege of power. Not only did the paraphernalia of learning belong to the naturally endowed; it also signified the financial advantages attained by those who controlled the politi- cal, social, and economic systems of the country. Thus the rich surrounded themselves with books and art objects, to show that power and culture were, if not synonymous, certainly closely related. Such a concept builds libraries in the homes of the leaders but does not stimulate the development of public collections. The citation of the third tradition, that of the "Renaissance Man" as the ideal role in society, is susceptible to misinterpretation. Insofar as the Renais- sance model stimulated the well-rounded development of the human mind, it may be viewed as a desirable goal of a democratic society. Its interpretation, however, sometimes tended to emphasize scholarship for its own sake, as contrasted with the practical utility of learning a trade. While this distortion of the Renaissance should not be seen as the only influence in the United States, it did set up another distinction between the ordinary man and the educated man, again encouraging the establishment of libraries for those who could appreciate them rather than for those who might abuse or ignore them. Against this background, Americans began to develop the idea of freedom, with its rights to "life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness." The struggles to establish freedom of the press in the United States reflected the tensions created by the emerging concept of liberty for all. A young nation, largely dependent upon England and Europe for its books and bibliographic systems, inexperienced in dispensing either education or information, equipped with few technical skills and little machinery, could hardly be blamed for its fail- ure to propose a bold new program of open access to the materials of learn- ing. Despite the inexperience, Americans of the eighteenth and nineteenth cen- turies often seemed, at least to the rest of the world, to exude a spirit of optimism. In the "land of the free and the home of the brave," there could be no goal too lofty to propose and no tradition too sacred to be challenged. If the people were to elect thelr representatives, then they certainly needed the opportunity for education. If they were to provide the nation with the tools of
THEORY OF BIBLIOGRAPHIC CONTROL 255 economic progress, they needed training. If they were to create the better life for all, they needed chances for self-improvement. In one sense, the basic concept of the Renaissance reached fruition in the United States in the country's emphasis upon upward mobility for the inventive, the ingenious, the dedicated person, regardless of background. Individual achievement was recognized and rewarded as being fully appropriate to a free-enterprise soci- ety. Inevitably, the individual had to be provided with the tools of self-im- provement, by means of government subsidy if necessary, in order for the ideals of the nation to be supported. A Dual Bibliographic Structure Among the phenomena with which Americans entering the nineteenth centu- ry were presented were the existence of private book collections of often major proportions and the emergence of a rapidly growing publishing industry. Some of the collections had already become the nucleus of academic and public libraries, although the concept of "public access" to the materials was severely limited. The most immediate challenge to those who administered these libraries was to identify materials for scholarly use. Although the librar- ies increasingly acquired items printed in the United States, their collections could hardly be called chauvinistic, for the materials of learning and culture came chiefly from the Continent and England. As the American publishing and printing industries developed, a group of bibliographers emerged, concerned to document the Americana becoming increasingly available.1 There was no clear demarcation between those who cataloged library collections and those who created the bibliographies. The purposes of the two, however, were sufficiently different to occasion their virtual separation during the latter half of the nineteenth century. This split has persisted through most of the twentieth century and seems only now capable of being mended-if, indeed, it should be mended. That question must be further explored. For the purpose of analysis the trends and problems encountered in the development of library catalogs and those encountered in the production of bibliographies will be discussed independently. Libra?y Catalogs As Ralph Shaw once remarked, if a library is small enough, it does not matter what kind of catalog is devised for it because the librarian can memo- rize the entire collection.2 Indeed there is still an expectation on the part of 1. Among the foremost American bibliographers was Charles Evans. For a perceptive analysis of his career and contributions, see [1]. 2. This "aphorism" was directed to a class in library management at the Graduate School of Library Service, Rutgers University, during the fall semester, 1956. For other aphorisms of Shaw, see t21.
256 DORALYN J. HICKEY many library users that the librarian ought to be able to say, without looking, whether the library contains a given work. The now classic argument con- cerning the catalog as a "finding list" versus the catalog as a "bibliographic record" generally posed no problem in the early days of American libraries.3 Without doubt the kind of incomplete and all too often inaccurate holdings lists found in libraries during the 1800s served as no more than location devices. It fell to systematic thinkers such as Charles Cutter [5], Melvil Dewey [6J, and Charles Jewett [7] to improve and systematize them. Although a certain amount of consistency was mandatory in the creation of the printed catalog utilized by a number of major libraries, there is little question that the gradual rise of the card file introduced the need for stand- ardization at a more rapid rate. The orderly minds of catalogers rebelled against the failure of the lists to collocate works by the same author. They believed that, if it was necessary to select a consistent approach to such works within a library, it would certainly do no harm to establish the "correct" form of the author's name. The Anglo-European heritage reinforced the em- phasis upon listing works under the name of the personal author, while in- creasing interest in the personal history of authors made it easier to find or establish a standard form of reference to their names.4 The standardization of names led naturally to the insertion of references from unused forms to those adopted for the catalog. Eventually these practic- es were adopted widely enough to permit their being recorded in a manual. Thus each new cataloger was no longer forced to retrace the steps of a prede- cessor in order to learn the assumptions on which the catalog had been devel- oped. Cutter's Rules and Dewey's manual fed into the activities of the Ameri- can Library Association and eventually resulted in the 1908 Anglo-American code [10]. As rules were being formulated and transmitted, questions were also being answered concerning the subject arrangement of the catalog. In this area, the European heritage was ambiguous, although a slight edge might have been accorded to the classed catalog as the form most likely to be dominant. There was, however, something inherently democratic about the dictionary catalog which probably appealed to the American mind.5 Certainly American li- brarians did not invent the alphabetic ordering of catalog data, but they did perfect its use. Classed catalogs presumed a knowledge of the hierarchy of learning; alphabetic catalogs could be utilized by anyone able to read. It is interesting to note, nonetheless, that the vestiges of classification abounded 3. The basic functions of the library catalog are dicussed definitively in sec. 2 of the so-called Paris Principles [3J; see also [4]. 4. For a history of the movement toward standardization of cataloging entries, see [8]. For an analysis of the problems created by American cataloging practices, see [9]. 5. For a contrast of the American interest in "monolithic" catalogs with the traditions of European catalogs, see [11].
THEORY OF BIBLIOGRAPHIC CONTROL 257 even in the alphabetic file. Subject designations might be either directly spe- cific or highly structured, depending upon the cataloger's perceptions of the user's expected approach to a topic.6 Even the filing rules often embedded hierarchy in the catalog. Few who were ever forced to learn the arrangement will be able to forget that "saints" come before "popes," "popes" precede "sovereigns," and "sovereigns" precede "lesser nobility," while they all pre- cede the "single surname," whenever the beginning name is the same. Simi- larly, persons come first, followed by places, subjects, and titles starting with the same word [14-161. The dictionary format dominated catalogs for close to a half century. Eventually these card files presented such an undifferentiated mass of data on the same topic or beginning with the same name that immense confusion was occasioned for library users and even librarians. Despite some efforts to re- popularize the classified catalog, objections to the dictionary arrangement more often resulted in an attempt to divide the catalog into smaller, presum- ably more manageable parts. There is some question as to whether the divi- sion into "author/title" and "subject" sections actually lessened the user's perplexity. In any event, the rise of computer-based catalogs seemed to fur- ther the development of a three-fold division: author (or name), title, and subject [171. Other separation devices, particularly the establishment of inde- pendent or subordinate files for special formats and collections, similarly at- tempted to reduce the complexity of the dictionary arrangement and lead the user more directly to needed items. The ever-cumulating card catalogs, which had largely replaced the book catalogs of the nineteenth century and represented collections growing often at geometric rates, became a managerial nightmare in many large libraries. Sheer numbers of cards posed difficulties severe enough without the strain occasioned by changes in cataloging rules. The code of 1908, with fewer than 100 pages of directions and examples, gave way to the intricate "cookbook" of 1941 [181 and the famous-or infamous-"red and green" books of 1949 [19 (called the "red book" because of its bright red binding), 20 (called the "green book")]. Cataloging detail was reduced; capitalization and punctua- tion patterns were altered; and fullness of entry fluctuated. These adjust- ments, while interfilable, produced a record of uneven depth. This, coupled with the magnitude of the file and its unwieldiness, began to reverse the trend toward the card catalog and move libraries back to the book format [21, 22]. Shortly, however, the difficulties of consulting a multipart uncumulated or infrequently cumulated record reemerged, and simply translating the biblio- graphic data into machine-readable form for computer storage did not solve the problems.7 6. Charles A. Cutter is commonly credited with (or blamed for) the introduction of "conve- nience of the user" as a criterion for selection of subject term. For an analysis of Cutter's approach, see [121 and 1131.
258 DORALYN J. HICKEY What, then, were the basic bibliographic problems encountered in the development of library catalogs? First, since it was regularly assumed that all catalogs must represent the complete holdings of the repository in a single, alphabetically arranged file, it was imperative that consistent rules for entry be stated and observed. This consistency generally did not have to extend beyond the individual library's file. As library collections began to look more alike, however, and catalogers found that they could save money and time by purchasing bibliographic records from a central source, the requirement for simple internal consistency gave way to that of consistency both internally and with the central source, that is, with the Library of Congress (LC). Those who could not afford LC cards or who chose to ignore them were free to pursue their own brand of cataloging, but they were without doubt influ- enced by LC services.8 The entry approach of LC and its dependent libraries followed the Renais- sance theme: credit the individual with the works which that person has written. Although American life developed "corporate" trends in authorship and despite the fact that many materials could hardly be said to have been "authored" by anyone, emphasis upon the individual creative scholar persist- ed, at least in library catalogs.9 An example of the confusion to which this emphasis can lead was provided by one library which divided its catalog in the 1960s. Although its three-part catalog was labeled "author," "title," and "subject," a library user reported that he was totally unable to find, either in the author file or in the title file, a listing of a work known to be in the collection. Further examination of the problem indicated that the user had looked in the author file under the name of the editor of the work; then he looked under the title in the title file (with no success at either point). An enterprising reference librarian explained the confusion. It seems that the "author" file was actually an "official" main-entry list. The work sought happened to have been given the title as the main entry, and hence the title 7. An interesting case study illustrating the problems occasioned by introducing a computer- based book catalog production sytem is found in 123J. 8. The dependence of American libraries, particularly academic libraries, upon the Library of Congres, once that library had begun to distribute its catalog cards, is fully described and documented in [241. 9. Since the Pn&ssian Instructions failed to recognize corporate bodies as "authors," there was considerable difficulty in reconciling the Prussian and Anglo-American cataloging tradi- tions. A major hurdle was passed in the negotiations resulting in the Paris Principles of 1961, when it was agreed that international sanction be given the category of corporate author. Unfortunately, it has taken some fifteen years of further consideration to discover that no one really knows how to define a "corporate author." At present, the joint Steering Commit- tee engaged in revising the 1967 Anglo-American Cataloging Rules has tentatively agreed not to try to define "corporate author" but, instead, to define situations of responsibility which give rise to corporate main entry. For an exhaustive analysis of the problem, see [25].
THEORY OF BIBLIOGRAPHIC CONTROL 259 appeared in the "author" file. The editor card, not a main-entry card, did not qualify for insertion in either the author file or the title file but was consigned to a set of supplementary drawers placed at the end of the title section. It is little wonder that the user was unable to follow the library's logic. The devotion to the idea of the author entry, even though it resulted in the title's being called the "author entry," became quite clear in the solution which the library developed for the user's dilemma. Instead of putting all names in the author file and titles in the title file, the catalogers simply added the rule that all title main entries would also have a title added entry pro- duced. The main entry would then go, as usual, in the author file, while the added entry went into the title file.'0 The application of the "author entry" to a variety of formats besides books has regularly caused trouble. Nor is it only the "new" media which create confusion, for map librarians have long argued that an author or author-like approach to modem maps is the mode of access least likely to be used [26, pp. 1-4]. Those who deal with films and filmstrips, kits, and models are equally dismayed with the seemingly wooden devotion of catalogers to the process of identifying an "author" [27, 281. Even those who handle serial publications find the concept of authorship sometimes less than helpful in the control of such materials." Clearly, then, the continued allegiance to the author as the only fully legitimate main-entry point for all library materials occasions many difficulties which an ideal theory of bibliographic control should be capable of eliminating. Another problem associated with the library catalog, particularly with an ever-cumulating file, is the standardization of entry forms. Americans are committed not only to the identification of an "author" main entry but also to keeping all works by or about the same author under the same form of the name. When materials were scarce and formats were few, it was relatively easy to distinguish between authors of the same or similar names. The growth of the publishing industry enabled many more people to disseminate their ideas in print, and the sheer increase in numbers of authors led to more potential name conflicts. When the elaborate searching procedures of the Library of Congress gave rise to the "crisis in cataloging" of the post-World War II era, "limited cataloging" and the "no conflict" principle were reluc- tantly accepted.'2 The goal of representing all the works of one person under a single form of the name began to appear particularly elusive. 10. This aneodote was reported by a master's candidate in the School of Library Science, Uni- versity of North Carolina at Chapel Hill; the student uncovered the problem in conjunction with a user study being performed in an academic library. 11. The problem of serial entry is discused in detail in the Fall 1975 issue of Libray Resowurcs and Technical Services. For an overall view, see 1291. 12. The policy papers of the Library of Congress dealing with these limitations may be exam- ined in [301.
260 DORALYN J. HICKEY Difficulties associated with establishment of author headings were com- pounded when the "author" was corporate rather than individual. While American society shifted its attention from the individual to the group, librar- ians clung for a long time to an inconsistent body of rules designed to strike a balance between entering a corporate entity under its "official" name and establishing it under a popular or commonly cited name.'3 Moves during the 1960s to eliminate most indirect forms of corporate heading produced great resistance among librarians and raised perplexing questions about the basic function of the catalog. Was it designed to serve an untutored user, a schol- arly client, a dedicated reference librarian, or a sophisticated catalog librari- an? Was it supposed to cumulate indefinitely and resist change? Or was it a tool of the society that created it and should change at least as rapidly as society itself adjusted to new demands? As if these challenges were not enough, questions arose which suggested that librarians had not even been anticipating user needs successfully. All kinds of catalog access points were examined for their potential value. It is almost staggering to recount various suggestions for revision. They included (1) standardizing all main-entry approaches by utilizing the title of the work as the basic unit of information (the so-called unit entry) [32]; (2) abandon- ing attempts to regularize or standardize forms of personal and corporate names and resolving serious conflicts simply by developing appropriate syn- detics;'4 (3) eliminating or drastically modifying the alphabetical subject approach [33]; (4) dropping the distinction between types of access points (main entry, added entry, subject headings) [34] and relying more upon ma- chine-based coordination of access terms; and (5) rejecting directly and un- ambiguously the traditional "bibliographic" function of the individual li- brary catalog in favor of developing effective and responsive "finding lists."'5 The problems involved in "entry" within the library catalog were linked with the second major difficulty, that of determining the proper sequence of entries in the file. The partially classified-partially alphabetical arrangement sufficed well enough when catalogs were small, but it became increasingly difficult to convey to the library user any meaningful sense of the multiple small (and sometimes not so small) hierarchies embedded in files that con- tained literally millions of separate entries. The rediscovery of the book for- 13. Although the Paris Principles of 1961 overruled the distinction between "societies" and "institutions" as far as heading form was concerned, American research-library personnel backed away from the elimination of entry under place name-a heading form which gener- ally applied only to "institutions." The offending section in the 1967 Anglo-American Cata- loging Rules, later abandoned by the Library of Congress, was entitled "Exceptions for Entry under Place," with the explanation provided in n. 26 131, p. 1411. 14. This alternative was recognized in the provision of an optional rule 42B in the 1967 Anglo- American Cataloging Rules, North American Text. 15. During the 1960s, there were a number of attempts to reduce backlogged cataloging by moving to a finding-list approach. For a typical solution, see [35].
THEORY OF BIBLIOGRAPHIC CONTROL 261 mat for the catalog somewhat alleviated the difficulties by providing once again the opportunity for scanning [361. Opening library stacks in the re- search setting (a distinct break with Anglo-European traditions) permitted the confused library user some recourse to the materials themselves if the catalog failed. Still the basic problems were not solved by these stratagems, nor were they eliminated by dividing the catalog or committing it to a com- puter. Indeed those who tried to design computer filing rules claimed either that the process was too costly or too complex to be worth the effort or that it could be accomplished only by rewriting catalog entries to conform to ma- chine requirements. Those who protested that humans should not be forced to conform to the "limited intelligence" of the computer were unable fully to discount the response that the behavior of the machine often reflected the same confusion exhibited by the human user of a large file. Perhaps, then, the problem lay in lack of consistency and predictability in file arrangement, not in the intelligence of either humans or computers [37, 38]. The third major difficulty besetting library catalogs was the unevenness of descriptive and subject detail incorporated in them. Early entries tended to be much more elaborate, access points more numerous, and depth of analysis greater. Later, in response to the pressure of too many materials and too few catalogers, there were dramatic cutbacks in descriptive elaboration, number of entries, and amount of analytic work. The single, cumulated catalog pro- vided no opportunity for distinguishing these levels of detail; and once again the library user, still operating in essentially a self-service mode, was present- ed with unexplainable inconsistencies. All speculations about current practice became dangerous unless the total history of the file was perceived.'6 For example, one library had in its earlier, more relaxed era inserted directional cards to alert users to the availability of manuscript materials dealing with certain persons and organizations. When the manuscript-cataloging load be- came too great to continue this helpful practice, it was argued that the earlier cards should remain in the catalog where, it was maintained, they could certainly do no one any harm. The catch was that a user, seeing the older cards for some names, could reasonably reach the conclusion that all manu- script materials were so identified and thus, if no card appeared for a person or group in which the user was interested, decide that the library had no relevant manuscripts. A knowledge of the history of the catalog would have eliminated this confusion. Few users, however, can be expected to acquire such knowledge.'7 A fourth problem, somewhat more elusive than the others, emerged out of 16. A perceptive analysis of the posible effect of changing to the 1967 Anglo-American Catalog- ing Rules is provided by [39]. 17. This problem was confronted in the midst of disertation research; only a fortuitous conver- sation with the chief of the manuscripts department prevented a failure to discover some important letters written by the man upon whom the disertation was centered.
262 DORALYN J. HICKEY the massiveness and unresponsiveness of many library catalogs. Two signs of "illness" arose: noticeable accumulations of errors and failure to adjust to contemporary terminology. Although management schemes were devised to spot check filing accuracy and reduce typing errors, the combination of hu- man inaccuracy and organizational changes over the years tended to increase the technical unreliability of the catalog. This situation was graphically illus- trated as attempts to convert manual files to machine-readable form often bogged down because of uncorrected errors in the manual catalog.'8 In the area of subject analysis, the problem was one not so much of errors as of ignorance or bias. Old terminology, sometimes not even correct at the time of its choice for catalog use, could not be eliminated without costly revision of the file. Further, the "theory" of subject cataloging, such as it was, was based as much upon the "convenience of the user" as it was upon the good judgment of the cataloger. Objectionable headings could be easily justi- fied in most cases by literary warrant, user expectations, and convention; but it is likely that the materials could have been just as adequately retrieved through the use of less emotional terms [41]. In sum, then, catalogers seemed unable to make up their minds as to whether the library catalog was a finding list or a bibliographic tool, whether it should cumulate indefinitely or be periodically terminated so that it could be purged of outdated forms, whether it should be arranged alphabetically or broken into a number of more manageable but fragmentary parts. Bibliographies In comparison with the multiplicity of bibliographic structures developing in the United States during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, American library cataloging provides a model of consistency and standardization. In general, bibliographic efforts in the United States seem to have been more haphazard and reactive than active. True, there were the great nineteenth- century bibliographic inventors such as Evans, Sabin, Jewett, and Poole, and there was the grand dream of the American Catalogue, but many of these efforts had only limited success at best. This analysis can do little more than identify major factors associated with the compilation of bibliographies. One was the freedom of the American marketplace, which encouraged the development of all types and sizes of bibliographic effort. In one sense, individuals were their own "bibliogra- phers." The activities survived as long as there were funds to underwrite the work and a market for the product. 18. Unfortunately the literature does not always record the experiences which many library administrators have faced in trying to convert error-ridden manual files to machine-readable form. Most of this type of information is transmitted through conversations at library meet- ings. Hints of the dimensions of the problem can, however, be found in the various "automa- tion" case studies, for example, [40].
THEORY OF BIBLIOGRAPHIC CONTROL 263 Frequency, arrangement, and entry style of the various bibliographies can be categorized only in the most general of terms. Some appeared on a weekly basis; others only at five- or ten-year intervals. Some were arranged in dic- tionary order; others introduced a highly structured classification system. A few exhibited some concern for fullness of entry and regularization of syndet- ics; many more seemed to select names almost ad hoc, with no effort to link variant forms. Subject terminology might be invented by the bibliographer, adapted from someone else's work, or selected from one of the steadily in- creasing number of standard lists. Only when cumulations were under way did the need for consistency of entry and headings emerge as vital; but not all bibliographies were cumulated. Many bibliographic activities went unre- warded, so that when the bibliographer's attention turned to other interests the bibliography could appear late or not at all.19 Perhaps the most recognizable factor in the development of published bib- liographies was the bifurcation of bibliographic efforts into those directed toward the production of a national bibliography and those centering about the materials of a particular subject field or discipline. It would be futile to try to delineate the multiplicity of bibliographic approaches to the various subject fields except to note that the compilers have been less inclined to observe the distinction between book and periodical materials than have library catalogers. At the level of national bibliography, there are many lessons to be learned from earlier bibliographic work. The United States seems to have tried al- most every approach: imprint lists, catalogs of Americana, trade bibliogra- phies, and union catalogs of library holdings. The bibliographies seldom pur- ported to include all of the materials published in the United States, much less those published by Americans elsewhere or those written about the Unit- ed States and published abroad.20 Lists emerged of copyright deposits (divid- ed into sections according to the type of material); of works in English pub- lished in the United States, Canada, or Britain; of government publications; of periodical and serial publications; and of works acquired for American library collections. More recently there have appeared extensive indexes of periodical articles, lists of films and filmstrips, catalogs of disc and tape re- cordings, and bibliographies of manuscript collections and microforms.2' During the 1960s and 1970s, an international consciousness of the need for 19. Probably the most dramatic presentation of the varieties of the American bibliographic tem occurs in [421. 20. This three-part scope of a "national bibliography" is traditionally accepted as valid, al- though various other features may be included. For a discussion of this question, see [43, esp. seW. 10, 11J. 21. The fragmentation of American national bibliography has been noted by many scholars. For a useful summary of the relation between copyright depcit and national bibliography, see [44].
264 DORALYN J. HICKEY and value of national bibliographies has become more evident. A movement called Universal Bibliographic Control-a somewhat grandiose but appeal- ing scheme for encouraging the creation or development of national biblio- graphic structures-has focused the attention of a number of Americans upon the fragmentation of bibliography in the United States. Although there may be hope for improvement through the coordinating efforts of such groups as the National Commission on Libraries and Information Science, the govern- mental structure and political system of the United States militate against any coerced bibliographic production. Thus neither the library tradition nor the bibliographic heritage seems able to direct uninterrupted attention to- ward the creation of a thoroughgoing national bibliography. Most of the necessary parts are already in existence, but the sheer energy required to blend them cooperatively into a national system seems still to be lacking.22 The problems which face bibliographic efforts in the United States are, in sum, largely associated with the generally laissez faire approach to the con- trol of knowledge and materials characteristic of the American way of life. Sponsorship of effort is divided between public and private agencies. Time lags and incomplete coverage of the available literature are the rule rather than the exception. Formats, arrangements, and entry style and fullness all follow the inclinations and experiences of individual bibliographers. Few of the services are directly responsive to user reaction, though some attempt to assess their value through consumer surveys and analysis of profit/loss state- ments associated with the sale of a particular service. Merging the Dual Systems The varying patterns in bibliographic organization and control in the United States have not contributed significantly to the development of more effective library catalogs. Although there was a time when librarians might have looked to the national bibliography as the model for local cataloging, the transfer of responsibility from the trade publishers to the Library of Congress, after the American Library Association proved unable to handle the task, assured that American national bibliography would be based either upon the work of the Copyright Office or upon the procedures of LC's own cataloging units. It is interesting to trace the history of the national bibliographic effort, for it shows unmistakably that the speedy creation of cataloging records has regularly taken priority over the development of a comprehensive biblio- graphic structure. Perhaps if the Library of Congress had not become a na- 22. Intermittent attention has been paid to the problem of the lack of a true American national bibliography. At the international level, however, the desirability of national planning for an integrated bibliographic structure has been recognized by a number of organizations, nota- bly the International Federation of Library Associations, the International Federation for Documentation, and UNESCO. For an indication of the complexity of the problem, see [45].
THEORY OF BIBLIOGRAPHIC CONTROL 265 tional repository of research materials, the situation would have been differ- ent. Nonetheless, LC did accept the responsibility for providing catalog copy for those libraries which elected to purchase it. As prime users of this service, research libraries eventually emerged as a community with goals and collec- tions not significantly different from those of LC. It was often assumed, with- out much attempt at justification, that what was good for the research librar- ies was good for all of the other libraries as well. Until post-World War II technology led to the proliferation of new media, the LC systems did indeed serve the needs of libraries of all types and sizes, either directly through providing cataloging data or indirectly through the trade catalogs which also utilized LC cataloging.23 By the 1950s, however, significant changes were taking place in the collec- tion-development policies of many school, public, and special libraries. Alter- nate services offering full processing became affordable as libraries merged into systems and qualified for federal funding. Additional federal monies helped to build multimedia collections, and although LC supplied more cata- loging data for nonbook materials than ever before, its own selection policies continued to parallel those of the academic and research libraries. By the 1960s and 1970s, it had become obvious that LC was providing major assis- tance to the research-library community as a chief priority. While the LC- based National Union Catalog functioned as a substitute for an American na- tional bibliography, it was in fact little more than a combined library catalog representing the holdings of the most important United States research col- lections. Its limited coverage of nonbook media, for example, merely reflected the policies of LC and its contributing libraries in acquiring such materials.24 The Library of Congress was not the only library to assume an enlarged role in bibliographic efforts during this period. Notably the National Library of Medicine (NLM) and, later, the National Agricultural Library accepted responsibility for creating and maintaining information and indexing systems in their particular fields. Their comprehensive specialized collections equipped them uniquely for the task. The NLM in particular saw the need to 23. There are numerous sources which document the importance of the Library of Congress, cspecially to the academic and research libraries. For an excellent summary of the work of John Cronin in facilitating Library of Congress services to other libraries, see [461 and, for a more general approach, [47]. 24. The acquisition policies of the Library of Congress are necessarily adjusted fairly frequently to account for new areas of interest and new services. The policies are codified at LC and distributed primarily through an in-house document entitled "Acquisition Policy State- ment." Selection of material for the LC collection does not assure, however, that its catalog- ing priority will be sufficiently high to warrant the prompt distribution of bibliographic data. Certain forms of audiovisual media may therefore never bc entered in the bibliographic data base at LC; or they may be so delayed as a result of their low priority that the bibliographic information is of relatively little value when it finally does appear. For a discussion of some of the reasons for deferred cataloging, see [48].
266 DORALYN J. HICKEY assume a leadership function in the indexing of periodical as well as book literature for the medical and allied health professions. Its computer-based MEDLARS (Medical Literature Analysis and Retrieval System) stimulated a great deal of interest and no doubt encouraged other agencies to undertake similar projects [49]. When LC moved to record its current monographic acquisitions in ma- chine-readable form (MARC) [50, 51], the way was opened for the devel- opment of a bibliographic data base even more comprehensive than LC's own. Although the reactions to the subsequent formation of the Ohio College Library Center were mixed, that organization has demonstrated an ability to amass a bibliographical record of almost staggering proportions [52, 53]. Here, possibly more fully than in any other manifestation, the functions of the library catalog and bibliography have been amalgamated. It is somewhat ironic to note, however, that the United States still has no proper national bibliography. Some Questions about Bibliographic Control This brief survey of the development of library catalogs and bibliographic systems in the United States has revealed some serious inadequacies and inconsistencies in both. There has been a prolific but relatively uncoordinat- ed effort to attain bibliographic control over the nation's intellectual output, possibly because the concept of freedom, which demands availability of mate- rials in all forms and on all topics, tends at the same time to resist regimenta- tion and standardization. American librarians appear to be caught in a para- dox: the more systems are regularized to facilitate easy and open transmission of information, the more suspicious people become of them. Despite this seeming contradiction, the bibliographic effort continues. It is appropriate to pose a few key questions in the hope of determining the prospects for develop- ing a reasonably coherent bibliographic system in the United States. Where Should Bibliographic Control Efforts Be Located? Among the things that American library history reveals is the futility of trying to dissociate library catalogs from bibliographies. While it is theoreti- cally possible to separate the responsibilities of librarians from those of bibli- ographers by maintaining that library collections should locate the materials which bibliographies identify, such a separation ignores the important fact that the nation's libraries are now sufficiently large and affluent to provide the best locus for most bibliographic-that is, identifying-activities. Certain- ly no one library, not even the Library of Congress, can produce the bibliog- raphies all by itself. Contemporary practice, namely, the grouping of libraries into supersystems via computer-based data exchanges, suggests that the old theory of the separation of cataloging from bibliography must give way to a
THEORY OF BIBLIOGRAPHIC CONTROL 267 new one which places the responsibility for bibliographic efforts squarely upon library personnel. If this new theory is to be properly served, then it is quite appropriate to de-emphasize the pseudo bibliographic devices so often incorporated in the local library's catalog, diverting this effort to the production of more effective national devices for the identification and exploitation of resources which are currently unexplored or underexplored. Librarians must lose their "mono- graph fixation" so that they can accept full responsibility for revealing the rich contents, for example, of archival and manuscript collections, maps, periodicals, audiovisual media, and machine-readable data bases. What Skills and Knowledge Should Be Expected of the User of Bibliographic Systems? Currently the theory of bibliographic control presupposes that users of library materials can exploit the collections effectively if the users possess two charac- teristics: an ability to read and a stubborn persistence in the face of difficulty. Each of these characteristics is in its own way ineffective, for an ability to read does not insure an understanding of complex and often inconsistent catalogs, nor does persistence always eventuate in success in finding desired resources. The library user cannot regularly be typified as the Renaissance scholar or even as a dedicated student. "The user" comes in all sizes, shapes, colors, and levels of maturity. Further, even though the user may be quite secure in one field of learning, that same person may lack maturity in anoth- er area of investigation. Users arrive with hearsay information, erroneous citations carefully copied from seemingly reliable publications, or half-re- membered data gleaned from some brief encounter with an item in the dim past. They want to get ahead in their jobs, win a lottery, settle a bet, encoun- ter a new idea, or be entertained. In most cases, however, they do not wish to become mired in the techniques of finding the materials; they simply want to get to them as quickly and painlessly as possible. Contemporary students of theories of bibliographic control ought, then, to take seriously the wide varieties of uses which their clientele have in mind for a library's collections, deal effectively with these needs by developing bibliog- raphies to match the projected uses, and furnish all the guidance and exper- tise necessary to make the bibliographic system work. This type of approach may, however, be viewed as an attempt to restrict freedom of access to infor- mation. In one sense perhaps that judgment is valid, but it need not be so. What is needed is not the identification of a single least common denomina- tor of library users but a psychologically and sociologically sophisticated analysis of user requirements which can provide a greater freedom of choice than is now possible. Materials may be hidden in two ways: by removing them from the catalog or by burying them among hundreds or thousands of similar items in the catalog. Neither option maximizes the freedom of the user to choose relevant sources.
268 DORALYN J. HICKEY What Kinds of Access Points and Arrangements Will Facilitate Catalog Use? The Anglo-European tradition has emphasized the "author" as the start- ing point for bibliographic control. If an author cannot be identified as the prime entry point, then an "author substitute" must be selected. As varieties of media have proliferated, the inadequacy of holding the theory that all materials should be entered under an "author" has become apparent. Fur- ther, technological advances have obviated the need for single-dimensional catalogs in which the "official" entry offers the only secure access point. A contemporary bibliographic theory should be able to dispose quickly of irrelevant arguments about main entry and should concentrate, instead, upon discovering the types of entry needed to make the material most accessi- ble. Categorization of entries into "author," "title," and "subject" fails to deal with the question of other types of approaches which may be helpful as either primary or secondary characteristics of selection. In machine-based systems, provision can be made for retrieving by language, date, geographic origin, publisher, and salient features of a work such as its format. Biblio- graphic theory should concentrate upon devising a way to anticipate the most common form of inquiry by users and establish effective systems to supply appropriate answers. The format and arrangement of bibliographic-control devices should be equally user oriented. A reasonable approach here would be to offer choices of format and arrangement tailored as nearly as possible to fit the needs of the projected user. This requires a sophisticated understanding of the user's expectations. What Depth of Bibliographic Control Should Be Provided? For more than a century, librarians have insisted upon dealing primarily with the description of physical objects-books, a run of periodical volumes, a record album, a film-as the basis of the cataloging. Despite their provision of "analytics," few catalogers were eager to attempt to assess the quality of library materials (though this analysis presumably could legitimately take place before the materials were added to the collection). This reluctance to judge materials by means of the cataloging process has unfortunately resulted in placing sometimes literally hundreds of bibliographic records under a sin- gle name or subject term. The user must then forge through the file item by item to select potentially appropriate sources. Why is it that librarians stead- fastly refuse to provide qualitative judgments about the potential strengths and weaknesses of certain materials for particular types of uses? A recent conference involving catalog librarians addressed the question of how to break up unreasonably long files which have developed under certain general subject headings in card catalogs. Although the utility of such files was recognized as minimal, there was an almost unanimous rejection of the application of value judgments to the arrangement of the entries. They could be sequenced by publication date (though it was admitted that the worth of
THEORY OF BIBLIOGRAPHIC CONTROL 269 the material was not always determined by its age) and perhaps by language, but not by the material's level of treatment of the topic and not by recognized characteristics of bias in the items described. Is it not possible for catalogers to help users select appropriate materials without running the danger of infring- ing upon their intellectual freedom? One question concerning depth of bibliographic analysis has not yet been addressed: Is there need for a single comprehensive bibliographic listing of everything ever written or published or released dealing with a given topic? Certainly one aspect of bibliographic control of library materials has been the effort to collocate references to all information which the library has on a subject. Yet it has been demonstrated repeatedly that the effort is futile, especially since library catalogs do not normally index periodical literature. With machine techniques, however, it is at least technically possible to create a comprehensive bibliographical listing of references to a given topic. This in turn raises a further question: Does anyone want such a list? To this question there is no firm answer, but there is clearly some doubt as to whether those who ask for a comprehensive list actually want one. Bibliographic theory needs to deal directly with this question, with the object of either laying it to rest or rephrasing it in a much more sophisticated manner. How Long Should a Bibliographic Record Cumulate? American bibliographers have long recognized that indefinite cumulation of any list eventually occasions severe problems. Possibly the weakest aspect of current theories of bibliographic control is their failure to deal systematically with the problems of subdividing the record so that necessary structural ad- justments can be made without destroying the credibility of the service. If librarians have been derelict in any area of cataloging, it is in their unwilling- ness to face the fact that files cannot be permitted to grow indefinitely. Al- though superimposition of unlike entries and bibliographic descriptions is physically possible, its toll upon the library user may be high. One of the unfortunate facts of library life is the user's tendency to walk away from a catalog when it appears not to have performed well-no complaints, no ob- jections, just an acceptance of defeat. In view of the user's common reluctance to verbalize bibliographic prob- lems coupled with the librarian's expectations that the catalog is a self-service tool, the responsibility falls to the designers of bibliographic systems to ana- lyze and prescribe a cure for the difficulties created by accretion in the cata- log. Surely there are more innovative solutions than merely closing the file every century or so. Prolegomena to a Theory of Bibliographic Control At this juncture in American library history-quite appropriately at the end of American librarians' first 100 years of self-conscious professionalism-it
270 DORALYN J. HICKEY must be concluded that, although theories of bibliographic control have abounded in this country, these theories have sometimes reflected outmoded traditions, inadequate understanding of user needs, and narrow perceptions of economic constraints. Rather than end this analysis on such a negative note, however, it may be useful to highlight some of the fragments of a coherent theory of bibliographic control which seem to be emerging. 1. Systems for bibliographic control are best designed and carried out in the library context, but they must represent the cooperative effort of librari- ans in order to cover all of the materials available to the user. 2. In a pluralistic society, dedicated to the preservation of individual liber- ty as well as civil obedience, bibliographic systems must also be pluralistic; that is, they must be designed to provide a wide range of information without predicating anything more than a desire on the part of the user to have that information. The system should be capable of being understood in its general structure, but it need not be a self-service operation from the user's stand- point. 3. The concept of "main entry" and "author entry" versus "secondary entries" should give way to a sophisticated analysis of desirable access points to the bibliographic record. Common inquiry patterns of users should be investigated in order to design systems which will respond to those inquiries effectively. 4. The depth of analysis represented in the bibliographic record should be such that the user may enter the system at a level appropriate to the require- ments of the inquiry. Artificial divisions of the bibliographic record solely on the basis of the physical format of the material should give way to an articu- lated sequence of bibliographic aids differentiated on the basis of the user's intensity of interest in the topic. Evaluative judgments about the potential utility of the material for various purposes should become a part of the biblio- graphic apparatus, but these judgments should not be used to prevent access to the material itself. 5. Interruptions in the bibliographic record should be introduced in order to permit structural adjustments in the system as warranted by changes in American society and in world situations. Artificial breaks associated merely with the desire to clear the record of debris should be eliminated in favor of planned breaks which can be interpreted readily to the user. Postscript This analysis of the theory of bibliographic control has avoided any discus- sion of international patterns of bibliography and cataloging. Such an omis- sion was deliberate. To attempt to construct bibliographic patterns in the United States simply as a means of facilitating international exchange of data is futile. A case in point is the repeated failure of Americans to develop a respectable, comprehensive national bibliography. All the necessary elements for the creation of the national bibliography are currently available. Ameri-
THEORY OF BIBLIOGRAPHIC CONTROL 271 can society, however, has not yet seen the value of giving such an effort priority. While Universal Bibliographic Control is a noble goal, it will be accepted only as each nation comes to perceive its importance. Perhaps this is a major agenda item for America's third and its librarians' second century. REFERENCES 1. Holley, Edward G. Charles Evans: American Bibliographer. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1963. 2. Stevens, Norman D., ed. Essays for Ralph Shaw. Metuchen, N.J.: Scarecrow Press, 1975. 3. International Conference on Cataloguing Principles, Paris, 1961. Statement of Principles. An- notated ed., with commentary and examples by Eva Verona ret al.]. London: IFLA Com- mittee on Cataloguing, 1971. 4. Lubetzky, Seymour. Cataloging Rules and Principles: A Critique of the American Library Association Rues for Entry and a Proposed Design for Their Revision. Washington, D.C.: Library of Congress, 1953. 5. Cutter, Charles A. Rules for a Printed Dictionaty Catalogue. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1876. 6. Dewey, Melvil. Library School Rules. 1. Card Catalog Rules; 2. Accession Book Rules; 3. Shelf List Rules. 4th ed. Boston: Library Bureau, 1899. 7. Jewett, Charles C. On the Construction of Catalogues of Libraries, and Ther Publication by Means of Separate, Stereo!vped Titles. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution, 1852. 8. Strout, Ruth French. "The Development of the Catalog and Cataloging Codes." In Toward a Better Caaloging Code, edited by Ruth French Strout. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1957. 9. Osborn, Andrew D. "The Crisis in Cataloging." Library Qyarterly 11 (October 1941): 393- 411. 10. Catalog Rules: Author and Title Entries. American ed. Chicago: American Library Association, 1908. 11. Reichmann, Felix. "The Catalog in European Libraries." In Library Catalogs: Changing Di- mensions, edited by Ruth French Strout. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1964. 12. Dunkin, Paul S. Cataloging US.A. Chicago: American Library Association, 1969. 13. Haykin, David Judson. Subject Headings: A Practical Guide. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1951. 14. A.L.A. Ruls for Filing Catalog Cards. Chicago: American Library Association, 1942. 15. Filing Ruls for the Dictionaty Catalogs of the Library of Congress. Washington, D.C.: Library of Congress Processing Department, 1956. 16. ALA Rules for Filing Catalog Cards. 2d ed. Chicago: American Library Association, 1968. 17. Dulka, John, and Nitecki, Joseph Z. "Filing Rules for a Three-dimensional Catalog." Li- brary Resources and Technical Services 14 (Fall 1970): 485-96. 18. A.LA. Catalog Rules: Author and Title Entries. Preliminary American 2d cd. Chicago: American Library Association, 1941. 19. A.L.A. Cataloging Rules for Author and Titk Entries. 2d ed. Chicago: American Library Associa- tion, 1949. 20. Rules for Descriptive Cataloging in the Library of Congress. Washington, D.C.: Library of Congres Descriptive Cataloging Division, 1949. 21. Kingery, Robert E., and Tauber, Maurice F., eds. Book Catalogs. New York: Scarecrow Press, 1963. 22. Tauber, Mauricc F., and Feinberg, Hilda, comps. Book Catalogs. Metuchen, NJ.: Scarecrow Pres, 1971.
272 DORALYN J. HICKEY 23. Kieffer, Paula. "The Baltimore County Public Library Book Catalog." Library Resources and Technical Services 10 (Spring 1966): 113-41. 24. Scott, Edith. "The Evolution of Bibliographic Systems in the United States, 1876-1945." Libraty Trends 25 July 1976): 293-309. 25. Verona, Eva. Corporate Headings, Their Use in Library Catalogues and National Bibliographies: A Comparative and Critical Study. London: IFLA Committee on Cataloguing, 1975. 26. Boggs, Samuel W., and Lewis, Dorothy Cornwell. 7he Classification and Cataloging of Maps and Atlases. New York: Special Librarics Association, 1945. 27. Weihs, Jean Riddle; Lewis, Shirley; and Macdonald, Janet. Nonbook Materials: The Organiza- tion of Integrated Collections. Ottawa: Canadian Library Association, 1973. 28. Tillin, Alma W., and Quinley, William J. Standards for Cataloging Nonprint Materials: An Interpretation and Practical Application. 4th ed. Washington, D.C.: Association for Educational Communications and Tcchnology, 1975. 29. Simonton, Wesley. "Special Cataloging Problems: Rules of Entry and Definition of Title." Library Resources and Technical Services 19 (Fall 1975): 294-300. 30. Cataloging Rules of the Amenrcan Library Association and the Library of Congress. Additions and Changes, 1949-1958. Washington, D.C.: Library of Congress, 1959. 31. Anglo-American Cataloging Rules. North American text. Chicago: American Library Associa- tion, 1967. 32. Hamdy, M. Nabil. The Concept of Main Entty as Represented in the Anglo-American Cataloging Rules: A Critical Appraiual with Some Suggestions-Author Main Enty vs. Title Main Entry. Little- ton, Colo.: Libraries Unlimited, 1973. 33. Wellisch, Hans (Hanan), and Wilson, Thomas D., eds. Subject Retrieval in the Seventies: New Directions. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1972. 34. Simonton, Wesley. "The Computerized Catalog: Possible, Feasible, Desirable?" Library Re- sources and Technical Services 8 (Fall 1964): 399-407. 35. Engelbarts, Rudolf K., and Williams, Harvey D. "Brieflisting: A Method for Controlling Cataloging Arrears." Library Resources and Technical Services 9 (Spring 1965): 191-99. 36. Pizer, Irwin H. "Book Catalogs versus Card Catalogs." In Tauber and Feinberg (comps.), 122J. 37. Hines, Theodore C., and Harris, Jessica L. Computer Filing of Index, Bibliographic, and Catalog Entries. Newark, NJ.: Bro-Dart Foundation, 1966. 38. Rather,John C. "Filing Arrangement in the Library of Congress Catalogs." Library Resources and Technical Services 16 (Spring 1972): 240-61. 39. Seely, Pauline A. "ALA to AA-an Obstacle Race." In "The New Rules in Action: A Symposium," edited by C. Donald Cook. Library Resources and Technical Services 13 (Winter 1969): 7-25. 40. Stewart, Bruce W. "Data Processing in the Texas A & M University Library." In Proceedings of the 1966 Clinic on Library Applications of Data Processing, edited by Herbert Goldhor. Urbana: Graduate School of Library Science, University of Illinois, 1966. 41. Berman, Sanford. Preudices and Antipathies: A Tract on the LC Subject Heads Concerning People. Metuchen, N.J.: Scarecrow Press, 1971. 42. Downs, Robert B., and Jenkins, Frances B., eds. "Bibliography: Current State and Future Trends." Libra?y Trends 15 January, April 1967): 337-908. 43. Anderson, Dorothy. Universal Bibliographic ControL A Long Term Policy-a Plan for Action. Mu- nich: Verlag Dokumentation, 1974. 44. Rogers, Joseph W. U.S. National Bibliography and the Copyright Law. New York: R. R. Bowker Co., 1960. 45. Intergovernmental Conference on the Planning of National Documentation, Library and Archives Infrastructurcs, Paris, September 23-27, 1974. Final Report. Paris: UNESCO, 1975. 46. Clapp, Verner W., and Wclsh, William J., eds. "The Age of Cronin: Aspects of the Accom-
THEORY OF BIBLIOGRAPHIC CONTROL 273 plishment of John W. Cronin, Library of Congress, 1925-1968." Library Resources and Techni- cal Services 12 (Fall 1968): 385-405. 47. Tuttle, Helen W. "From Cutter to Computer: Technical Services in Academic and Re- search Libraries, 1876-1976." College and Research Libraries 37 (Scptember 1976): 421-51. 48. Hellen, George B., Jr. "An Inquiry into Library of Congress. Cataloging Delays." Library Resources and Technical Services 15 (Summer 1971): 365-79. 49. Austin, Charles J. MEDLARS: 1963-67. Washington, D.C.: Public Health Service, 1968. 50. Information on the MARC System. 4th ed. Washington, D.C.: Library of Congress, MARC Development Office, 1974. 51. Henderson, Kathryn Luther, ed. Proceedings of the 1970 Clinic on Library Applications of Data Processing: MARC Uses and Users. Urbana: Graduate School of Library Science, University of Illinois, 1971. 52. Hopkins, Judith. "The Ohio College Library Center." Library Resources and Technical Services 17 (Summer 1973): 308-19. 53. Plotnik, Art. "OCLC for You-and Me?! A Humanized Anatomy for Beginners." American Libraries 7 (May 1976): 25867.