THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Volume XXIX JULY 1959 Number 3 THE AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF GRAPHIC ARTS AND THE FIFTY BOOKS OF THE YEAR HOWARD HUBBARD THE BACKGROUND A LL books of the present day are badly made....." So wrote W. A. Dwiggins in 1920 in a critical survey of the book industry which was quoted in Chandler Grannis' What Hap- pens in Book Publishing.' The very fact that such a study had been made was evidence of the stirrings in the book and allied worlds which were bringing into focus the neglected area of commercial book design. The shaping forces for this renascence were many. Thomas Willing, in a remi- niscent speech at a dinner in celebration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the American Institute of Graphic Arts, traced contemporary improvements in illustrating back to the English portrait art of the eighteenth century and the refinement of mezzotint engraving.2 Nineteenth-century advances in lithog- raphy and wood and steel engraving pro- duced tools for further development; but, although techniques were refined, the taste with which they were employed produced both good and bad books. After Thomas Bewick's development of the new art in England, wood engraving reached a high point in the beginnings of the Nineteenth century, to be debased by the 1860's. At that low point the stimulation of two wars reversed the trend. Harper and Brothers capitalized on the popularity of Civil War scenes to develop an art staff which later produced work of unusual quality in the Harper's special Christmas numbers. Likewise in England, the Franco-Prussian War drew an appreciative audience to the depiction of that war in the Graphic: A London Il- lustrated Weekly. The success of Har- per's no doubt had some bearing on the establishment of Scribner's Monthly, later the Century Illustrated Magazine, in which technically advanced reproduc- tions of art masterpieces and scenes from current life reached a new standard. The policy of the magazine encouraged ex- perimentation with the photographic processes, with the process-etching of line drawings, and with steel engraving under the direction of Scribner's imagi- native and sensitive art director, Alexan- 'Chandler B. Grannis, What Happens in Book Publishing (New York: Columbia University Press, 1957), p. 113. 2 J. Thomas Willing, How Our Quarter Century Began (New York: American Institute of Graphic Arts, 1939), p. 5. 157
158 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY der Wilson Drake. Drake was later to become the first honorary president of the American Institute of Graphic Arts. Nineteenth-century mechanical prog- ress, of course, reached far beyond the illustrating process into the fundamen- tal printing operation and far beyond printing into all other industries and crafts. International in scope, the excite- ment generated by the industrial revolu- tion found one outlet of expression in the great international expositions. The Crystal Palace Exposition in London in 1851 and the Philadelphia Centennial of 1876 assembled the fruits of experi- mentation in the graphic arts and other fields, and they and lesser exhibits helped to spread popular knowledge of the new productive forces and ideas at work. It was at the Arts and Crafts Ex- hibition in London in November, 1888, that a lecture on printing by Emery Walker so excited the imagination of William Morris as to lead, in 1891, to the establishment of the Kelmscott Press.3 Walker, a commercial printer, was one of a number of individuals in England and on the European continent who were beginning to preach the gospel of better standards in printing. He later helped Morris with the press that is fre- quently credited with having created the modern era of fine design. William Morris was, among other things, an artist, a student of economics, a designer, and a believer in making life beautiful. Sheer beauty was the objective of his bookmaking, and though modern critics regret his adherence to the medie- val book as his model and the predomi- nance of Gothic forms in the type faces he created, still the perfect taste dis- played, the quality of production, the insistence on fine materials, and the blending of all elements into a unity of design gave modern printers a new yard- stick for production. So striking was the appearance of Kelmscott's work and so dynamic the personality of its originator that the movement spread. By 1900 the Vale, Ashendene, Eragny, and Doves presses had been established in England, and the work of Morris and Charles Ricketts of the Vale Press was being imitated and copied in Amerca. Carrying the message of Morris legiti- mately into American bookmaking, Frederick Goudy in 1903 founded the Village Press. Primarily a typographer, Goudy's outstanding contribution has been the design of new type faces for which his private press offered him an experimental laboratory. Goudy, how- ever, was a businessman, daily occupied with advertising and related commercial matters. This rising field was already beginning to feel the impact of competi- tion and was reacting with fresh tech- niques to catch the popular eye. The development of modern advertising style influenced the type design of Goudy, and he in turn played some part in bridging the gap between the dilletante private press and the world of trade. Contem- porary with Goudy, Bruce Rogers and his press were setting a new standard for bookmaking. Freedom, including financial inde- pendence, gave the private presses a spe- cial opportunity for trying new effects with the best materials and impeccable workmanship. However, not only in ad- vertising but in other commercial ven- tures the urge to improve quality was spreading. In the early part of the twen- tieth century, printing firms such as those of William E. Rudge and Hal Marchbanks maintained high stand- 2Will Ransom, "Private Presses and the Books They Have Given Us," Part IV, Publishers' Week- ly, October 15, 1927, p. 1509.
AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF GRAPHIC ARTS 159 ards; and isolated individuals in the paper-making, publishing, and allied businesses caught the spirit of the move- ment. French commercial accomplish- ment, far in advance of that of America, aroused envy. With the revival of inter- est in fine printing and examples from the past and increasingly from the pres- ent available, the collection of specimens assumed new importance. Extensive enough was the interest in the late nine- teenth century to bring about the forma- tion of the Grolier Society. "This," says Willing, "was a potent force in develop- ing taste in book production."4 Its ex- hibits and publicity spread the word, with special emphasis on developments in Europe. On a broader scale than be- fore, American magazine illustration and page display began to show signs of Grolier Society influence. Alexander Drake, Scribner's art director, was a leader in this society. The collector's approach, however, soon proved to be inadequate for those who practiced in the trade. Excited by the accomplishments of the past and the prospects for the future and mindful of fresh innovations in design in architec- ture, the home arts, clothing and other areas, representative of various aspects of the graphic-arts industries formed the National Arts Club in the early twen- tieth century. Its membership included such people as John Clyde Oswald, pub- lisher of the American Printer; Cyril Nast, art director of Conde Nast pub- lications, publishers of Vogue; Messrs. Marchbanks and Rudge; a paper manu- facturer; a color expert; a printer and designer; and many others. Out of this organization the American Institute of Graphic Arts was shortly to emerge. THE FOUNDING OF THE A.I.G.A. A century of technical development, private experiment with book design, an increasingly design-conscious Amer- ica, competition, and a general excite- ment about new ideas in twentieth-cen- tury America helped to create in 1914, a favorable climate for founding the American Institute of Graphic Arts. The immediate impetus was the Internation- al Exhibition of the Book Industry and Graphic Arts to be held in Leipzig, Ger- many. An official invitation to the Unit- ed States to participate was addressed early in 1914 to the Department of Commerce, which was at a loss as to who might handle the assignment. It was President Woodrow Wilson who sug- gested the National Arts Club. Appar- ently overwhelmed by the magnitude of the undertaking but in sympathy with the project, officials of the club set about drawing up from its membership a list of names of those with graphic-arts con- nections to form an independent organi- zation. Nearly everyone who was ap- proached joined and later attend an initiatory dinner at which the speakers were George Putnam, the publisher; John Agar, president of the National Arts Club; W. B. Howland, editor of the Outlook; a representative of Columbia University's Fine Arts Department; and Henry Wolf, of the engraving firm of the same name. With a representative from Leipzig also on the rostrum, a com- mittee was thereupon appointed to han- dle the German exhibit. Constitution and by-laws were adopted at a meeting on February 17; and Howland, Oswald, Willing (who was associated with the American Lithographing Company), and Charles DeKay, the former secre- tary of the National Arts Club, were elected the first officers. Alexander 'Willing, op. cit., p. 9.
160 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Drake was made honorary president. The work of this first exhibition com- mittee was not especially productive. Willing at the anniversary dinner glossed over the matter,5 but George L. McKay, curator of the Grolier Club, on the occasion of the 1927 Leipzig Exhibi- tion, noted that the organization of the A.I.G.A. took a great deal of time and that "after it had covered the ground in a preliminary way, the committee de- cided that it was too late to do any- thing."6 Though a few books were as- sembled by G. E. Stechert and Company for the exhibit, the American book arts, in Mr. McKay's opinion, were "by no means adequately represented."' In any case, exhibiting American bookmaking was the raison d'etre of the A.I.G.A. and has continued to play a major part in the organization's work. Though World War I limited the Insti- tute's activities in its first years to a post- er-design competition, work toward the standardization of color, and one exhi- bition of printing, there were, after the War, weekly meetings of the Executive Committee, monthly board meetings, monthly exhibits, and a parade of din- ners, lectures, and other special events which testified to the liveliness of the organization. From the beginning its leaders-Howland, the first president, who is credited with having had the idea for the Institute,8 and John Oswald. its second president-oriented the work of the association toward typographv. The standing exhibition committee planned not only the monthly shows at head- quarters but special collections which occasionally traveled to other cities, the latter thus establishing a pattern which "Fifty Books of the Year" was later to follow. When, in May, 1923, the first exhibition of fifty books opened, the In- stitute had a background of almost nine years of experience with exhibits. THE FIRST FIFTY BOOKS OF THE YEAR The constitution of the American In- stitute of Graphic Arts states these ob- jectives: To stimulate and encourage those engaged in the graphic arts; to form a center for inter- course and for exchange of views of all inter- ested in these arts; to publish books and peri- odicals, to hold exhibitions in the United States, and to participate so far as possible in the exhibitions held in foreign countries, relating to the graphic arts; to invite exhibits of foreign work; stimulate the public taste by schools, exhibitions, lectures and printed matter, pro- mote the higher education in these arts, and generally to do all things which will raise the standard and aid the extension and development toward perfection of the graphic arts in the United States.9 If the Dwiggins report of 1920 was correct, no segment of the graphic-arts field was in greater need of an improve- ment in standards than the tradebook industry. In spite of the active agenda, some members of the A.I.G.A. saw the need for a more dramatic means of rais- ing the level of American book design. A representative collection of contem- porary American printing was not new; the exhibition committee had staged such a showing in 1920, but a selection of fifty only, from the current year's out- put, was an innovation. Through it, the originators hoped, publishers could 5ibid. 'George L. McKay, "American Book Arts at the Leinziz Exhibition," Publishers' Weekly, June 4, 1927, p. 2220. " ibid. ' "Ten Constructive Years of the American In- stitute of Graphic Arts," A.I.GA. News-Letter, July 13, 1924, p. 3. ' American Institute of Graphic Arts, Fifty Books of the Year (New York: The Institute, 1931), in- side front cover.
AMERICAN INSTITUTE 0F GRAPHIC ARTS 161 study progress and carry home ideas. As education of the public was also an ob- jective of the Institute, and in the hope that the public might ultimately demand better-made books, showings throughout the country were planned. The three members of the Institute who made the proposal were appointed a committee to carry out the idea. When the first invitation to partici- pate (the first "call for books") was sent out by the committee, it was greeted by publishers with apathy. Little more than eighty books were submitted from which the choice of fifty was made. Despite its slow start, the show was a striking suc- cess. In New York, Chicago, and else- where, it proved a nucleus for gatherings of enthusiasts for good bookmaking; comment and discussion were wide- spread, and booksellers reported their shelves emptied of works of the best con- temporary designers. Stimulated by the success of the first exhibition, the Fifty Books Committee of 1924 redoubled its efforts to draw entries from the publishers.10 This time more than two hundred were submitted. In addition, more elaborate preparations were made to publicize the openings. The A.I.G.A. prepared slides and text which could be used by speakers at for- mal openings in cities other than New York and arranged for local committees to find lecturers and to plan details. With the enthusiasm on all sides, "Fifty Books of the Year" became established as an annual undertaking of the American In- stitute of Graphic Arts. THE WORK OF THE FIFTY BOOKS COMMITTEE Since its inception, plans for the an- nual selection and showing have been handled by a special committee, ranging from three members in the first years to seven in 1957. Normally centered in New York, where the headquarters staff is available to help, the project in 1951 was handled by a Chicago committee, with a New York group responsible only for the opening in that city. This plan reflected the wish of the Institute to be identified as a national organization and expressed its desire for support from some centers outside New York, notably Chicago. The committee issues the call for books, prepares the instructions to the jury, including the statement of criteria, selects the jury, and, with the assistance of the headquarters staff, plans the open- ing dinner, publicity, and allied activi- ties. INSTRUCTIONS AND CRITERIA Though reworded from time to time, the requirements for eligibility and cri- teria for selection have remained rela- tively constant from year to year. The instructions for 1942 offer a fair sampl- ing: ELIGIBILITY 1. To be eligible for inclusion in the exhibi- tion, books must be manufactured and designed in the United States or Canada, and published between December 1st of the preceding year and December 1st of the year in which the Call for Books is issued. If only one of the steps in the production of a given volume was exe- cuted abroad, and if the material is well co- ordinated into the American book and forms only one point of interest, the book is eligible. It is a matter for the jury to decide whether the imported feature is the more prominent point of interest, or only one of several. 2. Books issued as advertising pieces, and those printed not for sale are ineligible. CRITERIA 3. The literary content of the book will be considered only as it relates to the problems of typographic design and production. 20 "1924 '50' Books Being Planned," A.l.G.A News-Letter, May 1, 1924, p. 1.
162 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 4. In appraising the physical excellence of a book, the Jury will take into consideration only the book itself, excluding the dust jacket. They will consider the material, design, and work- manship of the binding; the choice of paper and type face; the legibility and attractiveness of the page; the use of color and illustrations, if any; the register and impression; the typo- graphic design throughout; the artistic concep- tion and cohesion of the whole; the book's durability and fitness for the use for which it is intended; and the success with which the de- signer has met the problems of manufacture and those presented by the book's editorial content. It will be the aim of the jury to select the Fifty Books which attain in the highest degree the desired standards of excellence. 5. The jury shall not select more than one book designed or illusrated by any one juror." In the matter of eligibility, the twelve- month period designated as "the year" has varied from time to time, and final decision on questions of eligibility have been made variously by the jury or the committee. Juries have always been instructed to disregard literary content per se, a point to which some critics have taken excep- tion. Among them recently was Ray Freiman, production and art director of Random House, who recommended a program of joint awards with the Na- tional Book Awards Committee, which would honor the truly deserving and, he hoped, at the same time attract the pop- ular fancy in the manner of the annual motion picture and TV awards."2 An editorial which appeared in Publishers' Weekly after the opening of the exhibit in 1955 complained that too much atten- tion was being paid to "help me" and "how to" books at the expense of the novel.'3 This tendency on the part of publishers, the writer believed, resulted from the fact that there is "less justifica- tion for competition [in the area of the novel] among general trade publish- ers." 14 James Johnson Sweeney of the Guggenheim Museum, speaking at the opening of the latest exhibit, also criti- cized the fact that the best books were not given the best promotion. A com- parison of books submitted to the Na- tional Book Awards Committee and the A.I.G.A. showed that "when [publish- ers] put [their] best forward in the NBA, it is not the same best foot put forward in the AIGA."'5 On a lesser scale, the elimination of dust jackets has been a subject of con- troversy. Not until the 1948 exhibition did the committee relent to the extent of allowing them to be displayed and then only when they were so well planned as to be an integral part of the book. Though they may now be exhibited, they may still not be considered among the criteria for the selection of a book. Meanwhile, at least one independent ex- hibition of dust jackets has been held. In addition to the instructions quoted, in 1946 and in other years, juries have been asked to divide the entries into categories-juvenile, trade, text, illus- trated, and press-and to choose the best from each category, "thus avoiding the problem of applying one standard of evaluation to dissimilar classes of books."'6 This policy also has frequently been challenged. What does the exhibit represent, asked Robert Ballou of the University of Chicago Press as far back as 1926; does the selection show what bookmaking was like in the past year '1A.i.G.A., 50 Books of the Year 1942. . : Catalogue of the Twentieth Annual Exhibition (New York: The Institute, 1943), pp. [I]-[2]. 12 Ray Freiman, "The Fifty Books, 1956: Critique and Some Ideas on Public Relations," Publishers' Weekly, April 7, 1956, p. 1653. " "This Month in Bookmaking," Publishers' Weekly, April, 1955, p. 1741. 14 Ibid. 15 "Publishers Challenged in N.Y. '50' Talks," Publishers' Weekly, May 6, 1957, p. 61. "A.I.G.A., Fifty Books of the Year 1946 (New York: The Institute, 1947), p. 3.
AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF GRAPHIC ARTS 163 or what the best bookmaking was like?'7 Mr. Ballou could not decide, but the In- stitute has stoutly maintained through- out the years that these were not to be the best of all books published during the year but a representative cross-section of the industry. Writers still raise the question. Joseph Trautwein, then art director of the World Publishing Com- pany, complained in 1955 of too great a cross-section, covering everything from a paperback to a limited edition.18 The show, he believed, was not a true reflection of the craftsmanship of the outstanding designers, manufacturers, and suppliers. In spite of the criticism, the Institute has followed one course. Except to elim- inate forever advertising matter, which was allowed only in the first exhibition and has since had a separate showing, the A.I.G.A. has resisted all those who would ban textbooks, juvenile books, or other special forms, or who would limit the field to publications within a given price range or to literary masterpieces. Its fundamental criteria have remained the artistic conception and cohesion of the whole, the fitness of the book for the use for which it was intended, and the success with which the designer has met the problems of manufacture and edi- torial content, whatever the uses, funds available, and content. JURY DUTY The juries themselves have repre- sented a cross-section of the interests of the Graphic Arts Institute. Though in one period a member was retained from the immediately preceding jury, with rare exceptions the personnel of the three-man jury has varied from year to year. An obvious effort has been made to draw in many areas of specialization. As described by one jury foreman, the method of operation consists of individ- ual inspection of each title and segrega- tion into three groups: ( 1 ) not to be con- sidered, (2) to be discussed, and (3) to be selected; a preliminary ballot (from which this jury found itself in unani- mous agreement among the 1951 candi- dates in choosing only 7 of the 574 pos- sibilities and in discarding 324); re-in- spection and a second ballot (23 unani- mous votes then emerged); then discus- sion, re-examination, and more discus- sion until agreement is reached on the 50.'" The duration of the selecting pro- cedure has varied from a single all-night session, in the earliest years when the entries were few, to a week in 1946, the twenty-fifth anniversary year, when 750 books had to be pared down to 50, and the jury was, in addition, required to explain in writing the reasons for its choices. The final duty of the jury consists of choosing sample pages of the selected books to be illustrated in the catalog, an annual accompaniment of the exhibit produced through the co-operation of firms belonging to the Institute. THE OPENINGS The New York opening occurs with much fanfare, including dinner at the Hotel Pierre, or a place of equal promi- nence, and speeches. In the early days luster was added to the occasion by the presentation of medals to those who had made outstanding contributions to the development of the graphic arts. Fred- erick Goudy, Daniel Updike (whose Merrymount Press represented a high level of private press achievement), 7 Robert 0. Ballou, "Bookmaking," Publishers' Weekly, June 5, 1926, p. 1877. 1 Joseph Trautwein, "Many Standards or One?" P-ublishers' Weekly, April 2, 1955, p. 1742. 10A.I.G.A., 50 Books of the Year 1951 (New York: The Institute, 1952), pp. [5-6].
164 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Bruce Rogers, and Carl Purington Rol- lins (who was basically responsible for the representation of the Yale Univer- sity Press among the fifty books) re- ceived the first four awards. In the be- ginning, too, awards were made for the outstanding book in the show in one or two classes, but this practice appears to have been abandoned. Showings in other cities have been variously handled as to scheduling and seem to represent two levels: major events in a few large cities and later appearances in other cities where institutions have requested the show. EFFECTS What have been the effects of the Fifty Books Exhibition? Its effect on the general public is hard to trace. Freiman estimated that over 200,000 would view the 1956 show but regretted that interest was still limited chiefly to New York, Chicago, and Pittsburgh, with a smatter- ing in Philadelphia, Wilmington, At- lanta, Washington, D.C., and on the West Coast. After thirty-four years, he lamented, no "real, dynamic interest" in the public at large has been aroused.20 No evidence has been found in the form of sales statistics to prove that the public prefers good design, but since the incep- tion of the Fifty Books Exhibition, there have been those who argued it did. Ernest Elmo Calkins, in "The Market Value of Good Taste," reasoned that even as good advertising printing sells products, so would good bookmaking sell books." Over the years not every pub- lisher has agreed on the increased sale- ability of good taste. Boris Artzybasheff, the illustrator, speaking at a meeting of the A.I.G.A. Trade Book Clinic in 1940, told the story of the president of a pub- lishing firm who reported that he had hired a few "very fancy" designers and artists as an experiment, but since the firm sold no more books than before, he fired them and left the designing to the printer.22 Artzybasheff, whose chief com- plaint regarded the indifference of pub- lishers to illustration, noted, however, that this publisher was exceptional. "The publisher now knows the value of neat packages, like cold cream, the im- portance of using the latest and smartest shades of bindings, type ornaments, rules and blank space for chapter head- ings as long as they don't overstep the budget."23 That publishers have come to recog- nize the need for professional assistance in design in the course of the thirty-five- year history of the Fifty Books is evi- dent. In the listing of publishers in the Literary Market Place 1957-58, Crow- ell, Dutton, Appleton-Century-Crofts, Harper, and many others name art di- rectors among the officials of their com- panies. Not all do by any means; there are notable exceptions, but these have access to the selected listing of 50 book designers and 105 artists and art services "recommended by publishers."24 Where- as in the 1920's there was a cry among the design-conscious for better training in printing design, today commercial art schools turn out many specialists in this and related fields. In this the Graphic Arts Institute may have had a hand. Parallel with the establishment of the fifty Books Exhibition were the efforts ' Freiman, Publishers' Weekly, April 7, 1956, p. 1654. n Ernest Elmo Calkins, "The Market Value of Good Taste," Publishers' Weekly, April 26, 1924, p. 1393. 9 Boris Artzybasheff, Let George Do It (New York: The Institute, 1941), p. 13. Literary Market Place, 1957-58 (New York: Bowker, 1957), pp. 1-64. 24 Ibid., pp. 121, 123-2&
AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF GRAPHIC ARTS 165 of the A.I.G.A. to promote classes in the graphic arts. Goudy and other members of the Institute lectured at courses estab- lished at New York University through the encouragement of the organization; and though at least one writer ques- tioned the adequacy of a "few weeks of a carelessly planned course at N.Y.U,"'I this was a concrete step toward better- trained personnel. Neither the working of design into the fabric of the book industry nor the rais- ing of professional standards, however, can be laid entirely to Fifty Books Exhi- bition and the A.I.G.A. The growth of the industry and attendant specializa- tion of activities and many other factors are involved. What the Fifty Books Exhibition has done, however, is to establish a set of criteria and to create an incentive for meeting these standards. Occasional comments by the jury testify to the sense of rivalry which the annual selection arouses. "It is unfortunate," states War- ren Chappell, foreman of the jury for 1950, "that the annual selection and ex- hibition of 50 books is regarded by so many as a competition. If it is the desire of most to make of this educational effort an opportunity to inflate egos and pass out marks, then the constructive possi- bilities of such a show are lost and the project had best be abandoned."26 One could argue on the other hand that am- bition to be represented could only mul- tiply the chances for good bookmaking. Figures unfortunately do not show how many different trade publishers, at whom the show is aimed, have submitted entries from year to year. An analysis of "winners" in selected years shows that the number of general trade publishers has risen from six in 1926 to eighteen in 1957, and that the number of books pub- lished by them has increased from ten to thirty-six. One might wonder to what extent this represents increased interest and better bookmaking and to what ex- tent consciously or unconsciously the jury's selections were influenced by the known objective of the show. Doran, Knopf, Lippincott, Little-Brown, Put- nam, and Simon and Schuster were the six in 1931. Knopf, which incidentally was founded the same year as the Ameri- can Institute of Graphic Arts by a man with a special interest in book design, has been represented almost consistently ever since-often by as many as three selections. In this sampling, Viking has appeared since 1931, occasionally with as many as five books, and Random House with almost equal regularity. Among these three the policy of the firm and the influence of individuals within it are evident. Milton Glick of Viking Press and Ray Freiman of Random House, for example, have been vocal and active members of the A.I.G.A. for a number of years. Glick served twice on the Fifty Books jury. These firms, to- gether with Simon and Schuster, have supplied consistent trade representation over the years, and other trade publish- ers are in and out of the Fifty. The fact that some firms have man- aged to stay in business for a good many years while employing higher than aver- age standards of bookmaking suggests that good design is not an economic im- possibility. Viking Press books in the 1957 show averaged $3.50; Knopf's six, $4.50. A study of the average price for each show, however, proves little, as with the wide range of types of books se- lected, cost ranges from $0.95 for a pa- perback to $75.00 for an elaborate vol- 'Elmer Adler, "What about Better Bookmak- ing," Publishers' Weekly, October 1, 1927, p. 1310. a A.I.G.A., 50 Books of the Year 1950 (New York: The Institute, 1951), p. [S].
166 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY ume of reproductions of the works of Joseph Pennell. Increasing the competition, and in many cases offering standards for the trade publishers, have been the univer- sity presses, many quality printing firms, and institutions which have always been included. The Metropolitan Museum, the Museum of Modern Art, the Art In- stitute of Chicago, the Newark and New York public libraries, and such miscel- laneous organizations as the Colonial Dames and the U.S. Department of Agri- culture have appeared from time to time. While the number of university press books has fluctuated, a few have always been present. In the first years, with the exception of the University of Chicago, the eastern (particularly the Ivy League) universities alone appeared. More recent exhibits show that the good bookmaking movement has spread to universities presses in Michigan, Minne- sota, Oklahoma, Texas, and Hawaii. Actually, the Fifty Books Exhibition as revealed in its catalogs is as much a reflection as a pace-setter. A comparison of those of 1926 and 1952 indicates some of the changes in taste and technique wrought by the years. It is no surprise that in 1926 the type of twenty of the fifty was handset, in 1952, only one; that the offset process of printing was unrep- resented in 1926, while ten choices were so printed in 1952. Paper boards, fre- quently marbled and usually with cloth backs were a standard form of binding in 1926, evident on more than two-thirds of the collection, with the remainder cov- ered in plain cloth decorated uniformly with a label and/or gold stamping. In- deed, a certain uniformity pervades the fifty books of 1926. Twenty-one were printed in Caslon type, seven in Gara- mond, and the remainder chiefly in Bo- doni Book and a very few other faces. No single type face predominates in 1952. For the text designers used Bas- kerville thirteen times, Caledonia seven, Janson and Granjon four times each, and a wide range of other selections among the remaining twenty-six books. Frequently a second type face appears to vary the text, and as many as five additional display types have been used to enrich the pattern of a given book. Designers of 1952 turned to cloth bind- ings thirty-seven times, paper boards for the rest; but here again imagination cre- ated a variety of styles of decoration. Pre-printed designs, some over-all pat- terns in from one to four colors, ink stampings and copper, red, white, alumi- num, and other foils have replaced, in many cases, the uniform gold stamp of the twenties. End papers now receive special treatment. In the over-all impres- sion, the chaste, symmetrical pages of the nineteenth century with the eight- eenth century border decorations have given way to individualized, frequently asymmetrical, treatment of the material on the page, bold solids of color, fresh treatment of photographs, and stylized modern drawings scattered with what often appears to be abandon amidst the text. With all this the bookmaking critics are still not satisfied. "It seems incon- gruous," says the catalog of the exhibi- tion, Books for Our Time, "that today, in a world of mechanical and material resources undreamt of in the [pre-indus- trial revolution] days-a world finding expression in Stravinsky, Picasso, the UN Secretariat building and the prod- ucts of our best industrial and advertis- ing designers-we should yet strive to design books with conventions perfected centuries ago. . . . The book is not only a part of the world created by advertis- ing, radio, motion pictures and television
AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF GRAPHIC ARTS 167 -it must compete with them for atten- tion. To enable it to do so we must turn our eyes ahead, not backward, in design- ing the books of today."27 Thus the impatient innovators chal- lenge the traditional concept of the book. Certainly in its first thirty-six years the Fifty Books Exhibition has chiefly em- phasized those standards of taste and craftsmanship which so early brought a kind of perfection to the printed book. In typography the types most often used have been based on sixteenth- and eight- eenth-century models, and the codex re- mains the form. To what extent is it possible to tamper with fundamentals without affecting the fundamental pur- pose of the book, communication? It is difficult to say, but signs indicate that a slow evolution is occurring, and, what- ever the future of the physical book, the Fifty Books Exhibition has played a role in drawing attention to the defects of the recent past and in spurring some healthy rethinking of standards in American book design. 7 Marshall Lee (ed.), Books for Our Time (New York: Oxford University Press, 1951), back cover.