Recruitment of Library School Faculty JAMES D. RAMER, PHILIP M. TURNER, and J. GORDON COLEMAN Library schools primarily recruit teachers by contacting individuals known in ad- vance to the dean and/or faculty or by publicizing an opening and soliciting appli- cations. The first is operative most frequently in the recruitment of information scientists and senior faculty. The Chronicle of Higher Education appears to be the most effective medium for the second approach. The annual ALISE meeting plays an important role in the recruitment process as well. THE QUALITY OF THE FACULTY is one of the most im- portant factors in determining the reputation of any educational enter- prise. Considerable effort, usually accompanied by much anxiety, is consequently invested in faculty recruitment. In the relatively small uni- verse of a library school, each new appointment is critical, bringing with it the opportunity to effect substantial improvement in quality. Despite its importance, surprisingly little analysis has been made of the recruit- ment process itself, at least little that has been published. One dean may verbally "compare notes" with another dean friend about recruitment strategies, but complete candor is not likely if they are competing for the same type of candidate at the time of the exchange. Job seekers may con- fide in one another if they are not likely finalists for the same positions. None of these or other such exchanges adds up to generalizable informa- tion. Many questions, therefore, surround a process whose success is vi- tally important to the stature, if not the survival, of a library school. In an attempt to gather information beyond the anecdotal, the au- thors of this report decided to make a first effort toward a methodical survey. Specifically, the study had as its primary purpose to determine: (1) If the hiring institution initiated contact with the hired faculty mem- ber, how did this person come to the notice of the library school? (2) If the hired faculty member initiated contact, how did the vacancy come to the notice of the position seeker? Secondarily, this study also attempted James D. Ramer is Dean, Philip M. Turner is Assistant Dean, and J. Gordon Coleman is Assistant Professor, Graduate School of Library Service, University of Alabama, P.O. Box 6242, University, AL 35486. Mss. received 7/86; accepted 8/86. 100 Volume 27, Number 2
Recruitment of Library School Faculty to explore relationships between factors such as teaching area, rank, sex, race, etc., and the recruitment process. In late autumn 1985, the authors designed a two-part questionnaire to gather data pertinent to faculty recruitment, the first part to be com- pleted by library school deans or their office assistants, the second by faculty members appointed since January 1, 1983. Copies of the ques- tionnaire were mailed to all schools with American Library Associa- tion-accredited programs in the United States and Canada. Recipients were requested to complete a set of questionnaires for each regular, full- time teacher hired during the time period under consideration. A follow- up mailing was made in January 1986. Canadian responses were not in- cluded because of unique factors that impinge upon the recruitment processes north of the border. The response rate was 72 percent, although 6 library schools reported no appointments, 2 reported that their experiences were not relevant to the survey (they would have been), and 1 return did not conform to the accompanying instructions. In all, 106 usable questionnaires were com- pleted and returned, 60 of part one, 46 of part two. The first factor investigated by the questionnaire completed by the dean or surrogate was, who first contacted whom and how was that con- tact established? If the library school initiated contact, the dean was asked to describe the primary means through which the potential candi- date was identified. (If the applicant initiated contact, supplementary information was provided in the questionnaire completed by the ap- pointed faculty member.) There was evidence that the perception of who initiated the first con- tact was blurred in a few cases. The hiring school viewed itself as being the initiator of the process in 37 of the hires; the faculty members saw themselves as taking the first step in 28 instances. With a maximum of 60 appointments, there is a difference of opinion concerning who first con- tacted whom in at least five cases. This might have been higher had as many faculty as deans responded. This difference is not surprising when one considers the, at times, hectic dynamics of the recruitment process, particularly at conventions, as well as the frailty of decanal and professo- rial memories. Approximately 60 percent of the 60 people appointed during the pe- riod in question were approached on an individual basis by the hiring school, having first been ' 'nominated" by the dean or a member of the faculty (22 instances) or by someone external to the hiring school (4), or having been identified as a potential candidate from an evaluation of the curriculum vitae made available by ALISE (12). While the above data indicate that library schools are frequently pro- active rather than reactive in their hiring procedures, more in-depth analysis would suggest that this is truer for certain teaching areas and ranks than for others. Fall 198b 101
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Initial Contact and Teaching Area. Of the 44 people for whom teaching areas were identified, 20 were in the information science area and 24 were in other areas. Of the former, 16 (80 percent) were contacted ini- tially by the hiring institution while only 8 (33 percent) of the non-infor- mation science teachers were sought out. Of these 8, no pattern of sub- ject areas was apparent. Thus, there is a significant difference in proportions between information science and non-information science teachers (x2 = 9.58, df = 1, p < .01). Initial Contact and Rank. Of the 44 faculty members hired for whom both information regarding initial contact and rank were provided, 8 were appointed at the associate or full professor rank and 36 at lower ranks. Seven (88 percent) of the associate/full professors were individu- ally recruited by the hiring institution while only 14 (39 percent) of the instructor/assistant professors were. Again, this is a significant differ- ence (x2 = 4.40, df = 1, p < .05). Initial Contact and Sex. Forty-eight schools provided information re- garding gender of the faculty member and initial contact. Of the 27 fe- males hired 13 (48 percent) were contacted by the hiring institution, while 38 percent (8 out of 21) of the males were contacted by the hiring institution. This difference is not statistically significant (x2 = .048, df Initial Contact and Race. Only 5 of the faculty who were hired were not white. Of these 5, 4 were black and 1 was Asian Pacific. Interestingly enough, though, all five were female and represented a diversity of teaching areas: information science (2), public libraries (1), children's services (1), and one not indicated. Three of the nonwhite faculty ap- pointments were sought out by the hiring school, while two initiated con- tact with the school by responding to the advertisements. Because of the relatively small number of nonwhite faculty appointed during this time, any statistical analysis would probably be meaningless. Basis for Nominations. On what basis were the nominations made? A close prior acquaintance with the candidate was often involved. In sev- eral such cases (6 instances) the nominee had previously been a part- time or visiting instructor in the hiring school, had been a regular, full- time teacher at an earlier date (3), was an alumnus (4), had been a prior colleague at another school or library of the dean or a member of the faculty (3), or a fellow doctoral candidate (1). It is evident, therefore, that in almost 30 percent of the appointments described in this survey the candidate hired had one or more persons associated with the hiring school as knowledgeable advocates. Less intimate prior associations in- cluded joint service on committees (2) and social contacts (2). The basis of 9 nominations was the " general reputation in the profession" of the nominee, but in almost all cases this was a second, not the sole, reason for putting a name into the hopper. From the above, one might suggest that the old-boy network is alive 102 Volume 27, Number 2
Recruitment of Library School Faculty and well, but this would be a mistake. First, of course, the appointees are not necessarily "old boys." Although complete information was not given for each appointment, for those that provided such data, 35 were females, 22 were males. Second, we are dealing with a wide network of acquaintances that includes faculty as well as administrators. Third, and last, only 4 nominations came from sources external to the hiring school and only one of these was solicited. "Gatekeepers" find little employ- ment in library education nowadays. The curriculum vitae assembled and made available by ALISE were the basis for a library school's initial overture to the person ultimately hired, as already stated, in 12 cases. A review of these dossiers did not take place until the time of the annual meeting in 7 cases. This is surpris- ing, suggesting a more extemporaneous approach to convention inter- viewing than anticipated by authors, in whose school an excruciating amount of prior discussion, evaluation, and correspondence is elicited by the mailed resumes. Closely related to this phenomenon is the extent to which a conven- tion (ALISE in all but one case) is the site of first contact between the school and the potential applicant. Whether the person had been nomi- nated or had been selected from the ALISE packet of curriculum vitae, slightly more than half the people asked to apply for the position were first approached at the annual meeting. With the escalating costs of tra- vel, it appears that more and more schools are using the ALISE meetings as a site for evaluating and eliminating candidates, thereby reducing the number brought to campus for interviews. The remaining first contacts were almost equally divided between letter and telephone call. The large majority (21 out of 28) of the recently hired faculty who in- dicated that they had initiated contact responded that they first noticed the position vacancy either through a job notice in a publication or a po- sition description at an institution. Three publications accounted for the overwhelming majority of the job notices: Chronicle of Higher Education, in which 48 of the positions were advertised, American Libraries, with 42, and Library Journal, with 36. A majority of schools advertised simultaneously in all three. Distant fol- lowers were the ASIS Bulletin (7) and LJ Hotline (6). A few scattered ad- vertisements appeared in AECT, MLA, and ACM newsletters, as well as in local newspapers. Slightly more than half the schools advertising in the Chronicle ran two successive ads, while American Libraries and the Li- brary Journal saw a one-time announcement about twice as often as a re- peated one. Notices describing a job opening are almost universally cir- culated to other library schools. Of the 46 faculty members who completed the questionnaire, 16 re- plied that they initiated the contact by responding to an advertisement in a publication, 10 seeing it in the Chronicle and 6 in American Libraries. These results are surprising and surely not definitive, but it is hard to Fall 1986 103
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science believe that the advertisements in only two journals came to the active attention of their intended audience, i.e., the successful candidates. Closely related to these channels, 5 responded to a position description that had been circulated to other institutions - in almost all cases to li- brary schools with ALA-accredited programs. The remaining 7 faculty members reported that a person not on the faculty of the hiring institution had brought the vacancy to their atten- tion. In 5 of these cases this person was a peer at another institution. There appears to be, then, a minor collegial network that links job seek- ers, despite there being no patronage system operative at the administra- tive level. It appears that library schools with administrators and faculty who have a wide circle of acquaintances use these contacts very effectively in recruiting new faculty members. Personal contacts are particularly in- strumental in the successful recruitment of information scientists and senior professors. The annual ALISE meeting is an active arena for es- tablishing initial contacts, interviewing, and evaluating prospective teachers. Despite the effectiveness of proactive recruiting, advertise- ments, especially in the Chronicle of Higher Education, are helpful in reach- ing candidates. This is particularly true for lower rank openings. Such public notices, in addition to responding to affirmative action require- ments, also activate a peer network that alerts job seekers to employment opportunities. 104 Volume 27, Number 2