THE HUMANISTIC SCHOLAR AND THE LIBRARY Karl J. Weintraub This article seeks to address some of the implications of humanistic modes of scholarship for recent library developments. An attempt is made to characterize some of the essential habits of mind and scholarly needs of humanists as these affect issues in acquisition, allocation of funds, book preservation, computeriza- tion, problems of access to and use of collections. Some attention is paid to the changed and changing nature of humanistic research. In part the paper tries to respond to the proposition advanced by Don Swanson that a model of knowl- edge suggested by Karl Popper can serve to acquaint librarians with the mental habits of library users. Toward the end some questions are posed about the implications for the library profession and library users deriving from the close interrelation between problems of the library and society. For the better part of two days, you meet here on a highly significant problem of this cultural moment: the role of libraries in the growth of knowledge. You listen to men of great experience and insight. All of this occurs under the auspices of a graduate school of library science which has since its founding earned a venerable reputation for the thoughtful seriousness with which its faculty and students have tackled the issues of librarianship and the training demanded for it. How can a Pickwickian humanist "ruminating on the strange mutability of human affairs" pos- sibly fit into such proceedings? I am, at most, an outside observer of your problems. I am not conversant with the literature on your subject. As a dean, I have been deprived of observing the rapid changes occurring in the library. I deal with scholars and their problems, but I am not much of a scholar. As dean of the Graduate Division of the Humanities I am officially certified as a humanist, but in reality I can only call myself one by virtue of having tried to be a historian. I know some of Herman Fussler's papers on present and future problems of research libraries; his views are basic to mine. He, long ago, instilled in me a quiet lasting love for libraries, and whatever knowledge I may have of libraries I owe [Library Quarterly, vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 22-39.] ? 1980 by The University of Chicago. 0024-2519/80/5001-0003$0l.51 22
HUMANISTIC SCHOLAR AND THE LIBRARY 23 to having worked under his guidance. I have studied Don Swanson on "Libraries and the Growth of Knowledge" [1]. I do not completely share his enthusiasm for Karl Popper, but he states his own points so persua- sively that I can only amplify these from my own perspective. My per- spective comes from a professional calling as a historian whose mental habits are conditioned by having to view human existence under the long measure of time and in the large contexts of cultures. While I love the pursuit of truth, scholarship, knowledge, and man's varied attempts to give a rational order to his varied doings, my observations of life, past and present, have left me with a hefty dose of skepticism about the elusiveness of truth, the idiocies of scholarship, and the sometimes oppressive nature of knowledge. Intelligence is rare; hence we must pay so much for it. Learning must be balanced by a sense of proportion and a sense of economy, but it so rarely is. Our best planning for the lives of men and mice is so defective, so riddled by our inadequacies, that it is, at times, much wiser to leave matters to chance. A historian is, moreover, admonished to remember Voltaire's twin observations: (1) that Constan- tine the Great had no thought, in founding his city of Constantinople, that a Turkish Sultan, Muhammed I1, might come to use it as his capital; and (2) that a historian who is eager to predict the future is a knave and a fool. These formidable and lengthy qualifiers result from my unallayable disquietude that I do not belong here. Perversely enough, I yet seem to assume that the confessions of an ignorant man and his testimonium pauperitatis may, after all, be relevant to your deliberations. My presentation has two parts. In the first part I will do the dutiful thing: I assume that the organizers of this conference want a humanist to address himself to the present and future problems of library growth. The deliberations and prognoses of present and future library develop- ments seem to be dominated by considerations appropriate to the sci- ences, the hard and the applied sciences, and all those forms of knowl- edge in which quantification is desirable. It is thus an obvious question as to whether a consideration of the habits of mind and the requirements of the more humanistically inclined forms of knowledge poses the need for somewhat different approaches to library problems. I will deal with this by reviewing only a few aspects-all well known. In the second part, I will stick out my neck by saying more general things yet. The longer I thought about my assigned topic and the more I reflected on Swanson's position paper, the more I got involved in the issues of policy questions faced by the librarian and the library educator. Again, I have no techni- cal qualifications for raising such considerations. But in the long view, such matters are not so much matters for the experts as for thoughtful citizens. To such discussions I may bring the perspective of the cultural historian who tends to view institutions by placing them in the broader
24 KARL J. WEINTRAUB cultural context, and I bring to them also the perspective of a dean who worries about the problems of scholarship and the library in the larger frame of university life. Let me then first say something, not in a particularly systematic fashion, about the reactions of humanistic scholars to library problems. My ad- mittedly meager acquaintance with the literature, supplemented by dis- cussions I hear, indeed leaves me with the feeling that thinking about library problems is heavily affected by a concern with the sciences. This is especially noteworthy of discussions about future library develop- ments and the search for effective solutions to problems. The Library Problem But there are also areas where the perception of problems by scientists and humanists is very similar, even if they see problems of different magnitude. Just a brief word on one of these areas. The crunch oc- casioned by the simultaneous proliferation of printed knowledge and the growing financial restrictions is bound to affect all of us. Some recent cost increases in the production, purchase, and processing of the printed word have been so dramatic that suddenly everyone awakens startled and wonders: How can it go on? Of course, we do not know how it will go on, except that we always have known that such labor-intensive indus- tries as the "knowledge-producing and knowledge-consuming industry" are forever at an immense economic disadvantage. But this is not a new problem. Any thoughtful librarian has had to deal with expanding knowledge in relation to available fiscal resources for a long, long time. Minds that became intoxicated by the slogans of "the Good Sixties" (which were not all that good) may simply experience the jolt from sobering economic realities more intensely now. There is a good side to severer financial restrictions; at least, I found this to be true in the academic situation. One is thrown back upon one's resources and truly must ask: What is our task? And how can it be done with what we have? How, with given conditions, do we do best what we are best at doing? Hard times ought to have the virtue of making us think hard about the most essential priorities of our institutions. It is sad when this does not happen. Does it not seem, for instance, that the decisions to pay for serials and journals with a larger share of a shrunken budget, and at the cost of monographs, or to forgo retrospective buying in order to get the highest portion of the present output of books, are the decisions of men who seem to believe that the crisis is momentary and that the really hard decisions need not be made because a richer flow of funds will eventually resolve the problem? Insofar as the proportion of serials to
HUMANISTIC SCHOLAR AND THE LIBRARY 25 monographs, or current to retrospective purchasing, are matters of special concern to humanists, these humanists may well be a librarian's uneasiest customers these days. Their answers may not be useful at all to the librarians, but their insistence on their problems should be. There are aspects of the humanistic scholar's working habits that clearly have been affected by the spiraling costs, but it is not at all clear to me whether these have any direct effect on the library. Are there, for instance, any significant relations between an institutional library and the personal libraries of scholars? I have the "feeling," but no real knowledge, that the average scholar's library is no longer what it was, especially in regard to the very detailed technical materials relevant to his research. (A) Is this correct? and (B) Does it have any consequences for the academic libra- rian? The size of the problems of the modern library may have reduced this to a quite insignificant issue, even if it looms large in the life of the individual scholar preferring to work more with his own than with an institutional library. There are other areas in which the humanist's habits of mind and his needs have more direct relations to the problems of an academic library. After inspecting a few of these, I hope to work my way around to the questions raised by Don Swanson's proposition about the problem- solving character of scholarship. Humanists and Their Texts Humanists are probably the most book-bound creatures in the world of scholarship. They sometimes assert that they save a university money by not needing expensive laboratories or costly computer ware, while, in reality, they constantly clamor for the most expensive laboratory, namely the scholarly library. Their appetite for books is insatiable. They simply feel better by being surrounded by books-of which they can only read a fraction; one of their early patron saints, Francesco Petrarca, started this by holding forth eloquently about his Greek copy of Homer-which he could not read. Their most fundamental work depends on the availa- bility of original texts. Many humanists have a special reverence for manuscripts, and they need the real thing rather than a copy. I do not want to talk about this since the whole issue of archives and what their development ought to be is an immense problem in addition to all the other library problems. Humanists care about texts in their varieties. They usually need all editions of a text, notjust the printed texts but preferably also all the first drafts, second drafts, galley proofs, and page proofs to study the pro- cess, for instance, whereby Balzac gave final shape to his Comedie
26 KARL J. WEINTRAUB humaine. They need careful bibliographic description and cataloging of these variant texts. They need texts in their original languages-which does not prevent them from wanting the translations as well-and much of their labor is of a fundamental and painstaking philological sort. Their work tends to have strong historical dimensions. The primary act of historical understanding is an etymological, a philological one. Through the texts they desire to understand either a work of man-for instance, a poem qua poem-or the lives of specific men, or the minds standing behind the works of men, and they need to understand all of these in the complex interrelations with intrinsic contexts. The text is the real door to another world. This intrinsic fascination with texts makes them much more interested than other users of the library in having a much higher priority assigned to problems of book preservation. Any true humanist presumably still trembles at the thought that the text of Thucydides is available to us only by the accidental survival of two Byzantine manuscripts. From a humanist's point of view the transition made in the fourth century A.D. from the textscroll to the codex form of the book was momentous and intensely desirable. One wonders whether a twentieth- century transition from the codex to the electronic text would be as welcome. Despite being a rather conservative man, I do not hold much for or with humanists who instinctively or for alleged aesthetic reasons oppose any potential modification in the access to desired knowledge. I am much more concerned with our large ignorance of the potential consequences in changing over to a bookless world of scholarship. My instinct is to take it step by step, learning from trial and error. I am particularly concerned about a whole range of judgments we form seemingly by direct contact with the physical book. What exactly is the value of browsing, not only among many books delectably spread out on shelves, but especially browsing in a single book? Sometimes it is the makeup of the book itself that helps inform you as to how seriously to take the book. I tend to be much influenced by an author's sense of proportion and his sense of economy; the awareness in the back of the mind of the total structure of a book, communicated by its physical presence, may subtly affect the formation of a judgment as one moves from page to page and chapter to chapter. When we study books dealing with huge topics, I often ask the student to flip the book open in the middle to see where the author has gotten and what this says about his approach to the topic. I know that when I am working or writing on something, I may well have 5-8 books simultaneously opened around me; are these to be replaced by eight consoles or printouts? In many forms of humanistic learning the interaction of text and such matters as illustrations, maps, and graphs is very important. I assume that the
HUMANISTIC SCHOLAR AND THE LIBRARY 27 entire field of art history will be a separate area for future developments, different from suggestions for dealing with the majority of material; so I will not discuss it further. Man has indeed often, with great agility and very little fuss, adapted to new and better habits of doing his work. I know that. My addiction to the book is not that of the old lady opposing the airplane by saying that "if God had meant us to fly, he would not have given us the railroads." I know that the points I just tried to make may look silly to some and much too imprecise to others. But sometimes I feel like Bishop Bossuet ob- jecting to the Cartesian insistence upon clear and distinct ideas by re- minding us that in very many very important matters of life we must live with vague and indistinct notions. I simply would like to know more about the way in which the replacement of the book by electronic means will affect the subtler aspects of a humanist's working condition before I become enthusiastic about Professor Lancaster's vision of a paperless society. I gladly leave it to Washington's bureaucrats to try it first. Retrospective and Current Collecting Much of humanistic scholarship has a strong historical dimension. The old book (not the rare book) is thus at least as important as the current book. Humanists reread older texts and study older scholarship much, much more than scientists [2, fig. 3]. The most recent bit of scholarship is by no means always the better one. I know that the needs of historical work for retrospective holdings and purchases create immense problems for librarians. And the changing interests of historians amplify these problems in untold ways. A century ago historians were predominantly working as political and diplomatic historians. Rows and rows of consu- lar reports, for instance, were essential. Much of this has changed, and economic, social, and cultural historians demand quite different and ever more diversified materials. In the past many more historians had restricted themselves to the study of cultural elites, as the truly expres- sive strata of society whose utterings permitted the best means for the reconstruction of a past. The modern fascination with the history of masses and the common man creates needs for collecting materials of a quite different nature. The studies in popular culture and in social history may mean that a library should collect (and presumably preserve for all eternity) such things as comic books, TV Guide, Playboy, Hustler, and Mad Magazine. While we want everything on national life, we also want everything on regional and local scenes. Fifty years ago, a powerful collection on, say, the French Revolution consisted of the books on the major revolutionary figures, Parisian journals (of which there are many),
28 KARL J. WEINTRAUB the official acts and proceedings. Since then the mass of research has shifted to the study of the revolutionary years I, II, III, etc., in Nantes, Nancy, Bordeaux, Lyons, etc. And so on, and so on. The problem for responsive and responsible academic librarians has been amplified further by other shifts in interest. Before World War I1 most scholarship was concentrated in the Western tradition; very good libraries also had holdings in the basic history, literature, religion, and travel literature in classical Arabic, Sanskrit, and Mandarin Chinese. Since then we have had to give much more attention to the rest of the world, at least the great civilizations of Islam, India, and the Far East. For the rise of "area studies," materials are needed in anthropology, economics, sociology, etc. And when this involves a multilingual area such as India we need materials in Sanskrit, Prakrit, Pali, Hindi, Bengali, Tamil, Urdu, Gujarati, Marathi, Assamese, and other Munda languages. We have only begun to face the issue with the various forms of colloquial Arabic, the diverse Turkish tongues, or the babel of confusion in the Balkans. We regularly teach forty-five languages at Chicago. In many ways it is crazy to expect librarians to put up with these demands. But it remains a perturbing question as to what is happening and will happen to the task of building the collections of retrospective materials on which so much of the work of humanists depends. For from a humanistic point of view the strength of a library is in the backward extension of its coverage. I have the impression that retrospective buying is being sacrificed in this fiscal crunch to a desperate effort not to fall too far behind in acquiring the present output of books, just as the acquisi- tion of current monographs has been given a lower priority than con- tinued acquisition of serials. While the reasons for this are readily under- standable, one must wonder how the continuation of such practices can be reconciled with any conception of an enlightened library policy. What are the governing assumptions? Are gaps in serial holdings supposed to be more serious than gaps in the areas covered by mono- graphs? How does one square such thinking with the assertions which I, at least, hear-namely, that it makes more sense and is more likely that centralized collections of serials and periodicals can be created than that such will occur in the realm of monographs, which is much more subject to the specific needs of specific institutions? I know of one attempt to weed out serial subscriptions which failed because it was held to be too difficult to make the necessary judgments. But should such a testimonium pauperitatis be permitted to be turned into a policy? Similarly, is it being thought that it will be easier to supply an older book when actually called for than to forgo a current publication? Is this indeed so? Certainly, scholars try to keep up with the current literature through reviews, etc., and they will complain when a recent work has not been purchased. By
HUMANISTIC SCHOLAR AND THE LIBRARY 29 protecting himself on this flank the librarian is less exposed to present criticism; but it may also be that he will not earn the favorable judgment of history by doing so. Always allowing for my vast ignorance, I yet suspect that other factors are at work in this dilemma. Bibliographic staffs are better trained to keep track of current literature than to make the judgments necessary for an intelligent building of retrospective holdings. It is, at least, feasible to cull Publishers Weekly, publishers' blurbs, and the national bibliog- raphies for the current output. It is much harder to make a sensible decision as to what proportion of funds to set aside for older books. Hardly any training program seems to worry about the inculcation of the types of knowledge and judgment required for knowing how to build retrospective collections. It is easy to sympathize with the excruciating dilemmas faced by individual librarians. But it is also in order to suggest that the library profession is charged with a long-range social and cul- tural task. For this the undue weight of the present and its concomitant expediencies must be balanced by a long view of the present in its powerful forward and backward extension. Only enlightened long- range policies can save culture and society from deep harm. Don Swanson's position paper admonishes the professionals to think through problems by properly heeding the true character of knowledge and the creative processes promoting its growth. This seems to me eminently sane advice. I cannot add much to it. But I want to try, at least, to see whether his propositions fit the humanists as well. The model of knowledge derived from Karl Popper stresses the "problem-oriented" over the "topic- or subject-oriented" aspects of knowledge. I think there is great virtue in this emphasis, but I do not think that it can be the only model for the librarian contemplating the problems of the growth of knowledge. Subject matter areas and disciplines exist for sound reasons. When the librarian deals with many issues of fund allocations, acquisi- tion, cataloging, or storage-and probably also certain bibliographic tasks-he cannot neglect the fact that many of his users are subject oriented and that disciplines exist as organized bodies of knowledge. But when the librarian struggles with many of the problems as to how his library is being used, and how it could be used more effectively, then the problem-oriented model of knowledge may be the much more significant one to hold to. The dominant motivation of a good scholar is his preoccupation with a question which he, with a constant methodological awareness, refines into sharper questions. The question is his chief tool for investigation. The quality of scholarship depends on the quality of the question. Hazy question, hazy answer; clear question, clear answer; dumb question, dumb scholarship-and a lot of purely subject-oriented questions tend
30 KARL J. WEINTRAUB to lead to dumb scholarship. Usually the question then needs to be seen in the proper relation to the questioning that has already been done. It stands in some way in a relation to a consensus omnium, or what Popper calls objective knowledge, all that which is said to be known, an on dit of scholarship. The questioner must be concerned with the Problemlage, or how the problem lies. The Humanist's Frames of Mind and Reference For the humanist this objective knowledge, this publicly shared knowl- edge, has some different characteristics than it has for the scientist. Scientists have a much clearer sense of working on the frontiers of knowledge; they usually know fairly clearly where this frontier lies and what the truly significant issues at the frontier are. They know which issues have been settled, and they rarely shift their view backward. They rarely need to rethink what Euclid, Galen, or Newton said; for the humanist the whole tradition is often essential and present. The scien- tist's knowledge of the relevant problems on the frontier also permits him more frequently than the humanist to collaborate usefully in ad- vancing and ever more systematizing knowledge of an objective world of nature. The humanist tends to be more alone with his problem; his objective knowledge is much more diffuse; the frontier is less visible, and the dominant current concerns need not be as significant as they are fashionable. The scientist can have the belief-whether right or wrong-that he queries an objective nature until his mathematical rela- tions correctly express its fundamental workings. The humanist's object of study is a much more multilayered one, and his conceptual tools are much more problematic in their adequacy to the supposed reality. He desires to understand the works and the life of man, man seen as Homo sapiens, or as Homo faber, or as Homo ludens, that infinitely fascinating dimension of man. The subjective elements of all the knowers, makers, and players with cultural forms, as well as his own subjective aspects as knower, are forever entwined with his knowledge. The scientist is moti- vated by the belief that he may find the truth about his object studied. A historian, however, may only hope to write a history of his subject and not the history of it. All his subjects are time bound and culture bound, and so is his own consciousness as knower. His objectives are manifold, and thus he needs to be very clear about the range of his question. He may simply go back into the past to query once again what an Aristotle, Cicero, Saint Anselm, Montaigne, Leibniz, or Kant had to say on his question. Sometimes the question may simply be: "Now, what precisely did Augustine say?" It gets to be mighty complicated if he also asks in
HUMANISTIC SCHOLAR AND THE LIBRARY 31 what sense Augustine's thought was a reflection of his time and culture or what the subsequent career of Augustine's thought was. Whom did it affect and how? And how can one show this to be an influence? A biologist can more easily isolate and more completely define his phe- nomenon, say "mouse." But the historian's subject is an "open-ended" one; it depends on his perspective to know whether and how a consider- ation of Turkish wars, or the moods of Charles the Fifth, or the lusts of Philip of Hesse, wanting to divorce an uninspiring wife, affects the historian's definition, understanding, and interpretation of the chosen phenomenon "Luther." There are whole realms of judgment of which the scientist can steer free. It is not his business to determine whether moonlight is beautiful or the heart's inclinations are morally good; nor does he have to consider the complexity of emotions evoked by a snake. The humanist, however, may exactly be in business to make moral, aesthetic, pragmatic, or theological judgments. Very generally, he must deal with the complex ways in which his subject's aesthetic aspects inter- act with the moral or the religious ones. In pursuit of tentative answers to his question, the humanist relies on heuristic devices, tools of discovery, such as "ideal-type" constructions, systematic conceptualizations, mental constructs that in his world may embody something like normative assumptions and notions concerning man's behavior, the categories of his mind, the character of his creations, like genres, for instance. These rarely have the sharp crispness and the logical clarity of scientific theories, but they may play a similar role. Guided by his question, he must determine the relevance and suitability, the reliability of his data. He cannot experiment on his data, but he may be able to run thought-experiments, think through the "if-propositions," and try to separate out, in a painfully tenuous sort of labor, the adequate causes of events. Rarely can he settle a matter with the decisiveness of the scientist's answer. The humanist's work consists less of sequentially inter- related blocks of knowledge than is true of the scientist's work, even if every individual finding may pose a question for the next viewer. Hu- manists' bodies of knowledge are rarely-like mathematics-sequentially and hierarchically ordered. The complex interrelations of insights-and often they only exist in some minds-form at best reasonable patterns of meaning, plausibly arranged views of data in which, one hopes, the major data at least fit one another. Penetrating the minds of others, especially those of dead men, is an infinitely subtle and complex matter. Johan Huizinga once spoke of history as a loving reconstruction by the moonlight of memory, work which can never have the clarity of work done by daylight vision. The work may get stuck on one word, its true meaning, the significant connotations it had in an only partially recoverable human reality. The
32 KARL J. WEINTRAUB humanist has to try to understand other minds, often those of quite other cultures, without being able to step out of his own time and culture. It is always a question which truth about which subject he seeks. Is it to understand Augustine's relation to his mother Monica by apply- ing, say, a psychoanalytic theory? But is this imposition of a modern view of man more important than Augustine's own view of that relationship? It is one truth to perceive what Augustine thought in A.D. 391; it is another truth to understand how he interpreted this when he later wrote his own autobiographic truth. It is one thing to understand words in a text, it is another to understand them in relation to a time and its culture. Ultimately the search leads to the life that stood behind the text. Very often men do not even speak of their most fundamental beliefs and assumptions, their creencias, the beliefs about reality that everyone in a culture takes for granted, in the way in which a medieval mind simply never questioned that there was a God in heaven on whose inscrutable will all creation depended. Although unstated, these beliefs need be recaptured and built into our understanding. Fools rush into these worlds where scholars, with awe and reserve, fear to tread -ven if the better ones among them know that they have to tread where the quest leads. The works of man, his attempts at knowledge, the works of his imagi- nation, of his emotions and his will, this whole world of objective cultural goods and the internal worlds of mind that was their own understand- ing, together with the internal world of minds that is our own under- standing of their worlds, all of these are immensely subtle, complex, and fragile matters. In one sense, the scientist's world of knowledge is just a part of them also. Very little of the knowledge of these worlds can be quantified. Much of the knowledge is only by approximation. What is known is embedded in the intricacies of language or imagery or sounds. And what we want to express of this inner vision of human worlds involves us again in a complicated venture. How many persons even think of the problem of ecphrasis, or expressing in words what was said or perceived in images? The working methods and habits of mind required to come to know such worlds are hard to embody in firm rules and procedures even if an expert practitioner knows quite well what he is doing and how he is doing it. The work can rarely be done well without those elusive qualities known as sensitivity, an esprit definesse rather than an esprit de geometrie, wisdom, refined judgment, taste, a sense of propor- tion, a sense of economy, a courage to face the problematics of the ineffable. Frankly, I think that it will take a while until we know how this all works and how to build these habits of mind properly into the computer.
HUMANISTIC SCHOLAR AND THE LIBRARY 33 The humanist may, for ever and a day, insist on all these subtleties of his trade. He still will have to function in a practical world. I have not dwelt on these mnatters in order to protect the scholarship of humanists against necessary changes. Some of the best humanists I know have the dumbest attitudes toward questions of rational management, finances, and matters of technology. Some can hold forth, at the drop of a hat, that refined culture is refined only when in opposition to the industrial revolution-and they can do this eloquently over the telephone or at conferences to which they came by jet and oblivious to the plain fact that 200 years ago they most likely would have belonged to the 95 percent of the population that was needed to feed itself and to produce a bit of surplus permitting a small 5 percent a leisured life of culture. I make no plea for snobbish dumbness. Of course we need to make use of any technical means that can ease our labors and help us do our work. There are only two valid questions about this. One is to know how to do this intelligently. The other is to be troubled appropriately by the message of Goethe's Zauberlehrling, the sorcerer's apprentice whom you know as Mickey Mouse: How can we make certain that our tools do not dominate us beyond a certain point? To this one may add that almost all of us, especially when we feel almost overwhelmed by the magnitude of our problems, need to guard against a deep-seated inclination to believe that some helpful magic will appear just around the corner, when in reality there exist no methodological super-keys for solving problems and no magical wands are to be had. The very agencies that create the library's problems by creating the steadily growing knowledge, the scholars' questions and habits of mind, most likely also hold the keys needed to work out these problems. This seems to me the virtue of Swanson's position paper. So, it will be neces- sary to think through how the processes involved in creating knowledge-and knowledge of different sorts-can affect the accessibil- ity and subsequent use of knowledge. I assume that this means intelli- gent and enlightened questioning and probing, analytical care, skillful construction of theories, trial and testing and a willingness to expect the unexpected, artful summation, and talented argumentation. The plod- ding labor will only occasionally be aided by serendipity and intuition, that fortuitous jumping across conmplex networks of causal interrela- tions. The egg of Columbus and Alexander's solution to the Gordian knot are so startling because they are so rare. I do not really know why the Muses kiss us so rarely; after all, we are a fairly lovable race. Two areas, in particular, have been stressed as the ones in which the most likely and most profitable advances lie toward the most pressing library problems. One is to look toward more thinking about the use of
34 KARL J. WEINTRAUB computers and experimentation with them. The other is to try various forms of collaboration in consolidating holdings and data collection, to try the most sensible functional division of labor and of cost sharing, and to find good means for the evaluation of effective practices. Fussler's summary of such points in his address in Australia seems to me most sensible, even if I have more fears than he about relying on national organizations [3]. Very much depends upon the attitudes and the spirit with which the problems are attacked. This is where the dutiful part of my paper ends. Some have advised me that this is where I should leave it, and there may be those among you who will think that to have been good advice. Some will say that they do not see the logic of the argument that follows, and I do regret with sorrow not to be a more persuasive speaker. But I said at the beginning that the longer I stared at the question assigned to me, the more some implications stared back at me. The thoughts I voiced have, I believe, consequences for the librarian. And at the end of the line stands the most serious question of all: What can man do with the seemingly desired solution of perfect access to all available information? The librar- ian can help with this question, but he is not the primary one to try to answer it. I have a simple, and in some views, presumably, simple- minded, proposition which says: the more serious the problems of knowledge and the library grow, the more depends on an effective spirit of understanding and collaboration between librarians and the users of knowledge, ultimately between the society and culture and the library profession. I do not think that this spirit of understanding and coopera- tion is now what it should be, on either side of the desired partnership. But when, in my vast ignorance, I talk of this I am hampered by a vast range of difficulties, not the least of which are the sensitivities of a sensitive profession and the painful limitation of my experience. All I can assure you is that I do not mean to hurt, I mean to suggest-and more I cannot do-a problem, however poorly it may be stated, that I think should be faced. The Library Profession When I think about the future of the library I think about the self- evident truth that the problems of the library are so vast because they are so intricately embedded in the vast problems of our modern society. Under such conditions the problems of the library are as much the problems of all of us others as of the library profession. But when I watch the library profession, it often seems, to me at least, a profession which more frequently than is desirable struggles with the vast problems
HUMANISTIC SCHOLAR AND THE LIBRARY 35 in isolation, as if it were a beleaguered community of martyrs. I can only hope that in its relative isolation it will withstand the false prophets within its own ranks who promise all-solving solutions like a paperless society and that it will never hold a belief in the word "solution" other than that a solution is but the stepping stone to the next problem. As a profession, it has long been conditioned to think of itself as a "service profession," accepting in patient sufferance the problems dumped upon it. Of course, any profession, as is true of any decent commitment to life, is meant for service; but service involves a lot more than patient suffer- ance. Society indeed dumps problems on the library which then, like the encumbered and cumbersome creature it is, patiently seeks to adapt to the problems, more often reacting to the imposition of others than leading them. Now it must deal with the problems posed by authors wanting to be read while wanting to protect their intellectual property. Then it has to suffer' publishers trying to solve their problems at the library's cost. Now it faces faculty who complain about the bibliographic mazes leading to knowledge but who simultaneously insist on the availa- bility of every printed word. Then there are faculties and administrators who build new programs, adding new scholarly expertise without ever consulting the librarian about the implications of such expanded respon- sibilities. The producers and the users of knowledge have helped to create the complexity of the library world, and then they expect the librarian to reduce this to a set of simplicities. The library seems to serve willingly, but its problems are not understood by those whom it serves. And then, on top of it all, the ignorant user may treat it too often with disdain; when such comes from thoughtless faculty, I wince. But there is another side to this. As is true in many other professions, librarians talk to fellow librarians. They are not as effective as seems desirable in making the library problems clear to the outsider. It does not seem to me that academic libraries involve faculty enough in library problems; nor do they do enough to help the students in that sort of intelligent use of the library whereby that coming generation may be- come more aware of the coming problems of the library. If problems of book and journal production are interrelated with library problems, do librarians even talk enough with publishers and the directors of aca- demic presses? Ignorant as I may be, I still would want to ask whether the faculty who train the future librarians are closely in touch with the faculty training the future scholars, so that one may hope for a close understanding between these two in the future? There is real urgency for sensitive mutual understanding between a library and the academic community of which it is a part when they face a long period of financial hardship and a protracted period of adjustment. It may be harmful to that
36 KARL J. WEINTRAUB understanding when certain hard choices in a library are being avoided by a certain type of wishful thinking that fortuitous economic recovery or a new kind of computer breakthrough may allow one to avoid those choices. Can librarians really hope to be persuasive in such a situation by arguing for a better share of scarce resources by producing figures about the comparative standing of a library vis-'a-vis other academic libraries? How much weight should one give to these? When we are charged with the task of responsible fiscal planning for the whole university we can help the library most when it provides us with a sound and persuasive vision of what the library of the near future can and should be. Is it umambiguously true that the librarians have given or are about to give us these visions by which we must be guided? I am not saying this in a sniping spirit; I am not even particularly interested in any one specific criticism. I am simply listing some issues because I am concerned about the fact that something is sadly lacking in our mutual understanding and our communication with each other. Much of what is problematic in the relationship between the library and its own university has its parallels and analogies in the relationship between the library profession and our society. How effective is this relationship when the profession cannot truly influence the selection of such a centrally important library official as the Librarian of Congress? How sound is the advice given to the nation by the dominant profes- sional organization when this says: "All information must be available to all people in all formats purveyed through all communication channels and delivered at all levels of comprehension"? (Does the ALA promise to teach calculus in two easy TV lessons? And will it provide, at easily accessible newsstands, and in Spanish, Swahili, Armenian, or Korean, an analysis of Kant's Critique of Pure Reason for IQs of 60?) Or, what is one to think when the national commission, created to confront all these future problems, contradicts itself point by point? An effective attack on the vast problems of the library and the de- velopment of the library of the future seems to me to depend upon a more effective interaction between the professionals and the com- munities of which they are a part. The effectiveness of such interaction may well require that the profession extricate itself more from its relative isolation. It may require that the training of the professionals give more attention to the development of those skills, talents, and habits of mind which can be effective in promoting such interaction. If, as Swanson says, it is essential to understand better the creative processes that lead to the constant formation and transformation of knowledge, and how knowledge becomes an interrelated body of theory and ideas, and what the mental habits of the users of knowledge are, then this has implica- tions for a library school program and the thinking of librarians. If, as
HUMANISTIC SCHOLAR AND THE LIBRARY 37 Fussler says, it is essential to promote refined and workable forms of collaboration and intricate networks of resource sharing, then one may at least wonder whether a premium ought to be placed on the more effective cultivation of a political sensibility, diplomatic skill, the art of rhetoric, and the talent for constructing persuasive arguments. If an academic library has to function as the heart of a university, then a premium must be placed on such skills as assessing the nature and the aspirations of that university, understanding its projection into the fu- ture, and on the ability to perceive the library function as a genuinely academic function. None of this diminishes the need for technical library skills. Doctors and scientists have begun to understand the need for medical and scientific statesmen-humanists are blissfully oblivious of such needs. Is it totally illusory to hope that the best of our library schools could perceive a task in the training of the wisest possible library statesmen? All of this seems to me so important because beyond it all I see the weightiest question which may call for yet another task for the librarians. At the end, permit me, please, to indulge in some speculations to which I lean as a historian trying to understand our Western civilization. I have to be sketchy and can only evoke an immense question to which no one has a definitive answer. The examples of Saint Augustine, Rene Des- cartes, and Jean-Jacques Rousseau intrigue me, as they point by some of their work to a dilemma our culture has faced before. Educated in the accumulated wisdom and the vastly erudite knowledge of a 1,000-year- old culture, Saint Augustine set out to search for peace of mind and happiness. When he became a Christian he knew that he had to confront the problem of what to do with that accumulated erudition and wisdom. So, he asked himself: "What do I want to know?" and answered it: "God and my soul. Nothing else? Nothing else whatsoever." Guided by this question, he began to sort out his classical inheritance, saying to this: "Yes, I will preserve it," and saying to that: "No, I will let it sink into oblivion." The evidence is in his De doctrina Christiana. The consequences were enormous. Reendowed by the spirit of an all-consuming new inspi- ration, some of the knowledge was preserved and transformed because it had a function in life. In other regards this act of barbarism resulted in the century-long neglect of other knowledge. After much of this had been rediscovered, and had been added to the insights of a 1,000-year phase of medieval thought, supplemented by the new knowledge of civilizations acquired by Europe's expansion over the seas, Rene Des- cartes similarly faced an enormous accumulation of knowledge. Driven by his search for absolutely certain knowledge, he turned his back on the whole tradition and on a tabula rasa set out to construct a tree of knowledge by trying to rely only on his rational capacity. It was an
38 KARL J. WEINTRAUB invigorating act, especially for science, but in another sense the power of tradition took its peculiar forms of revenge. Feeling hemmed in and falsified in his very being by the ways of an elegant culture and rational civilization, Rousseau revolted against a surfeit of knowledge and the arts. He then tried to teach men to let their basic nature guide them and not to let it be swallowed up in the artifice of their civilization. Since he was in many ways such a "turkey" he did much harm, but he also left us a perplexing question. For the past half of a millennium our Western culture has been marked by the fact that an expanding body of knowledge and its appli- cation in techniques pervade more and more aspects of our existence. We have seen this coupled to intelligent division of labor, profes- sionalism, and an immense pluralistic differentiation in functions. We depend on theoretical and effective knowledge unlike any other civiliza- tion. All these processes have speeded up in the past half century. While we struggle for some intelligent control over our knowledge, we are beset by atavistic doctrinaires and the cultural barbarism of the terrible simplifiers who seem to be the destined curse of vast mass cultures. As sensitive men of learning, we wince at the destruction of any piece of information and urge the keepers: keep it all and make it easily accessi- ble. So, the archives bulge. The libraries become more and more un- manageable. And the only hope is being cultivated in some probably unreal wish that computer storage of every word will solve our problem. Someone, somewhere, should turn this all around and ask: What will the condition of man be if he has perfect access to all possible information? Is there a necessary relation between more information and more meaningful knowledge? And in all subjects? Is complete research better than inspired partial research? And what do we mean by this? Cultures are complex networks of tentative answers to life's problems. They can reach as far as man can master; but no culture can master everything. Its development depends on the questions that are being asked and on man's most absorbing loyalties and aspirations. Your problem is every- body's problem: that it is not predictable what these are-as long at least as we want to be free men. But this complex of cultural conditions may well evoke a vision of the future librarian as a knowledgeable sluicekeeper, a most sensitive filter, a wise cicerone who knows where what knowledge is available, how to get its essential parts, someone who does not block access but also someone who does not drown us in an unsorted morass of information. A manageable and truly fruitful research library will depend more, I think, on effective limitation, restriction to a work- able body of basic materials, the knowledge of what else to store where and in what form, etc., than on the pursuit of an unmanageable desire to provide anyone with anything.
HUMANISTIC SCHOLAR AND THE LIBRARY 39 But by now you will probably think that I am becoming a quixotic visionary. So, I had best disappear into the shadows where I belong. REFERENCES 1. Swanson, Don R. "Libraries and the Growth of Knowledge." This vol., pp. 112-34. 2. Garfield, Eugene. "Is Information Retrieval in the Arts and Humanities Inherently Different from That in Science?" This vol., pp. 40-57. 3. Fussler, Herman H. Reflections on the Future of Research Libraries: Two Essays. Victoria: Monash University, 1978.