THE LIBRARIAN AND ADULT EDUCATION EMERSON GREENAWAY SITTING in my office one winter afternoon, I began to peruse the pile of afternoon mail. Letters, memorandums, bills to be authorized, and finally at the bottom of the heap, a copy of the London Times Literary Supplement. On turning it over, I glanced casually at the last page, where books are reviewed in brief, and caught this little sentence: I can be known only by my notes: and I am quite satisfied if, 300 years hence, it shall be said that "one Porson lived towards the close of the eighteenth century, who did a good deal for the text of Euripides." There were a few short asides, scant- ily informing me that this "one Porson" was in fact Richard Porson, born in 1758, and appointed professor of Greek at Cambridge University at the age of thirty-three. The rest of the afternoon was spent in pursuing more pressing matters, but I could not quite get this unfamiliar scholar out of my mind. Few indeed are the men who aspire to immortality through their footnotes, and to settle the business I decided to sleuth this "one Porson" down. It wasn't long before I found him, cast adrift among all the other "P's" in the Dictionary of Na- tional Biography. From some ten pages of closely crowded type, he emerged: tall, Roman nosed, keen eyed, the per- fect portrait of the English scholar. Like many another man who has aspired to greatness, Porson had been born in "poor but honest" surroundings. The grandson of a shoemaker, he was intended for the weaving trade, but he showed such aptitude at the village school that he was sent to study with a neighboring clergyman. Scholarships provided him an education at both Eton and Trinity, and for a while he con- templated the ministry: "I found [he wrote] that I should require about fifty years reading to make myself thoroughly acquainted with divinity to satisfy my mind on all points." Considering the limited life span in the eighteenth cen- tury, Porson's decision not to take or- ders was undoubtedly a wise one. Ill- equipped for business and ignorant of a trade, he was fortunate in learning of an open professorship in Greek at his alma mater, Trinity, and at thirty-three, he found himself a professor. He con- tinued to reside in the Temple, where he could devote himself to textual criti- cism and shunt off the burden of student lectures. When someone inquired why he did not lecture, he said: "Because I have thought better on it; whatever originality my lectures might have had, people would have cried out, 'We knew all this before.' In 1806, he was made principal li- brarian at the newly formed London In- stitution, and benefited from the prince- ly annual stipend of ?200 and a set of rooms. In what I suspect to be a classic understatement of the case, the Diction- ary of National Biography notes that "the managers afterwards complained * . . that his attendance was irregular, and that he did nothing to enlarge the library; but in one respect, at least, he made a good librarian-he was always ready to give information to the numer- 25
26 EHE LIBRARY QUARTERLY ous callers at his rooms in the Institu- tion who came to consult him in matters of ancient or modern literature." In the words of a contemporary: "He told you all you wanted to know in a plain and direct manner without any attempt to display his own superiority, but merely to inform you." With such testimony to his professional good manners, I think his sporadic attendance at the reading room desk might be forgiven him. In between callers, he busied himself with the emendation and examination of the Euripidean drama. Hecuba, Medea, Orestes were the companions of his days-fellowships which do not wither or grow old. Books were the pat- tern of his life, and he was conversant with the literature not only of the an- cients but of his contemporaries as well. While other men sought the gaiety and wit of the coffee house, he remained a solitary figure on the London scene. Long, sleepless nights led him to hab- its of intemperance, and these no doubt strained a rather frail existence. Before he was even fifty years old, Richard Porson died. Overshadowed in life by the great author whose works he had studied, he was eclipsed also in death, for his grave in Trinity College Chapel lies at the foot of Newton's statue. And so I had done. The volume of the Dictzionary of National Biography was ultimately replaced with its fellows on the shelf. My curiosity had been satis- fied, and perhaps I should have for- gotten him, but somehow all through the preparation of this paper, this spectral scholar has remained in my mind. Whenever librarians get together to talk about the "great bookmen," they think in terms of someone like "one Porson." How leisurely his days: no traffic with burdensome budgets; no concerns with municipal problems; no building program to worry over. Which one of us does not turn nostalgi- cally to those intimate discussions in his library rooms where "he told you all you wanted to know" in such a singular- ly modest way? Yet beyond those tutorial sessions which he moderated, great things were happening in the world. Newton had opened up new dimensions of earth and air and sky; John Locke was insisting upon the rights of rational men; a small, struggling country across the sea was proclaiming its independence; on the continent a king and queen were sentenced to the guillotine. And we might question the limited periphery of that small set of rooms in the London Institution. Richard Porson used an an- cient method of teaching. To the ques- tioners who sought him out, he gave answers directly and informally. Who were these questioners? They were the initiated like himself, the scholar, the teacher, the student. In hoping that his- tory would render him the verdict of immortality for his textual criticism of Greek Literature, Porson could not fore- see the dramatic changes of history. Parliamentary government, the emer- gence of democratic states, the rise of a vocal voting constituency, the shift from rural to urban civilization, the great changes stimulated by the industrial revolution, all conspired to create a new class of questioners: the non-initiated working and middle classes. It was for them that the novel was written, those long, leisurely accounts with soap-opera plots dealing with the indeterminable perils of innumerable Clarissas and Pamelas. The newspaper, product of the eighteenth century, provided the first step in what we now call mass commu- nication. Technological and social advances
THE LIBRARIAN AND ADULT EDUCATION 27 precipitated a need for vocational train- ing and a desire for self-betterment. The nineteenth century responded with mer- cantile libraries, lyceums, classes for working men. The aims of this new edu- cation were varied. It was education for citizenship; education for aesthetic and cultural appreciation; education for more gainful employment. What nineteenth-century adult educa- tion tried to do, sometimes successfully, and sometimes not, was to teach large numbers of people who did not have the advantage of formal schooling. It was simply a voluntary program of study undertaken in maturity. The library, as a repository of great ideas and informed opinions, fitted into this framework by offering its resources at convenient hours, no longer for a subscription fee, to adults of whom it required only liter- acy as a stipulation of use. "The peo- ple's university" was an appropriate coinage, implying that education was a possibility for every man who desired it. The remedies of the nineteenth cen- tury were soon found wanting in rela- tionship to the educational needs of the twentieth century. The ambitious youth, intent on a better tomorrow, who bor- rowed his books from a mercantile li- brary in 1850, is today paralleled in the public library by a college student, a businessman, or a skilled workman, whose take-home pay in all probability exceeds the wage of the librarian who serves him. In any case, this young man's formal education is at least at a high-school level, and the net- work of informational circuits, includ- ing television, radio, newspapers, mag- azines, and movies, provides him a broader educational base than that of his nineteenth-century equivalent. His problem is not that of finding a single outlet for his educational drive but rather that of discovering from the welter of informal courses, great books programs, discussion series, and lec- tures, just which one is suitable to his needs. Within the span of a hundred years, from about 1850 to 1950, the picture of adult education has drastically changed from a ulniqueness of opportunity to a multiplicity of opportunities. In the process, adult education has been sub- ject to censure and to praise. Like most things in life, it is here to stay, and we must decide only what are the best ways to deal with it. If for convenience we can note the definition of adult education as "a voluntary program of study undertaken in maturity," then the activity can range from the reading of ten books on atomic energy to evening attendance at a major university or the watching of a session of "Sunrise Semester" on tele- vision. Most educators believe in these activities; some might be suspicious of the results, but very few would consider them intrinsically harmful. Two problems confront us again and again as we plan for adult education. The first, and we may dismiss this prob- lem somewhat quickly, is one of defini- tion. A variety of extraneous subjects are now covered by adult education. Cake-decorating, wine cookery, or up- holstering may each in turn expand the waistline, satisfy the palate, or stretch the pocketbook, but they do not seem the meat and matter of serious study and contemplation. The expansion of the mind is the responsibility of the edu- cator, and he rightfully resents the pop- ular confusion of learning with unessen- tial avocations. I said, we might dismiss this quickly, because it seems to me that librarians understand this distinction for the most part, and that their use of
28 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY the phrase "adult education" involves a large degree of what Agatha Christie's M. Poirot calls so delightfully, "the little grey cells." The second problem is far more com- plex and involves the distinction be- tween the individual and the group. Formalized adult educational programs, whether conducted by libraries or by other agencies, are largely group ac- tivities. There is an obvious practical reason for this. The education of adults is the education of a very large percent- age of the population; and unlike fourth-graders or sophomores, adults are not bound together in neatly identi- fiable age gradations. Adults are young- marrieds in their twenties, grandparents in their late fifties, retired people in their seventies. The difficulty of adult education is that it is mass education, and the educa- tor confronted with numerous people- some, as for instance in the television class, without even the identity of name or face-has a tremendous problem. To many librarians engaged in adult educa- tional activity, large numbers of people, some assembled for a lecture, others grouped for a discussion, still others seated in their living room watching a library television show, present not only a problem but a dilemma. Historically, traditionally, the teacher has always worked, with both children and adults, in groups. In our day, the specific difficulty to the teacher is not the group but rather the density and di- versity of the group, the ever increasing numbers of individuals who comprise it. The librarian, however, belongs to a tradition of work with individuals. It is a natural tradition, for book-reading is primarily a personal experience and one whose pleasures are not commonly shared on the adult level at one given time or in one place. This is the reason, perhaps, why the tribute to Porson's librarianship is so appealing: "But in one respect, at least, he made a good librarian-he was al- ways ready to give information to the numerous callers . . . who came to con- sult him in matters of ancient or modern literature." It is this factor of personal service, this knowledge, both intuitive and professed, of irndividual needs and the ways to serve them, that has been the mark and testament of good librar- ianship. However, the fulfilment of the edu- cational needs of the eighteenth century bears little resemblance to the educa- tional pattern of a democratic society. Two hundred years ago, it was the af- fluent, the socially acceptable, the pro- fessional class, who could afford or were provided the advantage of education. To these were added the exceptional cases, the brilliant or gifted who stood out from their fellows to such a degree that scholarships were recommended or granted for their particular needs. The extension of a mass educational program brings in its wake its own prob- lems and, sometimes we tend to forget, its own rewards. To meet the challenge of democratic education, the library has been compelled to carry on its own edu- cational objectives through service to groups, as well as service to individuals. And this has been the basis for much criticism. Many fear that the individual book-lover becomes merely a face in the crowd who passes through the public library only to register another number on a turnstile or to add a few digits to the daily circulation count. Such critics of group activities point out that the librarian, freed from the routines of hand charging, now leaves the service desk to chair a discussion
"THE LIBRARIAN AND ADULT EDUCATION 29 group or participate in a committee meeting. The technological progress made in libraries, it would seem, has led us to dehumanize our service and neglect our first responsibility, the reader. These critics find their support not only in the tradition of libraries with their concept of service to the in- dividual but also in a large body of lit- erature devoted to the critique of the group process as a stagnant and stultify- ing experience. The literary pretensions of Main Street's Thanatopsis Club have been rendered graphically in New Yorker cartoons showing very plump, much bonneted ladies engaged in a committee meeting. Such groups, whether they meet in libraries or without, gather to dis- cuss politics and poets with the same purposeful expression, and the result, say the critics, is a brew of good inten- tions, few facts, sporadic effects, and of course we must not forget, hot tea and little sandwiches. Basically, what li- brarians fear in the group process is a common denominator, a conformity of opinion and expression which unifies people rather than individualizing them. We often hear the expression, "water- ing down," and we mentally envision the great body of learning like a good thick soup being thinned and then thinned again until it feeds fifty where it should have fed five. The question we must ask is very simply: is this criticism justified? The persistent issue in adult educational ac- tivities in libraries has been the degree to which the library assumes the edu- cational burden. First, should we serve only those who register to use our re- sources? Second, should we co-operate in the educational process as a kind of silent partner by lending our assistance to established classes or groups in the community? And third, should we take a positive role in the educational enter- prise and perhaps "launch the library into a full-fledged teaching career"? We are all in agreement that service should be extended to that first class of library users, the readers themselves. In the second category, most libraries give at least tacit encouragement to any num- ber of formal or informal educational agencies in their communities. It is the third premise, that the library should assume an educational role per se, which provokes most of the controversy. The library is not a school; librarians are not teachers, and so the hue and cry be- gins. Admittedly, the library is not a school, and the librarian is not a teacher, but the schoolroom and the teacher are concomitants of formal education, and adult education as it is daily practiced in scores of libraries is basically infor- mal education. In this respect, the fact that the librarian is not a teacher has little or no bearing on the case. What is more to the point is whether or not the library fully lives up to its requirements as an educational institution. Education is defined as the imparting and -the acquisition of knowledge. His- torically, libraries have been and still are the main repositories of accumulated knowledge in the world. That the cul- tural status of a community or the aca- demic standing of a university can be in part assessed by the extent and quality of its library's holdings indicates to what extent the library is indispensable to the acquisition of knowledge. But imparting involves a transplant- ing of knowledge, a bestowal. It in- volves specifically a recipient and a giver, and there may be the crux of the matter. If the library provides the an- swers to questions such as: How many
30 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY children did Lincoln have? Where is Shakespeare buried? What is the length of the Brooklyn Bridge? then the library is not imparting knowledge, it is trans- ferring information, and interpreting the resources of the printed word to sat- isfy what, in many cases, is an isolated request. Even the more intensive refer- ence function of the library, one which involves considerable skill on the part of the librarian, stops short of fulfilling the library's responsibilities as an edu- cational institution. Many patrons, con- centrating on a particular problem, may use the library intensively for a short period of time, and in this sense, the li- brary contributes to their education but does not educate them. Whom should a public library in a democratic society educate? In Carl Sandburg's phrase, there is only one an- swer: "the people, yes." Five hundred years ago through the words of a Mo- rality play, the people heard Knowledge solemnly promise: "I will go with thee, and be thy Guide," and that promise was made to Everyman. Such inscrip- tions were once to be found carved above the doors of many a public li- brary, for librarians were not then so easily embarrassed about matters of the spirit and the heart. They believed, as Christopher Morley so gently states it, that there were "three ingredients in the good life: learning, earning, and yearn- ing. A man should be learning as he goes; and he should be earning bread for himself and others; and he should be yearning, too: yearning to know the unknowable."' And librarians then con- fidently offered their wares for the so- lution of all three. I am not here tonight to advise a re- turn to the "good old days," nor do I think it necessary to proclaim our func- tion to the world through carvings in marble or stone, but surely our progress in bibliographic techniques has not made us lose the vitality and energy which first made library service in this coun- try a reality instead of a dream. The very name, public library, was some- what awe-inspiring. "A library for the people," and few believed that "the peo- ple" only referred to a hard core of readers. There was many an anonymous "Everyman" who never used his library and yet supported it financially, and he was also *the library's responsibility. This philosophy of claiming all men for our province motivated many of our most rewarding extensions of service: library service to the handicapped and hospitalized; service to rural and outly- ing areas by bookmobile; and the estab- lishment of small book collections in everything from fire stations to hous- ing projects. Adult education was but a further- ance of this philosophy. To parody the old nursery rhyme: "Everywhere the people went, the librarian was sure to go." In our day, this means that the li- brarian engages in educational activities designed for group participation, be- cause group activities are the prevail- ing mode of contemporary education. To spend valued time regretting the loss of personalized service to readers is very like regretting the absence of can- dlelight or the horse-drawn carriage. When the die was cast to undertake the schooling of every child born in this country, the concept of education based upon norms or averages had to be real- ized. Only the exceptional child, excep- tional because his mentality is above the norm or below it, continues to receive personalized, individualized training. Because of universal primary and sec- ondary education, many more adults to- 1 Christopher Morley, Parnassits on Wheels (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, Page & Co., 1922), p. 136.
THE LIBRARIAN AND ADULT EDUCATION 3t day than a hundred years ago desire higher education or informal education at the adult level. All of us know the great problems confronting colleges and universities with their ever increasing student enrolment. The question before the minds of all teachers and professors in this country is: how can we cope with the mass? Twenty-five years ago, at the first Graduate Library School Conference this proposition was made: The library is part of society as a whole and does not exist in any sense in a vacuum, nor does it pursue its own course isolated from the happenings around it. The corollary of this assumption is that libraries are, on the other hand, largely molded by the events that are occurring outside their walls, in society as a whole.2 If this proposition is valid, and I believe it is then, why do we think that the li- brary can escape this perplexing na- tional educational issue? Whether it is education for children, for young peo- ple, or for adults, we are faced with a problem of numbers. Each year our children's librarians visit more classes in more schools; our reading rooms are filled with more students asking for help with school assignments and term papers; our adult librarians spread themselves thin by preparing book talks, participating in discussion groups, intro- ducing programs of library films. To- day we are forced to deal with masses wanting our services. The individual is becoming increasingly difficult to identi- fy. That Everyman might know is the belief on which the public school and the public library are founded. Are the re- sults of the belief our tragedy or tri- umph? Does our success paradoxically contain the seeds of our failure? Many believe that the education pic- ture is a tragic one. They view the in- creased attendance at museums, musical academies, libraries and schools with a sense of dread. America, they believe, is producing a mass culture, in which each person knows a little, but no man knows much. To make knowledge palatable, culture activities are rendered effortless, and the result is a race of enthusiasts who do not understand the nature of their enthusiasms. Others hold that the picture is not at all so grim. That Everyman might know a little is surely an improvement over the days when most men could not read or write. If it must be agreed that we have not arrived at an educational uto- pia, we must be at least grateful that the country no longer faces the illiterate barbarism of the frontier. Between the two extremes lies the an- swer, and for the librarian, the perspec- tive necessary for his educational role. Democracy survives in a climate of egal- itarianism, but nature produces man with many differentials. All men are free to learn in a democratic society; but only some men can profit by it. Since the library is part of this democratic so- ciety, anyone may use its resources and services; but only some men will. If we are to accept the full challenge of edu- cation in this society, then we must be aware that as each new generation is born, more people will have reason or desire to learn than before, and it is this new growth which we must encourage. How this is done is a matter for each library to decide, but it will not be done by the librarian patiently waiting in the reading room for numerous callers to seek him out. I may sometimes envy the Richard Porsons of the past, but their answers are not mine. The mark of good 'William F. Ogburn, "Recent Social Trends: Their Implications for Libraries," in Library Trends: Papers Presented before the Library In- stitute of the University of Chicago, August 3-15, 1936, ed. Louis R. Wilson (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1937), p. 1.
32 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY librarianship in our day will not be mere- ly our readiness to give information to those who consult us, but rather our readiness to give information to those who do not. Our libraries must not be mere stopping places to quench thirst; they must actively take their part in making men thirsty. This can be ac- complished only by thinking of the li- brarian as educator and in many cases this involves a redefinition of the librar- ian's traditional duties and his tradi- tional training. The role of the librarian as an anony- mous public servant is gradually disap- pearing, giving way to a new image of the librarian as a civic and cultural leader. For years, librarians gave book talks, and made a very careful distinc- tion between a book talk and a lecture. Lectures on moden art, musicology, or classical antiquities could only be given by professors, artists, archeologists or musicians. The librarian could only talk about books in these fields. The line be- tween delivering a well researched lec- ture on Matisse and giving a talk about the biographies and critical studies of Matisse can sometimes become so fine that it well-nigh disappears. After twen- ty years of critical selection, reviewing, and reading of books in the art field, the art librarian may be assumed to know something about art. If he does, his is a serious responsibil- ity to communicate this knowledge to others, to do his part toward extending the cultural boundary line. He may be called upon to lecture to a graduate seminar of future art historians; he may be invited to judge a show of paintings by local artists; he may add his remarks to an art film during a community pro- gram. This is the librarian as educator. Some of his efforts will be wasted; others will fall on fertile ground. When the relationship of pupil and master is intimate, and personal, the measurement of the pupil's progress is relatively simple, and if there has been progress, the master's rewards are great. But the librarian as educator does not easily per- ceive the results of his labor. This happens, perhaps, because of a basic error in our thinking. We expect a qualitative role to be assessed in quan- titative terms. For instance, if the book talk was not followed by fifteen requests for the book, the librarian felt a sense of failure, because the emphasis was placed on his resources and materials, not on his mind or ideas. In the education of many people, we will never know whether or not they will ever read or use a library. But we must accept, and indeed be grateful, that in one given place and at one given time, a little part of humanity can sit quietly in a meeting room, permeated by great ideas or stimulating conversation. For some, breathing an idea-charged air is very intoxicating, and they will come back for more. For others, less venture- some in spirit, the air -is rarefied and pure, like on a mountain top, and they find it downright uncomfortable. For the latter group, the important thing is that at least they have been exposed to a new atmosphere, and a hundred years ago that exposure was neither probable nor possible. "Who has seen the wind?" asks Christina Rossetti, and of course no one has, but it is there all the same. Mass education is very much like the wind: no one eye can see it, but it is there all the same. And I shall venture a prophecy that, in the years to come, as America is engaged in the basic question of sur- vival or annihilation, this wind must and will increase in such force that like a gale it carries out to sea the refuse of ignorance and prejudice.