TRENDS IN CHILDREN'S LITERATURE MARY K. EAKIN D URING the thirties many librar- ians, teachers, and parents re- joiced in what seemed to them to be a golden flow of children's books. The movement toward the establish- ment of school libraries, and especially of elementary-school libraries, the in- creased awareness on the part of class- room teachers of the possibilities of using library books in a wide variety of teaching situations, and the recognition by publishers of the potentialities of children's books as big business all con- tributed to the flow and to its encour- agement. The steady increase in the number of children's books published each year was not confined to fiction. Numerous books on science, nature study, history, handicrafts, sports, travel, geography, biography, and many other subjects ap- peared, and some of them even made bids for recognition as children's liter- ature. As might be expected, the major- ity of the informational books pub- lished during the thirties have not lasted to the present day. This was due in part to the fact that many authors were still clinging to the old, outmoded pattern of presenting their information in a highly fictionalized form. Adults had not yet come to realize that chil- dren not only are capable of accepting and understanding facts as facts, but even prefer to have their information given in a straightforward manner. Furthermore, much of the material dealt with in these books is no longer accurate or up to date, as new advances have been made in science and medi- cine and the events of history have brought political and social changes to most countries. However, a few of the informational books published in the thirties have come to be regarded as standard titles in their fields. Alice Dalgliesh's Amer- ica Travels (Macmillan, 1933) gives the young reader a vivid picture of one hundred years of travel in the United States. William Maxwell Reed's Earth for Sam (Harcourt, Brace, 1930) and Robert Baker's When the Stars Come Out (Viking, 1934) are as useful today for introducing young readers to the wonders of the earth and sky as when they were first published. Roger Du- voisin's And There Was America (Knopf, 1938) brings to life many of the early explorers of America through simple but dramatic text and glowing, colorful illustrations. Although a considerable amount of biography for children was published during the thirties, much of it was of the written-to-order, merchandising type which had little to recommend it at the time of publication and no hope or excuse for lasting through the years. Again, as with the informational books, there were a few notable exceptions. James Daugherty's Daniel Boone (Vik- ing, 1939), Janette Eaton's Leader by Destiny: George Washington, Man and Patriot (Harcourt, Brace, 1938), Eliz- abeth Janet Gray's Penn (Viking, 1938), Cornelia Meigs's Invincible Louisa (Little, Brown, 1933), and Con- 47
48 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY stance Rourke's Davy Crockett (Har- court, Brace, 1934) are still regarded as examples of outstanding biographies for young people. It is interesting to note that these biographies are all for readers of junior and senior high school level. As yet, no author had managed to combine simplicity of style, accuracy of content, and literary quality to pro- duce a biography of lasting value for young readers of the elementary grade levels. It is when we turn to imaginative writings that the truly golden nature of the thirties becomes apparent. A favo- rite pastime among many adults who work with children's books is the com- pilation of lists of children's "classics." An examination of several such lists re- veals that in almost every instance at least one-third of the titles described as classics were originally published in the thirties. This was the decade that saw the birth of Little Tim (Edward Ardiz- zone, Little Tim and the Brave Sea Captain [Oxford, 1936]), of the irre- pressible Madeline (Ludwig Bemel- mans, Madeline [Simon and Schuster, 1939]), of Mike Mulligan and his be- loved Mary Ann (Virginia Lee Burton, Mike Mulligan and His Steam Shovel [Houghton Mifflin, 1939]), of Mr. Bear (Marjorie Flack, Ask Mr. Bear [Mac- millan, 1932]), and of Mr. Small (Lois Lenski, Little Airplane [Oxford, 1938]). For the youngsters who had out- grown the picture-book stage there was an enticing variety of stories. Regional fiction got off to a good start with Ellis Credle's Down, Down the Mountain (Nelson, 1934), a start that has been continued so admirably by Lois Lenski in the regional stories which she began writing in the forties. Other periods in American history were vividly por- trayed in books like Carol Brink's Cad- die Woodlawn (Macmillan, 1935), Ra- chel Field's Calico Bush (Macmillan, 1931), Ruth Sawyer's Roller Skates (Viking, 1936), and the unforgettable "Little House" stories of Laura Ingalls Wilder. These books are important not only because of their good writing but also for the reality of their portrayal of people and incidents. The authors have abandoned the sentimental, "good-old- days" approach to stories of the past, and they present the characters as real, likable people who are not always as good as they might be, and whose lives are not always smooth but often reflect problems similar to those faced by young readers today. One of the more important trends of the thirties was that toward a change in the treatment of peoples of other countries and of minority groups in this country. The new trend was toward an emphasis on the similarities among chil- dren of all cultures and all nationalities -toward an attempt to show that even though children may differ in some ways of doing things, they are all essen- tially the same, with the same problems of growing up and of learning to live with themselves and with the people around them. Outstanding among such books were Eleanor Lattimore's Little Pear (Harcourt, Brace, 1931), in which the adventures of a mischievous five- year-old Chinese boy are delightfully presented; Kate Seredy's Good Master (Viking, 1935), a sensitive story of life on a farm in Hungary; Hilda Van Stockum's Cottage at Bantry Bay (Vik- ing, 1938), which first introduced to children of this country the wonder- fully Irish O'Sullivan family; Eliza- beth Lewis' Young Fu of the Upper Yangtze (Winston, 1932), an absorb- ing story of China for readers older than those who enjoy the adventures of
TRENDS IN CHILDREN'S LITERATURE 49 Little Pear; and Monica Shannon's Dobry (Viking, 1934), a distinguished story of a young Bulgarian boy's desire to become an artist. Humor found numerous and varied forms of expression among the out- standing books of the thirties. For read- ers who liked their animals drawn with a light touch there was Marjorie Flack's Story about Ping (Viking, 1933), the small duck who lived on a Chinese houseboat; Munro Leaf's im- mortal Story of Ferdinand (Viking, 1936), a story that adults have bor- rowed from children; and Richard and Florence Atwater's Mr. Popper's Pen- guins (Little, Brown, 1938). For sheer nonsense few books from the past to the present have matched Dr. Seuss's 500 Hats of Bartholomew Cubbins (Vanguard, 1938) or Pamela Travers' Mary Poppins (Harcourt, Brace, 1934). Few decades have given to children so many titles with so much promise of lasting value as did the years between 1930 and 1940. Certainly such has not been true of the decade and a half that followed. THE FORTIES By the middle of the forties many of the librarians, teachers, and parents who had hailed the golden flow of books in the thirties were beginning to have serious misgivings. The flow was rapid- ly turning into a flood, and much of the glitter was proving to be not gold but a poor grade of dross. In part, this' situa- tion was brought on by the war, with its accompanying increased costs of production and the restrictions on pa- per and on metal which sometimes made it impossible for publishers to produce books of the length and format they would have preferred to publish. Often a publisher had to choose between a two-hundred-page book which was a potential classic but might take several years to prove itself and five or six pic- ture books which, among them, would probably have reasonably good and fast sales. Too often the choice was in favor of the picture books, with the result that the market was flooded with has- tily written, poorly illustrated picture books, with a corresponding lack of good books for the intermediate and upper elementary grade levels. During these years, also, many of the good standard titles and many of the titles published during the thirties which had real charm and value but which had not had time to establish themselves as standard titles went out of print. Although the publishers could not do a great deal about the quality of paper and type that went into the making of books during the forties, fortunately some of them did manage to keep up the standards in content, and a few good books came out during this period. For youngsters at the picture-book and beginning-reading levels there were Robert McCloskey's incomparable Make Way for Ducklings (Viking, 1941); the Tall Book of Mother Goose (Harper, 1942), which young children have overwhelmingly claimed for their own; Virginia Lee Burton's Little House (Houghton Mifflin, 1942); and James Thurber's delightful Many Moons (Harcourt, Brace, 1943). Everyday affairs of modern children and realistic stories of animals are the predominating themes among those story books from this period which seem to have some claim to lasting value. Among the former are Elizabeth Enright's The Saturdays (Rinehart, 1941), a story of how four children liv- ing in New York City pool their allow- ances so that each one can have one perfect Saturday out of every four;
50 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Eleanor Estes' warmly real and humor- ous "Moffat" stories; Lois Lenski's Strawberry Girl (Lippincott, 1945) and her other vividly realistic regional stories; Robert McCloskey's rollicking stories about Homer Price (Viking, 1943 ); and Armstrong Sperry's beau- tifully written, deeply perceptive story of the young Polynesian boy who proves his right to manhood, Call It Courage (Macmillan, 1940). Animal fanciers, and there were many among the young readers of the forties, could find pleasure and good reading in Marguerite Henry's King of the Wind (Rand McNally, 1948), a story of the famous Godolphin Arabian who was one of the ancestors of Man o' Wrar; in John and Jean George's Vulpes, the Red Fox (Dutton, 1948), which set a new standard for the writ- ing of stories in which animals are the main characters and are individualized without being personified; in Jim Kjel- gaard's Big Red (Holiday House, 1945), a story that does for dogs of the American wilderness what London's Call of the Wild did for the dogs of Alaska; and in Rutherford Montgom- ery's Kildee House (Doubleday, 1949), the story of a shy man who built his house under a giant redwood tree and found his friends and companions among the small animals who shared his neighborhood. These are all books with some ele- ment of greatness in each one. How- ever, the book from the forties which shows the most promise of achieving a place in the ranks of children's classics is neither an animal story nor a story of the everyday life of children. Esther Forbes's Johnny Tremain (Houghton Mifflin, 1943) is a rare combination of great writing, historical accuracy, and an absorbing adventure story; it com- pares favorably with the best of her adult books. The trend toward informational books covering a wide variety of sub- jects which began during the thirties gained added impetus during the for- ties. More informational books were written in a straightforward, factual style, and some of them have come to be considered worthy of a place among the great books of children's literature. Genevieve Foster's "World" books- George Washington's World (Scrib- ner's, 1941), Abraham Lincoln's World (Scribner's, 1944), and Augustus Cae- sar's World (Scribner's, 1947)-set a standard in the writing of history that has been met by few authors, past or current. Katherine Shippen has com- bined high literary quality with an in- teresting style and subject matter, to bring masterpieces of writing on many subjects to young readers. Many new fields of subject matter were opened to young readers and new areas in some of the traditional fields were explored. Children whose inter- ests had been aroused in jet propulsion, atomic energy, space travel, miracle drugs, television, and other twentieth- century subjects were now able to find books written at their own levels of comprehension and reading ability. At first many of these books suffered from the misguided attempts of the authors to write down to their audiences, but it was not long before the young readers had shown that this was not only un- necessary but could not be continued if the books were to be read by the audi- ence for whom they were intended. As in the previous decade, biography for the younger readers appeared in fair quantities, but with no markedly great success in terms either of the quality of the writing or of the handling
TRENDS IN CHILDREN'S LITERATURE 51 of the subjects. Though some of the more prolific of the biography series be- came quite popular, the appeal was comparable to that of fiction series such as the "Nancy Drew" or "Tom Swift" books; the books themselves were de- ficient in literary quality. A welcome exception appeared in the biographies by Clara Ingram Judson; they are simply written, without sacrifice of lit- erary quality or historical accuracy. One of the more interesting phenom- ena of the forties was the sudden up- surge in books designed to teach inter- cultural and intergroup relations to children. The movement began with Lorraine and Jerrold Beim's Two Is a Team (Harcourt, Brace, 1945), an ad- mirable attempt to show how unimpor- tant skin color can be between two children who are friends. Within the next few years scarcely a fiction book was published that did not either treat an aspect of intercultural relations as its main theme or else bring in some problem of this sort as a subplot, even though the subplot very often had little or no relation to the remainder of the book. Fortunately, this trend began to subside within a few years, and such books as are being published at the present time have generally been writ- ten because the theme or subject makes a good story and not because the au- thor feels an overwhelming desire to teach children a lesson in intercultural relations. By the end of the forties the war re- strictions had been removed, and some of the manuscripts which had been put aside during the war years, waiting for the proper quality of paper and color and type work to do them justice, were being published. At the same time, many standard titles from the past and some of the better titles from the thir- ties which had gone out of print were reprinted. Several new reprint series ap- peared, some were reissued in new for- mats, and substantial numbers of titles were added to reprint series which had remained in print during the war. THE EARLY FIFTIES Having considered some of the trends and high spots in children's liter- ature of the thirties and forties, we shall devote the remainder of this paper to a detailed analysis of the books pub- lished within the last six years that have been evaluated by the Center for Chil- dren's Books. Such an analysis will show the development of some of the trends already pointed out as well as identify some new ones. One such trend which began in the thirties and has continued unabated to the present time is toward ever increas- ing numbers of children's books each year. The yearly figures on the publish- ing of children's books for the last six years, as reported in Publishers' Week- ly, show 929 titles published in 1948, 979 in 1949, 1,059 in 1950, 1,072 in 1951, 1,245 in 1952, and 1,394 in 1953, or 465 more in 1953 than in 1948. These figures include both new titles and new editions of books published in earlier years. In 1949 many titles which had gone out of print during the war were republished, a number of new reprint series were started, and some of the older reprint series which had been allowed to lapse during the war were revived. Few new reprint series were added in 1951, the figures for that year representing primarily titles added to already existing series. Two new re- print series were introduced in 1952. Some of the reasons for the tremen- dous output of children's books have already been suggested. A steadily in-
52 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY creasing use of a variety of materials in modern teaching, which has both stimulated and been stimulated by the development of elementary- and sec- ondary-school libraries, has resulted in demands for more trade books, both fiction and nonfiction. Publishers, in- creasingly aware that children's books are big business, are encouraging and even commissioning authors and are developing new methods of selling and book promotion. The major factors whose effect was felt during the thirties have continued to work together to- ward an increase in the number of chil- dren's books published in subsequent years. More important than the number of books published is their content. Dur- ing the last six years the Center for Children's Books has analyzed and evaluated 4,381 of the 6,678 books pub- lished for children in 1948-53, and it is on the basis of this analysis that trends in children's books are indicated. The figures that follow will show few, if any, startlingly new developments in children's books. They will, however, indicate areas of emphasis in published books and will suggest some fields in which a need for good books still exists. The 4,381 titles represent a range from preschool years to middle adoles- cence. For convenience they have been divided into four groupings: kinder- garten-Grade I; Grades II-IV; Grades V-VII; Grades VIII-X. Tenth grade is used as a top grading, since the ma- jority of the students in the eleventh and twelfth grades read books which are predominantly adult titles, and the so-called "teen-age" books are read most widely at the sixth- and seventh- grade levels, and seldom above the tenth-grade level. A major portion of the fiction titles were written at the eighth- to tenth-grade level, with books for the level of Grades II-IV ranking next, followed by those for the fifth- to seventh-grade level. (Books at the kindergarten-Grade I level are not con- sidered as fiction and will be discussed as a separate grouping.) The same pat- tern prevailed for the total number of fiction titles published during each year, with the exception of 1949 and 1953 when the Grades V-VII group ranked second, and the Grades II-IV group dropped to third in rank. In 1953 there were only two more titles in the Grades VIII-X group than in the Grades V- VII group. The increase in books for the fifth- to seventh-grade level in 1949 was due in large part to the increase in titles in the reprint series, since most of the books in such series are intend- ed for the middle elementary grades. The increase for the fifth- to seventh- grade level in 1953 was also due to series books, but not to reprint series. The year 1953 witnessed the unprec- edented, and often unwelcome, mush- rooming of publishers' series of original titles, and the books in most of these series were designed for readers at the fifth- to seventh-grade level. Of the informational books published in the period from 1949 to 1953 the largest number fell in the Grades V- VII class. Actually, this class ranked first in only one year, 1953; but in that year it accounted for 58 per cent of the total. As with fiction, the sudden spurt in informational books at the fifth- to seventh-grade level during 1953 can be traced primarily to the sharp increase in number of publish- ers' series and reflects the growing awareness of a need for simply-written but highly interesting materials, and of the need so often expressed by teachers for trade books to be used in connec-
TRENDS IN CHILDREN'S LITERATURE 53 tion with regular class work. During the 1949-53 span, 2,159 fic- tion titles were evaluated by the Center for Children's Books; they constitute almost half the books evaluated. Easy books and picture-books (for kinder- garten-Grade I) made up from 13 to 16 per cent of the total, the percentage varying from year to year. More in- formational books tended to be evalu- ated; the figures (exclusive of biog- raphy) rose from 19 per cent in 1948 to 24 per cent in 1953. Biography rose from 4 per cent in 1948 to 9 per cent in 1953. These increases reflect the continuing response of authors and publishers to requests from adults for more nonfiction for children and for nonfiction written with a minimum of personification. The increase in biog- raphy is due in part to two new series on the lives of famous Americans that have appeared within the past three years and to several of the series on American history that have included biographies among their titles. The ma- jority of the 1951-53 titles in the biog- raphy category are from publishers' series. Books of poetry, drama, short stories and folk literature showed little varia- tion in number of titles published from year to year during the period. FICTION When we examine the titles within each of the four major categories of children's books-Fiction, Easy Books and Picture-books, Informational Books, and Biography-we find some interesting patterns. Twenty-five major subjects or themes are to be found in the fiction titles, ranging from family stories to stories about the building of a house. The ten subjects ranking highest in the number of titles are, in Drder, the family, animals, internation- al and intergroup relations, adventure, teen-age problems (except careers), modern fanciful tales, school, sports, period stories, and farm life. It is interesting to note the large number of titles in which family rela- tions play an important part. In the 2,159 books of fiction examined, the family is treated together as a complete unit in 869 of them; and in 532 more there are broken homes or the children are temporarily away from parental control. The remaining 758, in which no elements of family relations occur, consist of fanciful tales, animal stories, or sport and adventure stories in which the main characters are seen from one perspective only-the baseball field, the basketball court, a jungle, a ship at sea, etc. Animals figure in 814 titles and play a predominating role in 511. In these 511 books 63 different animals are rep- resented, from horses to hamsters. The animals ranking highest in the total number of books in which they appear are, in order, horses, dogs, cats, bears, rabbits, birds (exclusive of ducks, hens, geese), mice, pigs, elephants, donkeys and burros, monkeys, and squirrels. Fifty-nine countries are represented in the international-relations grouping. As might be expected, England, Alaska, and Canada rank highest in number of books in which they serve as a set- ting. Then follow, in rank order, Mexi- co, China, Africa, France, India, Swit- zerland, Palestine, Italy, Norway, and the Low Countries. Most of the stories about China were published in the years 1948-50, although a few stories about this country continue to be pub- lished each year. Palestine is here used to designate stories about the country of biblical times. There were only three
54 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY stories about the modern state of Is- rael among the 332 fiction titles in the international-relations class. Sixteen different sports were treated in the 148 sports stories analyzed. The sports are mainly those in which boys are most likely to participate, and boys are the main characters in most of the books. Included among these sports are baseball (including stories of the Little League), football, -basketball, horse shows and racing, hockey, skiing, water sports, tennis, ice-skating, marbles, track, boxing, golf, fishing, the Olym- pics, and "hot rods." The creation of the Little League for the nine- to eleven-year-old boys was quickly fol- lowed by a spate of stories about Little League teams. Some of these stories were frankly designed to inform young- sters of the purpose of the new league and to interest their parents in helping sponsor such leagues in their own com- munities. Some were patterned on stories of major-league baseball and were intended to fill the need for sports stories that would be simple enough for children in the elementary grades. The "Little League" theme has not led to the production of outstanding writ- ing, and few of the books have even come up to the standards of the stories about major-league baseball. The three stories about "hot rods" which have appeared within the last three years have obviously been written for the ex- press purpose of helping boys under- stand the "hot-rod" problem and solve it to the satisfaction of themselves and of the adults in their communities. In each instance the author's purpose has become more important than the story itself, with the result that the books are tracts rather than real works of fiction. Although science fiction did not place among the top ten subjects in fre- quency of titles, it has an important place in current children's reading. Very few such stories have been writ- ten specifically for young readers, and most of the science-fiction books be- ing read by young people today were written for adults. The few writers who have attempted to write this type of fiction for the elementary grade levels have usually lapsed into science fan- tasy, often with a touch of whimsy. In one or two instances, such as William Pene Du Bois's Peter Graves (Viking, 1950) and Ellen MacGregor's Miss Pickerell Goes to Mars (Whittlesey House, 1951), the results have been quite good; but the majority of such books read like not-very-good imita- tions of comic strips and television pro- grams. For readers at the junior and senior high school level, Robert Hein- lein has produced a number of science- fiction books that combine scientific accuracy with good writing. BIOGRAPHY As stated earlier, one of the more initeresting trends reflected in the titles examined for the six years between 1949 and 1953 is the increase in the number of biographies for young read- ers. Thirteen different occupations and professions are represented in the 351 biography titles published during these six years. Their subjects are military and naval figures, explorers and fron- tiersmen, statesmen, scientists and in- ventors, writers, religious figures, social workers and social crusaders, sports figures, artists, musicians, actors and actresses, medical figures, and indus- trialists. There were 46 biographies of women, 122 of persons representing minority groups in this country or else-
TRENDS IN CHILDREN'S LITERATURE 55 where, and 29 collections of biograph- ical sketches. It is interesting to examine the biog- raphies in terms of the nationality, race, or cultural group represented by each. As might be expected, the largest num- ber comes in the "American, white, Protestant" group, with 179 titles. Fol- lowing that group there are 23 English; 20 French; 15 Italian; 10 Negro; 8 German; 7 each for Jewish and Amer- ican Indian; 4 each for Indian (India), Dutch, and biblical; 3 each for Norse, Danish, Polish, Spanish, and Scots; and 1 each for Chinese, Greek, Rus- sian, Portuguese, and Brazilian. A large number (233) are of persons who were either American-born or who in some way affected American history (e.g., Lafayette, Einstein, etc.); and 206 are of persons recognized as historical fig- ures (i.e., who died before 1900). It is in the biographies that we see the strongest expression of the present-day concern of many adults that children have a thorough knowledge of the his- tory of their country and of the men who have been primarily responsible for its growth and development. Few of the titles, however, can be consid- ered as examples of creative writing. By far the majority of them suffer from hasty writing and, in the case of the books in series, they follow a pre- scribed pattern that stifles the author's originality and results in all the biog- raphies sounding more or less alike. INFORMATIONAL BOOKS There are few subjects of contem- porary interest on which someone has not attempted to write a book for chil- dren or young people. Many of the at- tempts are unsatisfactory, either be- cause the information given is inac- curate or because the author does not know how to write for young readers. Nevertheless, it is encouraging to note that authors and publishers alike are willing to acknowledge the wide range of children's potential interests and to attempt to satisfy them. Children's books cannot readily be assigned to the neat categories of the Dewey Decimal System since many of them cut across traditional subject groupings. Science books, which make up the largest category of information- al books, usually contain practical ex- periments. Books about animals fre- quently include, in addition to strictly scientific information about the sub- ject, instructions on the care of the animals as pets. Many books on plants are composed of equal parts of in- formation on the structure of the plant, discussion of conservation measures as they relate to that type of plant, and instructions for raising it in a home garden. There are few astronomy books for children today which do not have sections on space travel. An increasing number of the informational books in science and related fields require some kind of activity on the part of the read- er, in the form either of experiments that demonstrate the scientific prin- ciples under discussion or of the con- struction of models to give the child a visual image of the subject he has been reading about. Such activities ex- tend over a wide range of subjects. A recent book on communications includ- ed instructions for building models of the various types of instruments de- scribed; it even included instructions for producing a neighborhood news- paper. A book on houses of the world from prehistoric to modern times gave directions for building models of each type of house. Although books on science consti-
56 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY tuted the major portion of the informa- tional books, other subject areas were by no means neglected. For the child wanting to know more about the gov- ernment and people of his own country and about those of the world, there were books describing the various cul- tures of this and other countries and books on minority groups in this coun- try, on the United Nations, on the Con- stitution of the United States and the government of the United States (in- cluding town meetings), and on the various public services to be found in most towns and cities. For the teen-age readers there were books to help solve some of the prob- lems of growing up. There were books on personality, on manners, and on sex. Recent years have witnessed a trend away from books of vocational fiction, with their distorted views of the ways in which jobs are obtained and held, and toward factual accounts of the pos- sibilities in various kinds of work, pro- fessional and nonprofessional. Sports fans could select from a vari- ety of titles, ranging from books on how to play various games to record- books and books of anecdotes about famous players or incidents. There were books on baseball, horseback rid- ing, football, sports in general, fishing, skiing, and tennis. When this group is contrasted with the similar group of fiction sports stories it seems that read- ers would find it easier to read a book about a fictional sports player than one which would help them become pro- ficient either as players or spectators. The arts have not been neglected. During the six years several songbooks were published, and there were also books on drawing techniques, the or- chestra, dancing (including ballet, square dancing, and rhythms), the ap- preciation and understanding of paint- ings, the theater, writing, bands, and sculpture. EASY BOOKS AND PICTURE-BOOKS The terms "easy books" and "pic- ture-books" have been used to desig- nate books for the kindergarten and first-grade level which are intended for reading aloud to young children, or which in a few instances are written so simply that beginning readers can handle them alone. Picture-books al- ways represent a large segment of the total publishing for any one year, but unfortunately, they also represent some of the worst aspects of each year's pub- lishing. Some of the books each year have the qualities of child appeal and of good writing and illustration which make them a pleasure to use with young children, but by far the major- ity of these books are designed for a mass market and rank above comic books only in price. The past few years have witnessed a trend toward the publishing of trade books written for the beginning reader and intended to supplement or, in some instances, to replace the traditional "readers." The idea behind such books is that they will be more interesting than the "readers" and will, therefore, encourage children to learn to read more quickly and more easily. The ex- treme simplicity of vocabulary and the frequent repetition of words, which are necessary characteristics of materials for beginning readers, are either ad- hered to by the writers of "easy books," in which case the books are as dull as the textbooks they are intended to re- place; or these characteristics are ig- nored, in which case the books are not easy enough for beginning readers to handle alone. Each year increasing
TRENDS IN CHILDREN'S LITERATURE 57 numbers of books are published which are too condescending in tone and too juvenile in subject matter for the read- ers who might be able to handle the text, too difficult for the beginning readers who might find the subjects of interest, and too poorly written to be suitable for reading aloud to young children. CONCLUSION As was indicated earlier, one of the major trends of the last two years and one that is responsible for most of the increases to be found in several of the categories earlier identified, especially biography and informational books, is toward publishers' series. The Center for Children's Books has in its collec- tion titles from eighty such series, ex- clusive of author and reprint series. Many of these publishers' series came into being between 1948 and 1953, and all of them expanded during that pe- riod. The series cover a wide range of subjects and types, the more recent ones being primarily concerned with general information, United States his- tory, and biographies. Not all publish- ers' series are bad, and not all the titles within any one series are bad, but the general impression obtained from a wide reading of them is one of over- whelming mediocrity. With few excep- tions the books show the results of hasty writing and hasty editing. Some of the books have obviously been writ- ten by authors who have done no pre- vious writing for children and who have made no attempt to learn the require- ments of such writing before starting on their assigned task. Other books, and these are in some ways even more distressing, have been written by au- thors who are capable of doing good writing for children when given a free hand in choosing the subject and style of writing. The overwhelming flood of merchandise that abounds in the chil- dren's book field today gives the adult who is working with children's books pause to wonder if there will ever again be a golden age to match that of the 1930's. Children's books are more beau- tiful today than they have ever been in the past; and it is to be hoped that the content will soon again come up to the standard of the physical format, and that there will once again be books that are beautiful to read as well as beautiful to see.