THE REORGANIZATION OF THE BOOK TRADE IN GERMANY FELIX REICHMANN PUBLICATIONS CONTROL IN NAZI GERMANY N SPITE of the pompous messages of Dr. Goebbels, who extolled the cul- tural importance of the profession, the German book trade was obstructed in its development during the entire Nazi regime. The war aggravated these condi- tions even further. The book trade was deprived of almost all foreign informa- tion, cut off from necessary raw materi- als, throttled by invidious regulations of the Nazi Kulturkammer, and finally sacrificed under the impact of the "Laws of Total War" on the already tottering altar of the Nazi myth. The Nazi government, which attempt- ed to control the most intimate actions of the German citizens, kept the produc- tion and distribution of printed material under close surveillance from I933 on. Although no official censorship existed for books (except for party literature), the Kulturkammer had the right to bar any offending publisher or author from further professional activities. Almost every number of the Bdrsenblatt fiur den Deutschen Buchhandel testifies to the fre- quency with which this right was exer- cised. The strict rationing of paper (be- ginning in I941) facilitated even further the regulation of the trend of publica- tions; the choice of the title and the size of the edition became dependent on gov- ernmental approval. The next move of the party brought the entire distribution under its control. The allotment procedure (Zuteilungsver- fahren) wrecked any existing intimate re- lationship between publisher and dealer. Ninety per cent of any edition was dis- tributed to the dealers according to an allotment table subject to approval by the Kulturkammer. The remaining io per cent was at the disposal of the pub- lisher. The effects of this regulation were detrimental to the very structure of the German book trade. The responsible dealer, proud of his book knowledge and selective ability, became an impersonal tool with no freedom of professional ac- tion. Publishing became a dry, almost mechanical activity: to hand over a manuscript selected by the party to a printer and to distribute the finished product to a dealer of the party's choice. It is not quite clear in what year the book trade was requested to introduce the allotment procedure "voluntarily." The party publishing houses were al- ready using it before the war, and it was universally applied from 1943 on. No method of distribution can offset the basic relationship between supply and demand. The commercially avail- able German book stock had already reached a low ebb in the summer of 1943. The old stock stored with the dealers was rapidly sold out, and the dwindling raw materials did not permit an adequate new production; there was left as a last resort the old stock of the publishers, many of whom still had a large supply of the less fashionable books. But a drastic pulping order issued by the Reichs- schrifttumskammer in September, I943, cut the trade off from this last resource. All publishers were ordered to report im- mediately how many of their remainders would fall into the following categories: x.85
i86 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY (i) books which publisher and author agree should be pulped (to be pulped im- mediately), (2) books about which pub- lisher and author disagree (both parties to submit a statement to this effect to the Kammer, which would render the ulti- mate decision), (3) valuable scientific publications of which only a few copies are sold yearly (the greater part of the edition to be pulped). Apparently the publishers were rather reluctant to obey this order, and the regulation had to be repeated. In its final form, published in the Btrsenblatt of July i, I944, the Kam- mer announced that the storehouses of the publishers would be inspected. Pulp- ing was declared to be essential "because of the extreme scarcity of raw material." It is not possible to evaluate precisely the loss which the German book trade suf- fered from this forced pulping or to state how many valuable Sitzungsberichte were destroyed to extend the life-span of the Volkischer Beobachler. Besides the mate- rial losses, the effect on morale was very detrimental. The commercially available book stock being nearly exhausted, the gov- ernment turned its attention to the pri- vate libraries. The Reichsschrifttums- kammer started a great campaign on March i8, I944, requesting the popula- tion to sell their libraries to dealer-mem- bers of the Kammer. Official posters dis- played in bookstores emphasized the patriotic duty of helping in a better dis- tribution of the small book stock at the disposal of the German people by selling all the books which were not absolutely needed. The effect of this request on a population which had become weary of scores of similar "voluntary" sacrifices cannot be even guessed. Not only was the quantity of German book production utterly inadequate dur- ing the war years; the quality did not correspond to the reading interests of the German public. Germans had always bought (and often even read) the classics of German literature. Glancing over the German bibliography of the last six years, one finds that the following au- thors were not republished during that period: Lessing (last edition I936; only a few reprints of Minna von Barnhelm and one of Emilia Galotti, I938) Goethe (last edition I938) Biichner (last edition 1940) Clemens Brentano Gottfried Keller (last edition I938) Jean Paul Schiller (a selection in I940) Droste-Huilshoff (last edition I939) Eichendorff (last edition 1940) Heinrich von Kleist (last edition I938) Morike (last edition I938) Stifter (last edition I938) Kant (no reprint after I 937) The K6hler-Volkmar Deutscher Literatur Katalog 1942, the most important trade catalog for the German book trade, does not quote complete sets of Gutzkow, Halm, Immermann, Nestroy, Novalis, Tieck, or Voss. It was a small compensa- tion that Mein Kampf was printed in I,I50,000 copies between I939 and I945. When the Allied armies were ap- proaching the German homeland, the at- tention of the German government turned exclusively to warfare; cultural belongings were shelved for good. With the "Laws of Total War" (August 22, I944), which were announced to the book trade on September 9, I944, in the Merk- blatt zur totalen Mobilmachung des Buch- handels, published as an appendix to the Bdrsenblatt, the book trade received its death sentence. The gist of the decrees was as follows: Publishing.-No books were to be published in the following fields: juvenile, fiction, belles- lettres, fine arts, history, philosophy, and po- litical and military sciences. In all other fields
REORGANIZATION OF THE BOOK TRADE IN GERMANY I87 only publications of immediate importance for the war were permitted. All periodicals were to cease publication. One periodical for each scientific field would be permitted if the neces- sity in terms of war effort could be proved. Dealers.-All new bound books in the fields of fiction, belles-lettres, popular science, and politics were to be sold to public libraries, hospitals, or factory libraries by September 30, I944. Closing.-All but two hundred publishers, about half of the retail dealers, and all whole- salers and commissioners were to close. The entire personnel formerly employed by these businesses was to report to the nearest Ar- beitsamt by September i5, I944. For all per- sons still employed in the book trade the sixty- hour work week became obligatory, except for children under sixteen, who were to work only fifty-six hours. No vacation was to be given except for women above fifty and men above sixty-five years of age. Intellectual activities.-All professional writ- ers were to report for work duty in war facto- ries. Twenty writers (names not given) were to be exempted. With these decrees the iron curtain falls. But behind the curtain the flames of the burning German cities were hissing for six more months; and leaping from east to west, from south to north, they de- stroyed the rest of what had once been the best-organized book trade in the world. PUBLICATIONS CONTROL UNDER AMER- ICAN MILITARY GOVERNMENT After the end of hostilities the Ameri- can Military Government tried to take stock of what had been spared by the deluge of war. About 8o per cent of the book stock had been destroyed, about 50 per cent of the printing facilities could not be used, the paper stock was small and of poor quality, and there was hardly any binding material. Every town had a number of bookstores, but these untidy rooms in dilapidated houses could hardly be called "stores"-and of books there were practically none. The majority of the stores had a couple of hundred vol- umes of poor literary and commercial value; about a dozen had moved their better stock into small neighboring vil- lages, but this stock did not amount to much compared with the peacetime standards of a German bookstore. Only the Weise'sche Hofbuchhandlung in Stuttgart, owned by an old and very shrewd Nazi, had a good stock hidden away. The owners were frightened and still under the shock of war, as they led the controlling American officials to a corner where they had already piled to- gether the Nazi books. The situation in the publishing field was even worse. Only a few publishers had going establishments and were ready to carry on; some fortunate ones had old stock. (Winter in Heidelberg, Enke in Stuttgart, Mohr in Tuibingen, and Beck in Munich were the chief exceptions to the general rule of poverty in old stock.) The publishers, too, were weary and did not know what the American adminis- tration would have in store for them. However, they all expressed their desire to obey all orders which would be forth- coming. Very few had a clear conception of the function of a publisher in a demo- cratic society. Among the wholesalers, only Koch, Neff and Oettinger (Stuttgart) was in business-with comparatively good hold- ings, by the way. There was no profes- sional organization and hardly any com- munication outside a city limit. Many Germans had, or pretended to have, a great interest in the book trade and were busy dreaming of extenlsive ac- tivities in this field. They could be divid- ed roughly into three groups: (i) former publishers and dealers whose business had been closed by the "Laws of Total War" ("Stillgelegt" was the Nazi tech- nical term) and who, the Nazi laws hav-
i88 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY ing been abolished, wanted to return to their old profession; (2) persons who had been excluded from the Nazi Kammer or who had never been accepted as members because of political reasons or racial dis- crimination; (3) persons who for varied reasons could not hope to find gainful employment (age, infirmity, no profes- sional training or training in war indus- try, Nazi reputation in their former call- ing, etc.); they believed that a small lending library would be the best way out of their dilemmas. All these hopes, however, had to be at least postponed, since the first regulation of General Eisenhower as Commander in Chief of the Allied Expeditionary Forces ordered the c]osing of all estab- lishments and agencies connected with information activities. For the control and reorganization of German-directed information activities by print, music, radio, and film, two information control divisions were established and attached to the Seventh Army (for Hesse, Wiirt- temberg, and Baden) and to the Third Army (Bavaria). Each division was sub- divided into four media branches and one intelligence branch. The publications control branch in each division had the supervision of the production and distri- bution of books and magazines and the control of all pnrnters. Commercial lend- ing libraries were also under its jurisdic- tion, but public libraries were not, al- though the personnel of the branch was frequently requested to screen the book stocks of public libraries. The branch had a number of outposts in the major cities of its territory. On January I, I945, information con- trol was transferred to the Military Government of the Lander (districts). Germany (United States Zone) is divided for administrative purposes into three districts (Hesse, Wiirttemberg-Baden, and Bavaria) and two cities (Bremen and Berlin). Each district (and city) has its own information control division, with the same structure as described above. All district information control divisions are supervised (without direct command channels) by the Information Control Division attached to the Office of Mili- tary Government (U. S.) in Berlin. The basic regulations for the control of the German book trade are contained in General Eisenhower's Law I9I.I, which states: Section 2.-No person shall conduct any of the following activities except under a license granted to him by Military Government and in accordance with the provisions of such license and Military Government Regulations and Instructions. (a) Publishing of newspapers, magazines, periodicals, books, posters, pamphlets, printed music and other publications. Section 3.-Any person who complies with the conditions in Section 4 of this Regulation, and who is not otherwise prohibited by Military Government, is hereby granted permission to conduct the following activities: (a) Distributing, selling or lending commercial- ly newspapers, magazines, periodicals, books, pamphlets, posters, printed music and other publications. (b) Printing of newspapers, magazines, peri- odicals, books, posters, pamphlets, printed music and other publications for licensed publishers thereof. Section 4.-No person shall conduct any activity listed in Section 3 of this Regulation except under the following conditions: (a) He shall first have registered at the office of the Military Government in such form and under such conditions as may be pre- scribed. (b) He shall adhere strictly to all Regulations and Instructions issued. In accordance with this law all activi- ties of the Publications Control Branch have differentiated between two func- tions of the book trade: (i) originating publications, the function of the publish-
REORGANIZATION OF THE BOOK TRADE IN GERMANY I89 er, who is responsible for the content of the publication and for the selection of politically clean authors; and (2) printing and distributing, the task of printers, dealers, circulating libraries, and all other variations of the book trade. All members of the German book trade have been subject to extensive scrutiny by the Branch, whether they were professionals of old standing or applicants for new es- tablishments. Because of the great responsibility of a publisher, procedures for obtaining a publisher's license have been complicat- ed, rigorous, and slow. The applicant is carefully interviewed by the local repre- sentative of the Branch. If the applicant makes a favorable impression, he is re- quested to file two Military Government questionnaires, two large questionnaires covering his entire business and private life, a short autobiography, a list of all his publications for the last fifteen years, and a publishing program for one year worked out in specific titles. If the out- post is satisfied, the applicant is inter- viewed by the chief of the district Branch. The most frequent stumbling- block in the applications of politically reliable publishers is the publishing pro- gram. Most publishers can easily write a three-page essay on their plans, using overworked expressions like "books for the spiritual reconstruction of the Ger- man people." But the Branch insists that these very laudable sentiments be trans- lated into specific titles. It is often quite a letdown to compare the actual selection of titles with the high principle stated in the essay. Often three or four inter- views have been necessary before the program is in satisfactory shape. The per- sonnel of the Branch are willing to dis- cuss all theoretical questions with the publisher at any length, but they refuse to suggest specific titles. Simultaneously with the discussions carried on by the Publications Control Branch, the Intelligence Branch investi- gates the background and the political ideology of the applicant. They interview him and his references and check the name in the different files of the Nazi party and affiliated organizations. If both branches agree that the applicant is eligible for a publisher's license, an appli- cation to this effect is submitted to the Commanding Officer of the district In- formation Control Division. If Berlin Headquarters concurs with the opinion of the district, the license is issued. Only 5 per cent of the applicants have been successful. However, a great number of applications have been not definitely re- jected but postponed for a later date. No application has been turned down with- out good reasons. The outposts are re- quired to report every application, giving detailed reasons in case the request has been rejected at the local level. The fate of old publishing houses whose license application has been re- fused has varied according to circum- stances. Generally the assets have been taken under property control. In the case of prominent publishing houses whose ex- istence is important for an eventual re- construction of the profession, a public custodian has taken over the administra- tion. The custodian is suggested by the district Publications Control Branch and appointed by the Property Control Di- vision of Military Government, to which he has to render monthly accounts. The custodian, who must be eligible for a pub- lisher's license, receives a monthly salary at the discretion of Property Control. Needless to say, Nazi literature still in stock has been impounded. The licensed publisher is free to pro- duce within his publication program; ad- ditions and changes must be concurred
I90 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY in by the Branch prior to being put into effect. There is no prepublication censor- ship, and the Branch carefully refrains from reading manuscripts. The goal has been not only to foster the publication of good books but to have a number of re- sponsible publishers who are able to re- alize the political implications in a given text. The only exception to the rule of no prepublication censorship is made in the case of magazines. The complete text of the planned magazine's first issue is re- quested in order to have a sound basis for judgment. The number of magazine applications has been very large, and many proposals have been quixotic in terms of Germany's economic status and the difficulties of communications. The publishers have been most em- phatically told that the following five topics or even slight allusions to them would not be tolerated in print: (i) criti- cism of any Allied government or inter- ference with Military Government regu- lations; (2) racial or religious discrimina- tion; (3) propagation of militaristic ideas, including Pan-Germanism and German imperialism; (4) national socialistic or re- lated vilkische ideas; (5) fascist or anti- democratic ideas. All publications have been carefully scrutinized. The outposts are responsible for the publications in their counties (Landkreise) and are required to report their findings weekly. Reports on maga- zines are rendered monthly. In addition to the reading done by the American per- sonnel and German employees of the Branch, public opinion surveys have been made by the Intelligence Branch to learn the reaction of the German reading public. File copies of all publications are kept at the outposts, at district Publica- tions Control Branch headquarters, and in Berlin. Every violation has been prosecuted. In minor cases a severe warning is given and the publication is confiscated. More severe punishments consist in suspension or revocation of the license and, eventu- ally, military court procedures. Infringe- ments have been infrequent and general- ly of a minor nature. Almost all trans- gressions have occurred in magazine articles discussing contemporary events like the evacuation of Germans from Czechoslovakia, Silesia, and East Prus- sia. The average size of an edition is five thousand copies, with a second printing permissible after a six-month interval. Publishers desiring a larger edition must make a special application giving in de- tail the various reasons for their requests. The possibility of larger sales is not ac- cepted as a valid argument. An oversize edition must be recommended by the outpost and can be granted by the dis- trict Publications Control Branch with concurrence from Berlin Headquarters. Several anti-Nazi books and pamphlets have been granted editions up to twenty thousand copies. Popular magazines have generally appeared in an edition of fifty thousand copies. The highest circu- lation figure was recently permitted to two youth magazines: Horizont (Hori- zont Verlag, Berlin; 250,000 semimonth- ly) and Der Pinguin (Editor Erich Kast- ner, Stuttgart Rowohlt; 200,000 semi- monthly). The main reason for the limitation in the size of the edition is the paper short- age. There was little paper to start with, and the new production is slow in getting under way. There are a number of paper factories of high standing in the Ameri- can Zone (Dachau, Heindl in Augsburg, etc.), but the scarcity of necessary chemi- cals, the difficulty in replacing parts of machinery, and the lack of fuel prevent their working to full capacity. The de-
REORGANIZATION OF THE BOOK TRADE IN GERMANY mand for paper is very great, and only a small part of the monthly output can be set aside for the publication of books and magazines (about five hundred tons of 70 gr. newsprint). American experts are of the opinion that the paper situation will not be back to normalcy before 1949. The Branch has accepted most reluc- tantly the added responsibility of paper distribution. The entire paper quota for a three-month period has been divided among the three districts and the two cities according to the publishing pro- grams of their respective publishers. The publishers order their paper with the written approval of the chief of the Branch. Every branch has had to set up its own elaborate accounting system to distribute the paper as fairly and effi- ciently as possible. The Branch has attempted to make the working and living conditions of its licensed publishers tolerable. The main efforts have been directed toward pre- venting unneccessary sequestration of their offices and apartments and recom- mending telephone installations, permits to use the railway, curfew permits, addi- tional fuel, tires for the delivery trucks, and the like. This assistance, by no means always successful, is intended to relieve the publishers somewhat from the heavy pressure under which civilians live in occupied territory and thus to give them a chance to do better profes- sional work. Compared with the cumbersome proc- ess of issuing a publisher's license and the never-ending work with him, the regis- tration procedures for a dealer or printer are easy and almost completely handled at the local level. Only severe transgres- sions of information control regulations must be reported to the chief of the Branch. Printers, dealers, and owners of lending libraries and similar businesses are required to file one Military Govern- ment questionnaire and an application with the local Military Government. If the applicant is politically acceptable, Military Government issues a registra- tion certificate subject to review by the Branch. Officials of the outposts visit the stores and shops at regular intervals to enforce the observance of regulations. Printers are allowed to accept orders only from licensed publishers. The printer is responsible for ascertaining that his cus- tomer is in possession of a valid license. Transgression of this rule is punished with revocation of the registration. How- ever, no malicious transgression-for in- stance, the printing of a Nazi pamphlet -has ever occurred. The publisher has to furnish the paper. If the paper is taken from the printer's stock, both parties must report this fact to the Branch so that the paper account of the publisher can be charged accordingly. The registration certificate for book- stores and lending libraries enumerates the five classes of books which cannot be distributed (fascist, nationalistic, mili- taristic, antireligious, volkisch). The listing of forbidden topics is identical with that stated on the publisher's li- cense. The German authorities of the given county are responsible for collect- ing the impounded books from the differ- ent stores and for keeping them at the disposal of Military Government. If an application is made for a new es- tablishment, the opinion of the local dealers is requested. Invariably the es- tablished dealers are reluctant to accept a newcomer into their fold. It has been the policy of the Branch to be very liber- al and to grant an application if the moral and intellectual qualifications of the applicant warrant it. An exception is made only if it can be proved that local economic conditions are so precarious as
192 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY to preclude absolutely the establishment of a new store. The German book trade in the Ameri- can Zone has received valuable additions through immigration from other zones. Some had already immigrated during the war-for instance, Reclam (Leipzig), who had established a main branch in Passau (however, no license was grant- ed); others came after the armistice. An important group of Leipzig publishers have settled in Wiesbaden: Insel Verlag (the foremost belles-lettres publisher), Brockhaus (a publisher of distinction, though unacceptable for the time being"), TABLE 1 Books Disric L Regis- and Periodi- trations Pam- cals phlets Bavaria ........ 7 I 2,870 I84 45 Wurttemberg- Baden..... io6 I1,722 491 63 Hesse .......... 46 2,I38 I30 2I Bremen ........ 5 375 Berlin .......... 26 843 32 I2 Breitkopf and Hiirtel (music, no license), G. Thieme (medicine), Dieterich (philos- ophy). The well-known Leipzig jobber C. F. Fleischer has moved to Weisbaden. Urban and Schwarzenberg (medicine) settled in Munich, and Julius Springer (medicine, technology) has a branch in Heidelberg. It is the policy of the Branch to accept professionally and politically I Under official pressure during the Nazi regime, the Brockhaus-Konversations Lexikon had become a storehouse of Nazi propaganda; most of the articles had been re-written in conformity with the Nazi ideology, using extreme nationalistic phraseology and hardly camouflaging the outspoken propaganda tendency. At the instance of the Russian authorities, the Leipzig remnants of the Brockhaus firm are now publishing a pocket encyclopedia with a decided communistic bias-a fact which is causing the elder Brockhaus no little concern, since he fears that this may in time bring him into fresh difficulties. qualified newcomers but not to encour- age any migration. By August i, I946, the American au- thorities had licensed 254 publishers and registered 7,948 dealers and printers; 837 books and pamphlets and I4I periodicals had been produced (Table I).2 A subject analysis of the book production is pre- sented in Table 2 (the subject headings are taken from the report of the Berlin Headquarters), and the I4I periodicals are analyzed in Table 3. The German output is satisfactory from the quantitative angle, at least to the extent that the available paper quota has been used. The quality, however, is beneath the standard which the Branch has set as its goal. The following reasons may throw some light on this shortcom- ing. (i) The writers are still under the shock of the last years. (2) Living condi- tions are not congenial to intellectual ac- tivities. (3) Many of the older experi- enced writers have made concessions to Nazi ideology and are unacceptable at present. (4) The younger generation has been intellectually sterilized and needs time to learn. (5) The purchase of copy- rights from America, Switzerland, Swe- den, etc., was barred by the Trading with the Enemy Act and by lack of foreign currency. The Branch has realized the necessity of giving the German publishers some help in contacting the world outside Ger- many and providing the German reading public with books until the German pub- lishers are able again to satisfy all the needs. These objectives have been at least partly accomplished by the follow- ing three methods: (i) purchase of Amer- ican copyrights, (2) distribution of Ger- 2 By April 24, 1947, the authorities had licensed 306 publishers and registered 8,920 dealers and printers. The production figures were then 2,745 books and pamphlets and 272 periodicals.
REORGANIZATION OF THE BOOK TRADE IN GERMANY 193 TABLE 2 Subject of Titles Nature of Titles Children's books .54 Mostly reprints of Andersen, Robinson Crusoe, and German fairy tales; a few picture-books of mediocre quality. The ma- jority are under ioo pages in length. Books for women .3 The best contribution is Gertrud Baumer, Der neue Weg der deutschen Frau (Stuttgart, Deutsche Verlagsanstalt); this is a volume of a very interesting series, "Der deutschen Spiegel." Criticism of National Socialism. 27 Mostly biographical statements of life in concentration camps, experiences with the Gestapo, and the like, chiefly in pam- phlet form. The best book is a reprint of W. Langhoff, Die Moorsoldaten (Munich, Desch). Social issues of present-day Ger- many .32 Mostly pamphlets; by far the best are the two works of the Swiss theologian Karl Barth, Zur Genesung des deutschen We- sens and Ein Wort an die Deutschen (both Stuttgart, Mittel- bach). The world outside Germany.... 5 Three books on the United States, one on Russia, one on China. The best book is D. W. Brogan, Der amerikanische Charakker (Stuttgart, Mittelbach). Law .5 Publications of Military Government laws and regulations. An excellent critical analysis of Nazi lawlessness is Albert Muller- Payer, Die deutsche Sunde wieder das Recht (Stuttgart, Mittel- bach). The Niinberg trials are represented with Robert H. Jackson, Grundlegende Rede (Frankfurt, Cobet). Education. 2I Pamphlets on school reform and youth problems like Neue Zeit neue Schule (Munich, Schmoll & Steiner). Textbooks ................... 36 Manuals for the learning of English, French, etc. (The publica- tion of textbooks for elementary and secondary education did not fall under the jurisdiction of the Branch.) Natural sciences .......... .... 7 Mostly reprints of college textbooks on chemistry and biology. Agriculture .17 Mostly manuals for the cultivation of small vegetable gardens. Philosophy, literary criticism. . . 43 Some reprints of Kant, Marx, Engels, and Stalin. The best con- tributions are Karl Jaspers, Die Idee der Universitdt (Heidel- berg, Springer), H. Stier, Grundlagen der griechischen Ge- schickte (Stuttgart, Cotta), and Karl Vossler, Luis de Leon (Munich, Schmoll & Steiner). Fiction and general literature... i8o A few reprints, selected titles of Goethe, Schiller, Heine, Lessing, Keller, Moricke, Morgenstern, Stifter, Storm, and Uhland. Interesting anthologies are Ernst Schwarz, Vorbei (Heidel- berg, Freiheits Verlag) and Lyrik der Verbannten und Ver- brannten (Stuttgart, Hatje). Fine arts .4 Nothing of importance because of lack of good paper. Trade and industry . Analyses of German business like A. Weber, Wohin stuert die Wirnschaft? (Munich, Desch). Architecture. Io Some interesting contributions (foremost in German mind) on the reconstruction of destroyed cities, like two pamphlets by K. Blaum (Frankfurt, Cobet).
I94 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY TABLE 2-Continued Subject of Titles Nature of Titles Medicine .................... I6 Important contributions like L. Blaskowitz, Eingri.ff am A uge (Stuttgart, Enke). Occupations .................. 24 Small trade manuals. Religion ..................... 271 Almost equally distributed between Roman Catholic publica- tions (126) and Protestant ones (145). Many titles have less than ten pages, and the majority less than twenty. The New Testament has been reprinted in three editions. The relationship between the churches and the Nazi party is treated from the Catholic point of view in J. Neuhaus- ler, Kreuz und Hakenkreuz (Munich, Katholische Kirche Bay- ems). The Protestant counterpart is H. Diem, Restauration oder Neuanfang in der Evangelischen Kirche? (Stuttgart, Mit- telbach). Reference books, dictionaries.. 46 English, French, and Russian dictionaries, a few city directories. Calendars .................... 21 Mostly small printing jobs. By far the best is Kunstkalender (Stuttgart, Hatje). TABLE 3 Number Subject Periodi- Nature of Periodicals cals Cultural ........'... .. I3 By far the best from the point of view of content is Die Wand- lung, edited by Dolf Sternberger, together with Karl Jaspers, Werner Krauss, and Alfred Weber (Heidelberg, Lambert Schneider). The best magazine from the point of view of typography is Der Standpunkt (Standpunkt Verlag). Illustrated ................... 5 ........................................................ Political ..................... 8 These represent the major political parties. Three are satirical- Ulenspigel (Berlin), Der Simpi (Munich), and Das Wespen- nest (Stuttgart) Professional .................. 47 Most important are the three medical periodicals, Klinik und Praxis (Munich, Urban & Schwarzenberg), Deutsche medi- sinische Wochenschrift (Wiesbaden, Thieme), and Deutsche zahndrtzliche Zei4schrift (Munich, Hanser). The book trade is most interested in the Borsenblait fur den deutschen Buch- handel (Frankfurt) and Der Druckspiegel (Stuttgart, Blersch). Religious ................... i Twenty-nine are affiliated with Protestant churches, 20 with the Roman Catholic, and 2 with Jewish congregations. The best- known Catholic papers are Petrusblatt (Berlin, Morus Verlag) and Katholisches Sonntagsbla4t (Stuttgart, Schwaben-Verlag); the leading Protestant magazine is Evangelisches Gemeindeblalt (Stuttgart, Quellverlag). Although the Protestant churches have the greater number of periodicals, the Catholic maga- zines have the larger circulation. Youth ...................... I0 The two best are Der Horizont (Berlin, Horizont Verlag) and Der Pinguin (Stuttgart, Rowohlt). Women ...................... 7 Rather mediocre without exception.
REORGANIZATION OF THE BOOK TRADE IN GERMANY man-language magazines published by the American authorities (overt maga- zines), and (3) distribution of American books in German translations printed in the United States (overseas editions). Through the good services of the State Department, the copyrights for eighty- nine American titles have been pur- chased. The Branch has rejected five titles and offered the remaining eighty- four to the licensed publishers. The con- ditions have generally included the right to one edition of five to ten thousand copies, which must be sold out within three years against io per cent royalty to be paid in advance. By August I, I946, forty-five titles had been sold and one book had appeared (Brogan, Der Ameri- kanische Charakter). The list of titles of- fered to the publishers follows (the starred titles are those which were sold by August I, I946): Adamic, From Many Lands* Agar, A Time for Greatness* Alexander, Our Age of Unreason* Alland, The Springfield Plant Barzun, Of Human Freedom Beach, American Fiction* Becker, The Heavenly City of the Eighteenth- Century Philosophers* Benedict, Race: Science and Politics Benton, Cow by the Tail Binkley, American Political Parties* Bowers, Jefferson and Hamilton* Brogan, The American Character* Brooks, The Flowering of New England* Brooks, New England: Indian Summer* Brooks, The World of Washington Irving* Burt, Powder River* Canby, Walt Whitman* Cannon, The Way of an Investigator Carroll, As the Earth Turns* Cather, 0 Pioneersl* Chase, Mary Peters Clapesattle, The Doctors Mayo Cleaveland, No Life for a Lady* Commager, The Growth of the American Re- public* Commager, Majority Rule and Minority Rights Copland, Our New Music* Cousins, The Good Inheritance Cozzens, The Just and the Unjust* Curti, The Growth of American Thought* Deering, USDA Ellsberg, Hell on Ice* Field, Time Out of Mind* Fisher, The Bentt twig Flexner, America's Old Masters* Flexner, William Henry Welch Forbes, Johnny Tremain* Forbes, Mama's Bank Account* Garwood, Artist in Iowa German, Doctors Anonymous Glasgow, Vein of Iron* Greene, Not in Our Stars Grew, Ten Years in Japan* Hagedorn, The Boys' Life of Theodore Roosevelt* Hansen, America's Role in the World Economy Hansen, The Immigrant in American History Harvard Committee, General Education in a Free Society Hendrick, Bulwark of the Republic Hertzler, The Horse and Buggy Doctor* Hough, Country Editor Hylander, American Inventors* Kelly, The Wright Brothers* Kohn, The Idea of Nationalism* Lane, Let the Hurricane Roar* Ling, Music in Western Civilization* Lion, The Grass Grows Green Lisitzky, Thomas Jefjerson Marks, A Tree Grown Straight* Maxwell, The Folded Leaf* Mead, And Keep Your Powder Dry* Meader, Red Horse Hill Merriam, On the Agenda of Democracy* Morison, Admiral of the Ocean Sea* Museum of Modern Art, Built in USA * Norris, Fighting Liberal Parrington, Main Currents in American Thought* Perry, Puritanism and Democracy* Pound, The Spirit of the Common Law Rourke, Audubon Rourke, The Roots of American Culture Sandburg, Abe Lincoln Grows Up* Sandburg, The People, Yes Sandburg, Storm over the Land* Schlesinger, The Age of Jackson Schlesinger, Land of the Free Schlesinger, The Newv Deal in Action Sheldon, The Varieties of Temperament* Spence, One Foot in Heaven Stettinius, Lend-Lease Turner, The Frontier in American History
i96 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Whitehead, The Aims of Education Williamson, Trends in Collective Bargaining Wood, Raymond L. Ditmars Woodbury, The Glass Giant of Palomar Woodward, Tom Paine Three German-language magazines ed- ited in the United States are distributed through regular book-trade channels: Heute (circulation 400,000), Neue Auslese (1260,000), and Amerikanische Rund- schau (200,000). All three magazines are rather popular in Germany because of a great thirst for some information about the outside world. The interest in Heute is steadily increasing; the appeal of the two others is declining. Over eight hundred thousand copies of the overseas edition have been distribut- ed. The following twenty-three titles had been received by August i, I946, each im an edition of thirty-five thousand: Becker, Die Welt von Morgen Benet, Amerika Bowen, Der Yankee vom Olymp Brogan, Politische Kultur Brown, Ein Marsch in der Sonne Dulles, Der Weg nach Teheran Fortune Magazine, Japan Grew, Bericht aus Tokio Holt, George Washington Carver Hough, Nach 25 Jahren Jaffe, Mdnner der Forschung in Amerika Kazin, Der Amerikanische Roman Lilienthal, Die Tennessee Stromtal Verwaltung Marshall, Der Bericht des Amerikanischen Ober- kommandos Nevins, Geschickhte der Vereinigten Staaten Pratt, Amerikas Flotte im Kriege Ratcliff, Aus der Welt der Wissenschaft Sherrod, Tarawa Steffens, Ritt ins Leben Stimson, Vorspiel zur Invasion Trumbull, Das Floss Van Doren, Benjamin Franklin White, Des Andern Brot The copies are priced at one mark each and are sold through the book trade. In the fall of I944 the Branch bought in Switzerland a thousand volumes of German authors who had been banned by the Nazis (Thomas Mann, Werfel, etc.). All these were sold to public institutions and lending libraries. Lack of funds pre- vented the repetition of this action on a larger scale, although the German public has accepted the books most eagerly, and severe controls have had to be exercised to keep the distribution within the regu- lar forms. (A lending library charged a fee of ten marks a day for Thomas Mann and had scores of reservations at a price which was twenty times the usual charge.) Price control in general is most efficiently handled by German authori- ties, the Branch interfering only in case of flagrant injustice, which so far has not occurred. It is only owing to the strict surveillance of the German Price Con- trol Office that the prices of new books are hardly above the peacetime level, al- though the supply of new publications is only a fraction of the demand. Black market activities in new books hardly ever occur. THE SECOND-HAND BOOK TRADE The prices of second-hand books and out-of-print material are more difficult to check because they are to a large ex- tent dependent on the evaluation made by the private owners of books. Un- doubtedly good books are scarce and in heavy demand. This is true of the major- ity of scholarly publications-for in- stance, the Handbuicher of the different subject fields-and also of the trade edi- tions of the German classics. Besides the manifest rarity of important publica- tions, two other factors operate in raising the prices. These are the fear of inflation (Germans remember well the inflation of I923 and the "escape in real values") and
REORGANIZATION OF THE BOOK TRADE IN GERMANY 197 the myth that all pre-Hitler publications can be regarded as "heirlooms of the past" and are therefore worth their weight in gold. Only such a myth (of course entirely unfounded) can explain the fabulous prices which are frequently asked in newspaper advertisements-for instance, a thousand marks for old bound annuals of Kosmos (a well-known popu- lar scientific magazine, subscription price twelve marks), or four hundred marks for Bildersaal deutscher Geschichte (pub- lisher's price thirty marks, obsolete). A price of ten thousand marks for a 1930 edition of the Brockhaus Encyclopedia has frequently been reported; however, the actual sale could never be tracked down. Most second-hand bookstores sell good German fiction at about double the former publisher's pnrce and scholarly publications at four times the peace eval- uation. Prices at auctions have risen ac- cordingly. The first postwar sale (Ham- burg, Hauswedel, March, I946) offered about twelve hundred valuable books, prints, and drawings. All items were sold at about five to ten times their former evaluation. For instance: Brentano, Col- lected Works (I852; first complete edi- tion), Mk. 1,300 (peace price about Mk. 250); the i827 edition of Goethe's works (last edition during the life of the poet), Mk. I,300 (peace price about Mk. 200); Homann, Atlas (Niirnberg, I714), Mk. 8,ooo (peace price about Mk. 300). Prints and drawvings of German artists banned by the Nazis were highly evaluated, Kathe Kollwitz bringing as high as Mk. 750, a small drawing by Corinth, Mk. I,200, and a water color by Klee, Mk. 2,I00. It is the consensus of the experienced German book-dealers that the trend of prices will be downward. Their argument is that the high taxes are taking the sur- plus money out of the consumer's hands and that little will be left for the pur- chase of books. Assuming that inflation can be averted (and it most probably can), this prediction seems to be correct. Most trade books, all publications whose content value has become obsolete, popu- lar editions of German classics-or, in other words, all publications which can be reprinted easily-will lose their pres- ent high market value. However,valuable scholarly standard works, sets of scien- tific periodicals, and scholarly editions of German literature will command a high price for some time to come. THE BOOK-DEALERS ASSOCIATION The reputation of the German book trade as the most efficient organization for the production and distribution of books was largely due to the efforts of the B6rsenverein, the well-known German book-dealers' association. The B6rsen- verein combined to a remarkable degree commercial efficiency, scholarly minute- ness in the bibliographical field, and democratic administration-"democrat- ic," however, in the sense in which the term is applied, not to a New England town meeting, but rather to the Athenian city government in the fifth century B.C. Many statutes which the B6rsenverein had worked out in years of struggle have been accepted as basic regulations by the book-trade associations of most coun- tries. The principle of a fixed publisher's price, the regulation of discounts, the re- lation between publisher and author, in- tellectual property rights vested in au- thor and publisher, prohibition of re- prints without the consent of the rightful owners-all these have served as a model for other nations, just as the German cur- rent bibliography has been regarded as a
198 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY standard for national bibliographies with respect to its up-to-date publications and its exact bibliographical descriptions. The Nazi government abolished the autonomy of the organization and trans- formed it into a tool of the Kulturkam- mer. Such a sudden change would not have been possible if many German book-dealers had not been ardent na- tionalists long before I933 and therefore an all too willing prey to Nazi ideology. The German book trade had been an ef- ficient servant of world scholarship, but it was faithless to the underlying concep- tion without which scholarly undertak- ings become meaningless: respect for human dignity. It has by no means been the intention of the Branch to reconstruct the Boirsen- verein on the level of I932, as an expres- sion of German nationalism. As a matter of fact, any thought of having in Ger- many anything like a world book-trade center has been utterly out of question. An efficient professional organization is desirable in due time, but its growth should be slow so that the conception of democratic responsibility can extend its roots through the entire structure. Every district in the American Zone has its own district association. Dele- gates of the districts have been meeting regularly in Stuttgart (for the first time in the fall of 1945) to discuss common problems and the blueprints for a future B6rsenverein which may grow as some- thing like a federation of the district as- sociations. As representation above the district level runs contrary to basic poli- cy directives, no over-all book-trade or- ganization exists to date. No objection was raised, however, when two officials from the former headquarters of the Borsenverein who came to Wiesbaden in the spring of 1945 wished to open an of- fice and publish a new edition of the Birsenblatl. Dr. Schauer, the licensee of this periodical, moved his office to Frank- furt and made arrangements with the Hessische Landesbibliothek for the pub- lication of a new current bibliography. The publishers agreed to deposit two copies of their new publications at the Hessische Landesbibliothek, one copy to be retained by that library as compensa- tion for editing the bibliography and one copy to be kept for the Deutsche Bu- cherei in Leipzig. DIFFICULTIES OF REORGANIZATION The organization of book-trade ac- tivities in a Germany devastated by modern warfare has been a difficult task in terms of economic connotations, but it is the psychological implications which have made it impossible to find a solu- tion which would be satisfactory from all points of view. The question of how to treat the Germans has had to be an- swered by every member of the Branch (as by every member of Military Gov- ernment) day by day. The problem can- not be pushed aside by adopting some over-all generalizations. The very fact that it has been necessary to grant licenses and registration to a selected group of German applicants has implied the necessity for differentiating between human beings, evaluating personalities. Policy directives differentiate between anti-Fascists, nonpolitical Germans, and members of the Nazi party and similar blacklisted nationalistic or militaristic organizations. Within party membership a difference is made between active and nominal members. Obviously, party membership alone is not sufficient to characterize a personality. For instance, a former Freemason was not eligible for party membership; nevertheless he
REORGANIZATION OF THE BOOK TRADE IN GERMANY might be a paragon of Nazi ideology. On the other hand, there were undoubtedly cases where a harmless citizen was brow- beaten into joining the party. The language difficulties have been al- most insurmountable. It is not language in its philological sense (many members of the Branch speak German fluently) but language as semantics. During the Nazi regime many words received a new meaning which differed widely from the formerly accepted usage. Many incidents can only be explained by the utter lan- guage confusion in the minds of the ap- plicants. What conception of the word "polite- ness" has a man who says to an American official, "I am always astonished to see how polite you are. There is no necessity for you to be polite (Sie haben es doch nicht notig)"? What connotation has the word "Jew," and what meaning has "democ- racy" for men who state in order to prove their "democratic" mentality, "I let a Jew use my telephone in 1938" or "I sold books to Jewish customers as willingly as I sold to Gentiles"? What meaning has "aggression" for a person who criticizes Hitler sharply for starting the war but ends with the state- ment, "It was surely intolerable to Ger- man honor not to throw these dirty Poles out of Danzig"? What implication has "intellectual responsibility" for an editor who tries to excuse his violently antidemocratic edi- torials by saying, "In order to show that I did not believe in the things I had to write, I did not sign these pieces"? Unfortunately, these incidents have not been exceptions but daily occurrences. Party members (membership since I928) earnestly request to be classified as anti- Nazi because they can produce a severe warning by the party issued because of some infringements of party rules. Others want preferred treatment because they stopped paying their monthly party dues in the summer of I944! The human trag- edy lies in the fact that many sincerely believe in the justice of their demands and cannot understand why their argu- ments are not accepted. Some had simply not had the courage to make a clear stand during the Nazi regime. They had joined the party under strong pressure and had even made important conces- sions, but they had done so half-hearted- ly, had therefore never been fully accept- ed by the party hierarchy, had been treated with suspicion, and in some in- stances had been persecuted. But be- cause of their party membership, their concessions and contributions to Nazi ideology, they cannot be classified as anti-Nazis (although some really are), sometimes not even as nominal party members. It can be stated that the Branch has done its very best to render impartial justice in spite of all difficulties. A pub- lisher's license has not been granted if the applicant had been in any way whatso- ever affiliated with the party or its organ- izations or had made concessions to the Goebbels propaganda machine. Excep- tion to this rule has been made only if active anti-Nazi activity could be proved. Books by authors who are com- promised by their former activities for the Nazi regime cannot be published. Scholars who have been cleared by other American agencies-for teaching at uni- versities, for instance-are declared ac- ceptable. It is the policy of the Branch to give first priority of publication to writers who had been barred from pro- fessional activities because of their anti- Nazi ideology.
200 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Nazi books and similar nationalistic and militaristic literature have been im- pounded, with the exception of books in private libraries. The Library of Con- gress Mission in Europe was permitted to select the items they were interested in for distribution among American scholarly libraries through the Co-opera- tive Acquisitions Project. Law 4, which supersedes all previous instructions on the confiscation of Nazi books, provides for the safekeeping of a hundred and fifty copies of each title. The rest are to be pulped; the paper thus gained will be used for the publication of schoolbooks. Faced by such a complex issue as the reconstruction of the German book trade, it has been impossible to avoid mistakes. But the Branch has never failed to keep its two main objectives clearly in mind: to supply the German reading public with books which support the conception of world peace and to promote those German book-dealers who are willing to respect human rights and human dignity.