Latino Librarians on Becoming LIS Educators: An Exploratory Investigation of the Barriers in Recruiting Latino Faculty Denice Adkins Library and Information Science (LIS) schools have produced a limited num- ber of Latino masters in library science (MLS) graduates, but they have not at- tracted them back to pursue doctoral studies and teaching positions. Using a semi-structured interview technique, eight "expert" Latino librarians were in- terviewed for their perspectives on the barriers preventing Latino LIS profes- sionals from pursuing positions as LIS faculty. This exploratory investigation identifies four specific barriers which are perceived as contributing to the lack of Latino LIS faculty: isolation from the academy, ethnocentrism within LIS education, financial concerns, and personal concerns. Introduction In the 2000-2001 academic year, American Library Association (ALA)-accredited library degrees were awarded to 130 Hispanic students.1 Those 130 students constituted less than three percent of the total number of students receiving MLS degrees.2 American Library Association statis- tics from 1998 report that 1.8 percent of academic librarians, 2 percent of school librarians, and 2.95 percent of public librarians were of Hispanic or- igin.3 Schools of library and information science have produced a limited number of Latino MLS graduates; in addition, they have not attracted those students back to pursue doctoral degrees and teaching positions. In the 2000-2001 academic year, only one Hispanic student received a doctoral degree from an LIS school,4 and of the 646 full-time faculty who indicated their ethnicity in the 2001 ALISE Statistical Report, only 19 (2.9 percent) were of Hispanic origin.5 However, the 2000 Decennial Census counted 35 million people in the "Latino or Hispanic" category - over 12 percent of the population.6 While the low numbers of Latino LIS faculty are propor- tionate to the low numbers of Latinos in the profession, both figures are dramatically disproportionate to the numbers of Latinos in the nation. Nonetheless, Latino LIS professionals do exist. REFORMA, The Na- tional Association for Library and Information Services to Latinos and the Spanish-Speaking, had over 900 members in 2000,7 the majority of whom 1 of Education for Library and Information Science, Vol. 45, No. 2- Spring 2004 ISSN: 0748-5786 ©2004 Association for Library and Information Science Education 1 49
1 50 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science About the Author Denice Adkins is Assistant Professor, School of Information Science and Learning Technologies, University of Missouri-Columbia (adkinsde@mis- souri.edu). Ms. received 02/02; accepted 05/02; revised 12/02. were Latino library professionals. REFORMA's position as "the largest and most established" of professional organizations dealing with library service to Latinos8 and its two successful conferences9 have indicated that Latino LIS professionals are committed to their profession and to educat- ing other LIS professionals. What prevents these active, involved librarians from becoming LIS fac- ulty? LIS literature and informal conversations with practitioners suggest reasons including a lack of role models and mentors, insufficient money and time, and a general sense that LIS faculty have little community in- volvement. To answer the question more fully, eight "expert" Latino librar- ians were chosen to be interviewed. These librarians, who were active in their communities and their professions, were interviewed in October 2001 , and their responses illuminate reasons why Latino LIS professionals do not pursue LIS education. Literature Review No research could be found which addresses the issue of why LIS faculty from any ethnic background choose to become faculty. However, there is some research explaining why Latinos have chosen to pursue librarianship. Some of these issues may relate to their desire to pursue doctoral studies. Respondents to Trejo & Lodwick's 1979 survey indicated that working in library jobs and being recruited by librarians were strong factors in their ca- reer choice.10 Hispanic respondents to a subsequent study confirmed that their primary reasons for pursuing a career as a librarian are having a non-minority role model (43 percent), a desire to work in a library (38 per- cent), and having "fall[en] into" a non-professional library job (30 per- cent).11 The personal account of one Latino librarian also supports these reasons. Rodriguez's narrative indicates that he started thinking about li- brarianship as a young adult, under the guidance of a non-minority, same-sex role model. He also had considerable library experience as an in- tern and a page, and a same-sex, same-ethnicity mentor encouraged him to attend library school. He further discusses a social network of librarians who encouraged him, financial aid which allowed him to attend school, the support of his fellow students, and a same-sex, same-ethnicity mentor to provide advice during his early career.12 Current LIS faculty can serve as role models for those interested in doc- toral studies. The profession and the student body, however, are primarily oriented toward a terminal master's degree. McCook and Moen suggest
Latino Librarians on Becoming US Educators 1 51 that for Hispanic students, the location of an LIS school is the highest ranked reason for choosing a program, while the reputation of the faculty is not always an influential factor.13 Doctoral students need to develop strong ties with faculty who respect their research interests. Location may not be the best reason for a potential doctoral student to choose a program. LIS literature has advocated the presence of faculty of color for fostering an ethnically diverse student population at the masters level. "The impor- tance of minority faculty members in predominantly white institutions can- not be overemphasized."14 But the lack of faculty diversity is a problem for not just for LIS - it is acknowledged as a university- wide problem, cross- ing disciplines. In each transition between levels of education - high school to a bachelor's program, bachelor's to master's, and master's to doc- toral - students of color are lost.15 In 1999, 83.4 percent of whites had grad- uated high school, 25.2 percent had completed four or more years of college, and 8.5 percent held advanced degrees. Only 56.1 percent of His- panics had completed high school, 10.9 percent had graduated from four-year colleges, and 3.0 percent held advanced degrees.16 One re- searcher found a 52 percent dropout rate for Hispanic students pursuing graduate education.17 A study of LIS master's students at the University of California, Los Angeles determined that minority students have twice the dropout rate of the total population of students.18 Transitional loss pro- duces smaller and smaller pools of candidates from which Latino doctoral students can be found. Those students who do make it to doctoral study are likely to feel uncom- fortable about pursuing their studies. A study of 953 black, white, and His- panic doctoral students found that students of color were more likely than white students to perceive their institutions as racially discriminatory and had significantly lower grade point averages.19 Another study reports that minority graduate students experience feelings of isolation and alienation, and have trouble building relationships with white faculty.20 No informa- tion has been collected about the feelings of minority doctoral students in LIS, but African American and Hispanic master's-level students have re- ported some incidents of racial insensitivity.21 The lack of role models for minority students may also play a role in the lowered numbers of minority doctoral students. Role models who share a student's ethnic background may help that student to visualize herself in her chosen profession or provide an example for her to follow. A survey of 204 Mexican American and American Indian doctoral students found that faculty role models from the same ethnicity and gender as the student were especially significant for doctoral recipients.22 The importance of same-sex role models is mirrored in LIS literature.23 However, with only 19 LIS faculty identifying themselves as Hispanic, the Latino LIS student is not very likely to find a role model who shares her ethnic background. Even after Latino doctoral faculty have been recruited and supported through the program, they can still be lost in the transition point from re- ceiving their doctorates to taking a position as a member of the teaching
1 52 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science faculty at a college or university. Less than half (42 percent) of Williamson and Fenske's survey population expected to join college faculty after grad- uation.24 Reeling found that only 35 percent of 1990 LIS doctoral recipi- ents intended to teach after earning their doctorates.25 University faculty positions have traditionally been filled by white males; "women faculty are much less satisfied with their positions than their male counterparts. . . . [and minority faculty] feel isolated and unsupported at work."26 Women in particular have responsibilities in the home-child care, house- hold maintenance, and supporting a spouse financially or emotion- ally - which may detract from their ability to meet the demands of the tenure system. A 1993 faculty survey found that female faculty tend to be younger than their male counterparts, with less education and less experi- ence. They spend more time in teaching and service than male faculty, and were less likely to work in research-oriented universities.27 Females are also more likely to teach in female-oriented disciplines28 - like library sci- ence. In fact, the majority of LIS doctoral recipients in the 1980s were fe- male.29 The ALISE Statistical Report indicates that LIS faculty are almost evenly divided between males and females, with the percentage of female faculty gradually increasing over the last ten years.30 In itself, this may limit the presence of Latino faculty. Wheeler suggests that white women tend not to be mentors for ethnic LIS faculty.31 Minority faculty have also found that the academy is not a comfortable place. Minority faculty feel that their student advising and counseling loads are heavier than those of non-minority faculty, plus their pay may be lower, and they face discrimination.32 Black and Hispanic faculty tend to earn less than white faculty, and are less likely to be tenured.33 Beyond the teaching, research, and service normally expected of faculty members, fac- ulty of color also become mentors and supporters of students of color.34 This role, while valuable, takes time away from research productivity. Respondents to a survey of deans and directors indicated that several had recently made "efforts to advertise for minority applicants."35 While the de- mand for Latino LIS doctorate recipients is considerable, the supply is not. Transitional loss rates between levels of education contribute to a low num- ber of Latino candidates in LIS master's programs. Minority LIS students' perceptions of discrimination, combined with a lack of same-ethnicity role models, make them less likely to return for doctoral studies. Those who do return may have seen role models in public or academic library administra- tion, but probably not on LIS school faculty. This diminishes students' per- ceptions of teaching as a viable career path, and they may have some justifiable trepidation of the tenure process. These factors combine to pro- duce very low numbers of Hispanic LIS doctoral students - 13 out of 753 total doctoral students in Fall 200 1.36 Method This project used an exploratory, qualitative methodology. In October
Latino Librarians on Becoming US Educators 1 53 2001, in-depth, semi-structured interviews were conducted with eight La- tino LIS professionals who were active in their fields, involved in LIS is- sues, able to articulate the concerns of Latino librarians generally, and capable of illustrating their own cases. A survey would have restricted re- spondents to short answers chosen by the investigator, while the interview encourages respondents to use their own words, share their experiences, and introduce subjects that the investigator may overlook. Interviews were conducted via telephone, tape recorded, and transcribed; the transcriptions were evaluated for trends and commonalities. In order to preserve their an- onymity, comments are labeled as being provided only by pseudonym: Re- spondent A, Respondent B, etc. Of the eight respondents, six (75 percent) were female and two (25 per- cent) were male. This reflected the larger profession's gender distribu- tion.37 Five were employed as academic librarians. One was employed as a public library manager, and three had previously been employed as public librarians. Two were employed in non-library fields at the time of the inter- views. One respondent was a recent MLS graduate with extensive experi- ence working with Latino communities. The rest had over five years of professional experience, and six had over 15 years of experience. One re- spondent had a doctoral degree, and one was pursuing a doctoral degree. Neither of these had decided to pursue an LIS doctorate. Some of the interviewees had made a commitment to LIS education through involvement in LIS school advisory boards, mentoring, adjunct teaching, and guest lecturing. Respondent A guest-lectured at an LIS school. Respondents C and G served on advisory boards, and Respondent D was active on the advisory board of an LIS education foundation. Re- spondent C mentored LIS students and new librarians, explaining, "Some- body mentored me through all of my programs, and I'm just passing the gift of whatever expertise or help I can share based on my experience." Respon- dent B had served as an adjunct teacher in an LIS school earlier in her ca- reer, and indicated that mentors were crucial in her decision to enroll in a doctoral program. Given the high levels of achievement of all the respon- dents, these results may not be generalizable to every Latino LIS profes- sional. Results Several themes emerge from discussions with Latino LIS professionals which explain a lack of formal commitment to LIS education. Themes of isolation from academe, ethnocentrism within LIS education, financial concerns, and personal concerns ware evident when discussing LIS educa- tion and teaching with these respondents. Isolation from the Academy. Respondents named several individual problems which, when taken as a whole, speak to a larger one: a perceived isolation of the academy which separates LIS faculty from LIS profession- als, their universities, and their communities. Respondent A noted a lack of
1 54 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science interdepartmental relationships between LIS programs and Chicano stud- ies or bilingual education programs, while Respondent F noted the lack of relationship between the Association for Library and Information Science Education (ALISE) and the ethnic caucuses of ALA. "I can't think of the last time I noticed somebody from a library school, a faculty member, at- tend any of our [ethnic caucus] meetings. They have their conference be- forehand, and then they leave just as we're starting to get there," she said, referring to the ALISE conference taking place before the ALA Midwinter meeting. Respondent E echoed the common concern that LIS faculty are disconnected from libraries, especially public library branches in multicul- tural neighborhoods. Respondent B said, "LIS schools really need to reach the community, get the support of the other Latino organizations in local area. ... I think the community has always been a strong part of who we [Latinos] are." When asked if she had seen LIS schools involved in community action or out- reach, Respondent B answered with a definite "No." Respondent D had to think for a full minute before coming up with an example of an LIS profes- sor active in the community, and Respondent F said about a particular school, "The connection to the community wasn't there. . . . There's a lot going on, on campus, that impacted minority students, and there never was much participation from the [LIS] school. All of [the action] sort of just went right by it." Several respondents indicated that they would need to have an invita- tion - an active solicitation - before they would presume to approach an LIS school. When Respondent A was asked how LIS schools could get committed Latino librarians like herself to teach as adjuncts, she re- sponded, "I think you just have to ask. We're not in the education world, so that's out of our experience. . . . If you can recognize librarians who know the literature and can do this, you just have to ask." Respondent D said, "If you wanted to get more involvement, maybe identify professionals who would contribute to a curriculum, or maybe just to a class. I guess then you would need to invite them, to see if they would be interested in participat- ing." When asked how LIS schools could encourage more Latino profes- sionals into teaching, Respondent G replied, "As for adjunct instructors, [schools] have no excuse. I don't even see them trying. ... I don't seem them going around to people and asking them, 'would you be an adjunct in- structor?' And as far as getting the doctorate, that doesn't happen either. I don't see people trying to get Latino librarians to get their doctorates." Re- spondent C added, "I don't think many Latino librarians know about doing this, and if they do, I think they probably think their hands are full with pro- fessional activities I don't think library schools are that proactive in try- ing to get people with an ethnic background to be part of their [educational] programs." Respondent B, who was earning her doctorate at the time of the inter- view, mentioned a lack of knowledge about the requirements of doctoral studies. "We need to do more with working with how to do research ... we
Latino Librarians on Becoming LIS Educators 1 55 need to do a lot more in the profession to talk about, what are the qualifica- tions for a faculty member? How do I prepare myself to become a faculty member? . . . If you're going to have adjunct professors, what do you want in an adjunct? How do you recruit them? . . . What's the process for reten- tion, promotion, tenure? Do I need to publish? If so, how do I increase my writing skills? How do I increase my research skills? What does it take to become an LIS teaching professional?" Respondent D said, "I don't know whether Latino librarians think of [getting a doctorate] as an option, unless someone stimulated them into thinking that this is an option I don't think I ever gave it much thought. . . . I don't know what would encourage people to do that option other than to make it more visible. Maybe there's a [conference] program that those who have earned a doctorate can do, where the option becomes more visible [to Latino LIS professionals]." Ethnocentrism within LIS Education. Some participants talked about the lack of ethnic representation in their experiences with LIS education, while others discussed insensitivity toward students. This perception of ethnocentrism becomes a barrier to Latinos' participation in doctoral edu- cation. Said one respondent, "Our experiences, even when we were in [li- brary school], were so intimidating that we don't go back." Several respondents were disappointed with the low numbers of Latino faculty. Respondent A commented that the number of Latino faculty was "really, really terrible, and what's really awful is that library schools, they're not even fazed by this." Respondent H indicated that "more Latino educators and professors with real passion and expertise" would draw in- creased numbers of MLS students. She suggested offering "Lecturer, in- structor, and assistant professor status to experienced Latino librarians who are willing to teach. Right now I could name a few that could be teach- ing from their experience in the field Students getting their MLS should be recruited to continue on and become professors." One of the respondents told of her experience serving on an LIS school advisory board, "I'm the only voice in the advisory meetings that even brings [the need for La- tino faculty] up. It's really, really difficult when you're one voice." Re- spondent B agreed that "the hiring of faculty, diverse faculty, is really critical." However, there was a sense from respondents that LIS education would not be a comfortable career alternative. Respondent G said, "Particularly at the professorship level, the library school does not look like a place for us [Latinos]." Having followed the careers of several multicultural LIS fac- ulty, Respondent F concluded that, "There are very, very few [LIS] faculty who are tenured faculty or seem to be supported by the schools. . . . The schools seem to get away with it." She noted a distinct lack of support for multicultural studies in LIS education, and a move toward a more technol- ogy-oriented, less people-oriented profession. She said, "I thought about [getting a doctoral degree], and every so often still think about it. I would be more interested in working in a library school, but I just really don't see a
1 56 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science fit, what with what's going on with library education in the last several years." Some respondents noted cultural barriers which would prevent students from getting their MLS degrees and dissuade them from pursuing further education. When describing her experience with a specific school, Respon- dent A said, "You've got to have a really thick skin to be able to put up with the attitudes When I was in library school, you so much as try to do co- operative learning and you were called a leech; you were chastised for working in groups." She also noted that she had spoken to a woman who had been discouraged from studying library use within her own ethnic com- munity. Respondent E said that he had observed a situation in which a fac- ulty member consistently mispronounced a Latino student's name. "Things like that, although they seem like little things, they were enough to drive him away from the [LIS] program. . . . For anyone who's done ESL teach- ing, it's obvious: one of the things you can do to make the classroom more welcoming is to be cognizant of not only cultural factors, but you know, getting someone's name right." Respondent F described a situation in which a Latina student was getting lost in the system at a library school, "The whole thing was just so artificial. The school acknowledged, without really acknowledging, that they had nothing for this woman in their school and that there was no one who could help her." Respondent B noted that, "If [Latino students] don't get the op- portunity for mentoring, [or a sense that the faculty] really understand their cultural differences, there's a great opportunity for people to drop out." Several respondents felt that the lack of ethnic diversity in the curriculum dissuades Latino students from pursuing doctoral curriculum. "One thing LIS educators can do, if they have a [goal of] recruiting more Latinos into the field, is including Latino studies, infusing that into the whole curricu- lum," said Respondent G. Respondent H said, "Courses in collection devel- opment, book selection, outreach services, programming especially designed to address the needs of the ethnic minorities would be a start." Ac- cording to Respondent A, "[Library schools] do nothing with bilingual ed- ucation, don't even try to understand the issues. . . . The one course that approaches libraries as a whole, approaches libraries from a management perspective and not from an outreach perspective. Why don't we have any courses on outreach or programming?" Respondent C said, "I think that serving multicultural communities, un- derstanding different ethnic groups, all of that should be integrated or dif- fused throughout the curriculum." Respondent E suggested that professors should be "willing to devote their time in class to talking about language is- sues or cultural issues in the delivery of information services If profes- sors were willing to make that part of the meat and potatoes of their course, that might just strike a chord with students who are from [culturally di- verse] backgrounds." Financial Concerns: Respondents were very concerned about the cost of doctoral education. Financial concerns were mentioned by a majority of in-
Latino Librarians on Becoming LIS Educators 1 57 terviewees, with a definite indication that increased financial aid was nec- essary to attract people to doctoral programs. Respondent G said, "Latino students want to do something meaningful. They're not particularly at- tracted to corporate America, but they have financial burdens that need to be addressed." Said Respondent A, "In order for you to go to graduate school, you can't just have your tuition paid and not have any kind of in- come. . . . There's not enough financial aid out there, and more and more, Latinos shy away from [taking out educational] loans." Respondent B said, "Oftentimes economics plays a significant part. [Students] have to go back and work to provide help for the family ... so that takes a longer bit of time to graduate. . . . [Financial aid] is critical." Referring to a Latina librarian who was earning her Ph.D., Respondent F said, "She's unusual in being able to do it. It's very expensive." Time is also a critical concern to working professionals. Respondent D said, "You know, going to school and getting the doctorate is some- thing that will require time. . . . When most people think of the doctoral de- gree, they think of a lot of time and energy." Respondent B said, "I'm working on my doctorate ... I went every Thursday, Friday, Saturday, and Sunday for eight hours, once a month. The class was only four days a month, but it was intense It enabled me to work full time and still go to school." Respondents also considered the expense of career advancement that might be jeopardized by spending too much time on doctoral studies. "[La- tino librarians] probably think that [the benefit of participating in LIS edu- cation is] more indirect than being on a committee, that serving on that committee would help them in their job or at their home library," said Re- spondent C. Respondent D added, "It could be financial, where you're working very hard to get your MLS degree and then working for a living, you get immersed in a career track where your [advancement] is based very much on a work experience type of exposure." Personal and Family Concerns: Personal and family concerns were least mentioned, and considering the success of this group, clearly they have found ways to work around personal and family concerns to further their education. However, Respondent B noted that for first-generation college students, families are not able to be as supportive as they would like to be. She added, "If you're the first to go to college, sometimes your family does- n't really understand what's involved." In addition, the time commitment necessary for completing doctoral coursework means that less time is available for personal and family com- mitments. Respondent A said, "People like me, who are ready to teach ... I would have to go back to school and get a Ph.D., at age 51 - It's too intim- idating, starting all over again, having to tackle a totally different animal, with tenure and all that." Even younger people are daunted by the idea of the time commitment for doctoral studies. Respondent G said, "I recently have really developed an interest in [pursuing a doctoral degree]; I think it would be great to be a library school educator, but I've got to tell you, I'm
1 58 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science already 37 years old. And that can be a barrier, the age at which we come to librarianship." Respondent D said, "I don't know whether many of us even consider the doctorate degree. . . . It's the [MLS] that gives you an opportunity to enter the profession. I don't know whether there's much of a focus or outreach for people to think . . . that there's still that doctorate degree there. We're all ea- ger to just find some work and begin a career." Implications for US Educators and Librarians The literature suggests that transitional loss rates, family responsibilities, and a lack of role models or mentors are barriers for producing faculty of color. The Latino LIS professionals interviewed here have indicated that other potential barriers include the isolation of faculty from the library community, ethnocentric attitudes, and a lack of communication with LIS faculty. The Latino LIS professionals interviewed herein have suggested that communication is key to helping prospective Latino faculty overcome these barriers. The first and easiest way to increase the production of Latino doctoral students is to work with master's students already enrolled in LIS pro- grams. If faculty do nothing else, they can at least learn to pronounce stu- dents' names correctly and respect their cultural differences. Educators may wish to redesign some assignments to take advantage of group work and different learning styles. When potential candidates for doctoral stud- ies are identified, they should be given the opportunity to develop their writing and research skills. Faculty can provide students with the opportu- nity to do real research within their communities. When students turn in as- signments, faculty should be willing to provide them with meaningful feedback that will help them develop their skills. When students know what goes into a good research paper, they are better able to produce good re- search papers. Potential candidates should be allowed to think of them- selves as researchers who can contribute to the LIS knowledge base. LIS educators also need to interact with LIS practitioners, to foster con- nections between the two camps and also to identify candidates for recruit- ment to doctoral studies who are already practicing professionals. Alumni recruitment campaigns help to keep the idea of future doctoral study among librarians. In keeping with the suggestion of one of the respondents, a re- cruitment campaign should tell prospective doctoral students exactly what is involved in doctoral education, from the initial entry exams to the de- fense. The Association for Library and Information Science Education, in pursuing liaisons with other LIS organizations, should consider partnering with REFORMA (The National Association for the Promotion of Library and Information Services to Latinos and the Spanish-speaking) and other ethnic caucuses of the American Library Association. A partnership be- tween ALISE and REFORMA would serve both groups by broadening the perspectives of each.
Latino Librarians on Becoming US Educators 1 59 LIS educators should also communicate the excitement and joy to be had in research and teaching. Many Latino LIS professionals are already quali- fied to be adjunct faculty, available for teaching classes in basic or special- ized subjects, and serving as role models to Latino students - but they do not wish to put themselves forward without an invitation. Others want to pursue doctoral degrees, but have not been encouraged to do so. A word of encouragement from deans of LIS programs would suggest to these profes- sionals that they might contribute to LIS education. But without that word of encouragement, Latino LIS professionals persist in thinking that LIS ed- ucation is not an environment for them. Flexible class schedules are essential, as most Latino librarians are un- able to quit their jobs and pursue full-time doctoral studies. While some full-time study will likely be necessary to complete a doctoral degree, a program can be designed which provides the least amount of inconve- nience and hardship to the student. A support system for doctoral students of color is necessary, and not just to provide financial support. Writing and research advice, teaching experience, and social networking should be pro- vided. A community service component might be added, to connect Latino resident students to the type of cultural environments they might have left behind. Deans and directors indicated that they have advertised for ethnic minority faculty and not found them; it is for deans and directors to create those faculty. They can work to alleviate the Latino doctoral student's re- source-crunch, by aggressively pursuing financial aid resources and also by providing a support network of faculty and other students who share the same concerns. The dean's attitude toward ethnic and linguistic diversity is communi- cated to the rest of the faculty. Latino doctoral students should view deans and faculty as approachable, rather than formidable. A feeling of accep- tance within their departments may encourage Latino doctoral students to persist in those studies. In addition, deans of LIS programs can insulate stu- dents and faculty from ethnocentric attitudes in other parts of the univer- sity. The responses gathered here suggest that Latino LIS professionals have a negative perception of LIS education. Before they are able to recruit many Latino faculty into doctoral programs, LIS faculty will have to change those perceptions. The current LIS faculty need to open the door for Latino LIS professionals to become involved with professional education, and in- vite them to become the next generation of LIS faculty. Latino librarians need to know that their background and knowledge is respected, that they have something to contribute to LIS research, and that the commitment to having a diverse LIS faculty is not just "lip service." Of the struggle to re- cruit and retain librarians of color, Kravitz writes, "If as a profession we want to continue to recruit and retain talented librarians of color, then we need to first acknowledge the barriers to advancement and second and most importantly, work to eliminate them."38 This is equally true for recruiting and retaining Latino LIS faculty.
1 60 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science References and Notes 1. The terms "Latino/Latina" and "Hispanic" are used interchangeably in this paper. "His- panic" is a term assigned by the U.S. government to identify all persons with origins from a Spanish-speaking country, while the term "Latino" receives more acceptance by certain members of the group. The term "LIS school" is used to indicate an ALA-accredited school which awards the Master of Library Science degree or its equivalent. Some respondents use the term "library school." 2. Evelyn H. Daniel and Jerry D. Saye, eds., "Table II-3-a, Degrees and Certificates Awarded by Gender and Ethnic Origin, 2000-2001," in Library and Information Science Education Statistical Report. Available at: http://ils.unc.edu/ALISE/2002/Students/Ta- ble%20II-3-a.htm. Accessed November 22, 2002. 3. Mary Jo Lynch, "Answers to Some Basic Questions about Library Human Resources," Li- brary Personnel News 15, no. 1 (Winter/Spring 2002): 1-5. 4. Daniel and Saye, "Table II-3-a, Degrees and Certificates Awarded by Gender and Ethnic Origin, 2000-2001." 5. Evelyn H. Daniel and Jerry D. Saye, eds., "Table 1-17, Ethnic Background of Full-Time Faculty in Schools Reporting These Data, January 1, 2001," in Library and Information Science Education Statistical Report. Available at: http://ils.unc.edu/ALISE/2001/fac- ulty/Table%20I-17.htm. Accessed November 22, 2002. 6. Profiles of General Demographic Characteristics: 2000 Census of Population and Housing (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Census Bureau, 2001), 1. 7. Norman Oder, "REFORMA Forges Forward," Library Journal 125, no. 6 (October 1, 2000): 46-48. 8. Gilda Baeza, "The Evolution of Educational and Public Library Services to Span- ish-Speaking Children," in Library Services for Hispanic Children, Adela Artola Allen, ed. (Phoenix, AZ: Oryx Press, 1987), 3-11. 9. Oder, "REFORMA Forges Forward;" and Norman Oder, "REFORMA Comes of Age," Li- brary Journal 121, no 6 (October 1, 1996): 38^0. 1 0. Arnulfo D. Trejo and Kathleen L. Lodwick, "Needed: Hispanic Librarians- A Survey of Li- brary Policies," Wilson Library Bulletin 53 (1978): 259-66. 1 1 . Lois Buttlar and William Caynon, "Recruitment of Librarians into the Profession: The Mi- nority Perspective," Library and Information Science Research 14 (1992): 259-80. 12. Ronald Rodriguez, "Library School Education in Retrospect: One Latino Graduate's View," Journal of Library Administration 1 1, no. 7>-\ (1989): 223-29. 13. Kathleen de la Peña McCook and William E. Moen, "Patterns of Program Selection: Ranked Factors in the Choice of a Master's Degree Program in Library and Information Studies," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 33, no. 3 (Summer 1992): 212-25. 14. Herman L. Totten, "Ethnic Diversity in Library Schools: Completing the Education Cy- cle," Texas Library Journal 76, no. 1 (Spring 2000): 16-19. 15. Alexander W. Astin, Minorities in American Higher Education (San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass, 1982), 51. 16. U. S. Census Bureau, Statistical Abstract of the United States: 2000 (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 2001), 157-58. 17. Astin, Minorities in American Higher Education, ill. 1 8 . Donald O. Case and John V. Richardson, "Predictors of Student Performance with Empha- sis on Gender and Ethnic Determinants," Journal of Education for Library and Informa- tion Science 42, no. 3 (Winter 1990): 163-182. 19. Michael T. Nettles, "Success in Doctoral Programs: Experiences of Minority and White Students," American Journal of Education 98, no. 4 (August 1990): 494-522. 20. Beatriz Chu Clewell, Retention of Black and Hispanic Doctoral Students. Part I: Personal
Latino Librarians on Becoming US Educators 161 and Background Characteristics of Persisting and Nonpersisting Black and Hispanic Graduate Students (Princeton, N.J.: Educational Testing Service, March 1987). 2 1 . Buttlar and Caynon, "Recruitment of Librarians into the Profession," 275 ; Herman L. Tot- ten, "A Survey and Evaluation of Minority Programs in Selected Graduate Library Schools," Journal for Education in Librarianship 18 (Summer 1977): 18-34; and Helen E. Williams, "Black Students in Predominantly White Library Schools," Journal of Educa- tion for Library and Information Science 27, no. 2 (Winter 1987): 139-47. 22. Madeline J. Williamson and Robert H. Fenske, "Factors Related to Academic Outcomes of Mexican American and American Indian Students in Doctoral Programs" (paper presented at the annual meeting of the Association for the Study of Higher Education, Portland, Ore., November 1^1, 1990). 23. Jill Moriearty and Jane Robbins-Carter, "Role Models in Library Education: Effects on Women's Careers," Library Trends 34 (Fall 1985): 323-41. 24. Williamson and Fenske, "Factors Related to Academic Outcome," 29. 25. Patricia G. Reeling, "Doctorate Recipients in Library Science: How They Compare with Doctorate Recipients in Other Disciplines," Journal of Education for Library and Informa- tion Science 33, no. 4 (Fall 1992): 311-29. 26. Martha W. Tack and Carol L. Patitu, Faculty Job Satisfaction: Women and Minorities in Peril (Washington, D.C.: ERIC Clearinghouse on Higher Education, September 1992), 2. 27. Michael T. Nettles, L. W. Perna, and E. M. Bradburn, "Salary, Promotion, and Tenure Sta- tus of Minority and Women Faculty in U.S. Colleges and Universities," Education Statis- tics Quarterly 2, no. 2 (Summer 2000): 94-96. 28. Tack and Patitu, Faculty Job Satisfaction, 1. 29. Reeling, "Doctorate Recipients in Library Science," 320. 30. Evelyn H. Daniel and Jerry D. Saye, eds., "Table 1-3, Male-Female Ratio of Full-Time Fac- ulty, 1991-1992 to 2000-2001," in Library and Information Science Education Statistical Report. Available at: http://ils.unc.edu/ALISE/2001/faculty/Table%20I-3.htm. Accessed November 30, 2002. 31. Maurice B. Wheeler, "Recruitment, Retention, and Tenuring of African American Fac- ulty," Culture Keepers III: Making Global Connections, Conference Proceedings of the 3rd National Conference of African American Librarians, July 31 -August 3, 1997 (Newark, NJ: Black Caucus of the American Library Association, 1999), 260. 32. Tack and Patitu, Faculty Job Satisfaction, 2. 33. Nettles, Perna, and Bradburn, "Salary, Promotion, and Tenure Status," 94. 34. E. J. Josey, "The Challenges of Cultural Diversity in the Recruitment of Faculty and Stu- dents from Diverse Backgrounds," Journal of Education for Library and Information Sci- ence 34, no. 4 (Fall 1993): 302-11; Totten, "Ethnic Diversity in Library Schools;" and Herman L. Totten, "Perspectives on Minority Recruitment of Faculty for Schools of Li- brary and Information Science," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 33, no. 1 (Winter 1992): 46-54. 35. Daniel Callison and Carol L. Tilley, "Descriptive Impressions of the Library and Informa- tion Education Evolution of 1988-1998 as Reflected in Job Announcements, ALISE Descriptors, and New Course Titles," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 42, no. 3 (Summer 2001): 181-99. 36. Evelyn H. Daniel and Jerry D. Saye, eds., "Table II-4-a, Enrollment (Number) by Gender and Ethnic Origin, Fall 2001," in Library and Information Science Education Statistical Report. Available at: http://ils.unc.edu/ALISE/2002/Students/Table%20II-4-a.htm. Ac- cessed November 22, 2002. 37. Mary Jo Lynch, "Answers to Some Basic Questions about Library Human Resources," 4. 38. Rhonda Rios Kravitz, "Battling the Adobe Ceiling: Barriers to Professional Advancement for Academic Librarians of Color," in Library Services to Latinos: An Anthology, Salvador Guerena, ed. (Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland, 2000), 28-37.