A UTILITARIAN CASE FOR INTELLECTUAL FREEDOM IN LIBRARIES Tony Doyle' The article begins with an outline of the history of censorship and intellec- tual and expressive freedom in American libraries, chiefly from the last quar- ter of the nineteenth century until the Social Responsibility movement of the late 1960s and early 1970s. Discussion of the two main types of ethical theory, utilitarianism and deontology, is next. Then the deontological posi- tion on intellectual freedom is presented in the context of its theory of rights. The discussion of deontology is followed by a utilitarian criticism of the deontological defense of intellectual freedom. Then a utilitarian defense of intellectual freedom is offered and applied to libraries. The article con- cludes by arguing that, even though in theory utilitarianism would counte- nance some censorship, in practice the utilitarian will support complete in- tellectual freedom. It is maintained that libraries have a special role to play in promoting unconditional intellectual freedom. Introduction To make a case for unrestricted intellectual and expressive freedom is to make a case against all forms of censorship. The case is a moral one because it defends certain conduct as right and endorses it as the conduct that ought to be followed. As Diana Woodward points out, "Censorship becomes an ethical issue when there is some 'good' rea- son for censoring that is set in opposition to a 'good' reason for not censoring" [1, p. 5]. This article will consider two different arguments in favor of intellectual freedom and against censorship, one a rights- based or deontological position defended by David Ward [2], the other a utilitarian position roughly followingJohn Stuart Mill's On Liberty [3]. This article will endorse the latter, maintaining that libraries have a special role to play in promoting intellectual freedom and as bulwarks 1. Reference librarian, Hunter College Library, 695 Park Avenue, New York, New York 10021; Telephone 212-7724181; Fax 212-772-4142; E-mail tdoyle@shiva.hunter.cuny.edu. [Libraiy Quarterly, vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 44-71] ? 2001 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-2519/2001/7101-0009$02.00 44
INTELLECTUAL FREEDOM 45 against the censor. "Censorship" here will be understood to be any deliberate impediment on the expression of or access to any ideas or images, "intellectual (or expressive) freedom" to be the freedom to publish or have access to any ideas or images. By way of background; I would first like to survey the evolution of American librarians' and the American Library Association's (ALA) position with regard to cen- sorship. American Libraries and Censorship: Historical Background Those not familiar with the history of library censorship in the United States might imagine that the ALA and prominent American librarians have always opposed censorship and championed intellectual freedom. The ALA's position today, as officially expressed in the "Library Bill of Rights" [4] and "The Freedom to Read" articles [5] in The Intellectual Freedom Manual [6], and its statement of professional ethics with regard to these issues, is extremely liberal, although this position was not al- ways the case: the spirit of Mill was a long time coming to the ALA and to this country's leading librarians. Witness the opening of Judith F. Krug's and James A. Harvey's "ALA and Intellectual Freedom: A His- torical Overview," which appears in the fifth (1996) edition of the ALA's Intellectual Freedom Manual: "At the outset, two myths can be dis- pelled, namely, that intellectual freedom in libraries is a tradition and that intellectual freedom has always been a major, if not the major, part of the foundation of library service in the United States. Both myths, assumed by many librarians, are grounded in the belief that librarians support a static conception of intellectual freedom. Nothing, however, could be further from the truth" [7, p. xix; see also 8, p. 95]. Evelyn Geller, writing over a generation ago, agrees: "In all these [recent] discussions, the concept of intellectual freedom has been so much taken for granted as a self-evident truth that we scarcely realize that the idea, far from being an eternal principle, has only been present in librarianship in a significant way for a little more than a generation" [9, p. 1365]. In fact, there has been considerable change in how librarians think of intellectual freedom since the ALA was founded in 1876. A brief survey of some hoary examples should be enough to convince the reader that, far from taking the lead in the battle for intellectual free- dom, until the early decades of the twentieth century, prominent Amer- ican librarians routinely engaged in a rearguard action against intellec- tual freedom, advocating paternalistic censorship. The debate did not center on whether there ought to be library censorship but rather on
46 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY how much and what kind. As Ronald Heckart points out, "What we would regard as censorship had a positive value for [American] librari- ans in the stewardship era [that is, from the earliest days of public li- braries until late 1930s]. Their duty was to promote books that would uplift readers and to suppress books that would do readers harm" [10, p. 494]. Librarians then generally conceived their mission to be "the elevation of taste and the development of skills" [11, p. 283] along with "improving manners, and teaching virtue and good citizenship" [12, p. 315], and that meant seeing that their collections were free of "improper" books [9, p. 1365]. The librarian, as Jan Dee Fujimoto points out, "was the 'apostle of culture' or the 'missionary of literature.' His chief reason for being was to uplift the masses beyond their narrow daily perspective, to 'better' them" [13, p. 17]. Fujimoto proceeds to maintain that the battle against fiction in libraries that was waged in the second half of the nineteenth century "was largely a recognition of the librarians' duty not to provide books that might incite crime or immorality" [13, p. 17]. For instance, in the mid-1870s, William Freder- ick Poole, later president of the ALA, argued that librarians were re- sponsible for ensuring that there were no "immoral and false" novels in their collections: "The librarian who would allow an immoral novel in his library for circulation would be as culpable as the manager of a picture gallery who should have an indecent picture on his walls" [quoted in 9, p. 1365]. In 1885, F. B. Perkins of the San Francisco Free Public Library echoed Poole. According to John Swan, Perkins was "expressing the dominant sentiment of the profession when he wrote, 'I say that a Free Public Library has no business to furnish licen- tious, immoral, or vulgar books.... A Free Public Library is an educa- tional institution.... Its first requisite is, therefore, that it should be useful-should do good; its office as to amusement is of very minor importance. The business of teaching immorality it ought not to prac- tice at all'" [14, pp. 3-4]. This conception of librarianship continued into the early twentieth century. Witness, for example, the following excerpt from Arthur Bostwick's 1908 ALA presidential address, "The Librarian as Censor": "'Some are born great, some achieve greatness, some have greatness thrust upon them.' It is in this way that the librar- ian has become a censor of literature.... Books that distinctly com- mend what is wrong, that teach how to sin and how pleasant sin is, sometimes with and sometimes without the added sauce of impropri- ety, are increasingly popular, tempting the author to imitate them, their publishers to produce, the bookseller to exploit. Thank Heaven they do not tempt the librarian" [quoted in 7, p. xxii].2 2. For more examples, see [7; 8, p. 3; 15, p. 512; and 16, p. 120].
INTELLECTUAL FREEDOM 47 Libraries have also been used as forums, both for political indoctrina- tion and propaganda. For instance, Herbert Putnam, librarian of Con- gress, 1899-1939, and ALA president, 1898 and 1906, opined that "Li- braries are progressive in many things, but conservative when it concerns morals and social order." He urged librarians to "use their influence in counterbalancing the revolutionary tendency of the age" [17, p. 99]. As for propaganda, Wayne Wiegand, in his "An Active Instru- ment for Propaganda". The American Public Library during World War I, points out that, during the First World War, "in public libraries across the country, librarians quietly but willingly pulled from their shelves any title that might raise suspicions of disloyalty" [8, p. 6]. It is not surprising that censors generally targeted materials either written in German or deemed pro-German, along with antiwar materials [8, pp. 6 and 88-95]. Despite some opposition by librarians to wartime censor- ship [8, pp. 89-102], the profession, claims Wiegand, "for the most part ... did not resist and in fact willingly, though quietly, participated in the campaign to rid their shelves of disloyal or seditious material" [8, p. 94]. Concludes Wiegand, "when viewed from the perspective of the late twentieth century, the American public library community clearly failed to resist censorship during World War I" [8, p. 94]. There were signs in the 1920s that the ALA's position on intellectual freedom was beginning to warp into something like its familiar form [7, p. xxi]. The idea that libraries should provide access to all kinds of ideas, all viewpoints, began to gain currency. Says David Lincove, "Growing numbers of librarians struggled for greater democracy in library management and greater freedom to provide the public access to books and periodicals, even if they included controversial ideas on politics and society. Freedom, rather than paternalistic protection and guidance, began to take root" [15, p. 512]. The new theme was sounded in 1930 by George Bowerman, who a dozen years earlier, in his capacity as director of the Washington, D.C. Public Library, had "removed German works from the shelves and forced patrons to come to the circulation desk to request them" [8, p. 108]. Bowerman now held that the public library "is not an institution for the inculcation of standardized ideas, and it is not afraid of new ideas, new art forms, new literature. It stands for free opinion and to that end it supplies material on both sides of every controversial question of human inter- est" [quoted in 15, p. 512]. Other leading librarians of the 1930s, for example Gretchen Garrison and Bernice Hodges, made similar ap- peals, Hodges paying particular attention to the important role that an uncensored library should play in a healthy democracy [15, pp. 512- 13]. All were soundly rejecting the "librarian as censor" model de- fended, for example, by Herbert Putnam and Arthur Bostwick; all, as
48 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY we will see below, were making a fundamentally Millian point against censorship [see 15, pp. 512, 516]A. The preceding suggests that censorship pressure has tended to come from the right, from those who feel that their values-political, reli- gious, or sexual-are threatened by new ideas or forms of expression, and it has. However, in the late 1960s and early 1970s, an attack on intellectual freedom sprang from the left with the so-called Social Re- sponsibility movement. Says Ralph E. McCoy: "During the late 1960s and early 1970s the historic meaning of intellectual freedom was chal- lenged by an aggressive section [of the ALA] that supported the advo- cacy concept under which libraries would play an active role in provid- ing materials that would promote certain social goals" [19, p. 114]. The movement challenged the idea that the mission of the library is to represent all points of view equally, that libraries and librarians should be neutral with regard to the leading social issues of the day. Instead its leaders urged that libraries take a stand against, for example, the Vietnam War, racism, or sexism and that the collection support this orientation. David Berninghausen, a longtime leading promoter of intellectual freedom in libraries [see 18, for example, pp. 3, 33, and 52], took on the Social Responsibility movement in 1972, offering two arguments. First, according to Louise S. Robbins, he appealed to librarians' profes- sional responsibility and to the importance of retaining the unity of the ALA: "Defining librarianship in terms of 'social responsibility' to take stands on various social issues ... would not only lead to the com- promise of the library profession's first obligation to make available all kinds of speech-even the most unpopular-but would also lead to a fragmentation of the [American Library] Association" [18, p. 159]. Berninghausen also condemned the Social Responsibility movement as undemocratic to the extent that it would deprive citizens of access to all points of view, access to which is needed to make informed deci- sions about which policies to endorse and which candidates to support. To wit, "unless men have access to all varieties of expression as to the facts, theories, and the alternative solution to these problems, they will be unable to apply their powers of reason toward their resolution" [20, 3. Libraries continued to feel political pressure to censor after World War II. For instance, as a result of McCarthyism in the late 1940s and early 1950s, public libraries came under pressure to control procommunist or "subversive" materials. The solution was often to label such material. But the ALA struck back, offering its statement on labeling in 1951 on the grounds that no reasonable criteria for subversive material could be promulgated and that labeling implies an endorsement of certain ideas by the library. The ALA's state- ment denounced labeling as a "censor's tool," calculated "to prejudice the reader" [18, p. 52].
INTELLECTUAL FREEDOM 49 p. 3675]. Librarians are professionally obliged to see that all points of view are represented in their libraries. But defending positions on spe- cific issues is "outside [librarians'] professional competence" [20, p. 3679]. That librarians should see that materials in the library serve some social cause is at odds with their professional responsibility to "maintain as high a degree of impartiality and neutrality as is humanly possible ... [and] to build balanced collections representing all points of view on controversial issues, regardless of their personal convictions or moral beliefs" [20, p. 3679]. In short, Social Responsibility would force libraries to cease striving to maintain free access to all points of view [20, p. 3680]. The ALA's Position Today In 1939, the ALA finally promulgated the "Library's Bill of Rights" [4]. It was, as Krug and Harvey point out, "the precursor to the pres- ent" Library Bill of Rights, "the profession's basic statement on intel- lectual freedom involving library materials" [7, p. xxiii]. The original document has been modified five times since (1948, 1951, 1961, 1967, and 1980) [21, pp. 87-88]. Today, Krug and Harvey state, the "Library Bill of Rights" is meant to "provide principles upon which libraries may stand to oppose censorship and promote intellectual freedom" [7, p. xxv]. The other important official statement of the ALA is "The Freedom to Read" [5]; its first version was approved in 1953, and it was most recently revised in 1991. The statement has been subsequently en- dorsed by numerous other organizations, including the American Civil Liberties Union, People for the American Way, the American Booksell- ers Association, and the Association of American University Presses [2, p. 132]. It is meant to be a more elaborate defense of intellectual free- dom than the terse Library Bill of Rights. It features the argument for intellectual freedom offered by Berninghausen above. The argument, which takes for granted that democracy is the most desirable form of government, goes in full like this: The decisions about which laws should be on the books and which policies should be adopted rest ultimately, in a democracy, with the electorate. For the laws and poli- cies that citizens indirectly endorse (through their elected representa- tives) to be the best possible the votes citizens cast on election day must be well informed. This view in turn demands that they have access to the broadest possible array of ideas; it also demands that they be able to express whatever ideas they hold dear. In short, democracy demands complete intellectual freedom. As Krug and Harvey put it, "To stifle
50 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY every nonconformist idea at birth would mark the end of the demo- cratic process. Furthermore, only through the constant activity of weighing and selecting can the democratic mind attain the strength demanded by times like these. We need to know not only what we be- lieve but why we believe it" [22, p. 129; see also pp. 3 and 30]. Krug and Harvey argue that censorship deprives the public of this opportu- nity and in so doing undermines democracy [22, p. 129]. Libraries must see that users have unfettered access to all ideas, however "unor- thodox or unpopular" some may be [17, pp. 127, 129]. Finally, no discussion of the current ALA position would be complete without mention of Lester Asheim, whose work on censorship begin- ning in the 1950s has attracted considerable attention in the library literature. According to Asheim, the librarian should seek to promote "liberty of thought" and to "multiply points of view" [23, p. 98]. Ash- eim's ideal is unbiased selection: "What the collection reflects is the librarian's view of what readers and users want and need, whether the librarian likes it or not. But an unbiased collection is precisely what many censors disapprove of" [24, p. 180]. The unbiased collection gives users free, unrestricted access to "the widest possible variety" of viewpoints, noxious though some of these may be to the librarian or to most people [24, p. 180]. Asheim concedes that even with balance some groups still will not be satisfied: either they will want to censor some aspect of the collection or they will object that it is biased [24, p. 184]. But as long as mechanisms are in place to ensure that librarians get as close to the ideal of balance as possible, they are beyond re- proach. Asheim concludes: " [Librarians'] responsibility is the defense of access to ideas, to information, esthetic pleasure . . . and to knowl- edge or at least to the process that leads to knowledge" [24, p. 184]. Moral Theory and Intellectual Freedom To put the debate about library censorship fully in context, I would like to look at the theoretical basis of the case against censorship gener- ally. And since the debate about library censorship is fundamentally a debate about the morality of censorship, I would like to look briefly at the moral theory that underlies the debate. In particular, I will discuss the two general forms of moral theory, utilitarianism and deontology. Utilitarianism Utilitarians hold that moral theory is the search for a first principle distinguishing right acts from wrong acts. In other words, moral theory attempts to identify a characteristic that all morally correct behavior
INTELLECTUAL FREEDOM 51 has in common, on the one hand, and that all morally incorrect behav- ior shares, on the other hand. The principle that the utilitarian identi- fies is the principle of utility, or the greatest happiness principle. All utilitarians are consequentialists. Like other consequentialists, the utilitarian holds that all actions, practices, policies, rules, or laws are to be judged, morally speaking, in terms of their consequences, that is, their effects. So between (or among) two (or more) mutually exclusive actions or policies-for example, cheat or do not cheat, per- mit or do not permit censorship-the utilitarian will claim that the right action or policy is the one that, among available alternatives, has the best consequences, where consequences extend indefinitely [see 25, p. 4]. What makes one set of consequences better than another? So-called classical utilitarians have answered net happiness, that is, total happiness over total unhappiness: one set of consequences is better than another to the extent that it contains more net happiness (or "utility") than the other. And when determining which set of possible consequences contains the most net happiness, we must give equal con- sideration to all affected. That is to say, each individual counts for one, and no individual counts for more than one [see 25, p. 31; 26, p. 3]. Rather than maximizing happiness, some more recent utilitarians have talked about maximizing the satisfaction of desires or preferences, since these can be more readily tested [see 27, p. 334; 28, p. 272; and 29, p. 25]. But these utilitarians agree in substance with the classical utilitarians that consequences alone are relevant to assessing moral rightness and wrongness and that equal weight must be given to the interests of all affected by a given action. This discussion will ignore the differences between the two varieties of the theory. A major advantage of utilitarianism is that it seems to come close to the ordinary sense of right and wrong, to capture accurately the way that most people generally think about morality. Take rape. Most soci- eties sternly condemn and severely punish the act because of the great harm that it does to its victims and because of the general fear that it tends to induce. In other words, it is proscribed because of its devasta- ting consequences. Likewise, when legislators debate a bill: nearly al- ways the discussion centers on the likely consequences of the proposed legislation. Supporters will typically contend-ingenuously or not- that passing the bill will have better consequences than not passing it; critics will deny this. The parties are not disagreeing about a fundamen- tal moral principle; both (ostensibly) agree that the bill must be judged in the light of the goodness or badness of its probable consequences. Instead, their disagreement is empirical; they disagree about the likely consequences of the bill, if enacted. In short, they are reasoning in a utilitarian manner.
52 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Another advantage of utilitarianism, as Jonathan Glover points out, is that it "replaces arbitrary-seeming [moral] rules by a morality with a single basis" [26, p. 1]. In other words, particular moral rules-the moral rules we are taught as children-should be derivable from the most general moral rule: maximize net happiness. In short, "the princi- ple of utility seems to provide an answer to such questions as 'Why is it wrong to lie or break promises?'" [30, p. 5]. Otherwise, the resolu- tion of moral questions is likely to be left to intuition, which is notori- ously unreliable at resolving moral conflict. Intuitions are often little more than veiled moral prejudices; moreover, they often contradict one another [27, p. 356]. For instance, intuition might suggest that it is always wrong to sacrifice an innocent life for the general welfare, but it might also be prepared to countenance war in some circumstances, and war always means the sacrifice of innocent lives. The second advantage leads to a third, namely, that the principle of utility provides a means of resolving conflicts between or among more specific moral rules in a given situation, the ultimate court being the principle of utility itself. Assume that the only way to prevent great harm is to tell a lie (and conversely, that telling the truth would cause great harm). The utilitarian will say that the apparent conflict here is a function of our ignorance: the correct choice is the one that maxi- mizes net happiness (or the satisfaction of preferences), and there is always a fact of the matter about this. So if the only way to save some- one's life from a deranged ax wielder is to tell the latter a lie, by all means tell it. More to the current point, suppose there is a conflict between allowing unfettered free expression and the successful prose- cution of a morally justified war. Again, the utilitarian would say that one must look carefully at the probable consequences of having some measure of censorship (just enough to win the war) and the probable consequences of having no censorship whatsoever and then choose the alternative that will most likely maximize happiness, where equal consideration is given to all affected by the policy. (Notice that intu- ition does not help much here.) The more general attraction of utilitarianism is that it satisfactorily answers the question, Why have moral rules at all? The short answer is, to promote happiness. More elaborately, only by having such rules, only by having a code of conduct that all are expected to follow, can we have the degree of security and cooperation necessary for social life, and there is more net happiness when human beings live coopera- tively than when they go it alone. Utilitarianism also satisfactorily an- swers the question, Which set of moral values ought we to embrace? The set that maximizes net happiness. What other grounds, the utilitar- ian will ask, could be more reasonable for deciding which moral rules
INTELLECTUAL FREEDOM 53 should be followed and encoded into law? So whether some censorship should be tolerated comes down to whether or not that policy will max- imize net happiness. Deontology Despite the great surface appeal of utilitarianism, many have rejected it and have embraced its rival, deontology. Deontologists maintain that consequences alone do not determine the moral rightness or wrong- ness of an action [2, p. 84]. (Some deontologists go so far as to claim that consequences have nothing to do with morality, but I will ignore that extreme position here.) Many deontologists are prepared to con- cede that consequences can be relevant to rightness and wrongness, although as deontologists they must deny that rightness and wrongness are solely a function of the goodness or badness of consequences. An action can be right even if it does not produce at least as much good as the available alternatives. Most deontologists have argued that other considerations besides consequences are relevant to rightness or wrongness, for instance, the type of act in question. So when I make a promise, for example, the deontologist will claim that I am generally bound to keep it simply in virtue of its being a promise and not because keeping it will promote slightly more well-being than not keeping it. In other words, I lay myself under a special obligation to the promisee, and I am not released from that obligation just because slightly more net happiness might accrue to breaking the promise. There are other considerations besides consequences that are morally relevant in this case-chiefly that I have made a promise [see 31, pp. 17-18, 37-38].4 Deontology and Rights A central contention of most deontologists, and one directly relevant to censorship, is that persons have rights and that these rights obtain independently of whether restricting them has better consequences than allowing persons to exercise them. In other words, the moral sta- tus of a right does not depend (solely) on the consequences of persons' exercising it. As Jonathan Glover points out, the deontological view of rights is that "the case respecting them does not depend on the good consequences of doing so.... In pursuing our goals we [should] re- spect, in an absolute way, certain limitations on what we can do to peo- ple" [33, p. 88]. Can rights be limited? It depends on the right (and the deontolo- gist). Says Ronald Dworkin, a leading contemporary defender of rights: "rights may . .. be absolute: a political theory which holds a right to 4. For a slightly stricter interpretation of deontology, see [32, p. 152].
54 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY free speech as absolute will recognize no reason for not securing the liberty it requires for every individual; no reason, that is, short of impos- sibility. Rights may also be less than absolute; one principle might have to yield to another, or even to an urgent policy with which it competes on particular facts. We may define the weight of a right, assuming that it is not absolute, as its power to withstand such competition" [34, p. 92]. Dworkin goes on to distinguish rights in this sense from the notion of a morally correct act. Generally, to say that people have a right to do something is not to imply that it would always be morally right for them to do it. Rather we mean "that it would be wrong to interfere with [their] doing it, or at least some special grounds are needed for justifying any interference" [34, p. 188]. For instance, if you have a right to free speech, I have a corresponding obligation not to interfere with your exercise of it. So the rights-based case for unconditional free speech would no doubt be prepared to concede that it might be wrong for neo-Nazis to post a hate site on the Internet. However, it would hasten to affirm their absolute right to do so and insist that it would be wrong for authorities to prevent them from doing so. In short, "someone may have the right to do something that is the wrong thing for him to do" [34, p. 188]. Deontologists have also envisaged rights as a bulwark against tyranny. We have certain moral rights that it would be wrong for the govern- ment to infringe even in the absence of legal protection [34, p. 192]. Dworkin again: "The claim that citizens have a right to free speech must imply that it would be wrong for the Government to stop them from speaking, even when the Government believes that what they will say will cause more harm than good.... If citizens have the moral right to free speech, then the Government would do wrong to repeal the First Amendment that guarantees it" [34, pp. 190-92]. To recur to an earlier example, suppose the government believes-correctly and on the best evidence-that utility would be increased by censoring criti- cism of how the government is waging a morally justified war. The de- ontological defender of the moral right to free speech is bound to say that the increase in utility alone does not justify the measure: "When individuals are said to have rights against the Government . . . like the right to free speech, that must mean that this sort of [utilitarian] justification is not enough" [34, p. 190]. There are some rights that cannot be infringed merely to increase net happiness. This view means that the principle of utility cannot be the most fundamental moral rule after all, which is to say that utilitarianism must be false. An influential rights-based criticism of utilitarianism comes from John Rawls. Rawls believes that rights are the upshot of a hypothetical agreement. He asks us to imagine a group of people who have gathered
INTELLECTUAL FREEDOM 55 together to decide on their basic rights and duties, as well as how bene- fits and burdens will be distributed [29, pp. 4, 11, 118]. In order to ensure that the principles that the contractors agree on are the correct ones, that is, that they embodyjustice, Rawls insists that the group con- duct their deliberations under a veil of ignorance, which ensures episte- mic equality. This veil prevents the contractors from knowing their sex, sexual preference, race, ethnicity, natural abilities, class, wealth, or even the generation to which they belong [29, p. 119].5 Thus those behind the veil are unable wittingly to bias the principles in their favor; the veil ensures that the principles are chosen fairly [29, pp. 119, 131, 136-37, and 139-40]. Rawls contends that the contractors will unani- mously embrace two basic principles that "are to regulate all further agreements ... [and that will] assign basic rights and duties and ... determine the division of social benefits" [29, p. 11 ]. These principles he calls the principles of justice. Only the first, the equality principle, concerns us here. The equality principle, which assigns basic rights and duties, has priority over the second principle, the difference principle, which relates to how, for instance, wealth and authority should be dis- tributed [29, pp. 14, 15]. The equality principle states that "each person is to have an equal right to the most extensive basic liberty compatible with a similar liberty for others" [29, p. 60; see also pp. 63-64]. The basic liberties encom- passed by the equality principle include "freedom of speech and assem- bly; liberty of conscience and freedom of thought" [29, p. 61]. These rights cannot be sacrificed for a greater gain of utility [29, pp. 61- 63]. By contrast, states Rawls, for the utilitarian, "there is no reason in principle why the greater gains of some should not compensate for the lesser losses of others; or more importantly why the violation of liberty of a few might not be made right by the greater good shared by many" [29, p. 26]. Rawls, however, is persuaded that the contractors deliberating behind the veil of ignorance would insist on the guaran- tees of the equality principle and require that they not be compromised utilitarianly. For this reason, Rawls declares utilitarianism inconsistent with the demands of justice and thus unacceptable as a moral theory. Although other deontologists arrive at their conclusions differently, all fundamentally agree with this last point that the extent of intellectual freedom cannot be decided by considerations of utility alone. The Deontological Critique of the Utilitarian Position on Intellectual Freedom Diana Woodward rightly notes that "one can give both consequentialist and deontological arguments for intellectual freedom, but the choice 5. See [29, pp. 142 and 158] for the general knowledge that they will possess.
56 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY of an ethical theory upon which intellectual freedom is based can result in different decisions about what ought to be done in particular cases" [1, p. 3]. Again, deontologists like Rawls have rejected utilitarian de- fenses of intellectual freedom because these defenses rest on the vagar- ies of consequences. By contrast, as we have seen, "a deontological theory of rights holds that individuals have them independently of the consequences of their possession" [2, p. 87]. Woodward sums up the utilitarian defense of intellectual freedom in the following way: "To defend intellectual freedom on consequentialist grounds, one must make the case that it is for the best. . . if information is broadly dissemi- nated" [35, p. 14]. That is, utilitarians opposed to censorship must contend that overall well-being increases the more broadly all types of information are disseminated and the greater the degree of access to this information. This, of course, is not to defend intellectual freedom in principle, or for its own sake, but rather to defend it for the sake of increasing net happiness. She points out that "to defend intellectual freedom in principle, and not merely in those cases where it can be shown to benefit someone, one needs to provide a deontological de- fense of intellectual freedom" [1, p. 4]. Woodward concludes that de- ontological defenses of intellectual freedom are "safer" than conse- quentialist defenses, for the former do not rest on the probable consequences of a policy of complete intellectual freedom. David Ward explicitly defends intellectual freedom deontologically, claiming that such a defense "takes precedence" over consequentialist, and thus utilitarian, defenses [2, p. 83]. Ward's position is the familiar one that utilitarianism "makes insufficient provision for considerations of rights and justice" [2, p. 85]. The point is that the utilitarian would have to endorse a violation of someone's rights or countenance an in- justice if doing so maximized utility. Ward pronounces this objection "sound": "Rights take precedence over utility; thus deontological the- ories take precedence over consequentialist theories" [2, p. 85]. Peo- ple are entitled to intellectual freedom, an entitlement that in no way depends on the consequences of the exercise of this freedom. In short, intellectual freedom is a right [2, p. 86]. Only a rights-based, deonto- logical defense of intellectual freedom can give Ward his desired un- conditional principle, according to which all forms of expression are permissible. His example is pornography. He writes that the case against pornography is often couched in utilitarian language. Those who have wanted to ban it have typically tried to show that it causes great harm, including "sexual violence and other undesirable sexual behavior" [2, p. 87], and that these negative effects outweigh any bene- fits that might accrue to its unfettered production and distribution. But, Ward continues, "the consequentialist opponents of pornography
INTELLECTUAL FREEDOM 57 were [sic] in a very weak position, for not only were their claims about the effects of pornography contentious and controversial, but even if the alleged bad consequences were shown to result from pornography, it would not follow that it was permissible to ban it. The exercise of one s rights does not depend on the felicitousness of the consequences of that exercise" [2, p. 87]. Ward gives an admirably clear statement of a deontological interpre- tation of rights. It is clear, too, on why many deontologists think that the right to intellectual freedom does not depend on the consequences of its exercise. To claim that the right of free expression, for example, depends on whether its exercise will lead to more good than its abridge- ment is to miss the very meaning of intellectual freedom. To be pre- pared to limit intellectual freedom in deference to utility is not to value intellectual freedom for its own sake at all. Thus the utilitarian defense of intellectual freedom fails. If we embrace the notion of intellectual freedom, we must accept it on deontological grounds or not at all. How extensive is our right to freedom of expression according to Ward? He rests his position on the distinction between "positive" and "negative" rights. Only negative rights are genuine. So-called positive rights, like the alleged right to a job, "require others to take positive steps toward providing the right holder with the object of the right" [2, p. 88]. And requiring others to take this action might violate some of their negative rights, like the right to dispose of their honestly gotten gains as they see fit. Negative rights, however, make no such demands. They only require that others not interfere with the right holder's exer- cise of that right [34, p. 188]. Freedom of expression is such a right. By exercising the (negative) right to free expression, one is only requiring others not to interfere; one is not requiring others to take any positive action on one's behalf [2, p. 88]. Ward's distinction appears to amount to this: to say that intellectual freedom is a negative right is to say that, by expressing myself freely and by investigating those lines of thought that I choose, I make no demands on others; their right to do the same is not infringed. In other words, I am morally entitled to behave in this way; I am morally free to express whatever ideas I like or to investigate all ideas of others. By the same token, others have a moral obligation not to interfere with my intellectual freedom. However, others do not have a moral obliga- tion to provide me with the means of free expression if I cannot afford to produce and disseminate my ideas or if I cannot get someone else to do it willingly: Says Ward, "Freedom of expression is the right not to have one's speech coercively interfered with; it is not the right to be provided with the resources necessary to produce and distribute speech. Freedom of the press, in other words, is not the right to be
58 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY provided with a printing press, but only the right not to have others interfere with the operation of one's press" [2, p. 8916 At the end of his article, Ward broaches the question of what all this means for the selection policies of public libraries and, by implication, of state-supported academic libraries. Since the public supports these libraries, should it also be able to decide what lines their shelves? Ward thinks that it should [2, p. 90]. No one's rights are violated by removing a given text from a publicly funded library. Presumably patrons can buy the text themselves if they choose, so their (negative) right of access to the ideas of others is not violated, and, of course, authors have no right that their books appear in libraries. To make his case, he appeals to the controversy of the late 1980s and early 1990s concerning the National Endowment for the Arts and its support of exhibitions by artists Robert Mapplethorpe and Andres Serrano, deemed "indecent" (Mapple- thorpe) and "blasphemous" (Serrano) by their detractors. "The tax- payers are exercising their acknowledged right to decide what they will and will not support, just as in the Mapplethorpe/Serrano case. And the librarian, if he or she is to remain in that position, must acknowl- edge the public's right to be selective about what it wants in libraries it pays for" [2, p. 90]. The most the librarian can do in these cases is to remonstrate with the public when, for example, a large part of it insists that certain works be removed from the collection. Likewise by implication with regard to the current clamor regarding the installa- tion of blocking software on computers with Internet access, for al- though the taxpayers are not financing, say, the pornographic sites ac- cessed by patrons, they are footing the bill for the computers and the software needed to run them. Here Ward concedes that utilitarian considerations are relevant. Li- brarians might employ utilitarian arguments to persuade patrons that the consequences of removing these books or installing blocking soft- ware will actually be worse than the alternatives. But, again, ultimately libraries should not override taxpayers' right to determine the contents of libraries the latter finance. Concluding, Ward puts the distinction this way: "Utilitarian counter-arguments fail against arguments based on justice or rights. This precedence, however, must not serve as a mo- tive for attempting to turn all that is desirable into a right [that is, by turning positive rights into negative rights]. The inflation of rights, by conflating the merely desirable with the obligatory [that is, the conflat- ing of positive rights with negative rights], dilutes the rights which pro- tect us all" [2, pp. 90-91 ].7 6. Nor, for that matter, do others have an obligation to provide one with access to ideas. 7. Ward sounds like a utilitarian here.
INTELLECTUAL FREEDOM 59 So Ward would allow the public to determine the acquisition and access policies of publicly supported libraries. This view raises the ques- tion, Just when do taxpayers have the right to remove a text or to have blocking software installed? When a majority decides? Two-thirds? Three-quarters? No obvious answer presents itself, and Ward himself offers no help. And how do we know when the threshold is reached? Let us assume that a majority suffices and that we can determine when one obtains (though of course this latter will be no easy matter). Sup- pose that 50 percent plus one decide to remove all books by Jewish authors from the local public library. Would it be within its rights to do so? Ward must say yes. Notice that he is then prepared to permit the caprice of the majority to determine which ideas and images can find their way into our libraries, an odd claim for one who contends that freedom of expression and access are basic rights. This view means that, on Ward's position, the public could be greatly limited in its access to the literature of minority cultures or unpopular ideas, at least when it comes to publicly supported libraries. To continue the case, suppose the next day that two people in the community change their minds. Does this change of mind mean that the previously removed literature must immediately be reinstalled? I defer to Ward. A final point against Ward: he takes a liberal position on pornogra- phy. He takes it to be an advantage of his position that, in contrast to utilitarianism, his defense of pornography does not depend on the ef- fects of its production and distribution. To repeat a quote: "The conse- quentialist opponents of pornography were in a weak position, for not only were their claims about the effects of pornography contentious and controversial, but even if the alleged bad consequences were shown to result from pornography, it would not follow that it was per- missible to ban it. The exercise of one's rights does not depend on the felicitousness of the consequences of that exercise" [2, p. 87]. Ward is not entirely fair to the utilitarian here. He implies that the utilitarian is committed to the following: if pornography has bad conse- quences, then we should ban it. Not necessarily: the clear-headed utili- tarian will agree with Ward that the mere fact that pornography might cause some harm does not imply that we should ban it, any more than the fact that open heart surgery causes some harm means that we should outlaw that procedure. What we would need to know, the utili- tarian would urge, is that banning pornography would prevent more harm (and thus promote more good) than not banning it. If this deter- mination is the case, then utilitarianism endorses a ban, otherwise not. Unfortunately this information is hard to come by. Suppose though, for the sake of discussion, that all sexually violent criminals have en- joyed pornography that depicts women in degrading roles (D for
60 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY short). Is this a utilitarian reason for banning all pornography? No. All D? Likely not. First, what if the vast majority of people who are exposed to D never perpetrate violence against women or anyone else? Second, we would need to establish more than a correlation between watching D videos and perpetrating sexual violence; a correlation alone fails to show that D is part of the cause, let alone the whole cause. Third, how do we devise effective criteria for identifying D, and how do we ensure that these criteria are correctly applied? And fourth, a legal ban on D could induce black markets, leading perhaps to turf wars among syndi- cates of pornography dealers, much like the drug wars that have plagued our inner cities for decades. By way of analogy, no one seri- ously considers reenacting Prohibition just because some abuse alcohol and drive drunk. As with alcohol, the potential benefits of banning any kind of pornography must be weighed along with the potential costs. And a decision about what to do must be made in the light of the best available evidence. Only then can we pass informed judgment about whether we should ban any type of pornography and, if so, what type. Just as most assume that the harm done by a second episode of Prohibi- tion would vastly outweigh any good that it would bring, so a consider- able opus would be on the censor to justify banning some types of pornography. Ward, then, misconstrues utilitarianism when he implies that the utilitarian would consider banning pornography simply if it were discovered to cause some harm. From the utilitarian perspective, the issue is far more complex. However, Ward's own position is different from this entirely. He im- plies that, even if we knew that banning certain types of pornography would have more "felicitous" consequences than not banning it, its production and distribution should still never be legally restricted. Such a position is surely monstrous. For instance, suppose that we knew that by banning pornography in the United States we could prevent on average 5,000 murders and 20,000 rapes a year. Utilitarians would insist that this carnage and violence is far too much to pay for unquali- fied free expression, safely assuming that the murders and rapes are not offset by some greater benefit. The value of freedom of expression must ultimately be cashed out in terms of its overall benefits, not in terms of certain "negative rights" that all persons allegedly possess. If we could be sure that a type of expression was seriously inimical to half the population, that it carried no compensating benefits, and that it could be banned with few repercussions, then we should ban it. Produc- ing and looking at D is in principle no different from any other poten- tially harmful type of behavior, like reckless driving or polluting groundwater. Any position that denies this has gone badly wrong. But it is difficult to see how a rights-based defense of freedom of expression
INTELLECTUAL FREEDOM 61 like Ward's could justify such a ban without a utilitarian appeal, that is, without abandoning rights, at least conceived of as unconditional. Thus a utilitarian position on intellectual and expressive freedom and censorship seems the only satisfactory way to justify intellectual free- dom and to oppose all types of censorship. It is to this kind of analysis that I now turn. The Utilitarian Case for Intellectual Freedom This section will begin by contrasting the utilitarian conception of rights with the deontological conception. Then I will look at Mill's case for intellectual freedom. Finally, I will discuss the limits of Mill's posi- tion. Utilitarianism and Rights The utilitarian rejects the notion of rights conceived of as independent of utility, disclaiming any moral principle or rule not grounded in util- ity [see 33, p. 87]. Says Mill: "It is proper to state that I forego any advantage which could be derived to my argument from the idea of abstract right, as a thing independent of utility. I regard utility as the ultimate appeal on all ethical questions" [3, p. 12]. We saw above, in the context of Dworkin's discussion, that rights can either be absolute or less than absolute. Take absolute or unconditional rights first. Actu- ally there can be but one, since it must trump all others in conflicts. Suppose that the one absolute right is the right to free expression and access to the expression of others. This one absolute right must obtain come what may, even when no good comes from its exercise, even when great harm follows in its wake. This, the utilitarian will say, is unaccept- able, as we saw in the preceding section. How, morally speaking, can we possibly defend a right that, if acknowledged, leads to more suffer- ing and less happiness than if it were abridged? What could possibly recommend it? Also, why is the right to free expression and not, say, the right to life or property the one absolute right? For the utilitarian, the choice seems completely arbitrary, lacking rational justification. Rights, then, if there are any, must be conditional, less than absolute. In a passage quoted above, Dworkin concedes though that, if rights are conditional, "one principle might have to yield to another, or even to an urgent policy with which it competes on particular facts. We may define the weight of a right, assuming that it is not absolute, as its power to withstand such competition" [34, p. 92]. But how are we to deter- mine the relative "weights" of conflicting rights in a given circum- stance? It is difficult to see how this can be done in a noncircular way,
62 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY without appealing to utility. Otherwise, the notion of a right's weight remains occult, invoked merely out of caprice or inclination. So the utilitarian rejects any defense of intellectual freedom that rests on an alleged right to freedom of expression or freedom of access to all available lines of thought. When utilitarians have defended free- dom of expression, or when they have opposed censorship, they have done so because they have been convinced that "happiness is increased through there being more room for self expression" [33, p. 87]. In other words, they have supposed that complete intellectual or expres- sive freedom will more likely conduce to human well-being than will permitting restrictions, however minor, on that freedom. Although utilitarians reject deontological rights, they will likely favor legal protec- tions that guarantee something akin to the rights of Dworkin or Rawls's equality principle. But these guarantees will, of course, be utilitarian. Deontologists, then, have a point when they claim that in a given case it may turn out that there are even stronger utilitarian reasons for re- stricting expression than for permitting it. [See 33, p. 87.] Specifically, the utilitarian must concede that, if we could demonstrate that certain restrictions on expression would produce more net happiness than their absence, then these restrictions would be morally required on utilitarian grounds. However, I will try to show that utilitarians need never endorse censorship in practice and can actually support strong legal proscriptions of it. Mill's Position The case presented here derives largely from chapter 2 ofJohn Stuart Mill's On Liberty [3]. As a utilitarian, Mill contends that practices and public policies are acceptable from the moral point of view to the ex- tent that they promote general happiness. More specifically a policy or practice is the morally correct one if and only if it promotes more over- all (or net) happiness than any available alternative policy or practice; otherwise it is wrong and ought to be rejected. Mill's utilitarian opposition to censorship and his support of intellec- tual freedom begins by connecting general happiness with the acquisi- tion of truth. The higher the proportion of true beliefs to false beliefs that society has, the better off it generally will be: "The truth of an opinion is part of its utility. If we would know whether or not it is desir- able that a proposition should be believed, is it possible to exclude the consideration of whether or not it is true? . . . No belief which is con- trary to truth can really be useful" [3, p. 23]. In other words, false beliefs, although perhaps temporarily useful, will eventually let us down, that is, will have less utility than true beliefs. Consider, for in- stance, this country's financial and intellectual devotion to physical
INTELLECTUAL FREEDOM 63 science. It assumes, first, that science is a reliable way to get at the truth. And, second, it strongly testifies to our conviction that the more true beliefs we have, the better off we are. By truth, I (and I think Mill, too) mean, well, truth. That is, I mean nothing esoteric or tendentious, nothing that needs to be cradled by scare quotes or qualified in any way. To paraphrase Bishop Butler, truth is what is and not another thing. When I use the word, I am not claim- ing an inside track on it. Unfortunately, it is easier to say what it is not than what it is. It is not a social construct, something relative to concep- tual schemes, era, gender, sexual preference, race, or ethnicity; neither is it an instrument of capitalist or colonial oppression; nor is it "the dominant ideology of a culture or relative to languages or social forma- tions" [36, p. 76]. Truth is the chief property people take their beliefs to have, even though some are doubtless false. And as soon as a person takes a belief to be false, she renounces it. To say that a statement is true is to say that it correctly describes the world, for example, that the universe is many billions of years old, that the earth is approximately 93 millions miles from the sun, or that snow is white. And the world is the way it is independently of how we think of it or describe it. I believe, unfashionably perhaps, that science is the best road to truth. Assuming that truth and utility are part and parcel, the question be- comes, What is the best way to promote truth? Mill's response was open and unfettered discussion [3, pp. 18 and 21], both with regard to how our political and social lives ought to be conducted-that is, the legal and moral rules that society should uphold-and with respect to the laws of nature that physical science attempts to discover.8 All ideas, even the most offensive, preposterous, or potentially injurious must be coun- tenanced; we must permit even those opinions that seem forever be- yond controversy to be subjected to the criticism of "all gainsayers" [3, p. 21]; and the criticism of all values, even fundamental ones, must be tolerated. Only then can we have any reasonable assurance that we are approaching the truth or that the values accepted by society are the values that it ought to accept (that is, are those values adherence to which in fact promotes the greatest sum of happiness). And this, of course, implies that censorship of ideas is never justified. Notice, though, that Mill is not claiming that unfettered discussion guarantees truth. His point is rather that our beliefs are only "warranted" orjusti- 8. Alan Ryan rightly offers the following caveat: "Mill argues for an almost absolute freedom to say what we please outside those situations where we would cause immediate, unjustifi- able damage. In American law, this is often referred to as the rule that we should not shout 'fire' in a crowded theater unless there really is a fire and the damage done by the ensuing panic is less than the damage that would be done by the fire" [37, p. xxix].
64 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY fied insofar as they have been subjected to such debate; and the better warranted, the better reason we have for thinking them true: "The beliefs which we have the most warrant for have no safeguard to rest on but a standing invitation to the whole world to prove them un- founded. If the challenge is not accepted, or is accepted and the at- tempt fails, we are far from certainty still; but we have done the best that the existing state of human reason admits of; we have neglected nothing that could give truth a chance of reaching us" [3, p. 22]. In sum, censorship inhibits the emergence of truth, and inhibiting the emergence of truth undermines overall happiness. Any practice or pol- icy that undermines overall happiness ought to be rejected. Therefore, censorship ought to be rejected. Mill proceeds to offer three reasons that any degree of censorship obstructs truth.9 The first is that the suppressed opinion may be true, however absurd or pernicious it might initially seem. Mill reminds his readers that no age is infallible: "Every age having held many opinions which subsequent ages have deemed not only false but absurd, and it is as certain that many opinions now general will be rejected by future ages, as it is that many, once general, are rejected by the present" [3, p. 19]. Examples of opinions once widely or universally accepted but now entirely discredited or generally rejected include the belief that infectious disease is communicated by evil spirits, that the earth is at the center of the universe, that the universe is only a few thousand years old, and that there is nothing wrong with enslaving others who are racially or ethnically different from oneself. Examples could obvi- ously be multiplied. In fact it does not matter if only one person subscribes to the opinion in question; even then censorship would be wrong: "If all mankind minus one were of one opinion, and only one person were of the con- trary opinion, mankind would be no more justified in silencing that one person than he, if he had the power, would be justified in silencing mankind" [3, p. 18]. Censorship in any form deprives everyone "of the opportunity of exchanging error for truth" [3, p. 18]. This sentiment is echoed by Krug and Harvey: "Censorship denies the opportunity to choose from all possible alternatives and thereby violates intellectual freedom. The library profession has aimed to ensure every individual's freedom of the mind so that society as a whole benefits" [7, p. xxi]. John Swan makes a similar point when he claims that, "it is [the librari- an's] job to provide access not to truth, but to the fruit of human com- 9. At the end of chapter 2 of On Liberty [3, p. 50], when he is summing up, Mill claims that he has offered four reasons. But the third and fourth reasons he offers there he treats as one reason earlier.
INTELLECTUAL FREEDOM 65 munication; not to reality, but to multiple representations thereof" [14 p. 11]. Mill's second argument concedes that many candidates for censor- ship are known to be false; he could have added that they might also be malign. Even then, though, the ideas should not be suppressed. For only if true or valuable ideas are rigorously tested against false or pernicious ideas can people come to know why the former are true or valuable. If a true opinion is never criticized, the reasons for holding it will go unappreciated: "However true it may be, if it is not fully, frequently, and fearlessly discussed, it will be held as a dead dogma, not a living truth.... Even if the received opinion be not only true, but the whole truth, unless it is suffered to be, and actually is, vigorously and earnestly contested, it will, by most of those who receive it, be held in the manner of a prejudice, with little comprehension or feeling of its rational grounds" [3, pp. 35, 50]. Accepted true beliefs must be regularly challenged, if only by a devil's advocate, so that the good reasons for holding them do not fall by the wayside and thus cease to have a positive effect on behavior. Without such challenges, "the meaning of the doctrine itself will be in danger of being lost, or enfee- bled, and deprived of its vital effect on the character and conduct; the dogma becoming a mere formal profession, inefficacious for good" [3, p. 50]. The great danger is that if the impact of important truths is lost in this way the field is open for dangerous falsehoods. John Swan has made this point much more recently, in the context of the duty of librarians: "The librarian's duty is as much to preserve the untruth on the shelves as truth.... [Librarians] are committed both to the search for truth and the expression of untruth" [14, pp. 4, 8]. Why? Because "it is vital that we recognize the place of untruth in helping us to get at the truth" [14, p. 12]. The implications that Mill's second argument has for censorship generally and for library censorship particularly should be clear. The "standing invitation" [3, p. 22] to criticism referred to above assumes that all opinions and doctrines, even the true ones, should be open to the severest possible criticism. Consider the literature of Holocaust denial. Most people believe that the principal thesis of this body of work is false, and I agree. Nevertheless, by Mill's lights, such work should have a place in our libraries. This literature should be readily available, though, not because those who produce it have some inher- ent right to promote their false doctrine, as the deontologist would contend. Rather, libraries should acquire it because making it available allows others to set the record straight by exposing its purveyors as virulent anti-Semites and by demonstrating that their research is deeply suspect. It also gives society an opportunity to think more generally
66 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY about what distinguishes sound historical research from sham exer- cises.'" Mill's third argument against any form of censorship is that, even when the heterodox idea is mostly mistaken, it may still contain part of the truth, and by allowing it to be expressed and criticized we stand a better chance of uncovering its kernel of truth. Or take a fundamen- tally true received idea that might be a bit off the mark. Here again vigorous debate is indispensable so that the idea might be further cor- rected. In Mill's own words, "We have hitherto considered only two possibilities; that the received opinion may be false, and some other opinion, consequently true; or that the received opinion being true, a conflict with the opposite error is essential to a clear apprehension and deep feeling of its truth. But there is a commoner case than either of these; when conflicting doctrines, instead of being one true and the other false, share the truth between them; and the nonconforming opinion is needed to supply the remainder of the truth, of which the received doctrine embodies only a part" [3, p. 44]. Mill likens this situa- tion to "the necessary elements of a healthy political life," which he thinks requires vigorous parties on both the right and the left [3, p. 46]. He proceeds to argue that in the great social debates about how wealth should be distributed or how consenting adults should be al- lowed to conduct their private lives it is essential that the minority view- point not merely be tolerated but "encouraged and countenanced," for "that is the opinion which, for the time being, represents the ne- glected interests, the side of human well being which is in danger of obtaining less than its share" [3, p. 46]. It is easy to extend Mill's position: uncensored libraries are needed because it is precisely books and periodicals representing minority viewpoints that are less likely to be published by large houses and thus less likely to find their way into bookstore chains and newsstands, where inventories are market driven. The burden is on librarians to seek out minority viewpoints energetically, for these viewpoints might otherwise be overlooked. Similarly, librarians also have a responsibility to identify reliable web sites presenting unpopular or controversial ideas. Limits of Mill's Position Unfortunately Mill's arguments, if successful, show only that censorship of ideas is wrong; they do not do this for images. A pornographic image, for instance, doesn't obviously say anything, let alone something true or false; nor for that matter does pornographic prose necessarily have a truth value. So it looks like Mill's position, at least as expressed in 10. There is yet another reason, to be discussed in the conclusion.
INTELLECTUAL FREEDOM 67 chapter 2 of On Liberty, will not help. Nor does the argument from democracy do much good here: it is not obvious that producing or having access to pornographic images with impunity is necessary for an electorate to arrive at informed decisions about the great social is- sues of the day or to determine where the candidates stand with regard to these issues. (Though one could argue that in order for the elector- ate to make rational decisions about censoring pornographic Internet sites, say, it would have to have a clear idea of the potential object of censorship.) Nevertheless, utilitarians can plausibly defend complete freedom of expression and access here. Remember that utilitarians judge actions or policies as right to the extent that they produce happiness or satisfy people's desires. Well, dirty pictures, like it or not, do this for many. Prohibiting their publication or people's access to them can be justified if and only if doing so prevents more unhappiness or promotes greater satisfaction of desires than permitting their publication and access. This, of course, is an empirical question. One way in which certain types of pornography might cause harm is through exploitation of its subjects. That pornography sometimes exploits those who feature in it no utilitarian would want to deny; still less would he or she want to deny that such exploitation is morally bad. But then this exploitation should be handled like any other kind; there is nothing special about its sexual nature. Society should do all that it can, consistent with in- creasing utility, to alleviate or abolish all exploitation, sexual or other- wise. So take the class of all pornography that involves no exploitation. It now becomes more difficult to see what harm this kind of material does. Although this is still an empirical question, surely the burden should be on those who would do the banning to show not only that pornography does harm but that banning it would do less harm. Putting aside the question of how minors should be treated, maybe we ought to think of pornography roughly as we think of alcohol, as suggested above in criticizing Ward. Alcohol does much mischief. Nev- ertheless, we rightly allow adults to drink, punishing them for abuses that could potentially seriously harm others, for example, drunk driv- ing. But most people manage to drink responsibly and are no worse off for having the legal right to do so. In fact most might even be slightly better off because utility accrues to letting people make such choices. Conclusion: Who Would Do the Censoring? Many might still feel uneasy about the utilitarian defense of intellectual freedom, since it is subordinate to the principle of utility. As we have
68 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY seen, cases can be envisaged in which the suppression of a particular work conduces to the general happiness and thus seems to be required on utilitarian grounds. Surely this position gravely imperils the utilitar- ian case, or so the objection goes." I don't think that it does. Utilitari- ans need not insist that we apply the utilitarian calculus case by case. In fact, there are solid utilitarian grounds for not doing so, for treating the conditional prohibition on censorship as if it were absolute [see 33, p. 87; 38, pp. 180-81]. Here's why. Legally sanctioned censorship assumes, to begin with, that legislators could fashion laws that specified, consistent with the principle of utility, just what should be censored. Assuming for the sake of discussion that this could be done, we would then need to repose faith in someone or in a committee to execute the law, empowering a few to make up the minds of the vast majority. This, in turn, implies both that the committee could determine just when censorship would maximize utility and that it would impose re- strictions in just those cases. It is unlikely that both conditions will ever be met. This is the core of the utilitarian case for intellectual and ex- pressive freedom. Censors, then, to paraphrase Mill, presume to settle controversial questions for others without allowing those others to hear what the opposition has to say [3, p. 39]. And who gets to make these decisions? In denouncing religious censorship in an 1814 letter, ThomasJefferson famously raised this question, and in so doing antici- pated Mill: Are we to have a censor whose imprimatur shall say what books may be sold, and what we may buy? And who is thus to dogmatize religious opinions for our citizens? Whose foot is to be the measure to which ours are all to be cut or stretched? Is a priest to be our inquisitor, or shall a layman, similar to our- selves, set up his reason as the rule for what we are to read, and what we must believe? It is an insult to our citizens to question whether they are rational beings or not, and blasphemy against religion to suppose it cannot stand the test of truth and reason. If [a book or idea] be false in its facts, disprove them; if false in its reasoning, refute it. But for God's sake, let us freely hear both sides.12 The censor might genuinely be animated by a concem for the com- mon good, just as conscientious parents are committed to their chil- dren's best interests. No doubt many of the paternalistic librarian- censors prior to the 1930s were motivated to do good. However, the assumption that the censor is in a better position than the rest of us to decide which ideas or images are so harmful that they ought to be kept out of circulation is misguided, and this is where the parent-child 11. I would like to thank an anonymous referee for raising this problem so clearly. 12. Quoted by David Berninghausen at the beginning of his article, "History of the Intellec- tual Freedom Committee," Wilson Library Bulletin 28 (June 1953): 813-17. Jefferson's quotation also appears in Geller's article [9, p. 1365].
INTELLECTUAL FREEDOM 69 analogy fails. Whenever someone has this kind of discretion, however well-intentioned he or she may be, the possibility of abuse is consider- able. What is to prevent the censor from screening ideas or images not because they are genuinely pernicious-as some no doubt are-but because she does not happen to like them. These are two different matters. Or perhaps the censor will be pressured to keep certain infor- mation out of circulation. And even if the censor is actuated by a desire to promote the common good, what guarantee does the general public have that she will not sometimes be mistaken about where that good lies and thus about what should be suppressed? This incidentally is another reason why even Holocaust-denial literature ought to be in our libraries. The recent controversy about blocking software on library computers with Internet access is also relevant here. First, there is the question of who gets to decide which types of content should blocked. And, second, even if, from a utilitarian perspective, we could determine what should be jammed, we face a further challenge, namely, writing software that blocks all and only undesirable sites. There is one more reason why utilitarians should insist that censor- ship be legally proscribed and thus that we not appeal to the principle of utility case by case to decide what can be said, seen, or read. For intellectual freedom to be genuine, people must have the confidence that they will not be harassed for what they publish or seek out. Only an atmosphere of legally guaranteed intellectual freedom can foster this confidence.'3 Again, as Ward and Woodward rightly note, the utilitarian position against censorship is not unconditional. The utilitarian will concede that some things would be better left unexpressed, unpublished, un- seen, and unread. The trouble is, we cannot know beforehand precisely which set of ideas or images, if published, would do more harm than good. In presuming to know this, much that is useful, although initially shocking, might also get banned. (Think, for instance, of someone in the nineteenth century advocating greatly loosening the restrictions on divorce, insisting that couples ought to live together before marriage, or arguing that homosexuals should have precisely the same legal rights as heterosexuals.) Utilitarians point to the fact that the history of censorship is littered with examples of suppressed prose and banned art that today we would never think of censoring, that indeed we recog- nize as making signal scientific, social, or artistic contributions. No doubt succeeding generations will shake their heads incredulously over much that irks today's bowdlerizers and obscurantists. And as the his- torical section above was intended to show, librarians have often been willing to play the censor themselves. However, even if we did have the 13. See [38, pp. 180-81] for a similar point in the context of punishment.
70 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY means of determining, for any given set of ideas or images, whether its publication would do more harm than its suppression, who could say that we would always censor just that set? What is true of censorship generally is true of censorship in libraries particularly. Of course, with regard to print, libraries, like bookstores, must wait upon the decisions of publishers. But libraries, even more than bookstores, are in a position to provide the broadest possible range of ideas. The newest threat to freedom of access in libraries is the use or implementation of Internet filters. These, too, run contrary to the position defended in this article as well as at least the spirit of the ALA's position. They must be the next target of all proponents of intellectual and expressive freedom. REFERENCES 1. Woodward, Diana. "Introduction." Library Trends 39 (Summer/Fall 1990): 3-7. 2. Ward, David. "Philosophical Issues in Censorship and Intellectual Freedom." Library Trends 39 (Summer/Fall 1990): 83-91. 3. Mill, John Stuart. On Libety. Edited by David Spitz. New York: Norton, 1975. 4. Office for Intellectual Freedom of the American Library Association. "Library Bill of Rights." In the IntellectualFreedom Manual. 5th ed. Compiled by the Office for Intellectual Freedom of the American Library Association, pp. 3-4. Chicago: American Library Asso- ciation, 1996. 5. Office for Intellectual Freedom of the American Library Association. "The Freedom to Read." In the Intellectual Freedom Manual. 5th ed. Compiled by the Office for Intellectual Freedom of the American Library Association, pp. 127-32. Chicago: American Library Association, 1996. 6. Office for Intellectual Freedom of the American Library Association. Intelectual Freedom Manual. 5th ed. Compiled by the Office for Intellectual Freedom of the American Library Association. Chicago: American Library Association, 1996. 7. Krug, Judith F., and Harvey, James A. "ALA and Intellectual Freedom: An Historical Overview." In Intelectual Freedom ManuaL 5th ed. Compiled by the Office for Intellectual Freedom of the American Library Association, pp. xix-xlvi. Chicago: American Library Association, 1996. 8. Wiegand, Wayne. An Active Instrument for Propaganda: The American Public Library during World War I. New York: Greenwood, 1989. 9. Geller, Evelyn. "Intellectual Freedom: Eternal Principle or Unanticipated Conse- quence?" Library Journal 99 (May 15, 1974): 1364-67. 10. Heckart, Ronald J. "The Library as a Marketplace of Ideas." Colege and Research Libraries 56 (November 1991): 491-503. 11. Swan,John. "lntellectual Freedom." In TheEncyclopedia of Libraty History, edited by Wayne Wiegand and Donald G. Davis, pp. 280-85. New York: Garland, 1994. 12. Richard Darling. "Access, Intellectual Freedom, and Libraries." Library Trends 27 (Winter 1978): 315-26. 13. Fujimoto, Jan Dee. "Representing a Document's Viewpoint in Library Collections: A Theme of Obligation and Resistance." Library Resources and Technical Senices 34 (January 1990): 12-23.
INTELLECTUAL FREEDOM 71 14. Swan, John. "Untruth or Consequences," In The Freedom to Lie: A Debate about Democracy, by John Swan and Noel Peattie. Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland, 1989. 15. Lincove, David A. "Propaganda and the American Public Library from the 1930s to the Eve of World War II." RQ 33 (Summer 1994): 510-23. 16. Preer,Jean. "Censorship." In The Encyclopedia of Library History, edited by Wayne Wiegand and Donald G. Davis, pp. 117-24. New York: Garland, 1994. 17. Putnam, Herbert. "Library Meetings." Public Libraries 2 (March 1897): 97-102. 18. Robbins, Louise S. Censorship and the American Library: The American Library Association's Response to Threats to Intellectual Freedom, 1939-1969. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood, 1996. 19. McCoy, Ralph E. "Social Responsibility vs. the Library Bill of Rights." In The First Freedom Today, edited by Robert Downs and Ralph E. McCoy, pp. 114-16. Chicago: American Library Association, 1984. 20. Berninghausen, David. "Social Responsibility vs. the Library Bill of Rights." LibraryJoumnal 97 (November 15, 1972): 3675-82. 21. Gates, Jean Key. Introduction to Librarianship. 3d ed. New York: Neal-Schuman, 1990. 22. Office for Intellectual Freedom of the American Library Association, compilers. "The Freedom to Read." In Intelkctual Freedom Manual. 5th ed. Compiled by the Office for Intellectual Freedom of the American Library Association, pp. 127-49. Chicago: Ameri- can Library Association, 1996. 23. Asheim, Lester. "Not Censorship, Selection." In Freedom of Book Selection: Proceedings of the Second Conference on Intellectual Freedom, edited by Frederick Mosher, pp. 90-99. Chicago: American Library Association, 1954. 24. Asheim, Lester. "Selection and Censorship: A Reappraisal." Wilson Library Bulletin 58 (November 1983): 180-84. 25. Smart, J. J. C. "An Outline of a System of Utilitarian Ethics." In Utilitarianism: For and Against, edited by J. J. C. Smart and Bernard Williams, pp. 3-74. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1973. 26. Glover, Jonathan. "Introduction." In Utilitarianism and Its Critics, edited by Jonathan Glover, pp. 1-4. New York: Macmillan, 1990. 27. Griffin, James. "Modern Utilitarianism." Revue Internationale de Philosophie 36 (1982): 331-75. 28. O'Hear, Anthony. What Philosophy Is: An Introduction to Contemporary Philosophy. Atlantic Heights, NJ.: Humanities Press, 1985. 29. Rawls, John. A Theory ofJustice. Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap, 1971. 30. Glover, Jonathan. "Utilitarianism and Its Foundations." In Utilitarianism and Its Critics, edited byJonathan Glover, pp. 5-8. New York: Macmillan, 1990. 31. Ross, W. D. The Right and the Good. Oxford: Clarendon, 1930. 32. Glover, Jonathan. "Consequences and Character." In Utilitarianism and Its Critics, edited by Jonathan Glover, pp. 151-54. New York: Macmillan, 1990. 33. Glover, Jonathan. "Persons, Justice and Rights." In Utilitarianism and Its Critics, edited byJonathan Glover, pp. 85-88. New York: Macmillan, 1990. 34. Dworkin, Ronald. Taking Rights Seriously. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1977. 35. Woodward, Diana. "A Framework for Deciding Issues in Ethics." Library Trends 39 (Summer/Fall 1990): 8-17. 36. Barbiero, Daniel. "Fashionable Nonsense: Postmodern Intellectuals' Abuse of Science." Issues in Science and Technology 15 (Summer 1999): 76-78. 37. Ryan, Alan, ed. Mill. New York: Norton, 1997. 38. Rawls, John. "Two Concepts of Rules." In Mill: Utilitarianism, with Critical Essays, edited by Samuel Gorovitz, pp. 175-94. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1971.