LIBRARIANS AS ORGANIC INTELLECTUALS: A GRAMSCIAN APPROACH TO BLIND SPOTS AND TUNNEL VISION' Douglas Raber2 In the January 1999 issue of Library Quarterly, Wayne Wiegand suggests that library and information science (US) has failed to critically examine its role in relations of power and knowledge that systematically marginalize the needs of less powerful members of society. What we know, and what we allow ourselves to know, about libraries and their users is conditioned by history and politics. The work of Antonio Gramsci can help us to understand this situation. Librarians and scholars of UIS occupy a space that is contested ter- rain in a war of position between the hegemony of the capitalist historic bloc and the subjects who would challenge that bloc to be true to its self-declared principles of democratic participation. Gramsci's insights regarding the na- ture of capitalist social formations, and the role of intellectuals organic to these formations, reveal the ambivalent social position of LIS as a source of both support and resistance to capitalist hegemony. Introduction In Library Qyarterly's January 1999 issue, Wayne Wiegand expresses a fear that plans regarding the future of librarianship are affected by blind spots and tunnel vision, "in large part because the cultures in which we are immersed-or to which we aspire-tend to control the range of questions we ask about ourselves and our profession" [1, p. 3]. In order to identify some of the questions we should be asking, he reviews the literature of American library history addressing a period from 1893 to the present. He concludes that the profession, and the academic research ostensibly providing it with a legitimating body of 1. This article is a revised version of a presentation at the Library Research Seminar n, "Part- ners and Connections: Research Applied to Practice," University of Maryland, College Park, November 2-3, 2001. 2. Associate professor, University of Tennessee, School of Information Sciences, 1345 Circle Park Drive, Knoxville, Tennessee 37996-0341; Telephone 865-974-9003; Fax 865-974-4967; E-mail raberd@utk.edu. [Library Quartcrly, vol. 73, no. 1, pp. 33-53] ? 2003 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-2519/2003/7301-0003$10.00 33
34 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY knowledge, is "trapped in its own discursive formations, where mem- bers speak mostly to each other and where connections between power and knowledge that affect issues of race, class, age and gender, among others, are either invisible or ignored" [1, p. 24]. Perhaps even more troubling is Wiegand's implied suggestion that this practice is system- atic and deliberate, if not entirely conscious. He explicitly notes that the work of certain critical theorists and interdisciplinary scholars that might help us to address the issue he identifies is generally absent from library and information science discourse [1, pp. 10-11, 22-25]. To support this claim, he refers to an "unscientific survey" he conducted of a couple of recent volumes of the Journalfor the American Society of Information Science, and he reports that he found little evidence of an awareness of the ambivalent relations between power and knowledge or any sign of an effort to explore Douglas Zweizig's concern that li- brary and information science research privileges institutions over peo- ple and tends to view the latter as a means to the ends of the former [1, pp. 23-24; 2]. Library and information science (LIS) practice and research appears to display a systematic tendency to attend to some issues while allowing others of at least equal importance to go unarticu- lated, undefined, and untheorized. This condition, according to Wie- gand, is the cause of our "blind spots and tunnel vision." Evidently, not everyone in library and information science agrees with Wiegand's observations. Donald Case, in a comment published in the October 1999 issue of Library Quarterly, questions Wiegand's conclu- sions and asserts that "one scholar's 'tunnel vision' may be another scholar's microscope" [3, p. 537]. Case also expresses disappointment "that Wiegand's essay deteriorates into yet another instance of disci- plinary navel-gazing" [3, p. 537]. Actually, Case's comment may repre- sent more than even he realizes, but there is one point he raises that deserves immediate attention.3 As noted earlier, Wiegand refers to the work of certain scholars whose work might help LIS to overcome its limited vision, and he refers to six persons in particular.4 Case fairly asks, "Why these six writers?" He is certainly correct when he asserts that Wiegand's list is not inclusive, but his claim that it is inconsistent 3. The pejorative use of the phrase "navel-gazers" is interesting in its own right. This use suggests the disparagement of inward-looking contemplation as being otherworldly, exces- sively idealistic or self-absorbed, and certainly not practical. The stereotyping of Eastern culture and religion, and the privileging of a Western pragmatic point of view regarding contemplation is also potentially involved. Scholars such as Edward Said might suggest that the casual use of such language, even with the intention of merely being humorous, says more about its speakers than they realize, but that is a subject for another study. 4. The six theorists identified by Wiegand are Michel Foucault, Antonio Gramsci,Jirgen Ha- bermas, Helen Longino, MargaretJacob, and Sandra Harding.
LIBRARIANS AS ORGANIC INTELLECTUALS 35 may have missed the mark [3, p. 536]. Conceived broadly, critical the- ory in the human sciences has a long history, a rich discourse, and is represented by a great number of writers [4]. It includes Marxism, post- Marxism, poststructuralism and postmodernism, psychoanalysis, her- meneutics, phenomenology, and semiotics, to name but a few of the lines of thought associated with critical theory. At best, Wiegand's list serves as a set of index terms to this literature. On the other hand, the six writers he names share a common characteristic: they study the connections between power and knowledge, and they would agree with Wiegand that these connections are "never totally objective and never disinterested" [1, p. 23]. One of the writers Wiegand mentions is Antonio Gramsci. My goal is to show how Gramsci's work can help to explain the blind spots and tunnel vision of LIS and to provide a means for expanding our vision. Gramsci is especially relevant to the issues raised by Wiegand because he explicitly addresses how the culture in which we are immersed con- trols the range of questions we can ask about ourselves and our histori- cal situation. To be specific, Gramsci's work suggests that librarians can be viewed as "organic intellectuals" and that they play an ideological and organizational role in maintaining a historic bloc's hegemony over the relations of economic production and civil society. From this per- spective, the apparently neutral discourse of LIS regarding access to information can be examined as a discourse that privileges particular rather than universal interests. Gramsci's Marxism In order to understand the concept of "organic intellectual," we must first review Gramsci's development of Marxist theory. The notion that human being and history are products of human labor provides the foundation of his thought. The production and reproduction of value, culture, and even our bodies constitute the material foundation for human existence. The relations of production that socially organize this labor constitute the structure on which is built particular super- structures at particular points in human history. The superstructure includes not only the state and its associatedjuridical and coercive insti- tutions but also the social and cultural institutions and practices typi- cally associated with the idea of civil society. Together, base and super- structure constitute a social formation that Gramsci calls the "historic bloc." In our time, the historic bloc is one of capitalist democracy, characterized by private ownership of the means of production and wage labor, and ideologically organized by a discourse of parliamentary and electoral politics. While formally organized at the level of the
36 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY nation-state, this social formation is a global phenomenon, and it exer- cises hegemony over economic and political relations [5, pp. 416-18]. Gramsci's use of the word "bloc" in this context is important. A historic bloc is not merely a structural phenomenon. As a social forma- tion, it depends on political principles and alliances that are subject to constant negotiation, challenge, and change. It is characterized by diverse interests whose particular fortunes and influence will vary as an outcome of political contests both within the bloc and between the bloc and its historical challengers. It organizes and assesses its he- gemony over society largely by controlling the terms of political dis- course and setting the agenda of that discourse, but its own internal divisions combined with events and behaviors beyond its control can create historical imperatives to which it must respond. In effect, a his- torical bloc represents a form of social contract; it is relatively stable but subject to renegotiation. The concepts of structure and superstructure arise from Marx's as- sertion that relations of production constitute "the economic structure of society, the real foundation, on which rises a juridical and political superstructure" [6, p. 503]. The ideas that dominate and govern a par- ticular moment in history are the ideas of the class that dominates and governs the means and relations of material production [7]. Given these kinds of statements, it is not difficult to see how some interpreters of Marx arrive at the conclusion that Marxism represents an economic determinism, but one must also recall that Marx insists that "men are the producers of their conceptions, ideas, etc.-real, active men, as they are conditioned by a definite development of their productive forces and of the intercourse corresponding to these" [7, p. 47]. His point is simply "that circumstances make men just as much as men make circumstances" [7, p. 59]. Social reality must be understood as the material outcome of a dialectical relationship between human be- ings and their circumstances. The historic bloc, then, is an outcome of this relationship. In his explanation of human nature, Gramsci makes clear that the historic bloc, and the superstructure that repre- sents it, is not merely a determined outcome of certain relations of production: The measure of freedom enters into the concept of man. That the objective possibilities exist for people not to die of hunger and that people do die of hunger, has its importance, or so one would have thought. But the existence of objective conditions, of possibilities, or of freedom is not yet enough: it is necessary to "know" them, and to know how to use them. And to want to use them. Man, in this sense, is concrete will, that is, the effective application of the abstract will or vital impulses to the concrete means of which realise such a will.... Man is to be conceived as an historical bloc of purely individual
LIBRARIANS AS ORGANIC INTELLECTUALS 37 and subjective elements and of mass and objective or material elements with which the individual is in an active relationship. [5, p. 360] This passage reveals the intimate relationships Gramsci sees between history, social existence, and individual human lives. Individual exis- tence and, we shall see, social formations can be characterized by the nature of the historic bloc that governs each, but to be conditioned by history is not the same thing as to be determined by it. Recent Marxist theory, influenced by Michel Foucault and Jacques Derrida, manifests a controversy over whether the structure, or "base" as it is sometimes referred to, and superstructure should be regarded as inherent categories of historical existence or as cultural and intellec- tual constructions. This issue turns on another controversy regarding the role of classes as agents of history [8-9]. Both problems are related to the failure to realize a genuine socialist hegemony and to the post- modem turn of late capitalism. This situation is about much more than merely the collapse of the Soviet Union. By the mid-1970s many Marxist scholars and socialist activists, largely because of the influence of Gramsci's thought, had already come to regard the Soviet Union as a practically and theoretically bankrupt historical model [10]. Rather, it is the resiliency of capitalism as a viable productive formation, despite the persistence of contradictions between the social production of value and its private appropriation, that led to these controversies within Marxist theory. Despite these controversies, however, and the successes of late capitalism, Marxist theory as exemplified by the work of Gramsci still possesses a power to explain persistent economic, so- cial, and political problems of capitalist democracy, not the least of which are blind spots and tunnel vision across a wide range of practices in addition to library and information science. It might still offer guid- ance to a democratically transformative, if not revolutionary, politics. The key to Gramsci's thought lies in his rejection of economic and historical determinism. There are no inexorable laws or inevitable outcomes in human affairs. Human existence is characterized by an ethical-political, or as Gramsci frequently referred to it, an "intellec- tual" reality as much as it is by economic reality [5, pp. 8-9, 161, 258, 333-34, and 366-67]. As can be seen from the long quote above, Gramsci explicitly recognized the role of human will in human history. This recognition has important implications for understanding how capitalism works. The historical relations between base and superstruc- ture are complex, and they are not unidirectional. Gramsci writes: "Be- tween the premise (economic structure) and the consequence (politi- cal organization), relations are by no means simple and direct: and it is not only by economic facts that the history of a people can be documented. It is a complex and confusing task to unravel causes and
38 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY in order to do so, a deep and widely diffused study of all spiritual and practical activities is needed" [11, pp. 280-81]. Relations of production can be organized in a variety of ways, and more and less progressive choices are available. Combined and uneven development both within and between national social formations means that different peoples will organize themselves in different ways. In other words, not everyone lives, or lives in exactly the same historical moment. As a result, superstructures will vary, and some capitalist social formations will be more progressive than others. Politics at the level of the superstructure can be used to effect a "catharsis," or "the pas- sage from the purely economic (or egoistic-passional) to the ethico- political moment," and in this moment the base can be "transformed into a means of freedom, an instrument to create a new ethico-political form and a source of new initiatives" [5, pp. 366-67]. Ideas have power, and progressive material reform of the relations of production, short of their revolutionary transformation, is possible. Historical Subjects and Hegemony The location of the historical subject, whether individual or social group, in a social formation is not an absolutely determinate phenome- non. There are no historically determined, objective, political interests. By no means does Gramsci deny that the relations of production assert a powerful material influence on the course of history. This notion is central to Gramsci's concept of hegemony, but he insists that historical subjects are located-and more important, willfully locate them- selves-in the nexus of historically conditioned productive and social relations that constitute a hegemony. Louis Althusser's structuralism has been criticized for merely substituting an idealist essentialism for economic determinism, [8, pp. 97-105], as a result leaving "little room for a revolutionary subject" [12, p. 141], but it seems clear that he was working from Gramsci's ideas when he used the psychoanalytic concept of overdetermination to describe the moment in which base and super- structure, economic and intellectual reality come together to create the actual historical location of a subject in a social formation. This location depends on objective historical conditions and what the sub- ject thinks about these conditions [13, pp. 87-128]. This reality, then, is ideologically constructed, and while it ordinarily reflects the ideas of a "ruling class" -more accurately, a dominant hegemony-it is also the source of the superstructure's power over the base and represents a possible historical position from which a dominant hegemony and the relations of production that support it can be challenged. Class
LIBRARIANS AS ORGANIC INTELLECTUALS 39 membership, that is, a subject's location in a social formation with re- gard to the relations of production between capital and labor, is a fun- damental but not determining factor. It plays a large but hardly exclu- sive role in the construction of a subject's political interest. In Althusser's language, the relations of production are, in the last instance, the determining force within social formations, but this is an instance that may never fully arrive, precisely because of willful, counterdetermining resistance to their logic. The continued domi- nance of capitalist relations of production is no more assured than their radical transformation [14]. The outcome of the contest between capital and the resistance to it that arises from the exploitation follow- ing from the differences that capital creates and maintains will be de- termined by what Gramsci calls "the war of position." This is a struggle of ideological and political practice that is protracted and ordinarily takes place on the terrain of civil society, but in some instances it can occur within the state itself [5, pp. 108-11, 120, and 229-39]. It is in the context of this kind of war that both the progressive and conserva- tive nature of libraries can be seen, but to get to this we must first take a look at Gramsci's analysis of how capitalist social formations are politically organized and reproduced. The Historic Bloc and Hegemony Central to Gramsci's analysis of both hegemony and the war of position is the concept of the historical bloc. At any given moment in the life of a social formation there is only one historic bloc. It organizes and dominates base and superstructure, and the relations between them, in order to reproduce the means and relations of production from which it derives its resources, its political power, and its intellectual/ cultural, or as Gramsci calls it, its "ethico-political hegemony." The base provides a historic bloc its content, and the superstructure gives it form [5, p. 377]. The historic bloc represents political alliances, but it cannot be reduced to a mere political alliance [15, pp. 119-25]. It is a "complex, contradictory, and discordant ensemble of the superstruc- tures [that] is the reflection of the ensemble of the social relations of production" [5, p. 366]. A historic bloc is an ensemble of social groups, intellectual and ideological forces organized around the historic inter- ests of the "fundamental social group" that organizes and leads the bloc [5, pp. 115-16]. Hegemony is a concept Gramsci uses to clarify the nature of a his- toric bloc's power. This power is dominant, but not dominating. It is far from total, and as mentioned earlier, it is exercised by setting political
40 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY agendas rather than by dictating political outcomes. Gramsci writes that "the supremacy of a social group manifests itself in two ways, as 'domination' and as 'intellectual and moral leadership.' A social group dominates antagonistic groups, which it tends to 'liquidate,' or to sub- jugate perhaps even by armed force; it leads kindred and allied groups. A social group can, and indeed must, already exercise 'leadership' be- fore winning governmental power (this indeed is one of the principal conditions of winning such power); it subsequently becomes dominant when it exercises power, but even as it holds it firmly in its grasp, it must continue to 'lead' as well" [5, pp. 57-58]. A ruling historic bloc, then, relies as much if not more on ideological leadership, exercised through agents constituted by civil society rather than on coercion exercised directly as state power. In fact, the historic bloc is likely to be more politically successful when it does so. The col- lapse of Soviet hegemony in Russia, for example, is clearly related to failures on the part of the historic bloc led by the Communist Party to reconcile contradictions between its claims to ideological leadership and its need to rely on state coercion to retain power. It is precisely this need to rely on intellectual and moral leadership that opens a dom- inant hegemony to a challenge of its legitimacy on its own terms and suggests historical roles for intellectual groups, including professionals. Gramsci saw this as crucial to a war of position. There will always be challenges to a historical bloc. Some will be based on traditional seg- ments of society generally seeking a return to a mythical past. Others will be based on marginalized and radicalized segments seeking a trans- formation to a utopian future. Some will arise from within the bloc itself as different interests that constitute it assert different visions of the bloc's future. Perhaps at this moment the last instance arrives. In Marxist theory of capitalist social formations the fundamental social group is the bour- geoisie. In late capitalist societies direct ownership of the means of pro- duction typically is dispersed, so this group instead consists of those who exercise direct control over the means of production. To render this phenomenon in a way that captures its complexity, however, ac- counts for the overdetermined relations between base and superstruc- ture, avoids personalization, and recognizes the problems of "class" as a theoretical and historical category, I will refer to it simply as "capi- tal." Among other problems, the historic bloc of capital may not be dominated by the bourgeoisie as a class, and the subjects of its domi- nance may not be exclusively the working class or proletariat. In the past, and in nondemocratic capitalist social formations, the historic bloc is often organized by social groups other than the bourgeoisie on behalf of capital [16]. The military, for example, typically takes a lead-
LIBRARIANS AS ORGANIC INTELLECTUALS 41 ing role in the organization of fascist social formations. With the advent of a discourse of democracy [8, pp. 152-59] and the rise of parliamen- tary institutions, the notion of a "political class" is useful [17]. Begin- ning with Bismarck's Germany, for example, professional politicians and a bureaucratic "class" have organized welfare states on behalf of capital. As discussed earlier, a historic bloc is not free of internal con- flict. This condition is especially true of welfare states and capitalist democracies. Fractions with different immediate interests exist within historic blocs, and each will seek its own power within the bloc [18, pp. 77-85]. For example, since the passage of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, we have witnessed a significant struggle among incumbent and competitive local exchange carriers, long-distance telephone com- panies, and cable operators for control of the telecommunications mar- ket, within the context of the game defined by that act of legislation. The focus of this contest, however, is relative competitive advantage, and the interpretations of the rules of the game, rather than the nature of the game itself. All of the players accept without question the need for "liberalization" (that is, deregulation of telecommunication mar- kets). Political Strategy and Hegemony Following Goran Therborn [19], we are now in a position to examine what the historic bloc of capital does when it rules and to understand the war of position as a matter of revealing and challenging blind spots and tunnel vision. According to Gramsci, this bloc seeks to protect its hegemony and to reproduce capitalist relations of production as well as its own position as a privileged historical subject in the social forma- tion. Coercion and exclusion by using the state as an oppressive appara- tus is a dangerous option. An alternative is to seek the legitimacy of the historic bloc's authority and to maintain its position by grounding the institutions of the state and civil society on a "rational/legal" basis [20], and to grant concessions to popular demands for social and politi- cal participation, and economic security, if not equality. Outstanding examples of this strategy include Franklin Roosevelt's New Deal and Lyndon Johnson's Great Society. These initiatives invite a kind of lim- ited membership in the bloc by creating permeable class boundaries for individuals, recognizing the grievances of historically excluded so- cial groups, and representing themselves symbolically as extensions of a historical discourse of democracy. This political strategy is itself overdetermined, driven notjust by con- siderations of practical politics seeking a social equilibrium and the
42 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY maintenance of capital's power, but also by a widespread acceptance of the discourse of democracy's legitimacy, even among the members of the historic bloc. By granting a legitimate place to the discourse of democracy in its political strategy, and accepting the idea that this im- plies meaningful participation beyond voting and formal equality of citizenship, the historic bloc brings an "intellectual" reality into play, and finds in persuasion an ideological solution to the frailty of its he- gemony. Ultimately this solution is based on the widespread acceptance of a Panglossian observation: that while not perfect, capitalist relations of production when combined with a political superstructure of parlia- mentary democracy, rational/legal structures of governance and au- thority, equality before the law, and a guarantee of individual rights, makes for the best of all possible worlds. There is powerful empirical evidence for this claim. Certainly since World War II, the general level of prosperity in the capitalist West has increased. The cultures of West- ern capitalist democracies manifest a real commitment to human rights, and the nation-states based on these cultures display pluralist polities that represent diverse political interests and compromise among these interests despite evident political partisanship. Concur- rence with a Panglossian viewpoint, however, can also be taken as evi- dence of the effectiveness of the capitalist historic bloc's ideological strategy in a war of position, given the persistence of systematic and structural inequalities and exclusions, the relative privileging of prop- erty rights over human rights, and the tendency to privilege market relations over human relations by privileging commodities over their producers. Late capitalism, however, offers a complex political situation in which the nexus that conditions the location of historical subjects tends to work against polarization. There are wealthy suburbanites who sup- port environmental causes and rural industrial workers that reject unions. This condition invites us to return to Gramsci. The war of posi- tion that characterizes politics in late capitalism is not a war of violent civil strife. It is, instead, an ideological war, conducted over a long term, and its goal is to alter the relations of production that unnecessarily limit human freedom. To accomplish this goal, the social formation must be altered at its base in order to realize the collective nature of the production of human values and to transcend the private appropri- ation and commodification of human labor. According to Gramsci, the political means of accomplishing these ends lies in challenging capital's hegemony within the superstructure. He argues that progressive social groups and individuals must "pene- trate" civil society of the dominant hegemony, seize positions within
LIBRARIANS AS ORGANIC INTELLECTUALS 43 it, and "turn" its institutions toward progressive and transformative ends. The goal is to take state power, but that can only be accomplished by fighting in the "trenches" of civil society [5, pp. 235, 243]. Gramsci writes: "The massive structures of modern democracies, both as State organizations, and as complexes of association in civil society, consti- tute for the art of politics as it were the 'trenches' and the permanent fortifications of the front in the war of position: they render merely 'partial' the element of the movement which before used to be 'the whole' of war" [5, p. 243]. Gramsci's understanding of the art of poli- tics follows from his understanding of the dialectical relations between base and superstructure. Change is not a matter of reforming the base so that reform of the superstructure may follow. The art of politics is a matter of reforming base and superstructure simultaneously through political action that accompanies a change of political consciousness [21, p. 1328]. The fact that capital relies on the discourse of democracy to legitimate its hegemony also creates an opening for a politics that demands the meaningful extension of democracy at the level of the base. Intellectuals, Blind Spots, and Tunnel Vision If we now combine Gramsci's theoretical understanding of the way so- cial formations are organized, his notion of the role of intellectuals in politics, and Althusser's understanding of superstructural institutions as overdetermined sites and stakes of ideological conflict in late capital- ist social formations [22, pp. 127-86], we can begin to outline an expla- nation of the blind spots and tunnel vision of librarianship. This move will also allow us to raise some serious research questions about the reproductive role of libraries and librarianship in the context of politi- cal contradictions generated within capitalist social formations. To be clear about Gramsci's terms, it is important to note that he believed that intellectual capability is not limited to a particular group identifiable as intellectuals. The "intellectual" is an aspect of ethical/ political reality in which all people live and participate [5, pp. 333- 34]. Gramsci writes: "All men are intellectuals, one could therefore say: but not all men have in society the function of intellectuals. When one distinguishes between intellectuals and non-intellectuals, one is referring in reality only to the immediate social function of the profes- sional category of intellectuals.... This means that, although one can speak of intellectuals, one cannot speak of non-intellectuals.... There is no human activity from which every form of intellectual participation can be excluded: homo faber cannot be separated from homo sapiens"
44 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY [5, p. 9]. The capitalist possesses and uses intellectual qualities as an organizer of relations of production. The worker likewise possesses and uses intellectual qualities but often without a clear theoretical con- sciousness of his or her activity. This last point is especially important, because it implies the existence of a space from which intellectual resis- tance to the historic bloc can arise. "Intellectual," then, is a broad theoretical term describing anyone who exercises "an organizational function in a wide sense-whether in the field of production, or that of culture, or that of political organi- zation" [5, p. 97]. Of those who can be formally identified as intellectu- als, some, including academics, physicians, and the clergy, for example, appear to exist outside of a context established by capitalist relations of production. These "traditional intellectuals" [5, pp. 6-8], and their social functions, existed prior to the rise of the capitalist historic bloc. They belong to an earlier time and appear to represent a historic conti- nuity, as well as a political neutrality with respect to the capitalist his- toric bloc. Their origins, however, trace back to an organic link to the preindustrial historic bloc. The clergy's role as the source and orga- nizer of morality in preindustrial social formations is perhaps the best example of this link. These practices were crucial to the feudal hege- mony grounded on the divine right of kings to exercise governing authority, but they were ideologically co-opted and adapted by the nineteenth-century bourgeoisie to provide the foundation for Victo- rian morality [23]. Traditional intellectuals, then, are assimilated into the capitalist historic bloc and indeed are often crucial allies and mem- bers of this bloc, providing important organizing and organic services, not the least of which is an ideological legitimation of the capitalist historic bloc's hegemony as a natural extension of prior historical de- velopments [15, p. 142]. In contrast, "organic intellectuals" [5, pp. 5-6] emerge as a historic bloc ascends to power and begins to assert its hegemony over a social formation. For capital, these intellectuals include technicians, engi- neers, managers, economists, lawyers, librarians, and now, information professionals. They are the organizers of capitalist hegemony and its culture, and they play central strategic and ideological roles in the su- perstructure that reproduces capitalist relations of production. These intellectuals "are the dominant group's 'deputies' exercising the subal- tern functions of social hegemony and political government" [5, p. 12]. They are organized and related by the historic bloc through its industrial and state bureaucracies, serving the bloc by fulfilling certain functions that require their expertise and by providing the bloc with a "homogeneity and an awareness of its own function, not only in the economic, but also in the social and political fields" [5, p. 5]. The
LIBRARIANS AS ORGANIC INTELLECTUALS 45 function at issue here is no less than the organizing and ruling function of the capitalist historic bloc. Organic intellectuals, then, provide the link between the base and superstructure that in turn provides capital with its identity as the fundamental group and leader of the historic bloc. These intellectuals are essential for the practical and ideological exercise of capitalist hegemony. We are now in a position to offer a Gramscian explanation of Wie- gand's observation that librarians, among other intellectuals, are trapped in their own discursive formations. Librarians, as intellectuals, and librarianship, as a practice, are immersed in a culture determined by the hegemony of the capitalist historic bloc. Indeed, they serve a positive function in the production and reproduction of this bloc and its hegemony. Under these circumstances, it is unlikely that librarians will raise questions that critically interrogate the relations of power and knowledge that sustain capitalist hegemony. To do so would not only challenge the authority of the historic bloc, it might also lead to sanc- tion against those posing the questions. Wiegand's notion of immersion is important here, because it helps us to understand the nature of the politics at work. For many in LIS, this immersion means that critical questions regarding their own role in the historic bloc simply will not occur to them, as they accept its legitimacy and see no reason to question its means or its ends. For those who might question this legitimacy, the threat of sanction is real. In this instance, however, immersion has different implications. Recall that late capitalist social formations generally do not rely on overt co- ercion to enforce discipline. Immersion creates a situation in which coercion is not necessary. Instead, discipline is enforced through var- ious ideological mechanisms that send messages as much as they pro- vide incentives or deny benefits. Transgressors, for example, are de- nied funding for library operations, find themselves unable to obtain research grants, are not chosen to give presentations at professional conferences, and are marginalized in the research literature. This discipline can be effective precisely because the transgressors are themselves immersed in the dominant culture and depend on that cul- ture for their social position. In addition, this discipline does not ap- pear as oppressive to those exercising it as, in their eyes, the transgres- sors are not formally denied free speech. Indeed, they are allowed to speak and then dismissed as either incorrect or as "navel-gazers" whose concerns are not relevant to more important matters. Wiegand's brief reexamination of the history of American librarian- ship might be regarded as an instance of such navel-gazing, but it re- veals a profession that rather consistently overlooks its own contribu- tion to the imbalances of power and knowledge that in turn contribute
46 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY to the systematic exclusion of certain groups of people from full partici- pation in capitalist social formations. Wiegand asserts that throughout the twentieth century, a dominant professional imperative systemati- cally privileged some library purposes and audiences to the exclusion of others. He argues that this trend is also visible in the practice of information science: "The 'information science' that has developed in the last years of the twentieth century constitutes an arena of study in which the technology to which it is harnessed defines the field ... and to the extent that people's 'information economy' does not require the use of these technologies within the culture in which they live, current 'information science' discourse renders them and their culture(s) in- visible largely by ignoring both" [1, p. 24]. Questions that information science might ask about the information needs, uses, and behaviors of marginalized people in a capitalist social formation are not regarded as important enough to deserve concern. As Wiegand might say at this point, blind spots and tunnel vision stand revealed. In an earlier work, Michael Harris used Gramscian theory to examine blind spots and tunnel vision in the practice of public librarianship. His particular concern was with practice that reinforced print culture as an aspect of capitalist hegemony [24]. He locates librarianship as a historical subject in an ensemble of institutions, both public and pri- vate, constituting the means of sanctioning and distributing public knowledge in a capitalist social formation. In effect, he describes librar- ians as intellectuals organic to the dominant culture of capitalist he- gemony. According to Harris, the central role of libraries as a state apparatus and agent of capitalist ideological hegemony is "the preser- vation, transmission, and thus the reproduction of the Book, and the audience for the Book" [24, p. 241]. While simple enough in itself, the implications of this statement have been contextualized by what Harris provides before it. The word "Book," for example, is deliberately capitalized. Harris does so to indi- cate its role as a symbolic representation of high culture-the canon of Western civilization that grounds and provides the legitimacy for capital's worldview as universal and universalizing, as well as its claim that its particular vision of the ends of cultural reproduction are in fact also universal. The library, along with the bookstore, is one of the least powerful institutions at the end of a chain of both state and civil institu- tions that function to produce and reproduce the cultural hegemony of capital in the form of the book. Producers and publishers are at the top of this chain, while reviewers and other "tastemakers," including educators, are located somewhere near the middle. This condition also tends to privilege some books, some uses of those books, and some users of them, while it marginalizes and excludes others.
LIBRARIANS AS ORGANIC INTELLECTUALS 47 Librarians, as professionals, participate in this function as organic intellectuals. They appear to have some autonomy with regard to selec- tion of materials and provision of services in the libraries they direct. This autonomy is ostensibly based on a professional ideology of neutral- ity with regard to book selection, and a commitment to intellectual freedom. It is reinforced by the status and trust accorded to librarians as professionals who can demonstrate that their practice is nondiscrimi- natory, based on a rational/legal authority derived from knowledge that is an outcome of a value-free research discourse, and supported by positive law that guarantees public accountability. Harris argues, however, that this autonomy is only apparent, and is actually quite lim- ited. The library is what Althusser calls an "ideological state apparatus" [22, pp. 141-48]. Selection decisions by librarians are framed by al- ready determined criteria over which librarians have little control. The library is a consumer of culture already determined as appropriate for distribution, and library and information science's research paradigm does not allow these conditions to be problematized. This situation resembles one of "don't ask, don't tell." Harris concludes: "Libraries are marginal institutions embedded in a hierarchically arranged set of institutions designed to produce and reproduce the dominant effective culture in print form. Power is asymmetrically distributed among these institutions.... The library's structural and functional characteristics are determined by its definition as an institution contrived to consume, preserve, transmit, and reproduce high culture in printed form" [20, p. 242]. Harris, like Wiegand, might be accused of expressing well-intended but impractical concerns. His theoretical speculations, however, lead him to assert twenty-six related propositions, all of which have serious implications for the everyday practice of librarianship [24, pp. 242- 44]. Harris offers these propositions as hypotheses in need of investiga- tion, not as truths whose certainty is already established. In other words, he poses critical questions that challenge received wisdom and conven- tional knowledge. Like Wiegand and Zweizig, he is concerned about the library in the life of the user. Many of his propositions point to specific, unexplored blind spots regarding relations of power, knowl- edge, and access to information alluded to by Wiegand. If one is to be selected as the most telling, it might be this one: "Librarians blame non-users for non-use of libraries" [24, p. 244]. Possibilities of Resistance A persistent pessimism characterizes the tone of Harris' essay, and it is not entirely absent from Wiegand's. Perhaps a sense of futility, as
48 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY well as misgivings regarding possible sanction, holds in their grip some librarians and LIS scholars who might otherwise explore through prac- tice and research the issues raised here. But even Harris notes that "one must not push the metaphor of 'reproduction' too far, lest we obscure the real evidence of resistance, or counter-hegemonic forces in American librarianship" [24, p. 242]. Despite their tone, it seems clear that both Harris and Wiegand also imply the possibility of a kind of political action that might at least counter the excesses of capitalist hegemony. Neither wants to give up on an institution thatJesse Shera [25] and Sidney Ditzion [26] identify as central to the discourse of democracy in America. The historical reality of this discourse, when combined with an over- all view of Gramsci's thought, reveals a political space within which progressive resistance to the historic bloc's hegemony can be and has been mounted. Recall first of all that the categories of Gramscian dis- course, including structures such as base and superstructure, and classes of people such as intellectuals, represent theoretical constructs whose concrete, historical reality is fluid and malleable. Both objective structures, and subjective positions within structures, are open to over- determination. Neither human nature nor the nature of human institu- tions are inexorably fixed by forces of history or hegemony. It is entirely possible that the actions of a given structure within a social formation, or a given intellectual working within that structure, might at a given historical moment be characterized by a conflict between hegemonic and counterhegemonic ideas. Such a condition is indicative of the war of position. According to Gramsci, ideas do make a difference because human beings are free to act on them. Change at the superstructural level can cause change in the base. Turning to the nature of intellectuals specifically, Gramsci observed that both traditional and organic intellectuals possess a relative auton- omy from the historic bloc because of their expertise [5, p. 6]. They perform specialist functions on which the bloc depends, and this de- pendency of the bloc on their skills provides them with a measure of power [18, pp. 255-62]. As Harris argues, they may not possess a great deal of power, and the threat of sanction is real. Nevertheless, intellec- tuals, including librarians, are not entirely constrained in either their thoughts or actions, and the range of freedom available has grown in the context of a discourse of democracy that has become integral to at least some capitalist social formations. Indeed, this expansion has occurred precisely because of political struggles conducted by an alli- ance of people that reflects the potential of a new historical bloc [5, pp. 9-10]. This alliance includes members of the current historical
LIBRARIANS AS ORGANIC INTELLECTUALS 49 bloc, who exercise their relative autonomy to pursue change within the bloc, as well as people excluded from the bloc [8, pp. 152-71]. Given Harris' analysis, for example, the public library may be re- garded as an ideological state apparatus. It is a state-maintained, super- structural institution designed not to coerce but to persuade the public of the historical bloc's legitimacy by reinforcing the dominant culture. From a Gramscian perspective, it is an ideological weapon in the war of position, but it is a double-edged weapon. Librarians, as organic intellectuals, are in a position to exercise at least some real choice re- garding the ends they pursue. Some libraries may never venture be- yond satisfying the conditioned demands of audiences seeking nothing but assurance that this is the best of all possible worlds. The actions of these libraries will confirm Harris' theory. Some libraries, however, will seek out the underserved and the unserved and commit significant quantities of their limited resources to engaging these audiences. Most libraries will fall between these extremes, and some of their users will find their own paths through mazes of information and classification systems presented to them to achieve ends that librarians can neither imagine or anticipate [27]. Even within a single library it is likely that one will discover some professional practices that represent capitalist hegemony at work and others that challenge that hegemony. Intellectual freedom regarding book selection, for example, may be practiced uncritically and imperfectly realized [28], yet its position in the professional canon of librarianship is not without meaning, and it has led librarians to active resistance against censorship [29]. The ambivalent location of the library in the social formation, especially within the context of the discourse of democracy, means that the li- brary as an agent of hegemony is politically vulnerable. It is a potential site of ideological conflict manifest in contests over decisions regarding the nature of its collections, services, and audiences. It is also a stake in that conflict in that it can and perhaps usually does serve the purpose Harris describes, yet it has the potential to be penetrated and turned counterhegemonic. Certainly this condition does not imply a revolu- tionary transformation. The library's dependence on the state for fund- ing, to say nothing of the political conditions and practices of capitalist democracies, precludes this outcome. This condition, however, does raise interesting questions that are not free of political implications. In what ways and to what extent does the library's position in the super- structure and librarianship's location as a historical subject result in practices that are progressive or conservative? Does Kathleen McCook's [30] recent work on the library's potential role in community building represent a progressive counterhegemonic challenge to the Public Li-
50 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY brary Association's (PLA's) emphasis on administrative rationality [31- 32]? Does the latter represent a kind of tunnel vision that limits the library's contribution to genuinely progressive social outcomes by de- fining professional success in terms of the ability of the library to serve the predictable demands of a normatively identified market? And what does it say about the American Library Association, that it is willing to publish both McCook's and the PLA's texts? It may be that this bears witness to pluralism in action, a manifestation of ideological conflict within ALA, or both. Gramsci repeatedly asserts that neither theoretical abstractions nor facile assumptions regarding the "laws" of history will contribute to understanding how civil society actually works at a given moment. Coming to an understanding of the real conditions of exis- tence in order to exercise a genuine freedom is a difficult task requir- ing critical empirical study. The empirical questions arising from the ambivalent position of libraries in the social formation, however, also imply that librarians must confront political and moral choices in their everyday practice. In his discussion of the problems faced by workers in their effort to develop a theoretical consciousness of their actions, Gramsci neatly describes a situation that can be applied to librarians [5, pp. 333-34]. His work suggests that librarians might manifest a contradictory theo- retical consciousness. On the one hand, their activity implies a progres- sive transformation of the world. This is particularly manifest in librari- anship's long-standing commitment to empowering individuals to pursue self-culture and lifelong learning [21, pp. 53-77; 33]. On the other hand, they uncritically absorb a theoretical consciousness from the past [1; 34]. This consciousness holds them together as a social group, influences their ethico-political conduct and will, but produces a situation that does not permit action, instead reinforcing a moral and political passivity [35]. They offer a potentially progressive and transforming service, but they do so in a context that preserves their self-interest and liberal identity within the capitalist hegemony, thus allowing them to dismiss the need for critical selfW-examination. A series of questions follow, not unlike the propositions advanced by Harris. In each instance, research questions imply political and value questions. Questions for Practice and Research 1. Do libraries work within a context of contradiction, sustaining a capitalist hegemony and providing a means for users to think be- yond that hegemony, as well as its limits to human freedom? Can libraries do more to enhance freedom and overcome the struc-
LIBRARIANS AS ORGANIC INTELLECTUALS 51 tural barriers that deny to some full participation in the social formation? Should libraries do this? Does librarianship conduct a discourse within and about itself that assumes that the important value questions regarding the ends of public library practices and services have already been satisfactorily answered? 2. If the condition indicated by the first question above is true, is this then a manifestation of a reality in which the public library is a site and stake of an ideological conflict whose outcome con- tributes to the production and reproduction of the social forma- tion? Can we find evidence of this conflict? Can we find librarians and scholars who do address the issues raised by Wiegand and Harris and act in ways that reveal blind spots and expand our vision? Are we hesitant to engage these questions because we might cast ourselves in a less than ideal light? Might we find our- selves on the wrong side? 3. Why do questions like those posed here go unasked? Why do propositions like those offered by Harris go unexamined? Does the lack of action reveal blind spots and tunnel vision? Are they not pursued because they are not salient or important, or because librarians, fulfilling their responsibility as organic intellectuals in support of capital, deny the saliency and importance of these questions and propositions? Is the source of the blind spots and tunnel vision identified by Wiegand? 4. If librarians chose to pursue a counterhegemonic strategy, would this even be possible? To what kinds of discipline would it be sub- ject? How are progressive choices constrained or encouraged by a capitalist hegemony that is nevertheless characterized by a dis- course of democracy? If limits are in place, in what ways and to what extent can and should librarians challenge them? What strat- egies can and should be pursued if librarians choose to engage in the war of position? Conclusion Wiegand's essay implies that librarianship's discourse, in both its theo- retical and practical aspects, is essentially centered on its own status and power within the historical bloc that organizes and governs the American capitalist social formation. He argues that information sci- ence as an academic discipline willingly, if unconsciously, contributes to this bloc's maintenance and exercise of power by its focus on ques- tions that perhaps manifest truly universal human needs, but only on terms favorable to the interests of the capitalist historic bloc. He does
52 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY not assign personal blame but, rather, points to historical and struc- tural conditions that result in the kind of human choices that cause this outcome. He asks us all to consider if this is what we truly want. He is conscious of the counterhegemonic nature of his statements, of the challenge he poses to the historic bloc, and the difficulties of the tasks he sets before us. One can almost hear him wondering who will take him up on his offer. It might well be that Gramsci is both right and wrong; that modern Western social formations are dominated by a capitalist historic bloc whose reach is global in scope, but that the discourse of democracy adopted by this bloc ensures reasonable, if not entirely fair, life out- comes for all of the formation's members. On the other hand, if capital- ist democracy continues to suffer from persistent problems of system- atic and structural exclusion and marginalization of some its people, and because of this condition it diminishes their humanity, where should we look for solutions to this problem? The history that brings us to any given point in time lays its weight on the choices available to us. Gramsci, however, would insist that the future of humanity is not absolutely determined by what came before. Wiegand's essay suggests libraries might be a place to look for choices, for a political space in which undetermined choices can be made, because sometimes both librarians and the people who use libraries have by their actions chal- lenged and shattered the normative expectations under which they or- dinarily labor. They have used the resources at hand to determine in small ways new criteria of human freedom. REFERENCES 1. Wiegand, Wayne A. "Tunnel Vision and Blind Spots: What the Past Tells Us about the Present; Reflections on the Twentieth-Century History of American Librarianship." Li- braty Quarterly 69 (January 1999): 1-32. 2. Zweizig, Douglas. "Predicting the Amount of Library Use: An Empirical Study of the Role of the Public Library in the Life of the Adult Public." Ph.D. diss., Syracuse University, 1973. 3. Case, Donald 0. "Comment." Librayy Quarterly 69 (October 1999): 536-37. 4. Suber, Jere Paul. Culture and Critique: An Introduction to the Critical Discourses of Cultural Studies. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press, 1998. 5. Gramsci, Antonio. Sekections from the Prison Notebooks. Edited and trans. by Quintin Hoare and Geoffrey N. Smith. New York: International Publishers, 1971. 6. Marx, Karl. "Preface to a Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy." In his Sekcted Works. Vol. 1, p. 503. Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1973. 7. Marx, Karl. The Geman Ideology: Part One. New York: International Publishers, 1970. 8. Laclau, Ernesto, and Mouffe, Chantal. Hegemony and Socialist Strategy: Towards a Radical Democratic Politics. London: Verso, 1985.
LIBRARIANS AS ORGANIC INTELLECTUALS 53 9. Derrida, Jacques. Specters of Marx: The State of the Debt, the Work of Mourning, and the New International. New York: Routledge, 1994. 10. Claudin, Fernando. The Communist Movement: From Comintemn to Cominform, Part Two. New York: Monthly Review Press, 1975. 11. Gramsci, Antonio. Studi Gramsciani. Rome: Instituto Gramsci, 1958. 12. Fields, A. Belden. "In Defense of Political Economy and Systemic Analysis: A Critique of Prevailing Theoretical Approaches to the New Social Movements." In Marxism and the Intepretation of Culture, edited by Cary Nelson and Lawrence Grossberg, pp. 141-56. Ur- bana: University of Illinois Press, 1988. 13. Althusser, Louis. "Contradiction and Overdetermination." In his For Marx, translated by Ben Brewster, pp. 87-128. New York: Vintage Books, 1970. 14. Schumpeter,Joseph A. Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy. 3d ed. New York: Harper, 1950. 15. Sassoon, Anne Showstack. Gramsci's Politics. New York: St. Martin's, 1980. 16. Marx, Karl. "The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte." In Karl Marx and Frederick Engels: Selected Works, pp. 97-180. New York: International Publishers, 1968. 17. Mosca, Gaetano. The Ruling Class. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1939. 18. Poulantzas, Nicos. Political Power and Social Classes. London: Verso, 1978. 19. Therborn, Goran. What Does the Ruling Class Do When It Rules? London: Verso, 1978. 20. Weber, Max. From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology. Edited and trans. by H. H. Gerth and C. Wright Mills. New York: Oxford University Press, 1946. 21. Gramsci, Antonio. Quaderni del Carcere. 4 vols. Turin: Einaudi, 1975. 22. Althusser, Louis. "Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses." In his Lenin and Philoso- phy and Other Essays, translated by Ben Brewster, pp. 127-86. New York: Monthly Review Press, 1971. 23. Searle, Geoffrey R. Morality and the Market in Victorian Britain. New York: Oxford University Press, 1998. 24. Harris, Michael. "State, Class and Cultural Reproduction: Toward a Theory of Library Service in the United States." In Advances in Librarianship, vol. 14, edited by Wesley Wimonton, pp. 211-52. New York: Academic Press, 1986. 25. Shera, Jesse. Foundations of the Public Library. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1949. 26. Ditzion, Sydney. Arsenals of a Democratic Culture. Chicago: American Library Association, 1947. 27. Radford, Gary P. "Positivism, Foucault, and the Fantasia of the Library: Conceptions of Knowledge and the Modern Library Experience." Library Quarterly 62 (April 1992): 408-24. 28. Serebnick, Judith. "Book Reviews and the Selection of Controversial Books in Public Libraries." Library Quarterly 51 (October 1981): 390-409. 29. Robbins, Louise S. GCnsorship and the American Library. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1996. 30. McCook, Kathleen de la Pefia. A Place at the Table: Participating in Community Building. Chicago: American Library Association, 2000. 31. Nelson, Sandra; Altman, Ellen; and Mayo, Diane. Managing for Results: Effective Resource Allocation for Public Libraries. Chicago: American Library Association, 1999. 32. Nelson, Sandra. The New Planning for Results: A Streamlined Approach. Chicago: American Library Association, 2001. 33. Van Fleet, Connie. "Lifelong Learning Theory and the Provision of Adult Services." In Adult Sevices: An EnduringFocus for Public Libraries, edited by Kathleen M. Heim and Danny P. Wallace, pp. 166-211. Chicago: American Library Association, 1990. 34. Wiegand, Wayne A. The Politics of an Emerging Profession: The Anerican Library Association, 1876-1917. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1986. 35. Raber, Douglas. Librarianship and Legitimacy: The Ideology of the Public Library Inquiry. West- port, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1997.