A Different Drummer: Thoughts on Library Education ROSE Z. SELLERS ". . . if a man does not keep pace with his companions, perhaps it is because he hears a different drummer. Let him step to the music which he hears, however measured or far away . . ." - Henry David Thoreau - Walden. THE PROFESSION of librarianship in the United States has always been prone to soul searching, as the pages of library literature amply attest, but up to recent times there was never any doubt in the minds of those who practiced it (1) that the basic core of their pro- fessional preparation was sound; (2) that machines were simply de- vices to reduce the drudgery of repetitive work and save time; and (3) that the term LIBRARIAN could be worn with pride, as labeling one a member of an intellectual and humanistic calling devoted to making the wisdom of the ages accessible, and helping to add to it, directly or indirectly. With the advent of computers, and the prevailing emphasis on sci- ence, or rather, technology, with millions of dollars in grants being made available to the new aristocracy of the cyclotron, electron micro- scope, high speed centrifuge and electronic computer, an upheaval in values appears to be taking place. Some library schools are no longer content to be called that, and have added Information Sciences to the name, in line with the new shibboleth. "Loyal alumni" have beseiged the deans of the schools which did not jump on the bandwagon fast enough, to change their names, or at least introduce and advertise the new, prestigious courses in electronic data processing, and information retrieval. The author is Associate Librarian and Pre-Librarianship Counselor at Brook- lyn College. This lecture was delivered on December 29, 1964, at the dedication of the Graduate Library School Wing of the Jewish National and University Library, Hebrew University in Jerusalem, Israel. 151
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP For those who become enamoured of the spanking new and dif- ferent terminology (many in the expectation of kudos in the shape of salary and prestige) and for those persuaded or frightened by the apostles of the machine that "librarians are on the way out/' the logical next step was to become "Documentalists," or "Information Specialists" or "Literature Scientists," just as janitors had become main- tenance personnel, undertakers, mortuary artists, and plumbers, sani- tary engineers. Before we allow the formidable combination of panic, the hard sell of the "hardware" suppliers, and the desire to keep up with the Joneses (if not one step ahead of them) , to change the character of our pro- fession, a long hard look at the situation is in order. In Defense of Diversity During a luncheon meeting which followed recruiting interviews for library trainees, a bright young counselor asked me whether the current emphasis on machine techniques would bring about the ap- pearance of a "new kind of librarian." I am sure I surprised him by the fervency with which I uttered, "I hope not!" One of the many satisfying elements in our profession has been its capacity to offer fulfillment to all kinds of people (providing, of course, they had the ability to do professional work) . Those who have loved books - "the feel of them, the smell of them, the way they're printed, even the idea of them" 1 better than they do people, have gone into technical services; those who prefer to work with people directly, have gone into public services. There is a place, too, for those who are interested in developing systems which involve the use of high speed printers, cards falling into slots, or unseen hands typing . . . and I am happy to welcome them, but I do not feel that what they are doing is more important or more significant than what has been done in libraries since clay tablets were collected in Mesopotamia. "Information Specialists" have a tendency to feel that they alone are ready for the "library of the future," but so are those of us whose work brings us into contact with no machine more complicated than the typewriter. The newest wrap-around technique, which makes pos- sible "current awareness" among chemical titles, does not bring greater satisfaction to a patron interested in "normal stress effects in second order fluids" than does a traditionally made index which leads an in- quirer to a beloved poem from a dimly remembered fragment. 152
A Different Drummer: Thoughts on Library Education There is room in the profession for all kinds of librarians, but I would give short shrift to the arrogant assumption that this is the century of gadgets, and that the librarian who does not surrender himself to The Machine is an anachronism. The century in which Wassily Kandinsky flourished also nurtured an Andrew Wyeth; Aaron Copland's music is contemporaneous with the sounds produced by John Cage; James Joyce and John Galsworthy are both products of the same era. Change for Change's Sake There is a school of thought which considers all change to be im- provement. To the worshippers at such a shrine, nothing is good un- less it is "the latest," however shoddy, however inapplicable to a given situation. When I visited Library/USA at the New York World's Fair, I was appalled to see what passed for an Information Center. No one was answering unplanned reference questions, no one was talking about books or libraries or librarianship. Amid shouting suitable to any "push a button and see it light up" show, librarians were grinding out printouts. If I were a possible recruit, I would have found the field as tempting as tending an endless belt in a factory, or wrapping parcels in a supermarket. It was not the use of devices ... the Children's Theatre, part of the same exhibit, used devices too - slides, films, tape recordings - but the exhibitors had had the grace to recognize them as secondary; the focus of attention was a librarian, not a computer. The idea of change for change's sake, coupled with the equally crippling blind following of "the trend" has always resulted in gro- tesques, whether the field is librarianship or architecture. And indeed, blind following in the case of the latter has dotted the American land- scape with library after library that is distinguished only for windows, windows, windows, with no regard for the differences posed by climate or terrain. In the case of the former, it has resulted in the use of com- plicated or expensive or space wasting machines where they make no discernible sense. The frenzied desire to change just to be changing is sad but it is not new. In a 1902 issue of Library Journal, Melvil Dewey complains that, Some librarians seem to feel toward their catalog rules as they do toward their clothes, that they are liable to be commented on unpleasantly unless 153
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP they have something new each season. Whenever a few come together there is the tendency to propose alterations with the same freedom that they would try experiments in other directions, forgetting that the card catalog is the worst place in the world to make new changes, because new work is inserted at irregular places, destroying consistency and harmony, and reflecting un- pleasantly on the ability of those who have done the work . . .2 Special Training for Special Librarians Among the dangers that confront the profession, a persistent one is that of fragmentation of preparation. This danger is inherent in the continued insistence of some special librarians that the library schools re-arrange the entire curriculum in line with their needs. They ask for a curriculum which will "prepare them for the kind of library in which they are to work and which excuses them from presently re- quired courses which are valuable primarily for school and public li- braries.8 This is absurd as well as short-sighted. Just as a city is a congeries of villages, so every library except the smallest, is a series of special libraries. As Lawrence Clark Powell said, in an address given before the 52nd annual convention of the Special Libraries Association on May 29, 1961, "Although I have worked most of my life in a univer- sity library system, it is a varied one, embracing law, medicine, engi- neering, chemistry, physics, education, art, music, theatre arts, and in- dustrial relations and business administration, and I could claim to be a special librarian." 4 Besides, even were it true, which it seldom is, that a librarian-to-be knows in advance exactly what kind of library he wants to work in, what guarantee is there that a job in such a library would be waiting for him on graduation, or that he might not want to make a change? I make a point of reading "personal progress" notes in the newsletter published by the New York Chapter of the S.L.A., and I am wryly amused to note both the frequency of change and the radical difference in the type of library the librarian moves from and to ... from a job with an oil company to one with a public relations firm, from a college library to a public library, from an art library to an insurance library! Could a narrowly-based curriculum, suitable only for an industrial library have carried over to a college library? Paul Woodring, in a Saturday Review editorial 5 on The Future of Liberal Education says: "Specialized or technical training prepares an individual for his first job but not for the decisions he must make as a free man or for the changes in careers that will come during his 154
A Different Drummer: Thoughts on Library Education lifetime. Liberal education, because it is education for versatility, is the best preparation for those who live in a changing world." So it is with preparation for librarianship in a special library, or a public library, in a school or a college. The basic library curriculum is deliberately left general, elastic, and "liberal" so that it will prepare not only for the first job but for all of them. One of the best state- ments I have seen, regarding this nagging insistence on a myriad of special courses, was the one made by Harold Lancour, when he was the Associate Director of the University of Illinois Library School, in response to a letter asking what special courses were available at Illi- nois. ... we believe that the principal distinction between types of libraries has to do with the book collection and the purposes of the readers. We are also convinced that knowledge concerning specialized subjects is not gained in library school but must be based on study which either precedes or follows li- brary training. These are the reasons then why one does not customarily find a course in special libraries under such a title in the current library school catalogs. Nevertheless, we insist that we prepare for special librarianship at Illinois. In all of our courses it is possible for a student to exploit any specific interest to a very considerable extent. In our administration course, which is a general one, the student specifically interested in music librarianship, for example can do all of his projects in that course with the music library in mind . . . ... we also have a special projects course called Advanced Studies in Librari- anship in which a student may, under close direction, carry out a detailed in- vestigation of a problem in special libraries in general or in even more spe- cialized areas, such as Art and Architecture, Agriculture, Chemistry, Physics, Law, Music, etc. These problems can be either bibliographical or administra- tive. Thus you see while we do not have a course 'How to be a Special Librarian' we have a rich group of offerings which permit highly specialized develop- ment of a particular interest, all of which must be based, however, on a strong general training in librarianship.6 Not only do people shift from one kind of library to another; some- times a whole library shifts from one pattern to another. My own library used to be arranged on the traditional pattern, by form of material. When we got our new building, we switched to a divisional 155
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP set-up. Overnight our general reference staff was scattered throughout the library, and our reference librarians became subject specialists! How did it work out? Fabulously! Since science seems to be the subject about which there is most concern, I asked our new science librarian (who had majored in history!) how she was faring, and she assured me that her experience as a general reference librarian had been the best possible preparation for her new assignment. She feels strongly that the science librarian who knows humanities and social science reference tools can do a better job as a result. These examples illustrate the point: 1. Mathematics and Music (librarian has to know about Scholes and other reference books in music as well as Physics Abstracts and the Journal of the Acoustical Society of America.) 2. Mixed Marriage (librarian has to know of Sociological Abstracts and International Index as well as of Psychological Abstracts) 3. Hostility in Children (librarian has to know of Winn's Encyclo- pedia of Child Guidance and Child Development Abstracts as well as of Education Index and Psychological Abstracts) 4. Child Life in Israel (librarian has to know of Sociological Ab- stracts, Education Index, yearbooks issued by the Israeli gov- ernment, as well as of Psychological Abstracts) The (perhaps) strange but wonderful fact is that intelligent and interested librarians seem to be able to function well in highly spe- cialized situations, regardless of their major. (When I say "interested," I mean that they will be willing to "re-tool" for a new job by taking a course in the bibliography of the subject, if that seems desirable, or by learning on the job through a total immersion in it.) The experience of the Documentation Center connected with the School of Library Science at Western Reserve University in training abstracters for work with papers in metallurgy, is very significant: "There was no special study made of this phenomenon, but it was the impression of the supervisory people that non-specialists in metal- lurgy (especially arts and science trained people) tended to produce more satisfactory abstracts (of the particular short indicative kind wanted) than did the specialists, who were inclined to argue with the authors, editorialize about authors' statements, etc." 7 and what could be more "special" than metallurgy! The purpose of the special librarian is much better served by the practice followed by all the library school deans I know, when they 156
A Different Drummer: Thoughts on Library Education have candidates with unusual backgrounds or specific jobs waiting - of tailoring the curriculum to their special needs. They know how far they can depart from the regular curriculum without destroying its integrity. Is the Machine a Panacea? I should make it clear at the outset that I am not opposed to the use of machines per se. Indeed, I do not know how we managed in my own library before we acquired the very versatile Xerox 914 copier, and IBM has been a godsend in speeding up the return of books to the shelves. My antagonism stems from Society's idolatrous attitude toward what Jacques Barzun, in his provocative "Science, the Glorious Entertainment" calls Techne (and what I, privately, call Moloch) ! Specifically, I object to four unfounded claims or abuses in the appli- cation of machines to library functions, and will discuss each in turn. 1. I find meretricious the impression created in some quarters that machines have achieved a remarkable advance over conventional meth- ods used for information retrieval. I should like to recommend to any- one who has been persuaded that this is so, an excellent article on this subject. "Automation and Library Systems," by Theodore Stein, form- erly with IBM and now an independent consultant, is an honest, calm appraisal, mercifully free of gobbledygook. Among the important points that Stein makes are the following: There is frequent indication that present techniques in machine searching do not adequately substitute for human judgment. Provisions to supplement the machine search with human judgment are often described. A study asking the 111 users of the Western Reserve University System for metallurgical literature searching to rate the system resulted with roughly half saying it was excellent or satisfactory while the other half rated it adequate, fair, or poor. This is not sufficiently strong endorsement to encourage an at- tempt to apply the technique to a large general reference library. However, when the report is examined in further detail more serious implications about the system become apparent. The report includes one table which isolates those users who had access to the information by conventional means and by the machine system. They were, therefore, able to compare performance of the machine system with that of the conventional system. In this group of 52 users, 36 rated the machine system worse, 16 rated it better. A listing of reasons for the ratings is given. In this listing, five rated the machine system worse in relevance of materials; none rated it better.* 157
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP Not only are doubts about the current superiority of machine retrieval (a very expensive installation) being expressed by authorities like Ralph Shaw and Yehoshua Bar-Hillel; there is grave doubt that im- proved computer equipment will improve the situation. I will cheerfully grant that in some highly selective and specialized fields, machine searching will probably work very well (but even if it does, who wants all that information!) It cannot be denied that an urgency exists in scientific-technological research and that this has greatly affected the demands placed upon the special library. The amount of research, the number of scientists, and the volume of publica- tion has increased. The extent of this has been adequately documented else- where. Yet the volume of publication is deceptive. The desirability of supply- ing all the available information, and the assumption that more and more in- formation is better than less and less, is based upon a fallacy. The inescapable truth remains that most people have too much and not too little information. The difficulty is not so much storage and retrieval as evaluation and interpreta- tion. Much of the available information is meaningless, inaccurate, or irrele- vant Its relationship to research and the problem at hand is often far from explicit; the contexts, frames of reference, and configurations of concepts cannot be readily formed which would give significance and structure to raw information. The provision of additional information often serves to cause further confusion and to impede the structuring process. Quite understandably a microbiologist recently remarked, 'If all of human knowledge could be put on a computer, and I could push a button and get all the information on DNA, I doubt that I would ever push that button.' 9 Fortunately for the human race, it is still true that people, poor fallible things that they are, have something that can never be built into a machine. Moreover, there are certain kinds of retrieval that a human reference librarian can perform that no known machine can. This is retrieval based not on objective factors, but on associative recall, a wholly subjective process. As one information retrieval specialist has explained it: 'The machine may be able to get me a copy of Shannon and Weaver on The Mathematical Theory of Communication if I ask for it and describe it correctly. But it cannot, if I mis-identify it. Yet I can ask a librarian for a copy of that red book by Shannon on information theory, and somehow, through a process of associa- tion she will remember that it is, in fact, an orange book, and that it is the one that has been circulated a lot recently to faculty members in the math department, and that its title is not what I said. She can find it for me despite 158
A Different Drummer: Thoughts on Library Education my misinforming her.' A good deal more work must be done on human psychology and perception before the machine can match this capability. Tor a long time,' says this expert, 'the first step in information retrieval will be a conversation between a user and a librarian.' 10 The same thought was expressed by two librarians: "No matter how omniscient the machine or how clever the scientist in the Informa- tion Center it will still take a good librarian to identify, locate, and produce a document that has been cited incorrectly or incompletely." u It would be a wholesome experience for all our machine-intoxicated ad- ministrators (or directors, or documentalists, or information specialists - in short, anything except librarians') if they were required to spend part of their day behind a reference or information desk, if only to see how far re- moved the borrower's question is from the information he really wants. 1 need material on medicine,' says the frantic student. Fifteen minutes of ques- tioning finally narrows the scope of medicine to information sufficient for a five-minute speech on the role of the white corpuscle in combating disease. 'Have you got anything on American Literature'? is reduced by careful in- terrogating to critical analysis of Hawthorne's Marble Faun. A student inquires, 'Where are your books on American education? The kind librarian doesn't just send him to the shelves; he probes. What he really wants, it develops, is the enrollment of students in secondary schools during 1840, 1850, I860.12 2. I do not like to see elaborate systems set up in institutions or situations too small or inadequately staffed to profit by them . . . The article by Theodore Stein previously mentioned has this to say: A principal consideration [in introducing automatic procedures] is the fact that the same equipment and the same basic machine processable files can be used to obtain more than one result. In many instances it is this factor which favors the punched card or magnetic tape approach. . . . Against these encouraging factors must be set a few practical cautionary remarks. While the economics of this general class of application can be quite favorable, it is well known that there is a certain minimum volume of activity which must be maintained before the economic benefits can be realized.13 Equally indefensible is thinking up things for the machine to do once it is bought - (and alas, it is easier to obtain money for com- puters than for shelvers, higher salaries, or even electric typewriters!) - not because they deserve or need doing, but because the machine is expensive and ought to be used as much as possible. 159
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP I'm sure few would deny that every effort should be made to provide readers with those services judged essential by the profession, regardless of costs or techniques. But what constitutes 'essential'? A computerized system can provide us with an astonishing array of lists and statistics as by-products of the system. But we must not lose sight of the crucial question of whether patrons and administrators really want or need this information.14 An automated ordering system can also provide the library with data on the status of outstanding book orders, particularly orders which have been de- layed. To perform this job manually is no small task. It means that all status reports received from publishers must be posted in the outstanding order file. Nevertheless, the cost might very well be justified if this represents a type of information our patrons require. However, just because a computer- ized system can provide us with this data as a by-product, this does not make it an essential service. Why do a job efficiently that does not need to be done at all? 16 3. I am highly irritated by the substitution of expensive alternatives for the printed page which fail to live up to the promises made for them. . . . Microreproduction techniques are not a panacea for the problem of sprawling collections. First, the need for a machine of some kind to enlarge the image means that users do not have the physical freedom that book users enjoy. The Council on Library Resources is supporting studies aimed at de- veloping a simple, light-weight, and effective pocket reader - an enlarging lens and bracket of some kind that readers can carry with them anywhere* But there are a number of prickly optical problems to be solved before this can be accomplished. Secondly, many readers, especially researchers, need the convenience of a book. Study through a reading enlarger makes it difficult to flip through pages, to scan, or to browse for material. The machines often must be used in subdued light.16 In his charming "Thoughts on Books and Libraries," 17 Edwin Wolf II discloses a number of well kept secrets about book, magazine, and disc substitutes which should give pause to those librarians who are busy throwing away the originals. I cannot accept microfilms or microcards or magnetic tapes as a substitute for the original. As expedients for the inexpensive transmission of texts from a library to a scholar's desk, miles apart, for circumscribed use, these gadgets of reproduction are wonderful. But we are being assailed by a barrage of hard salesmanship, which tells us not to bother about the expense of the 160
A Different Drummer: Thoughts on Library Education real thing; just get it microfilmed. The attack on the rare book and the auto- graph document has put us antiquarians on the defensive. We are in the position of having to justify what has survived and been hymned for cen- turies. It's time to counterattack. My intention is not to talk of the aesthetics, the aura, the feeling of the writer and his times which is inherent in an original. Bookmen from Richard de Bury to Robert Taylor have done that better than I can. No, I have some- thing shocking to tell. It is now being rumored around that some microfilms have deteriorated to the point of illegibility, and that some magnetic tapes have scrambled to the point of unintelligibility. ... A release from the Na- tional Bureau of Standards, dated Sept. 25, 1963, is headed, 'Microscopic Defects in Film/ In conservative low-key fashion it says that for a year the Bureau has been studying defects which appear on microfilm negatives from two to 20 years old. 'Thousands of rolls of microfilmed government records/ the release goes on 'have been inspected, and a widespread incidence of de- fects noted.' A radio station made special orchestral recordings for its own use. Within two years the independent magnetic fields set up in the coiled tape, as I was told, had so scrambled the recordings that they were useless. Some while ago a record company is reported to have put all its master discs on tape and thrown away the discs. (Saves space, you know.) Now, the tapes cannot be used to make new records. The little jest entitled ' 'Oblivion" 1S is not entirely funny: "This is to advise that due to unforeseen circumstances our library has had to temporarily discontinue operation. Our chemically reproduced catalog cards have faded into oblivion, our microfilm and microcards have rotted away, and our information retrieval tapes have accidentally de- magnetized. Please send us some books." 4. Most of all I resent having librarians (who should know better) fall for the impudent practice on the part of "hardware dealers," of stealing library ideas and selling them back to libraries disguised by the pompous new terminology: "Our administrators, fresh from a four day plush conference arranged and paid for by a firm selling 'hard- ware' ask us about 'descriptors/ 'indicia/ and 'subject tags' or the pos- sibility of a 'thesaurus/ 'referencing/ and 'codes' as if these things had no relation to our time-honored 'subject heading/ 'classification schemes/ or 'see' and 'see also' cross references." 19 In a speech about value judgments, which he delivered to the 161
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP Brooklyn College Bureau of Economic Research, Harry D. Gideonse, President of the College, noted that ". . . we live in a swamp of se- mantic confusion where economists and other social scientists some- times think they have solved the problem when they have only created a vocabulary to describe it." The technologists have not even created the vocabulary; they have only bastardized it! Fun's fun and a joke's a joke, but when people are asked to marvel over a 'great breakthrough in electronic data processing' which turns out to be nothing more than a botched job of shingled vari -typing, it's time to speak up for sanity. According to the press releases, the new Educational Media Index is 'an entirely new approach to index compilation,' and 'the enormity of the project obviated the traditional bibliographic and graphic arts techniques.' The press release goes on to say that the producers 'devised a sequential card system which combines graphic arts techniques with an ingenious use of conventional data processing equipment.' This looks very impressive, especially when boxed in 14 separate volumes. However, let's take a look behind the gobbledygook. For those unused to the data processing argot, here is a brief glossary of translations of the terms used in the prospectus for EMI: 'A mnemonic code of three, four or five characters was assigned to each primary source.' Translation: Producers and distributors names are abbrevi- ated. 'Sources were provided with an effort-saving structured response form.* Translation: Questionnaires were sent to producers and distributors. 'The editorial work is paralleled by a machine processing effort that trans- lates the worksheets into decks of punched cards/ Translation: The entries are typed on cards which are then punched for ease of sorting. 'The system permits custom searching on the data base - for example, the custom print-out could be made of 1) filmstrips, 2) arranged for teaching French, 3) to adults, 4) released since 1958, and 5) arranged alphabetically, 6) by source translation.' Interpretation: If it is too much trouble for you simply to open the language volume to the 'French Language - Study and Teaching' section (which has only eight filmstrips graded for adults anyway), we will be glad (for a stiff price) to go to our card file and pull out the same entries for you and make a special copy of them. If you want to be sure that all the filmstrips which could be used with adults for the teaching of French 162
A Different Drummer: Thoughts on Library Education are actually found, including those that may have been misclassified in our 14 volumes, we can if you like search our entire files, 500,000 cards. Such a search will, to be sure, be prohibitively expensive - still it is theoretically possible. One could simply pass with averted gaze over the childish pretense that the composing typewriter coupled with a shingling mechanism and an IBM card sorter constitute 'advanced data processing techniques' if it were not for the fact that it was precisely this mumbo- jumbo that misled the earnest and well-intentioned sponsors of the Educational Media Index into wasting half a million dollars of the taxpayers' money. The committee was persuaded that the world of the future would never be won with the old-fashioned tech- niques of Wilson and Bowker and the Library of Congress, and decided instead on 'the electronic data processing approach,' which was the more interesting inasmuch as it carried with it a grant from the U.S. Office of Education which would permit the committee to employ a full time executive secretary and open a New York Office.20 Are the Library Schools Doing their Job? I have never taught in a library school, but I think I know what they are up against because for many years now I have tried to squeeze into a 50 minute period, a lecture which includes everything an en- tering freshman should know about our library's resources, along with the techniques of research for the preparation of term papers. The lecturers are constantly under fire for (1) putting too much into the lecture (or not enough); (2) pitching it on too elementary a level (or too high a one) ; (3) not allowing enough time for ques- tions (or too much) etc., etc., etc. I know what it means to grapple with a class with diverse backgrounds, intelligence, and library ex- perience, and to crowd twice as much information into the time avail- able as can comfortably be absorbed. The one thing our lecturers do not have to worry about is alumni pressure to proliferate courses, make them more practical and less theoretical, and "modernize" the curriculum ... in a hurry! And we do not have to listen to complaints from people who do not do any recruiting but moan that the schools are not graduating enough librarians to fill the vacancies! No, unlike Samuel Johnson's preaching woman and walking dog, the schools, in my opinion, are not only doing the job, they are doing it well. Though it may seem to the restless souls among us that the rate of change has been glacial, actually the schools have moved with the times; I, for one, am grateful for the careful examination that 163
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP has preceded the acceptance of every new course that has been pro- posed. Some of the misunderstanding between the schools and their gradu- ates has arisen because the latter expect too much. It is no more pos- sible for a library school to impart omniscience than it is for any other professional school. In his column "On the Grindstone," Lawrence Clark Powell, Dean of the then newly-fledged library school at Los Angeles wrote: 21 "As a new comer to library education, I am sure my seasoned colleagues will permit me a season of naivete, provided that it does not become perennial. As an oldtimer in library service, I long ago lost my innocence; and my final philosophy governing the treat- ment of library school graduates coming to work for the first time as professionals was, 'Let the weak perish and the strong survive' " ! In the long pull, that will happen, for though men are born equal, they do not stay that way long. One can hope that each neophyte will come under a good administrator who will provide an atmosphere in which the newcomer can develop to his fullest capacity. The rest is up to the new librarian. If he is true to his calling, he will realize that education in a profession is a lifelong process; that graduating from library school marks only the beginning of this proc- ess. As Estelle Brodman has noted, the means made available for inter- ested librarians to improve themselves and increase their ability to provide superior service are endless: "... formal courses, informal study groups, discussions, films, film strips, syllabi, pamphlets, books, correspondence lessons, lectures, symposia, recordings, lantern slides, travel, exchanges of personnel, journals, projects . . . " 22 And if the right kind of person has been recruited, continued learning will give him pleasure. The idea was expressed with clarity and vigor by Miss Brodman in the same article, characteristically entitled The Pierian Spring: 23 Learning is like that - long after the compulsions of school have passed, there remains the pleasure and satisfaction in the discovery of new truths - new to the person learning them, even if not to others. A young assistant I once knew used to exclaim delightedly when a new fact or concept was brought to her attention, 1 never knew that before'! This joy in discovery, this enrichment of personality is what I dangle before you when I urge you to continue to study and learn throughout your lives. But I know I do not have to sing the praises of learning to an Israeli 164
A Different Drummer: Thoughts on Library Education audience, not when, as I read in The Pioneer Woman: "A favorite circulation builder for newspapers is the practice of printing coupons entitling the collector to buy deluxe editions of literary works at high prices. These inducements have so far included such highbrow works as the complete Talmud, the Mishna and contemporary Israeli poetry, revealing the high standards of the reading public." 24 With that kind of public, Israel's librarians will find it embarrassing not to continue to learn! To get back to the library schools, I hope they will continue to call their graduates LIBRARIANS, and that their graduates will wear the title proudly. (I was extremely pleased to read on page 2 of the Hebrew University's Graduate Library School catalog: M. . . the pro- viding of scientific information to industry, to laboratories, to the re- search worker in various disciplines, is part of the aspect of librarian- ship known as documentation. The librarian engaged in documentation collects, classifies, etc. . . ." I hope those schools which now include among their admission re- quirements a bachelor's degree with a strong liberal arts background unadulterated by vocational inlay, will continue to do so; and that those which now require undergraduate courses in library science as prerequisites will see the error of their ways. And I hope finally, that the schools will stick to their guns and con- tinue to offer a sound basic core of library courses, so that their gradu- ates will have "a sound knowledge of the philosophy, the methods, and the materials common to libraries of all types . . ." ** Are Librarians on the Way Out? My answer is a rousing no. The threat of being replaced by machines has hounded other professions too. When audio-visual devices first came into prominence, the throw-the-baby-out-with-the-bath-water en- thusiasts predicted that film strips, discs, and movies would soon re- place the teacher. (The same thing is now being said about television and programed teaching.) The loudest denials came from those who know and like audio-visual materials; they have insisted that these devices, if properly used, will enhance and enrich teaching; that they do not, they can not, replace the teacher. Neither will the computer replace the librarian, for regardless of how sophisticated the former or naive the later, machines lack what all humans are blessed with - the panoramic scope of the human senses. I would like to close with a quotation from a favorite author of mine, 165
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP Joseph Wood Krutch: "Until a computer begins not only to propose and answer questions, but also to debate with another computer whether or not they are both mere machines (and loses his temper in the proc- ess) sensible men are justified in doubting that anything resembling a brain has been constructed out of tubes, transistors and cables." 26 References 1. Wolf, Edwin II: Thoughts on Books and Libraries. Bibliographical Society of American Papers, 57:438, Fourth Quarter, 1963. 2. Dewey, Melvil: Changing Catalog Rules. Library Journal, 27:196, July 1902. 3. white, H. S.: Training Special Librarians. Library Journal, 87:860, March 1, 1962. 4. Powell, L. C: Into the Mainstream. Special Libraries, 52:295, July- August 1961. 5. Woodring, Paul: The Future of Liberal Education. Saturday Review, Al:5òt April 18, 1964. 6. Owens, Elizabeth W.: A Survey of Special Library Education. Special Libraries, 51:290, July- August I960. 7. Quoted from a letter written by Barbara Denison, Director, Special Libraries As- sociation Classifications Center. 8. Stein, Theodore: Automation and Library Systems. Library Journal, 89:2725, July 1964. 9. Rees, A. M.: His Future- Bright or Bleak? Library Journal, 89:4289, November 1, 1964. 10. Educational Facilities Laboratories. Bricks and Mortarboards. [New York, 1964], p. 94. 11. Fishbein, Elise P.: Wanted-Documents Librarians. Library Journal, 89:2039, May 15, 1964. 12. Sellers, Rose Z.: O Brave New (Push Button) World! Library Journal, 89:6, Jan. 1, 1964. 13. Stein, op. cit., pp. 2728-2729- 14. Dougherty, R. M.: An Ostrich Kicks Back. Library Journal, 89:3520, Oct. 1, 1964. 15. Ibid., p. 3522. 16. Educational Facilities Laboratories, op. cit., p. 84. 17. Wolf, op. cit. pp. 441, 442. 18. Shepard, S. A.: Oblivion, 1964. Library Journal, 89:4242, Nov. 1, 1964. 19. Brodman, Estelle: The Pierian Spring. Special Libraries, 54:488, Oct. 1963. 20. Melcher, Daniel: A Plea for Sanity. Library Journal, 89:3108-3109, Sept. 1, 1964. 21. Powell, L. C: On the Grindstone. Library Journal, 87:1748. May 1. 1962. 22. Brodman, op. cit., p. 491. 23. Ibid., p. 490. 24. Lapide, P. E.: Israel's Polyglot Press. The Pioneer Woman. 38:6. Dec. 1963. 25. Warncke, Ruth: Is the Traditional Library School Meeting the Needs of the Profession- Two Viewpoints. Special Libraries, 54:493, Oct. 1963. 26. Krutch, J. W.: The Brain vs. the Machine. Saturday Review, 47:19, Jan. 18, 1964. 166