ITeaching to Dismantle White Supremacy in Archives Michelle Caswell ABSTRACT This article reflects on an exercise I developed to enable students to identify the ways in which white privilege is embedded in archival institutions and to collectively strategize concrete steps to dismantle white supremacy in their own archival practice. It argues that, in the face of disas- trous political events—such as the election of an explicitly racist protofascist as US president— LIS faculty must intervene pedagogically to meet the needs of their most vulnerable students and to model behaviors of critique and resistance if we aim to train students who will disrupt the sta- tus quo of oppression as LIS professionals. The article includes printable graphics designed by Gracen Brilmyer and generated by the class exercise to serve as a visual reminder of our obliga- tion to dismantle white supremacy in archival studies and archives more broadly. t’s the first 5 a.m. after the 2016 US presidential election, and my phone rings, ending a few hours of restless sleep. It’s my best friend on the phone, an information studies (IS) faculty member at another university in a different time zone who is a gay immigrant of color, and he is sobbing, worried that under a Trump presidency his same-sex marriage will be annulled, his green card revoked, and his career in this country ended. I do my best to assure him this will not happen, that we will not let this happen, but I know full well that his worst fears are possible. I get ready for work and stumble into my previously scheduled meeting as part of my school’s diversity and equity committee. I am early, and one of my students, a genderqueer student of color, walks in. They sit down next to me and burst into tears, telling me how ter- rified they are for their own safety under a Trump presidency. I listen and tell the student that I will do everything in my power to protect them, knowing that everything in my power might not be good enough. Throughout the meeting, students and colleagues openly sob, some worried that they and their families might be deported or forced to register, others ac- curately painting the Trump election as the logical conclusion of a 500-year history of white supremacy. It is clear we cannot—and should not—conduct business as usual between sobs.The author would like to thank Joyce Gabiola for research support in providing key definitions and citations and Gracen Brilmyer for graphic design expertise and enthusiasm. Library Quarterly: Information, Community, Policy, vol. 87, no. 3, pp. 222–235. © 2017 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-2519/2017/8703-0004$10.00 222
Teaching to Dismantle White Supremacy in Archives • 223As I hope these stories illustrate, these are not just issues of personal import (although, of course, they are very personal) but also professional issues that we must address as a profes- sion. They affect us professionally, that is, as professionals; they interfere with our and our students’ and our colleagues’ ability to succeed, with our collective ability to build scholarship in LIS, and with the lives of the users we serve—and should be serving—as LIS professionals. A student who is worried about where to safely use the restroom or who is being harassed by the campus police or being raided by US Immigration and Customs Enforcement is less able to concentrate in class and hand in assignments on time. A research partner who spends energy worried about being deported has less energy to spend on scholarship. A field that is built solely by the most privileged within it suffers immeasurably. A failure to acknowledge and ad- dress white supremacy explains the paradox of a field that claims to value diversity but persists in replicating whiteness in demographics, values, and practices (Hathcock 2015; Hudson 2017). This article argues that in the face of disastrous political events—such as the election of a white supremacist protofascist as US president—LIS faculty members must intervene peda- gogically to respond to the needs of their most vulnerable students and to address issues of structural oppression in the classroom. In so arguing, I will reflect on an exercise I developed to enable students to identify the ways in which white privilege is embedded in archival in- stitutions and to collectively strategize concrete steps to dismantle white supremacy in their own archival practice. As intellectual leaders in the field, faculty must model behaviors of cri- tique and resistance if we aim to train students who will disrupt the status quo of oppression in their information institutions as LIS professionals.1 This article also includes a printable graphic created by University of California Los Angeles IS doctoral student Gracen Brilmyer, who participated in the class exercise. The accompanying graphic identifies concrete steps to take to dismantle white supremacy in archives. We hope archivists and archival educators print out this graphic and display it prominently to serve as a visual reminder of our obligation to dismantle white supremacy in archival studies and ar- chives more broadly. Teaching to Disrupt The Monday after the election I am scheduled to teach a session in my introductory archives course, “Archives, Records, and Memory,” on collective memory and forgetting. Five days after the election, students—particularly students of color, LGBTQ students, and disabled students, and especially those who inhabit more than one of those identities—are still weeping in the hallways and at office hours; many are angry and scared and ready to talk about their grief and anger and fear. I want to give them a space to express this, but I also want to move through1. This assertion builds on important work about teaching social justice in LIS classrooms, most (but not all of which) was created by students and junior faculty (Gilliland 2011; Pluralizing the Archival Curriculum Group 2011; Caswell et al. 2012; Cooke, Sweeny, and Noble 2016; Gabiola 2016; Roberts and Noble 2016).
224 • The Library Quarterlydespair, to channel it into political action through their professional practice as archivists. I want to do this despite my own personal condition of hopelessness, to move toward what Verne Harris (2017) calls “a praxis beyond hope.” It is clear as class nears that I cannot—should not—continue with my previously scheduled lecture. Instead, I print out 28 copies of the two-page handout based on Peggy McIntosh’s (1990) “White Privilege: Unpacking the Invisible Knapsack,” grab a handful of markers and some giant Post-it notes, and head to class. If white supremacy is the underlying cause of a Trump presidency, as many have convincingly argued, I want to do ev- erything in my power to dismantle it in the small space and time I have.2 I also know that, as a white woman, I have a responsibility to use my privilege to dismantle white supremacy and that I can model white antiracist behavior for the white students in my class. I begin class by telling the students that I think we have a deep-seated white supremacy problem in the United States, as shown by the election results. Instead of the regularly sched- uled lecture, we are going to discuss white privilege and white supremacy and then do a brain- storming exercise in which we first identify areas of white privilege in archives and then strat- egize concrete plans of action for dismantling those privileges through our professional practice as archivists. Students get quiet and tense; I have their attention. I make a joke about how you know I mean business when I have giant Post-it notes, and off we go. I start off by defining white supremacy as “a political, economic, and cultural system in which whites overwhelmingly control power and material resources, conscious and unconscious ideas of white superiority and entitlement are widespread, and relations of white dominance and non-white subordination are daily reenacted across a broad array of institutions and social set- tings” (Ansley 1989, 993). White supremacy is closely related to white privilege, but white su- premacy “more precisely describes and locates white racial domination by underscoring the material production and violence of racial structures and the hegemony of whiteness in set- tler societies. The concept of white supremacy forcefully calls attention to the brutality and dehumanization of racial exploitation and domination that emerges from settler colonial societies” (Bonds and Inwood 2015, 2). I discuss how white supremacy is a structural problem and stress that it is not a matter of individual choice, that racist structures exist and that white people benefit from these structures despite their individual choices and attitudes. Tak- ing Peggy McIntosh’s (1990) cue, I then describe white privilege as “an invisible package of un- earned assets” enjoyed by white people in the United States whether they want to choose it or not. I ask for volunteers to collectively read aloud McIntosh’s insightful list of 50 white privi- leges, such as “I can turn on the television or open to the front page of the paper and see peo- ple of my race widely represented,” “I do not have to educate my children to be aware of sys-2. Asserting that white supremacy is the underlying cause of the election results is not to discredit the role of mi- sogyny but rather to argue that those two factors—race and gender—interact in complex ways. It bears repeating that the majority of white women voted for Trump. For more information on white supremacy as the cause of Trump’s elec- tion, see Cox (2016), Huber (2016), Krell (2016), and Dyson (2017).
Teaching to Dismantle White Supremacy in Archives • 225temic racism for their own daily physical protection,” and “I am never asked to speak for all the people of my racial group.” When we are done, I ask for reactions. A student of color, seem- ingly incredulous, asks, “Do white people really feel that way? Do you really get to do all of that?” As a white person, I nod, and some of the white students in the room nod in agree- ment. One white student asks, “I know all these things are true and I feel bad about them, but what am I supposed to do about it?” I respond that part of oppressive structures is that they are totalizing, that they make people think there is no way out of them. But people cre- ate structures, people enable structures, and people can also disrupt and dismantle them. They must be actively committed to doing so, to intervening to dismantle those structures in concrete ways, which we would soon be talking about. I then shift gears, honing in on archives, because this is an archival studies course and the students are training to be archivists. (I know this is only a small slice of the world, but it is my sliver, the one in which I have the most influence.) I tell the students we are going to use our giant Post-it notes do the following: • List examples of white privilege and white supremacy in archives inspired by McIn- tosh’s (1990) list. • For each point listed, ask and answer the following questions: What would liberation look like?3 How do we get there? What concrete steps can we take to dismantle each privilege as humans and archivists? I hang up five giant Post-it notes at the front of the room and write an area of archival praxis at the top of each one: appraisal, description, access and use, professional life, and archival edu- cation. For each category, I ask the students to collectively generate statements of white priv- ilege. Students start shouting out contributions to my giant Post-it notes. I write them down as fast as I can. Together, we generate a list (which I subsequently supplemented and edited), as visualized in the accompanying poster (figs. 1 and 2) by Gracen Brilmyer, a student in the course.4 Reflection I cannot claim that all students were fully engaged and on board with this exercise, but I can report that much of the classroom seemed energized, that students who had not previously3. I have since become aware of a visioning exercise Melina Abdullah does with her students. She asks them to med- itate on what freedom would be like, what it looks like, feels like, and smells like, and then asks them to describe what they envisioned with words or drawings (Melina Abdullah, “Information, Access, and Activism,” UCLA Information Stud- ies Diversity Council event, Los Angeles, February 9, 2017). There is also fantastic work on imagining as an IS methodology in Duarte and Belarde-Lewis (2015). 4. Figure 1 presents the full poster, and figure 2 splits it into six sections. Color versions of both can be downloaded online, with accompanying assembly instructions included for figure 2.
226 • The Library Quarterlyspoken in class actively contributed, and that some students of color and LGBTQ students ex- pressed appreciation for the exercise after class. For white students, having to confront their own privilege can be an uncomfortable exercise that can result in defensive reactions or worse; this heightened state of “white fragility” is a component of white supremacy, as Robin DiAngelo has written about extensively.5 In fact, I did receive a complaint about the exercise from a white student after class, but I think we as faculty—particularly white faculty, whoseFigure 1. “Identifying and DismantlingWhite Supremacy in Archives” poster designed by Gracen Brilmyer. Printer-friendly color version available as an online enhancement.5. DiAngelo (2011) writes, “White Fragility is a state in which even a minimum amount of racial stress becomes in- tolerable, triggering a range of defensive moves. These moves include the outward display of emotions such as anger, fear, and guilt, and behaviors such as argumentation, silence, and leaving the stress-inducing situation. These behaviors, in turn, function to reinstate white racial equilibrium” (6).
Figure 2. Detail of figure 1. For the downloadable posters, see the online version of this article.
Figure 2. (Continued)228
Figure 2. (Continued)229
Figure 2. (Continued)230
Figure 2. (Continued)231
Figure 2. (Continued)
Teaching to Dismantle White Supremacy in Archives • 233racial privilege partially insulates us from the consequences of critique—are going to have to learn to live with that discomfort and cast aside our (gendered) expectations of wanting to please everyone if we are to create real change in the classroom and the world.6 I want to openly acknowledge the risks associated with discussing issues of racial oppres- sion in class, especially for untenured faculty and for faculty of color. It is not easy, especially when many of us are ill trained and uneducated about these issues ourselves, when many of our students and colleagues may themselves be hostile to addressing them, and when we have few models of more experienced faculty leading the way. But I also want to assert that the risk of not addressing white supremacy, of modeling allegedly neutral behavior to students who will soon graduate and shape the profession, is also a risk—a risk of furthering white suprem- acy, a risk of maintaining the racial status quo, a risk that I am not willing to take for myself or for the field (Roberts 2015). Carrying on business as usual in the classroom when the world is on fire is a form of culturally and politically irrelevant pedagogy. It is uninspired, uninspiring, bad teaching. If we cannot transform the discourse in our own classrooms, how do we expect the students to change the field as new professionals or to change the world as humans? Conclusion In the months since the election, the grief and anger have only intensified in the classroom. Students are still openly sobbing. One of my students, on learning about a new executive or- der that expands police powers, asked the class through tears, “So does this mean my whole community is fucked?” I did not then and do not now have a hopeful answer for her, but turning that rage into action is perhaps our only chance at collectively generating a differ- ent future for ourselves. We cannot let the current political climate take away our ability to imagine otherwise, even as our rights are being stripped away. We cannot let white supremacy steal our imaginations. The exercise described here is a first step, the start of a conversation, and not an end in and of itself. I hope all LIS educators reading this article—particularly white faculty members—will ed- ucate themselves about white supremacy and adapt this exercise to their own classrooms. I hope LIS student groups and professional associations adapt it and enact it and build on it. I hope each archival educator, student, and practitioner prints out the graphic and posts it prominently as a reminder of the importance of our own actions in dismantlingwhite supremacy in our classrooms and our archives. I hope that the action items here become dated over time as we work to dis- mantle white supremacy, and I hope that archivists generate their own lists that respond to ever- changing immediate needs. Over the next 4 years, each of us will have our moral compasses6. I want to acknowledge the racialized and gendered consequences of bad student evaluations, which disproportion- ately affect faculty members who are women of color (Pittman 2010, Lilienfeld 2016).
234 • The Library Quarterlytested. May this exercise and the visual accompanying it serve as a reminder of where we stand and of our personal and professional ethical obligations to dismantle white supremacy. In the wake of the disastrous election of Trump, the standard answers to the questions of archival activism—document social movements as they happen, build participatory systems that empower marginalized communities, expand representational practices, encourage use of materials to inspire contemporary activism (all of which I have spent the past decade mak- ing a case for)—seem weak or ineffectual. We need more radical archival interventions on the past—and the future—to build liberatory archival imaginaries (Caswell 2014). What those will look like will take time to formulate, but they begin with students and faculty members and professionals who can think critically about white supremacy, with white people acknowledg- ing their own roles in promulgating it, and with all of us imagining ways out of it through concrete action. We get the world we make, we get the classrooms we make, we get the ar- chives we make. Let’s all work to make them more just. References Ansley, Frances Lee. 1989. “Stirring the Ashes: Race Class and the Future of Civil Rights Scholarship.” Cornell Law Review 74 (6): 993–1077. Bonds, Anne, and Joshua Inwood. 2015. “Beyond White Privilege: Geographies of White Supremacy and Settler Colonialism.” Progress in Human Geography 40 (6): 715–33. Caswell, Michelle. 2014. “Inventing New Archival Imaginaries: Theoretical Foundations for Identity-Based Community Archives.” In Identity Palimpsests: Ethnic Archiving in the U.S. and Canada, edited by Dominique Daniel and Amalia Levi. Sacramento, CA: Litwin. Caswell, Michelle, Giso Broman, Jennifer Kirmer, Laura Martin, and Nathan Sowry. 2012. “Implementing a Social Justice Framework in an Introduction to Archives Course: Lessons from Both Sides of the Class- room.” InterActions: UCLA Journal of Education and Information Studies 8 (2). Cooke, Nicole, Miriam Sweeney, and Safiya Umoja Noble. 2016. “Social Justice as Topic and Tool: An At- tempt to Transform an LIS Curriculum and Culture.” Library Quarterly 86 (1): 107–24. Cox, Ronald W. 2016. “Trump’s Ponzi Scheme Victory.” Class, Race and Corporate Power 4 (2): article 5. DiAngelo, Robin. 2011. “White Fragility.” International Journal of Critical Pedagogy 3 (3): 54–70. Duarte, Marisa, and Miranda Belarde-Lewis. 2015. “Imagining: Creating Spaces for Indigenous Ontologies.” Cataloging and Classification Quarterly 53 (5–6): 677–702. Dyson, Michael Eric. 2017. Tears We Cannot Stop: A Sermon to White America. New York: St. Martin’s. Gabiola, Joyce. 2016. “Instruction for Inclusion: Addressing Race, Gender, and Sexuality in the LIS Curric- ulum.” Paper presented at the Association for Library and Information Science Education (ALISE) con- ference, Boston. Gilliland, Anne. 2011. “Neutrality, Social Justice, and the Obligations of Archival Education and Educators in the Twenty-First Century.” Archival Science 11 (3–4): 193–209. Harris, Verne. 2017. “Reflections from the 2016 Mandela Dialogues.” Nelson Mandela Foundation, Febru- ary 27. https://www.nelsonmandela.org/news/entry/reflections-from-the-2016-mandela-dialogues. Hathcock, April. 2015. “White Librarianship in Blackface: Diversity Initiatives in LIS.” In the Library with the Lead Pipe, October 7. http://www.inthelibrarywiththeleadpipe.org/2015/lis-diversity/.
Teaching to Dismantle White Supremacy in Archives • 235Huber, Lindsay Perez. 2016. “‘Make America Great Again!’: Donald Trump, Racist Nativism and the Virulent Adherence to White Supremacy Amid U.S. Demographic Change.” Charleston Law Review 10 (Fall): 215–50. Hudson, David James. 2017. “On ‘Diversity’ as Anti-Racism in LIS: A Critique.” Journal of Critical Library and Information Studies 1. http://libraryjuicepress.com/journals/index.php/jclis/article/view/6. Krell, Matthew R. 2016. “Fear-Driven Donations: Campaign Contributions as Mechanisms for Entrenching White Supremacy.” Social Science Quarterly 97 (5): 1119–29. Lilienfeld, Eva. 2016. “How Student Evaluations Are Skewed against Women and Minority Professors.” Chronicle of Higher Education, June 10. https://tcf.org/content/commentary/student-evaluations -skewed-women-minority-professors/. McIntosh, Peggy. 1990. “White Privilege: Unpacking the Invisible Knapsack.” Working paper. Wellesley College Center for Research on Women, Wellesley, MA. https://www.deanza.edu/faculty/lewisjulie /White%20Priviledge%20Unpacking%20the%20Invisible%20Knapsack.pdf. Pittman, Chavella. 2010. “Race and Gender Oppression in the Classroom: The Experiences of Women Fac- ulty of Color with White Male Students.” Teaching Sociology 38 (3): 183–96. Pluralizing the Archival Curriculum Group. 2011. “Educating for the Archival Multiverse.” American Archivist 74 (1): 69–101. Roberts, Sarah. 2015. “Teaching Social Justice as an Assistant Professor: Risks and Rewards.” Paper pre- sented at the Association for Library and Information Science Education (ALISE) conference, Chicago. Roberts, Sarah T., and Safiya Umoja Noble. 2016. “Empowered to Name, Inspired to Act: Social Responsi- bility and Diversity as Calls to Action in the LIS Context.” Library Trends 64 (3): 512–32.Michelle Caswell: assistant professor of archival studies in the Department of Information Studies at UCLA. Caswell’s work examines the ways in which traces of the past are used to build more just futures, with an emphasis on community-based archives. She is the author of the book Archiving the Unspeakable: Silence, Memory and the Photographic Record in Cambodia (University of Wisconsin Press, 2014) and of more than two dozen articles. She is also the cofounder of the South Asian American Digital Archive (http://www.saada.org), an online repository that documents and pro- vides access to the diverse stories of South Asian Americans. E-mail: caswell@gseis.ucla.edu.