Certification and Education for Library and Information Science HOLLY G. WILLETT Pressure from librarians about the quality and content of library education pro- grams has combined with concern for affirmative action and the legal requirements for employee selection to create an uncertain future for the M.L.S. degree. Certifi- cation has been suggested as a means of assuring the quality of persons employed as librarians and as a means of maintaining the library profession's control over the education of librarians. The American Library Association is suggested as the organi- zation most capable of mounting a valid certification program through competency examination. If certification became a reality it would affect accreditation, the content of library science courses, autonomy of library and information schools, and enrollment. AT THE PRESENT TIME, nearly everyone wishing to become a librarian attends a graduate library school and receives the M.L.S. or equivalent degree. School librarians are the major exception since they may take their training at the undergraduate level or in non-degree programs. The fact that most librarians hold the M.L.S. does not rep- resent consensus among librarians that the M.L.S. degree is the appropri- Willett is a doctoral candidate, School of Library Science, and Fellow, Bush Institute for Child and Family Policy, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27514. 13
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science ate one or that library education is all that it should be. From time to time, challenges to the M.L.S. appear in the library press with suggested alternatives.1 During the past two decades, political and social trends have created a climate in which the position of the M.L.S. as a required minimum qualification has become uncertain, as the concepts of equal employment opportunity and job validation have entered the personnel selection process. As alternatives to the M.L.S. have become more common, certification has been suggested as a means of maintaining the profession's control over the quality of the persons being employed as librarians. Should a national program of certification for librarians become a reality, the impact on programs of education for librarianship and information service could be substantial. This article explores some of the background issues and ponders the implications of certification for library education. Ever since the days of Melvil Dewey, librarians have been disputing the structure of library education. The Carnegie Foundation hired C.C. Williamson to study library education and make recommendations for its improvement. The Williamson report, published in 1923, recognized the importance of general education and suggested that library education be placed on a graduate footing, in a program of possibly two years' length, followed by certification.2 His proposals were hotly debated within the profession. Work was begun on standardizing library education at the graduate level, but accreditation by the American Library Association (A.L.A.) was finally chosen instead of certification. Over the past 60 years, the pattern of basic professional education has evolved into the present structure of a one-year master's degree with a handful of two-year master's programs. Some librarians consider the M.L.S. a weak degree because its content is technical rather than aca- demic, it lacks general public recognition, and the A.L.A. appears unable to do anything substantive to change this situation. In light of such criticism, the U.S. Office of Management and Budget has sought to downgrade all federal librarians to the baccalaureate degree level, reserv- ing the M.L.S. for those in management positions. The social turbulence of the 1960s the reforms of the 1970s, and the second thoughts of the 1980s have also contributed to an uncertain picture for the M.L.S. These are pressures from outside the profession. Under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Equal Employ- ment Opportunity Act of 1972, employers must hire, transfer, and promote workers on the basis of job qualification. Individuals may neither be discriminated against nor treated preferentially because of sex, race, color, religion, or national origin. The burden of proof is on employers to 14
Certification and Education demonstrate that any criteria used to judge job qualifications have been validated through research and shown to have a high degree of utility. The employer must also show that alternative means to hiring, pro- motion, and transfer do not exist. One of the most significant Title VII court cases was that of Griggs vs. Duke Power. The U.S. Supreme Court ruled that it was only necessary for plaintiffs to show that the consequences of a hiring practice were dis- criminatory. Intent to discriminate was not necessary in order for an employment practice to be illegal. The court also ruled that diplomas, degrees, and "broad and general testing devices" cannot be employed as the controlling criteria for hiring unless they have been shown to be reasonable measures of job performance.3 Although the M.L.S. has not been validated - a process which requires the services of an industrial psychologist and legal counsel - a few studies have tried to assess the effectiveness of the degree by comparing M.L.S. holders with persons who do not have the degree but perform similar jobs. The studies have been small, local, and not generalizable, according to Lucille Wert.4 However, they tend to refute the value of the M.L.S. Another aspect of the problem is that accreditation also must be shown to be a valid, job-related criterion. Libraries may not be able to continue requiring an M.L.S. from an accredited library school unless "we can demonstrate such accreditation to be a factor in the most efficient valid hiring practice."5 The recent case of Glenda Merwine focused attention on the validity of requiring the accredited M.L.S. as a minimum qualification. A variety of approaches have been tried to provide alternative means for entry into the profession. At public libraries in Sacramento, San José, and Alameda County, California, during the decade of the 1970s it was decided to permit non M.L.S. holders with library work experience to take a written civil service exam along with persons who have earned the degree in order to qualify for entry-level professional positions. The Library of Congress (L.C.) has not required a master's degree for some years, which has allowed it to employ more minority group librarians than other research libraries. There seems to be no indication in the literature of the number of people who have acquired professional status without the M.L.S., but it is probably relatively small. The emphasis that libraries have placed on this approach is not to meet the requirements of affirmative action laws, but out of "the desire to recruit and to facilitate advancement of minority members, who might not have completed graduate studies. . . ."6 The 1972 Equal Employment Opportunity Act may well have raised their 15
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science consciousness, however. Both the M.L.S. (accredited or nonaccredited) and civil service entrance exams may be subject to attack on the basis of lack of validation. Employers are probably safest if their minimum qual- ifications allow for different combinations of education and experience. Having a single criterion invites challenge. The A.L. A.'s present role in library education is to ensure the quality of library education through the accreditation process. Herbert S. White has been very critical of A.L.A. accreditation mechanisms: ". . . the present accreditation procedures do not serve to measure or ensure quality. The present process tends to be self-adjusting, to accredit what is rather than what should be. . . ."7 Though the Merwine case does not, in A.L.A.'s view,8 mean that accreditation per se is vulnerable, it is still A.L.A.'s responsibility, as the accrediting agency, to study the quality of library education and consider the options to accreditation. In addition to education standards, A.L.A. has tried also to give the profession guidance in defining library jobs and has recommended training appropriate to various positions. In 1976, A.L.A. Council adopted a policy statement entitled "Library Education and Personnel Utilization" (L.E.P.U.). L.E.P.U. provides for library career lattices in which some occupations have specific training for library work while others are specialist positions which happen to be employed in a library. There are two levels of professional staff and three of support staff. In order to pass from the paraprofessional to the professional ranks, L.E.P.U. advocates that those in the associate category, the highest rank of the paraprofessional staffing lattice, combine library employment and graduate study with the aim of advancing to the professional level when the master's degree (not necessarily the M.L.S.) is awarded. Paragraph 20 of L.E.P.U. states: "Until examinations are identified that are valid and reliable tests of equivalent qualifications, the academic degree (or evidence of years of academic work completed) is recom- mended as the single best means for determining that an applicant has the background recommended for each category."9 However, because of the court decisions regarding educational credentials, A.L.A. issued a mod- ifying statement in 1980. Saying that L.E.P.U. "represents an ideal," the Office for Library Personnel Resources recommended that employers give "careful consideration before requiring applicants to possess these credentials."10 Despite Lester Asheim's assertion that paragraph 20 is an implicit invitation to the profession to develop equivalency examinations,11 the profession as a whole has failed to do so. Although L.E.P.U. and the accreditation standards are not legally enforceable, and despite the fact 16
Certification and Education that A.L. A. is not a professional organization but an educational organiza- tion which represents libraries as well as librarians, A.L.A., because it is the only national organization including librarians of all kinds, would be the obvious choice of a sponsoring agency to develop and administer an equivalency examination. Although the assistance of library educators would be necessary, there would be a conflict of interest if the Association for Library and Information Science Education (ALISE) were to admin- ister the exam. Such an equivalency exam could become part of a certification pro- gram, which has been suggested as a means of enhancing the image of the librarian as a professional and a way of exercising some control over the performance quality of persons employed as librarians. Currently, various states certify school and public librarians, and some states provide for public librarian certification by equivalency exam- ination. In a strict sense, these efforts are more properly called regis- tration, since they are provided by government agencies. The Council on Postsecondary Accreditation (C.O.P.A.) restricts the term "certification" to nongovernment agencies and associations. To qualify for certification, an individual may be required to have graduated from an accredited professional program, to pass an examination, and/or to have a specified amount of work experience.12 In the library field, two special library groups have certification pro- grams which meet C.O.P.A.'s criteria, the American Association of Law Libraries (A.A.L.L.) and the Medical Library Association (M.L.A.). A.A.L.L. certification is based on academic courses and/or work experi- ence. Under its 1978 revised certification code, M.L.A. gives a competen- cy exam for first-time certification and requires graduation from an A.L.A.-accredited school and two years of experience as a health sciences librarian within the last ten years. Every five years, health sciences librar- ians may obtain recertification through continuing education activities, such as meetings, through formal academic coursework, or by taking the current certification exam. M.L.A. certification is voluntary. According to a 1981 survey, less than half of the health science librarians in the South and Southwest were certified. Most of them had been grandfathered, i.e., certified under the pre-1978 code, and the majority planned to meet recertification requirements through continuing education." Critics of certification point to the incompetents in other professions who have not been weeded out by certification; they observe that certifi- cation has not protected school librarians from being removed from their libraries and returned to the classroom or laid off. Critics also charge that the variety of types of libraries and library positions make it impossible for a standardized national or state level certification program to work.14 17
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Voluntary certification does not directly address the criticisms so fre- quently leveled against library school education. As Keith Cottam points out, certification is not a means of avoiding the minimum qualifications difficulties which plague the M.L.S. Like ac- creditation and the degree itself, certification would have to be validated.15 The research that would be needed in order to produce an equitable, workable national plan for certifying all librarians might well produce the documentation needed for validation, that is, proof of the job-relatedness of the M.L.S. Some of that work has already been done by the Illinois Task Analysis Project and the Selection Consulting Center in California. The methods and the results of these studies can serve as beginnings for a study that the A.L.A. should undertake to realistically assess the value of M.L.S. education in comparison to undergraduate and in-service training programs and to compare graduates of accredited and nonaccredited M.L.S. programs. Until a criterion-validity study is done, it will not be possible to uphold the M.L.S. as the single entry-level qualification. At issue is also the question of what is professional in the work that librarians do. L.E.P.U. still represents a reasonable guideline in this area, along with the Phase II studies of the Illinois Library Task Analysis Project. Suzanne Mahmoodi's dissertation identified competencies needed for public service librarians in Minnesota, and she found high degrees of agreement among librarians as to the nature of the com- petencies and the relative importance of each.16 The certification exam of the M.L.A. also represents a high level of thoughtful consensus about professional duties. It will not be easy (or inexpensive) to draw together all the disparate opinions, but it is probably not impossible because the profession already has reached agreement about important segments of professional work. The more difficult part of the task is to decide what kind and amount of training develops these competencies and how best to test them. Even here we are not without some assistance from the Selection Consulting Center and those California public libraries which have developed equiv- alency and promotional examinations. We also can look at the nature and process of the Bar and Medical Board examinations, among other pro- fessional testing devices. It is only by testing (in a broad sense) that we can compare individuals with classroom education to those with on-the-job training. A national certification program might include a bachelor's degree and an equivalency examination for those who do not possess the M.L.S., one to two years of professional experience, a competency examination, and 18
Certification and Education periodic recertification based on continuing education. An equivalency exam would give minorities and rural residents unable to attend a library school a transferable credential that would allow them to seek promotions and avoid career dead ends. A competency examination for everyone would be necessary to establish the effectiveness of whatever training individuals have had. Experience is suggested as a means of integrating practice and training or education. Finally, lifetime certification earns no one's respect; recertification is a means of ensuring that professional librarians are keeping up with their ever-changing profession. The research required and the time involved in preparing equivalency and competency examinations are very expensive. It would take the resources of a national organization, in this case, the A.L.A., to sponsor the effort. Realistically, the current lack of cohesiveness within the orga- nization makes it seem unlikely that A.L.A. will be able to mount such a major effort requiring the cooperation of every component of the organization. Another justification for taking a national approach is to fulfill one of the recommendations of the Conant report: a national plan for library education.17 The reform of library education is being done piecemeal now: Individual libraries offer equivalency exams, each state registers school and public librarians in a different fashion, the federal govern- ment potentially imposes its standards on the entire profession, and the library schools cope in a variety of ways with their financial straits. What benefits can we hope for from national certification? First of all, the process of validating the M.L.S. and developing certification stan- dards will enable library administrators to examine the jobs of pro- fessionals and paraprofessionals in their agencies. Secondly, a national effort at certification may help change the public image of librarians as it brings librarianship into closer alignment with the "true" professions of law and medicine. Both the testing procedure and its source within the profession would increase librarianship's autonomy. At the same time, libraries and librarians would be less vulnerable to chal- lenge on the basis of discrimination and invalid minimum qualifications. We should be able to improve service through competency-based examination, although it is not possible to estimate the degree of im- provement. We cannot hope to weed out all the incompetents because that is statistically impossible. By chance there will always be some people who pass who should not have passed, who did a little better on the test than they normally would, and conversely, some who fail who normally would have passed.18 Given the fluctuating financial situation of many libraries, it would be 19
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science unreasonable to expect that certification would give librarians greater job security. The sad experience of school librarians is testimony to the lack of job security of "certified" personnel. Job security is an unworthy motive for certification. Voluntary certification may be a prelude to mandatory certification. As with the health sciences librarian certification of the M.L.A., voluntary certification would indicate a person with above average capabilities - more than half of the people who take the M.L.A. exam fail, yet most are employed as health sciences librarians. Mandatory certification is seen as necessary to motivate the library schools to upgrade their curricula and methodologies. The profession sees certification by examination as a means of having direct input into the nature of library education. For library science educators, the potential examination raises the specter of "teaching to the test," whereby the content of the examination becomes the content of the courses, to the exclusion of matters which might be just as substantive, and, to the educator, as necessary as the material which is tested. The schools have resisted standardization, but equivalency and competency examinations might impose some standardization, at least in the basic courses, while the specialty courses would continue to differ from school to school. Library administrators might indeed be happier if there were more uniformity among the schools as to the basic background of all graduates. As it is now, they really do not know what to expect from someone who has graduated from any particular library school unless they happen to know that school's curriculum well. It is not possible to know well the curricula of 60 plus programs. Assuming that any competency examination would test the most neces- sary and most basic skills and knowledges needed to perform as an entry level librarian or information professional, stronger library schools ought to be able to say that they are not teaching minimum qualifications or for the first day on the job. In the course of a semester or a quarter of basic reference or cataloging and classification there ought to be far more content than could be tested on a competency examination. At present the weaker library schools receive guidance from the profession only during the accreditation process. The certification competency examination would provide firm guidelines as to the basic content in which students should be instructed and the level at which that instruction should take place. For the first time, the unaccredited library schools would also benefit from the profession's expertise in the skills necessary in practice, since their graduates would take the competency exam along with every- one else who desired entrance to the profession. 20
Certification and Education Certification might replace accreditation as the process whereby the quality of library education is assured. It seems unlikely that A.L.A. would be willing to undertake both certification and accreditation. By evaluating the products of the education rather than its ingredients, the A.L.A. would take on the function of gatekeeper to the profession, a role the library and information studies schools now fill through their admission practices. This suggests that the results of the competency examination might be used as a measuring device in several ways. However, it would be a mistake to think that one would compare library schools with each other on the basis of how many of their graduates passed the test. Such examinations usually measure the students' abilities at least as much as the quantity or quality of education received. To compare graduates of one school with those from other schools would simply show which school attracted the most able students. For the same reason, a competency examination would not necessarily sort out the differences between the accredited programs and the unaccredited programs, between library school and on-the-job training. These differences are apt to lie only partly in the training and mostly in the capacity of the learners. However, university administrations have been known to use test results as a mea- sure of the quality of professional education programs. In the University of North Carolina system, some of the nursing programs have been threatened with dissolution if a certain percentage of their graduates did not pass the nursing registration examinations. Under a certification program which included a competency examina- tion, the most drastic change for library schools could be enrollment. If the pass rate for the different schools were public knowledge, then prospective students might begin to select library schools on that basis. Although there will always be some students who select a school because it is convenient or less expensive, some schools might face increased en- rollments while others lost enrollment. The schools would be more likely to compete for the best students than they do now. And it might be that only the most motivated students would attend library school if a test were required for professional practice. Less committed students might decide that a profession with strict requirements was undesirable. Library schools might also lose potential enrollees among library employees who opt for the equivalency exam instead of library school education. There is no way to tell how many persons might make such a decision. In Cal- ifornia, where it is still possible to "read for the bar," only a handful of individuals pursue that route in lieu of attending law school. It is unlikely that the process outlined above would cause a return to the 21
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science days when large public libraries conducted library schools. Few libraries would be willing to invest the necessary resources at a time when it is evident that there are at least enough library schools for the number of potential students and probable job openings. For the foreseeable future, the accredited M.L.S. will probably continue to be the most desired library credential, and the preferred way to acquire the knowledge and skills of a professional librarian through education. Even if accreditation has no legal status, within the profession it has a higher social status than nonaccreditation, deservedly or not. Whether or not certification be- comes a reality, the content and methods of education for library and information service will continue to evolve. Librarians cannot deal with ideas and methods constantly in flux without expecting changes in their preparation to work with the shifting patterns of information, com- munication, recreation, and human needs. References 1. Vavrek, B.: Profession Needs New Entry Level. American Libraries, 13:271, April 1982. 2. Williamson, C.C. : Training for Library Service. New York, Carnegie Corporation, 1 923, pp. 1 43- 1 45. 3. Garland, H.C., III: The MLS, Affirmative Action, Equal Employment Opportunity and Equiv- alency. California Librarian, 36:42, Oct. 1975. 4. Wert, L.M.: The M.L.S. and lob Performance, North Carolina Libraries, 38:1 1, Spring 1980. 5. Garland, ref. 3, p, 43. 6. Shoham, S.: Organizational Adaptation to the Environment: The Case of the Public Library." (Ph.D. dissertation, University of California, Berkeley, 1981), p. 78. 7. White, H.S.: Perceptions by Educators and Administrators of the Ranking of Library School Programs. College and Research Libraries, 42:193, May 1981. 8. Wedgeworth, R.: ALA and the Merwine Case: A Word as to the WHYS. American Libraries, 1 5:562, Sept. 1984. 9. American Library Association. Library Education and Personnel Utilization. Chicago, American Library Association, Office for Library Personnel Resources, 1976, p. 6. 10. American Library Association. Office for Library Personnel Resources Advisory Committee, March 1980. (Mimeographed.) 11. Asheim, L: I'm Glad You Asked That. American Libraries, 2:598, June 1971. 12. Virgo, J.C.: Degree or License, Wilson Library Bulletin, 51:341-342, Dec. 1976. 13. Morton, W.W., and Triplett, B.L.: Certification-Recertification in the TALON Region: A Survey. Bulletin of the Medical Library Association, 71 :37-38, Jan. 1983. 14. Gerhardt, L.N.: Certification Revisited. School Library Journal, 24:17, April 1978. 15. Cottam, K.: Minimum Qualifications and the Law: The Issue Ticks Away for Librarians. American Libraries, 11:281, May 1980. 16. Mahmoodi, S.H.: Identification of Competencies for Librarians Performing Public Services Functions in Public Libraries. Ann Arbor, MI, University Microfilms, 1978, pp. 124-125. 17. Conant, R.W.: The Conant Report: A Study of the Education of Librarians. Cambridge, MA, M.I.T. Press, 1980, pp. 189:190. 18. Appelbaum, M.: Reliability of Measurements I (Lecture given at the Frank Porter Graham Child Development Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, May 23, 1983.) 22
Certification and Education ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Canelas, D.B.: Task Analysis of Library Jobs in the State of Illinois: A Working Paper on the Relevance of the Study to Academic Libraries. Northwestern University Library, 1971. Library Selection Project. Job Analysis Report: Phase I. Sacramento, Selection Consulting Center, 1977. Library Selection Project. Phase II: Selection Systems Designs for Entry-level Professional Librarians. Sac- ramento, Selection Consulting Center, 1978. Ricking, M.: Illinois Task Analysis Project: Phase II. Illinois Task Analysis Project, Advisory Committee, 1971. MSS. ree: 9/83 Accepted: 2/84 STATEMENT OF OWN E RSHHJ MANAGEMENT AND CIRCULATION U TITLE OF PUBLICATION I IB. PUBLICATION NO, J2, DATE Of FILING Journal oí Education for Librar ianehip 0 |o ¡2 | z\ p| fe|o 4_ 10/4/84 3. FREQUENCY OF ISSUE 3A. NO^.SSUES PUBLISHED 3B. ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION 5 times per year 5 $20.00 4. COMPLETE MAILING ADDRESS OF KNOWN OFFICE OF PUBLICATION (Street. City. County. St.» .nd ZIP Code) (Not printer,, 471 Park Lane, State College, PA 16803 Centre County 5. COMPLETE MAILING ADDRESS OF THE HEADQUARTERS OF GENERAL BUSINESS OFFICES OF THE PUBLISHER (Not printer) 471 Park Lane, State CoUege, PA 16803 Centre County JTfuLL NAMES AND COMPLETE MAILING ADDRESS OF PUBLISHER, EDITOR, AND MANAGING EDITOR (This Item MUST NOT be blank) Assn fo7'Library'and Information Science Education, 471 Park Lane, State College, PA 16803 EDITOR (Name and Compiete Matting Address) MANAGING EDITOR (Nome .ml Complete Moilim AMre», ~~~ Janet Phillips, 471 Park Lane, State College, PA 16803 piji i MAME COMPLETE MAILING ADDRESS Asan, tor Library and Information Science Education 471 Park Lane, State College, PA 16803 • KNOWN BONDHOLDERS. MORTGAGEES. AND OTHER SECURITY HOLOERS OWNING OR HOLDING 1 PERCENT OR MORE OF TOTAL AMOUNT OF BONOS. MORTGAGES OR OTHER SECURITIES (If »ere m «.,, *,mu) FULL NAME | COMPLETE MAILING ADDRESS -~ HOME 9. FOR COMPLETION BY NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS AUTHORIZED TO MAIL AT SPECIAL RATES (Section 423.12 DMMonly) a p!?iciooTnccTmSontohuswng d SaaggssB gsggsgssr^a*te"it"<r * EXTENT ANONATURE OF CIRCULATION I «SftS^giSSg1 17 MONTHS I «JflUffij» FILINO fflffW» PW It 17 MONTHS FILINO PW It A. TOTAL NO. COPIES (Ne, »«, Run, 2,000 2,000 B. PAID CIRCULATION ' ^.M.J.Su^ip.ion Lilfi2 1^536 C. TOTAL PAID CIRCULATION (Sum of I OBI md I0B2) 1 , 507 1 , 586 D. FREE DISTRIBUTION BY MAIL. CARRIER OR OTHER MEANS SAMPLES. COMPLIMENTARY. ANO OTHER FREE COPIES 30 34 E.T0TALD.STRI,UT,0N^O/C«>O; ¡^ ¡^ F. COPIES NOT DISTRIBUTED 1. OffiCTu».lt<lo»^un«CTOUMrt.ipo.l»d.ftt>pcintin9 463 3J0 2. Return from Nm Agino G. TOTAL (Sum of E. FI «J 2-*ou* «** net pet» run Vo^ *. A, 2,000 2.000 "■ X^~*~~m-*+ I^sign^eLndt^ofeditor.pu.lisher'bus.nessmanager.orow.er 2,000 Aaaiatant 2.000 Editor imabov* ara comet and oomptota /* y^u^U KJiLiU^U^o/ Aaaiatant Editor SX«» ISecfatmctiononrevtn*) 23