The belief that it is essential to help all individuals who enter the library by providing materials and services that reflect the diverse range of perspectives and groups in society has been the underlying foundation to the code of ethics and the bill of rights of the American Library Association [1]. There are various library services tailored to specific populations—young adults, children, older adults, immigrants, non–English speakers, persons with disabilities, and people with literacy challenges, among others. These services targeted to specific populations have been formulated and offered by libraries based on the current needs of society. For example, in the early 1900s, public librarians in New York City held special language programs for the flood of new immigrants to the country, most of whom did not speak English fluently [2]. During the present economic downturn, public libraries have engaged in a wide range of programs and activities to provide access to and assistance in searching for jobs, seeking social services, locating housing, and applying for government benefits [3, 4]. This professional commitment to serving diverse patron communities, however, has never translated into widespread advancement of research in diversity-related areas in library and information science (LIS) or increased offerings of diversity courses in LIS programs. Recent research in LIS has provided a proliferation of evidence that has highlighted the vital needs of diversity-related research and course offerings in LIS [5–8] and the importance of creating a model for building and sustaining diversity in LIS [9, 10]. Consider one element of diversity that has always been the focus of politics and socioeconomic discussion in the United States—racial diversity. From 2000 to 2010, 83 percent of population growth in the United States was nonwhite [11]. Half of the population 18 and younger is nonwhite, and minority births now account for 48 percent of children born [11, 12]. For example, the Hispanic population increased by 15.2 million between 2000 and 2010, accounting for over half of the 27.3 million increase in the total population. Between 2000 and 2010, the Hispanic population grew by 43 percent, which was four times the growth in the total population at 10 percent [13]. The Asian population is also growing at a similar rate [13]. By 2050, minorities are projected to comprise 54 percent of the US population [12, 14]. Many places are already majority-minority, meaning that the majority of the population is nonwhite. Of the 3,141 counties in the United States, 303—nearly one in ten—are already majority-minority [12, 15]. In addition, in one of every four counties, there are more minority children than white children [12, 15]. Libraries and other information organizations either are currently or will be serving an ever more racially diverse national population. The nation is becoming more diverse, but LIS is not embracing this change in its research, particularly in research that will support libraries in providing services, resources, programs, and outreach that will meet the needs of these diverse communities and patron populations. The example of the changing of racial demographics is only one of many elements of diversity that LIS research must be paying attention to. The population of low socioeconomic status serves as an excellent example of the neglect of another population in terms of research. The economic downturn has simultaneously further increased usage and further diversified library demographics to include people with a lower socioeconomic background, as many people who had not previously used the library may need to begin using it. Public libraries have been serving as “America’s first responders to the economic crisis” [16, n.p.] and are developing many innovative ways to provide information and social services to patrons in response to the crisis [3, 17]. However, library research remains primarily disconnected from these efforts, with some researchers even objecting to focusing on the information needs of the socioeconomically disadvantaged [18–21]. In order to support the realities of practice, library research needs to better address key diversity-related research questions. How do library services accommodate this diverse national population? What type of training should LIS provide to future librarians? What type of resources and programs should this diverse population have access to? As mentioned earlier, diversity-related research remains scarce in the LIS scholarly world. Clearly, with the change in demographics and diversity in the United States, research geared toward enhancing service to diverse populations can provide essential support to library practices. We begin the exploration into diversity-related research by examining an important aspect of research and education within the field of LIS diversity-related dissertations published between 2000 and 2009 (almost similar to the time range used in US census data). This article reports the findings of a study exploring the nature and extent of research on diversity in LIS doctoral dissertations from 2000 to 2009. By systematically examining the last decade of dissertations in the field, this study is meant to reveal the levels of interest in diversity research among doctoral students in LIS and the types of diversity topics and contexts being addressed by scholars who will represent the next generation of LIS scholars and educators. The level of focus on diversity by the next generation of scholars will heavily shape the amount of support library research can provide library resources, programs, services, and outreach in supporting ever more diverse service populations. Examining these dissertations serves to: (1) determine whether scarcity of diversity-related research in publications is also evident in dissertation studies, (2) reveal areas of diversity that need more research focus to support practice as these new scholars add their voices to the LIS discourse, and (3) suggest future directions that diversity research may support library practice. We begin by discussing our definition of diversity in LIS, proceed to presenting the details of the study, and then conclude with the implication of the findings to practice. Diversity in LIS Research Racial diversity has traditionally received the most focus in LIS literature related to diversity in preparation to work with diverse populations, initiatives to diversify the profession, and research [e.g., 22–29]. However, LIS as a profession cannot limit itself to research on inclusion based on race and ethnicity or even based on populations protected from legal discrimination [5, 6]. LIS professionals facilitate access to information, must be prepared to work with the information needs and information behavior of diverse populations, and must understand the needs of individuals based on the complexities of political, socioeconomic, and technological divides. With these considerations in mind, LIS research needs to expand its focus from diversity in terms of simple demographics to a focus on diversity as the populations that are underrepresented, disadvantaged, and underserved in terms of information [6]. Having limited or no access to the Internet serves as a social and learning disadvantage in terms of education, civic participation, employment, and other major life functions, to many who come from families that are in poverty [6, 30, 31]. These issues are more critical in LIS than almost any other field, as graduates of LIS programs and LIS practitioners work with diverse service populations every day. The definition of diversity research must encompass populations that have been marginalized in relation to information needs and information behavior, as well as populations that are traditionally underrepresented in the LIS professions. We define diversity in LIS as elements that touch on populations that are legally protected, such as race, ethnicity, gender, and disability, as well as populations with access challenges related to literacy, poverty, culture, religion, migration status, language, sexual orientation, and age, among others [6]. These expanded definitions need to be interwoven into research and teaching in LIS, as they are already part of the realities of librarianship. Within every social group, there are numerous issues that can be explored, including information needs and expectations, the trust of information and social institutions that provide information, norms and behaviors about information, and the attitudes toward information, sources, services, and types of access. Issues of information related to underrepresented, disadvantaged, and underserved populations are so prevalent that they can seamlessly fit into the work of any LIS scholar, either as a specific focus or as an aspect of an area of research [5]. The field of LIS is imbued with topics of diversity, representation, and inclusion related to libraries and other cultural institutions. The issue is that LIS scholars often do not pursue these research opportunities, perhaps because they do not see the importance of such research to the profession at large. Research also informs teaching, which translates into offerings of diversity-related courses in LIS programs. Faculty who conduct research in diversity may be inclined to offer diversity-related courses at their institutions. The scarcity of research in diversity may have a negative impact on the offerings of diversity courses in LIS programs: • Only 22.2 percent of recent LIS graduates had the option to take a course related to diversity in their degree program, and only 21.3 percent of LIS graduates indicated that they were prepared by their Masters in Library and Information Science (MLS) program to work with diverse populations [32]. • Among i-Schools (a group of schools that produce a large number of doctoral students that become faculty in LIS schools (see http://www.ischools.org/), very few courses in MLS and doctoral programs have a stated diversity component in the course description; of those that do, the clear majority of these courses are electives [7]. Consistent exposure to diversity issues stands as a key means through which students in LIS programs can become ready to provide inclusive information services to the wide range of patrons they will encounter in their professional lives [5, 33], and clearly this is not evident in the current course offerings description above. Diversity course offerings can be extended by recruiting doctoral students who intend to include diversity as a core pillar of their research and teaching interests to become future faculty at LIS schools. One key to changing the LIS curriculum to incorporate diversity and offering of courses that embed diversity is to encourage future faculty (doctoral students) to conduct dissertation research in diversity-related areas, who could inform practice and create many further contributions to the understanding of the roles of information in society, resulting in the profession providing better service to society. To gauge the diversity research pursued by LIS doctoral students, we formulated a study to examine the coverage and emphasis on diversity in LIS dissertation studies. LIS Doctoral Dissertations and Diversity This study was conducted to determine the nature and extent of inclusion of diversity-related elements in dissertation studies completed at ALAaccredited LIS schools between 2000 and 2009. The nature and extent of inclusion of diversity-related elements were determined based on: the elements of diversity examined; populations (such as ethnic populations, older adults) that were studied; the venue (such as libraries, museums) of these studies; and the rationale of studying the selected diversity issues or problems. Abstracts classified as “library science” and “information science” for dissertations completed between January 2000 and December 2009 were retrieved from the ProQuest Dissertations and Thesis database. These abstracts were then sorted to ensure that all were limited to PhD dissertations completed at LIS schools accredited by ALA. This also served to eliminate dissertations from other fields that used those classifiers. These efforts yielded 216 LIS dissertations from the period of ten years, which were collected in the database. To analyze the dissertation abstracts, a codebook of diversity terms was generated based on the terminology used in LIS discourses and diversity research across fields. To ensure intercoder reliability, we did a preliminary analysis by using the list of terms in this codebook as a framework to analyze a small subset of these dissertations and also sought to identify additional diversity-related terms from the dissertation abstracts themselves. We gathered and discussed results from this preliminary analysis and updated the codebook, which included forty-four diversity-related phrases/terms. Using the codebook, we conducted a content analysis on the 216 dissertation abstracts to identify diversity-related dissertations and determine the nature and extent of inclusion of diversity-related elements in these dissertations. The study determined that of the 216 LIS dissertations published during the period under study, eighty-nine (41 percent) were diversity related. This number was very robust, given the overall lack of emphasis on diversity in LIS education and research, as discussed previously. These eighty-nine dissertations were written at thirty-one different institutions, which represent 86 percent of the PhD-granting ALA-accredited LIS programs. Among these thirty-one schools, nineteen produced one or two diversity-related dissertations in the ten-year period. As can be seen in table 1, researchers from six schools were responsible for producing forty-two of the eighty-nine diversity-related dissertations, representing nearly half (47.19 percent) of the dissertations. These leading schools primarily parallel the LIS programs that graduate the most students from racial minorities [34]. Table 1.  Schools with Highest Number of LIS Diversity-Related Dissertations LIS School No. of Diversity-Related Dissertations (89) Florida State University 10 (11.24%) University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 9 (10.11%) Rutgers—the State University of New Jersey 6 (6.74%) University of Pittsburgh 6 (6.74%) University of Texas at Austin 6 (6.74%) University of California, Los Angeles 5 (5.62%) There is also an increase in the number of diversity-related dissertations published by LIS schools primarily in the last two years included in this study—years 2008 and 2009, as seen in table 2. Although it may be too soon to assume that more dissertation researchers are incorporating diversity elements in recent years, this increase may be pointing toward a potential positive trend of including diversity elements at the dissertation level. Table 2.  Number of LIS Diversity-Related Dissertations by Publication Year Year No. of Diversity-Related Dissertations (89) 2009 15 (16.85%) 2008 17 (19.10%) 2007 5 (5.62%) 2006 12 (13.48%) 2005 4 (4.49%) 2004 7 (7.87%) 2003 9 (10.11%) 2002 9 (10.11%) 2001 4 (4.49%) 2000 7 (7.87%) Elements or issues of diversity in the dissertations include a wide range of aspects, both visible and invisible [35]. Visible elements are those related to age, race, gender, physical disabilities, and others [36]. Invisible elements include, but are not limited to, language proficiency, sexual orientation, place of origin, religious, and moral and political values and beliefs [37]. For this study, we used the codebook based on forty-four elements of diversity to analyze the eighty-nine LIS dissertation abstracts. The analysis identified 169 occurrences of elements of diversity, which represent fifty-three distinctive elements, including thirty-eight of the original forty-four elements in the codebook, three elements that emerged from the data, and twelve subcategories also identified from the data, classified under the “other groups or places of origin” category (see the appendix for the complete list of elements). The 169 elements were ranked based on the rate of occurrences, as seen in table 3. Table 3.  Ten Most-Used Elements of Diversity in LIS Dissertations No. Elements of Diversity Occurrences (%) 1 Gender (in general, unspecified variable) 15 (8.88) 2 Black/African American 14 (8.28) 3 Diverse, diversity, diverse populations, diverse perspectives 9 (5.33) 4 Women 8 (4.73) 5 Young adult, adolescent 7 (4.14) 6 Race (in general, unspecified variable) 6 (3.55) 7 Age (in general, unspecified variable) 6 (3.55) 8 Immigrant(s) 5 (2.96) 9 Underserved population(s), communities 5 (2.96) 10 American Indian and Alaska Native 5 (2.96) These elements were further analyzed, and through a process similar to axial coding, they were distributed and grouped based on similarities and close relationships to major categories, or dimensions of diversity. Ten dimensions of diversity resulted from this analysis, including: age, or age group(s); disability, or accessibility issues; discrimination, and/or related issues; diversity and/or multiculturalism; ethnicity, place of origin, and/or ethnical groups; gender; language and/or related issues; migration status; race; and sexual orientation. Five of these dimensions (ethnicity, place of origin, and/or ethnic groups; diversity and/or multiculturalism; gender; race; and age/age group) comprise 136, or 80.47 percent, of all studied diversity-related elements as seen in table 4. Table 4.  Ten Dimensions of Diversity and Distribution of Related Elements Dimensions of Diversity Elements (169) Ethnicity, place of origin, ethnical groups 29 (17.16%) Diversity/multiculturalism 28 (16.57%) Gender 28 (16.57%) Race 28 (16.57%) Age/age group 23 (13.61%) Language 11 (6.51%) Disability/accessibility 10 (5.92%) Migration/migration status 7 (4.14%) Sexual orientation 3 (1.78%) Discrimination/related issues 2 (1.18%) As table 5 shows, the dissertations studied issues of diversity in terms of a range of venues. The most and third-most frequent venues were a specific physical location (31 percent) or digital location (13 percent). Given the strong linkages between LIS and spaces that provide access to information—libraries, schools, archives, museums, websites, and so on—it is logical that specific physical and digital locations would be primary venues for these diversity studies. Similarly, the remaining categories of venues are reasonable spaces to explore diversity within the context of information. There were also dissertations either that did not specify a venue or that had abstracts that made it evident that data were collected without the use of a physical or digital location (20 percent). For example, some abstracts stated that data were collected through interviews (a data collection method) but did not indicate where the interviews were conducted and the contexts of the study. Table 5.  Venues in Which LIS Dissertations Discuss Diversity Venue/Example Occurrences (89) Specific physical place (library, church, public computer access sites) 28 (31.46%) Unspecified 18 (20.22%) Digital space (website, computer) 12 (13.48%) Books (novels, graphic novels, other literature) 11 (12.36%) Nonbook text documents (periodicals, archival documents) 7 (7.87%) Educational space (K–12, college) 5 (5.62%) Specific communities (book club, women’s prison) 5 (5.62%) Communication means and networks (public service networks, HIV/AIDS help networks) 3 (3.37%) The dissertation abstracts were also examined in terms of whether diversity was the primary or secondary emphasis of the study. This distinction hinges on the degree to which the use of diversity elements was central to a particular study. If the focus on a diverse population was central to the dissertation, it was classified as primary. Examples of this included a focus on information needs of a specific population, outreach to a specific population, or materials designed for a specific population. In 64 percent (n = 57) of the dissertations, diversity was the primary focus. In contrast, dissertations were labeled secondary if the study was focused on a diversity-related context with the diverse population serving as the element by which to examine that context. In the remaining 36 percent (n = 32) of dissertations, diversity was identified as a secondary component of the research. In many such studies, the diverse populations were a small part of a larger study—often one population of several—such as a study of the availability of home health care information to several different populations, one of which is persons with disabilities. Examples of the contrast between dissertations labeled primary and secondary can be seen in two dissertation studies in which information related to American Indians was a component. In the dissertation study where information related to American Indians was the primary component, the study examined an academic system created specifically for American Indians; the problem of the information needs of American Indians within this academic context is the reason for the study. In another dissertation study, information related to American Indians was a secondary component. The focus of this study was on school librarians’ knowledge about children’s literature related to American Indians. In this latter case, the reason for the study was the knowledge of the school librarians, with literature related to American Indians serving as a measure of this knowledge. Finally, the issues behind investigation—in relation to either the group/population or external issues affecting the group/population—were extracted from the abstracts. As indicated in table 6, the most common foci of the dissertations in which diversity was the primary component were impacts of diversity on information behavior (26.3 percent), portrayals of diverse populations (26.3 percent), information literacy in diverse populations (19.3 percent), and access to information for diverse populations (14.0 percent). Table 6.  Reasons for Studying Diversity Where Diversity Was Primary Component of Dissertation Reason (Diversity as Primary Component) Occurrence (57) Impact of group membership on information behavior 15 (26.32%) Portrayals in published materials, library collections, or other information resources 15 (26.32%) Information literacy and/or digital skills 11 (19.30%) Availability of information access and services 8 (14.04%) Construction of group identity or construction of perceptions of other groups 6 (10.53%) LIS professional issues 2 (3.51%) In the dissertations where diversity was a secondary component, the reasons for studying diversity were significantly different. Noting the most frequently occurring categories (see table 7) illustrates these differences. For example, presentation or management of information was the reason for eleven (34.4 percent) of the dissertations with abstracts that indicated diversity as having a secondary role in the research. These dissertations often used a diverse population as a way of testing a technology, rather than assessing how useful the technology was to the diverse population. The second and third most frequently occurring reasons for conducting research examining diversity in ways that emphasized issues related to diversity (as opposed to individuals or populations) were information literacy (21.8 percent) and the availability of information resources and services (18.7 percent). Table 7.  Reasons for Studying Diversity Where Diversity Was Secondary Component of Dissertation Reason (Diversity as Secondary Component) Occurrence (32) Presentation or management of information 11 (34.38%) Information literacy and/or digital skills 7 (21.88%) Availability of information access and services 6 (18.75%) LIS professional issues 5 (15.63%) Impact of group membership on information behavior 3 (9.38%) Translating Dissertation Research into Sustained Diversity Research to Support Practice Overall, analyzing the dissertation abstracts in this way provides several important insights into diversity research and the potential of future diversity research to support library services and resources that support diverse user populations: • Using the expanded definition of diversity proposed earlier in this article, many dissertations (41 percent of the 216 LIS dissertations published) in LIS have a diversity component. • There was an increase in the number of diversity-related dissertations published by LIS schools primarily in the last two years included in this study—years 2008 and 2009. • A number of diversity dissertations focused primarily on “traditional” elements of diversity noted in previous studies such as race, gender, and ethnicity (e.g., minorities, people of color). An encouraging finding is that dimensions of diversity such as age and language were also included in a significant number of the dissertation abstracts, indicating that doctoral researchers have begun broaden their understanding of what comprises diversity. • Diversity dissertation venues primarily centered around physical space, digital spaces, and educational spaces (49 percent of the dissertations). • Dissertations with diversity as their primary research focus were devoted mainly to issues about specific diverse populations. • Dissertations with diversity as a secondary research focus were devoted mainly to external issues affecting particular populations. This study’s findings suggest opportunities for further studies on how the findings from the analysis of diversity dissertations completed in ALA-accredited schools can be translated into further strengthening a diversity research agenda in LIS scholarship that can support libraries in providing services, resources, programs, and outreach that will meet the needs of diverse communities and patron populations. There are four trends identified through this dissertation analysis that need to be considered in working toward a sustained research agenda for LIS to support library practices in meeting the needs an expectations of diverse populations: • There is a disconnect between diversity research that is being done in the LIS generally and diversity-related dissertations completed in LIS schools. Even when the broader definition of diversity is used, diversity-related scholarly research in the field is surprisingly limited. However, using the same definition to analyze dissertation abstracts completed in the last ten years offers a different result. Of the 216 LIS dissertation abstracts analyzed, eighty-nine (41 percent) described studies that embraced this broader definition of diversity. There also seems to be an upward trend in embracing diversity-related research at the dissertation level, with thirty-two (36 percent) diversity-related dissertations published in the last two years. • Authors of diversity related dissertations seem genuinely interested in meeting the information needs of diverse populations. Many of the dissertation authors (64 percent) focused their study on diversity because of genuine issues/problems about the groups/populations themselves and on external issues affecting these groups. There was less focus on using diverse populations as a way of presenting and managing information. Based on this analysis, we infer that most diversity dissertation research was undertaken because the authors were genuinely interested in diversity and scholarly work in relation to diversity, and not merely including diversity as a component in their research for the sake of inclusion and diversity. • Traditional definitions of diversity guide most dissertations. Diversity dissertations are primarily still focused on ethnicity, gender, race, and age (80.5 percent from a total of 169 diversity elements). This is indeed very similar to the traditional focus on diversity research as discussed in the beginning of the article whereby, race, ethnicity, and populations protected from legal discrimination such as gender are the core focus of the scholarly diversity study. This seems to be still the trend in LIS research but will need to be changed as practitioners have certainly moved beyond these legally protected populations [6]. To respond to the needs of practice, LIS researchers and doctoral students must make this move and extend their focus on diversity to address the multitude of issues related to populations that are underrepresented, disadvantaged, and underserved in terms of information. Paul Jaeger, John Bertot, and Renee Franklin present multiple ways to identify research opportunities related to diversity and underrepresented populations [5]. • Outreach beyond library spaces is not central to most of the dissertations. Diversity dissertations’ venue primarily centered on physical space, digital spaces, and educational spaces (49 percent of the diversity dissertations). Very few dissertation studies seem to extend beyond physical and digital spaces of libraries, such as conducting studies at venues that service specific cultural communities and their information needs such as church, prison, and homeless shelters. However, some LIS scholarly research has investigated venues that move beyond the traditional definition of venues in LIS [25, 38–40]. More research needs to be done to examine the importance of extending the traditional definition of venues in dissertation studies and its implication to practice. Understanding the types of diversity research being conducted by the rising generation of scholars helps identify new areas being addressed in diversity research, potential future trends in diversity research, and opportunities for future research that need more exploration. Most importantly for practice, it reveals the interests of scholars who will be shaping LIS research in the coming years that will support libraries in serving diverse populations. As the demographics make abundantly clear, libraries must meet the information needs of continually more diverse service populations and communities. The services, programs, outreach, and resources implemented to meet these needs will be more successful when grounded in and supported by research. Diversity research in LIS can help libraries and other information institutions remain relevant to changing service populations. If libraries are not providing the resources, programs, and materials that various diverse populations expect, they may well view the library as being of decreasing value. Libraries have long adapted to meet the changing needs and expectations of patrons. The present and foreseeable future will be defined by an ever more diverse population of library users, and libraries must adapt to these demographic changes to remain a vital social institution that meets the needs of all members of the community. As librarianship has long struggled with the representation of diverse populations within its own professional and academic ranks, adapting research to better support practice in this context may be challenging due to both the limited diversity within LIS and the lack of a strong emphasis on diversity in research. The dissertations from the previous decade of LIS research, however, provide a considerable amount of hope that the rising generation of LIS scholars will be more attuned to conducting research that will provide insights into improving library services, resources, programs, and outreach for diverse populations. In the long run, libraries better attuned to the needs of diverse populations also raise the prospect of people from a greater range of populations being drawn to librarianship as a profession. The rising generation of LIS scholars also has the potential to broaden the focus on diversity-related research to support inclusive practice. Scholars more focused on diversity will be more inclined to develop and teach diversity-related courses at their institutions that will prepare future professionals to provide inclusive practice and also mentor new doctoral students to include diversity concepts in their research. The ability of this rising generation of scholars to translate their greater focus on diversity into research that supports inclusive library practices depends heavily on the support these scholars receive in their work from senior faculty and administrators, LIS journals, and funding agencies. Without encouragement and support—or worse, with discouragement and rejection—this generation of scholars could be driven away from a focus on increasing diversity research in LIS. To ensure that libraries can continue to serve as vital community institutions that meet the needs of all of their patrons, support for diversity-related research is very necessary. Libraries need research that will support inclusive practice with increasingly diverse populations and communities, and, as the dissertations of the rising generation of LIS scholars demonstrate, LIS research can rise to this challenge if the field commits to sustaining this vital area of research.