ALPHABET AND BIBLIOLOGICAL TERMS IN SOME EARLY JUDEO-CHRISTIAN LITERATURE FRANCIS J. WITTY ABSTRACT Texts presented from the Gospel of Pseudo-Thomas and the Contra haereses of Irenaeus (both written before A.D. 200) employ the word "alphabet," and are earlier than D. Diringer's citation for its first appearance in literature. Bibliological terms found in the Apocrypha and Pseudepig- rapha of the Bible and some early Christian literature are translated and presented in their context and discussed. It is concluded that some terms are not adequately treated in the standard lexica; thus thorough examinations of such terms in individual Christian writers of this early period are still needed. Systematic studies of bibliological terms in the works of individual Greek and Latin writers have yet to be made, particularly of those writers of the early centuries of this era when the form and material of the book were changing from a roll of papyrus to a codex of parchment. Birt [1] and Wattenbach [2] remain the classics for the general treatment of ancient book terminology, but I know of no other works of this na- ture which deal with such terms in indi- vidual authors, except that of Arns on Jerome [3] and my own study on Cas- siodorus [4]. Recently I had the occasion to reread the so-called Apocrypha and Pseudepig- rapha of the Old and New Testaments (that is, the extant Greek and Latin texts) and some Christian literature of the first few centuries of our era, partic- ularly the works included among the Apostolic Fathers. The purpose of this reading originally was a theological in- quiry; but some terms were noted that would be of interest in the history of writing and bibliology in general. The various terms are presented in this pa- per under the headings: "Alphabet," "Writing Instruments and Materials," and "Bibliological Terms"; Greek words have been romanized. ALPHABET Diringer, in the latest edition of his history of scripts [5], makes the follow- ing statement about the word "alpha- bet": "The Pseudo-Tertullian work katdlogos haireseon (chapter 5) men- tions ex Graecorum alphabeto-but when was th'is work written? Altaner, Patrologie, Freiberg, 1951, seems to at- tribute it to Hippolytus of Rome [flour- ished from ca. A.D. 200, died A.D. 235]; if this attribution is accepted we have here the first mention of the word Al- phabet" [5, 1:1451.1 Two features of this statement ap- peared somewhat anomalous: first, the Latin quotation cited under a Greek title in Greek script; second, that a Latin work would be attributed by Altaner-a respected patrologist-to Hippolytus, who wrote in Greek. Now I am aware that the works of some early Christian Greek writers are known only, or partly, in Latin translations; but such a situation is ordinarily clari- fied before a citation is presented. The cited edition of Altaner [6] was 340 ' This statement would seem to be a slight im- provement over that of the second edition (Lon- don, 1953), p. 195: "It [alphabetum] was first mentioned by Tertullian (ca. A.D. 155-230) and by St. Jerome (ca. 340-420) ."
BIBLIOLOGICAL TERMS IN EARLY LITERATURE 341 searched, and what appears to be the text that lead Diringer to his above con- clusions is on page 136, where a lost work of Hippolytus, Syntagma or Hapdsas tas haireseis, is mentioned. But all that Altaner says here is that the lost work can be reconstructed from oth- er works, and mentions the Pseudo- Tertullian De praescriptione has reti- corum (46-53), Epiphanius, and Phil- astrius. The clearest statement on the authorship of this work appears in the latest seventh edition of Altaner's Pa- trologie [7, p. 154], and this is substan- tiated in E. Dekkers's Clavis patrum latinorum [8, p. 6]. The work is entitled Adversus omnes haereses, and is be- lieved by E. Schwartz [9, pp. 38-45], to have been originally a Greek work by Pope Zephyrinus (A.D. 199-217), or a contemporary of the same name, and to have been translated into Latin by Vic- torinus of Pettau (died ca. 303). This attribution by Schwartz has not been disputed either by Altaner, Dekkers, or Refoule [10, p. 154, n. 6]. The title cited by Diringer in the quotation above is not used in any of the patrologies I examined, but the Thesaurus liinguae latinae, s.v. "alphabetum" [11, vol. 1, col. 1721] cites "Ps. Tert. catal. haer.," but in its index volume (published four years later) which lists editions cited, the work appears as Adversus omnes haereses [11, Index, p. 101]. Thus, ac- cording to the most accepted patristic authorities, this work would not have appeared until the first part of the third century, and its Latin version (cited by Diringer) would not have been com- pleted before the latter part of the fourth century. However, two other works-appar- ently unknown to Diringer-from the latter part of the second century men- tion the word and so provide us with even earlier testimony. The first work, the Gospel of Pseudo-Thomas [12, pp. 14080], is extant in two Greek versions (called "A" and "B" by Tischendorf) and the word alphabetos appears in both. The pertinent incident is the at- tempt on the part of a teacher, Zac- chaeus, to teach the child Jesus the al- phabet. Text A states the case briefly:2 "For the teacher recognized the talent of the child and feared him. Neverthe- less, after he [Zacchaeus] had written the alphabet [grapsas ton alphabeton], the child studied it for some time, but did not answer him" [12, pp. 152-53]. Text B goes into more detail about the incident, and uses alphabetos as a femi- nine noun: "When Zacchaeus had writ- ten the alphabet [grapsas . . . ten alpha- beton] in Hebrew characters, he said to him 'Alpha.' And the child said, 'Alpha.' And again the teacher said, 'Alpha,' and the child likewise. Then again for the third time the teacher pronounced the alpha. Then Jesus looked at the teacher and said, 'You, who do not know the alpha! How can you teach the beta?' And beginning with alpha the child re- cited the twenty-two letters on his own" [12, pp. 160-61]. Of course, the refer- ence is to the twenty-two letters of the Hebrew alphabet. In addition to these texts from the Apocrypha we can add two passages from the Contra haereses of Saint Ire- naeus (died ca. 202) [ 13], a work written before 200 and reconstructed through quotations from other authors and a Latin translation. The first passage ( 1.15.2 ) describes the Greek alphabet as a vehicle for expressing numerals; that is, certain letters were used for units, tens, and hundreds: "Then, too, the alphabet of the Greeks [ton alphabeton ton Hellenon] contains eight ones, eight 2All translations used in this paper were made by me; the pertinent terms in the citations are italicized.
342 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY tens, and eight hundreds, making up the sum of eight hundred eighty-eight" [ 13, col. 617]. The reason for only eight of each and not nine (no zero among Greek numerals) is that the character, antisigma, was used for six, but was not a regular letter of the classical Greek alphabet. The other passage (2. Praef. 1) appears in the Latin translation of Book Two, the original Greek of which is lost: "and since I narrated in detail how through numerals and the twenty- four letters of the alphabet [viginti qua- tuor elementa alphabeti] they [heretical teachers] make bold to attempt an es- tablishment of truth" [ 13, col. 709]. The twenty-four letters are those of the Greek alphabet; for at this time the Roman alphabet had only twenty-three letters-I and W were yet to come, and no distinction was made between U and V. Two further passages are mentioned in the Liddell-Scott lexicon under alphd- betos [14]3 and can be found in the Anecdota graeca of Bekker [15], but they are merely titles of lexicographical works-lists of words katd alphabeton "in alphabetical order." These titles ap- pear in the Lexica Segueriana [15, 1: 181] and among the additional notes to the scholiasts on Dionysius Thrax [15, 3:1170]-the latter being a title men- tioned in Cod. Vat. 1751, fol. 227. Ac- cording to Krummbacher [ 16, paragraph 236], such lists date from the beginning of grammatical studies in Byzantium (Constantinople) in the tenth and elev- enth centuries of this era, and it can be taken for granted ordinarily that alpha- betical lists in strict order beyond the first letter or two are of late date [17] .4 It should be noted, finally, that the oth- er instances of the Latin term alpha- betum which are cited in the Thesaurus linguae latinae [11, vol. 1, col. 1721] date from the fourth century or later. Now we proceed to terms relating to writing, writing materials and instru- ments, and to the book in general. SOME NOTES ON SOURCES The works surveyed for bibliological terms were the Greek and Latin texts of the Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha of the Old and New Testaments and the collection of early Christian works known as the Apostolic Fathers. Al- though all the works of these collections were thoroughly examined, the particu- lar works in which pertinent material was found were: the Epistle of Ignatius to the Ephesians (Greek) written pos- sibly in the first decade of the second century, the Shepherd of Hermas and the Martyrdom of Polycarp, both Greek works of the middle second century; texts for all three works are in Lake [ 18] and Lightfoot [ 19]. The former, of the Loeb Classical Library, contains En- glish translations on facing pages. How- ever, the most recent text of the Mar- tyrdom is that of Bihlmeyer [20]. The Acts of Peter with Simon is a third-cen- tury Latin version of a Greek work written around A.D. 200; text in Lipsius et Bonnet [21]. The Acts of Pilate, or the Gospel of Nicodemus, possibly dates only from the early part of the fourth century in its present form, but a work known as the Acts of Pilate was men- tioned by both Justin (Apol. 1.35.9; 48.3) and Tertullian (Apol. 21.24) in the latter part of the second century. It has come down in several Greek and ' Augmented throughout by Henry Stuart Jones. The Supplement to this work (1968) was con- sulted, but proved to be not pertinent to the sub- ject of this paper. ' Cols. 2432-84. See also the latest work on this subject, J. W. Daly, Contributions to a History of Alphabetization in Antiquity and the Middle Ages, Collection Latomus., vol. 90 (Brussels: Revue d'6tudes latines, 1967).
BIBLIOLOGICAL TERMS IN EARLY LITERATURE 343 Latin versions; texts in Tischendorf [12, pp. 210-432] and translation in James [22, pp. 94-146]. The Corre- spondence of Paul and Seneca is an imaginary exchange of letters in Latin between Paul the apostle and the Ro- man philosopher. It was composed in the latter part of the fourth century; text and translation in Barlow [23]. Finally, it should be noted that the Old Testament Apocrypha and Pseudepig- rapha yielded few terms that were not adequately treated in the standard lexica; only one passage is cited in full, and this is from the Third Book of Maccabees (Greek) found in Fritzsche's collection [24]; its date of composition is around the end of the first century B.C. WRITING INSTRUMENTS AND MATERIALS Pen (kdlamos arundo), ink (merlan, atramen tum), and papyrus," (cha/rtes, charta) are mentioned in several pas- sages, but since these terms are fully covered in the lexica and in Birt [1, pas- sim], they are presented here without comment: 3 Maccabees 4. 19-20: It turned out that he [Ptolemy Philopator] was clearly convinced of this problem [failure of scribes to register Jew- ish prisoners] when they told him and pre- sented proof that the papyrus mill [charteria] and the supply of writing pens [graphikol kdlamoi] which they had been using were al- ready exhausted. [24, p. 339] Acts of Pilate xvii.3 (Greek): When the men who had risen heard this, they made the signi of the cross upon their faces and said to the chief priests, "Give us papyrus (charten), ink (melan), and pen (kdlamon)." And so they brought them; and when they had sat down, they wrote as follows. [12, p. 324] Acts of Pilate xn (xxvii). 8 (Latin): Then Karinus and Leucius beckoned to them with their hands to give them a roll of papyrus [tomum chartae] and ink [atramentum]. [12, p.421] Correspondence of Paul and Seneca vi [Seneca]: Concerning your letters to me, I may not declare with pen [arundine] and ink [atra- mento]; because the one makes a thing notice- able and delineates it, while the other makes it clear to the eye. [23, pp. 127-28, 142] The term charterfa (Greek) meaning "papyrus mill" is not attested in either Liddell-Scott or Lampe, but only in Stephanus [25, vol. 9, col. 1354], where Pliny's term officina chartaria (Nat. kist. 18, 89) is used for the definition. The empty papyrus roll ready for writing (tdmos chdrtou and its Latin- ization, tomus chartae) appears several times in the Greek and Latin versions of the Acts of Pilate, as well as the sim- ple charta (Latin) meaning "papyrus" in general or a roll thereof, as attested in the lexica. The Latin tomus chartae has already been seen in the passage of the Acts above; the Greek term is seen in the same work at xv.2: "they took a roll of paper (tdmon chdrtou) and wrote Joseph the following [12, p. 266]. The general term for papyrus- whether a sheet or a roll-chartes in Greek, charta in Latin, appears rela- tively frequently, as in the two passages above from the Acts of Pilate (see also in editions of the Vulgate: 4 Esdras 15. 1-2; Tobit 7.16; 2 John 12). The sec- ond of these two passages from the Acts (Latin version xi.8) continues as fol- lows: Now they did this [that is, made a sign for paper and ink] because the Holy Spirit did not allow them to speak to them. And so they gave them individual rolls of papyrus [singulas chartas] and set them apart one from the other in individual cells. But they made the sign of the cross of Christ with their fingers and began writing in their individual rolls [in singulis tomis]; and after they had finished, they The term "papyrus" in this study means the writing material, and does not refer to the papyrus plant itself.
344 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY shouted from their individual cells-as if with one voice-"Amen." Now they got up, and Karinus gave his roll [charta sua] to Annas, and Leucius gave his to Caiphas, and bidding farewell to one another they went forth and returned to their tombs. Then Annas and Caiphas opened up the roll of paper [tomum ckartae] and began each to read to himself.... Thereupon Annas and Caiphas were struck with fear and handed the roll of papyrus [tomum chartae] to Rabbi Addas, Rabbi Finees, and Rabbi Egias who had come from Galilee and proclaimed Jesus' ascension into heaven. And all the crowd of Jews trusted them to read this writing. And they read the roll [chartum] which went as follows. [12, pp. 421-22] The long, apocalyptic passage which follows and purports to represent the writing of Karinus and Leucius would be much too long for a single sheet of papyrus; thus charta, tomus, and tomus chartae here must mean "roll of papy- rus." The use of these terms in a fourth- or fifth-century work attests to the per- sistent employment of papyrus for epis- tolary writing well after its place had been taken in book production by the parchment codex; just as the Variae of Cassiodorus (6.16; 9.15; 10.23; 11.38) shows its continued use in the files of the imperial civil service in the mid- sixth century. Now let us examine some terms referring to the book and its use. BIBLIOLOGICAL TERMS For a comprehensive account of an- cient Greek book terms, the work of Haeberlin [26], although now somewhat old, is still standard. Bu'blos (biblos) was the primary name for papyrus as well as for its chief export city, Gebal. This term and the diminutive form biblion (bublion) are by far the most commonly used terms for "book" in Greek literature; and the latter occurs frequently enough in early Christian lit- erature, as can be readily seen in the article on this term in Lampe [27, p. 296]. Biblion also carried the meaning of "letter" (that is, epistle) [1, pp. 20- 21; 19, p. 296]; and, interestingly enough, it appears in the Acts of Pilate (Greek) xv.3 with this meaning, but the modifying term tes epistoles is add- ed: "Now they handed over to him the roll containing the letter [td biblion tes epistoles] and Joseph took it, read it, and rolled the letter up" [ 12, p. 268]. It should be noted, however, that although biblion is diminutive in form, it ordi- narily has the same meaning as biblos; that is to say, "book" in general, or "book" as a part of a larger work, as attested in the lexica [27, pp. 296-97]. Two other diminutives of biblos, but of less frequent appearance than biblion, were also encountered: biblidion and biblaridion [26, pp. 288-89]; both are given adequate coverage in Lampe [27, p. 296], although Birt treats only biblidion and what looks to be a metath- esized form of the latter, bibliddrion [1, pp. 20-21]. However, this last di- minutive gets equal treatment on the same page in Lampe. Its meaning is the same as that of the other two, but with an occasional connotation of self-depre- ciation by an author. The writer has noted this usage of the diminutive libel- lus by Cassiodorus in a reference to his Variae [4, p. 81]. Biblaridion is the "book" in the angel's hand in Revela- tion (Apocalypse) 10.2-10, where it is used interchangeably with biblion. Bib- lidion appears in the Epistle of Ignatius to the Ephesians 20.1, and seems to mean "letter" just as biblion [1, pp. 20- 21], although it is translated by Lake as "book" [18, 1: 195]: "If Jesus Christ allows me through your prayers, and it be his will, I will show you in the second letter [biblidfoi] which I intend to write you" [19, p. 111]. In the Shepherd of Hermas, the passages presented below employ biblaridion and biblidion inter-
BIBLIOLOGICAL TERMS IN EARLY LITERATURE 345 changeably with the simple meaning of "book," and probably with no diminu- tive significance at all; this seems to be corroborated by the Latin version which employs the simple liber throughout. It should be noted that Latin after the classical period tended to proliferate di- minutives without any diminutive sig- nificance, as is shown in this particular subject by Jerome's use of libellus [3, p. 106] and by many standard words in the Romance languages (for example, oiseau from aucellus, a popular form of avicellus, a diminutive of the regular word avis, "bird") which obviously are derived from these late diminutives. The passages from the Shepherd appear in the second Vision: Vision 2.1.3: After rising from prayer I saw before me the elderly woman whom I had seen the previous year walking about and reading a book [biblaridion]. . . [I said to her] "Now give me the book [biblidion] so that I can copy it." [19, p. 300] Vision 2.1.4: I took it, and after going to a certain place in the country, I copied the whole document letter for letter, because I could not make out the syllables. And then, when I had finished the letters of the book [biblidion], the book [biblidion] was suddenly snatched from my hand; but by whom I did not know. [19, p. 300] As noted by Lake [18, 2: 19 n.], the inability to recognize syllables could stem from the custom in ancient times of writing in a continuous script without divisions between words, especially in private copies. In the same work a little later on biblaridion again appears: Vision 2.4.3: And so you shall write two books [biblaridia] [probably better rendered as "let- ters"] and you shall send one to Clement and one to Grapte. [19, p. 302] In the Latin West, by the late fourth century, volumen (properly "roll," from volvere "to roll") was fast losing its etymological significance and was com- ing to be used like liber to mean "work," whether in roll form or codex [3, pp. 118-22; 4, pp. 88-92]; thus when the term appears in the so-called Corre- spondence of Paul and Seneca, which is dated between 350 and 392 [23, pp. 80- 89], it could merely mean a "work." Certainly the translation of James, "in a volume" [22, p. 481] does not make much sense. The passage occurs in Let- ter III from Seneca to Paul: "I have organized some [of my] books (volu- mina) and dressed them up with their own proper divisions. I am determined also to read them to Caesar" [23, pp. 125-26; 140-41]. The Latin of this passage reads as follows: "Quaedam volumina ordinavi et divisionibus suis statum eis dedi. Ea quoque Caesari legere sum destinatus." What exactly is meant by ordinavi and divisionibus suis statum dedi is anyone's guess. It could mean arranging into chapters with chapter headings (capitula) [4, 52-53]; perhaps the fourth-century author of this fictitious work thought of his placing a list of capitula or tituli at the beginning of the work, as one finds in some biblical manuscripts and in other works like the Latin manu- scripts of Josephus's Antiquities [28, p. 261]. During the early period when the pa- pyrus roll was the standard form of the book, the Latin loanword tomus [ 1, pp. 25-27] was used in the same sense as that of the original Greek, namely, "roll of papyrus." And this seems to be the sense of the term in the following ex- cerpt from Manuscript C of the Latin Acts of Pilate: "Now before they had begun to write, both raised their right hands and made the sign of the cross, and then began to write in their individ- ual rolls [in singulis tomis]. And when their writing was ended, they shouted
346 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY from their individual cells, 'Amen' [12, p. 421, n. 8]. Bibliotheca, meaning "Bible," is not uncommon in early Christian literature [1, pp. 116-17; 26, pp. 291-92; 29, pp. 112, 208, n. 108], for the Bible would have required a number of rolls and would have constituted a small library in itself. This term continued to mean "Bible" even after the universal adop- tion of the codex; and there is some controversy about whether Saint Bene- dict was referring to the monastery Bi- ble, when he spoke of the bibliotheca in his Rule [29, p. 112]. It appears in this meaning several times in Manu- script B of the Latin Acts of Pilate: Afterwards, Pilate having entered the Temple of the Jews . . . said to them, "I have heard that you have a certain large Bible [magna bibliotheca] in this Temple of yours; for this reason I ask that it be brought before me." And when the very Bible [ipsa bibliotheca] decorated with gold and precious stones was brought forth by four attendants, Pilate said to everyone, "I adjure you by the God of your fathers, who ordered you to build this Temple as a place for his sanctuary, not to keep the truth from me. You know everything that is written in this Bible of yours [bibliotheca ista]; but now say if you have found this Jesus of yours in the scriptures-the one whom you crucified-that he is the son of God, who is to come for the salvation of the human race, and in how many years in chronological reckoning was he supposed to come.". . . They [Annas and Caiphas] said to Pilate ... "It is our cus- tom every year to open this holy Bible [ista sancta bibliotheca] before our assembly and seek the testimony of God. And we have found in the first book of the Septuagint [Genesis] where Michael the Archangel spoke to the third son of Adam, the first man, about 5,500 years in which there would come from heaven the most beloved son of God, the Anointed One" [Christus]. [12, pp. 409-10] This passage later mentions the bibli- otheca Esdrae, again referring to the Bible. The term "codex" is always of inter- est to the historian of the book when it occurs in early literature; however, the term originally was applied to anything composed of several boards (tabulae) fastened together, if we are to take Seneca's word for it. The passage in Seneca refers to a certain Claudius who was the first to induce the Romans to take to the sea (that is, to build ships): "It was Claudius, and he was given the name Caudex because of it; for any item composed of a number of joined boards was called a caudex. From this, public records [publicae tabulae] are called codices, and even now ships which carry supplies on the Tiber are called from ancient custom codicariae" [30]. It is codex meaning "public rec- ord" and modified by the adjective pub- licus for clarity that occurs in the same Latin Acts of Pilate in the chapter fol- lowing the temple incident cited above: "When Pilate heard these words of Annas and Caiphas, he recorded every- thing on the activities of the Lord Sav- ior in the public records [in codicibus publicis] of his hall of justice, and wrote a letter to Claudius, king of the city of Rome" [12, pp. 412-13]. Although the literature here surveyed did not reveal any interesting or unusual writing terms (graphou, scribo, and their compounds only), the Epilogues-per- haps better rendered "colophons"-to the Martyrdom of Polycarp tell of the copying and recopying of the work, and show how precarious was the life of an ancient work in manuscript. There are two versions of the Epilogue, cited here as A and B, in which, however, the terms for "write" and "copy" are mere- ly grdpho and its compounds and de- rivatives: "A. Now Gaius copied [mete- grdpsato] this from the copy of Irenaeus, a disciple of Polycarp, who also lived in the same city as Irenaeus. Then I, Socrates in Corinth, wrote [Jgrapsa]
BIBLIOLOGICAL TERMS IN EARLY LITERATURE 347 from the copy [ek tin antigrdph6n] of Gaius.... And again I, Pionius, wrote it from the previous copy [ek tou proge- grammgnou egrapsa] after searching it out according to a revelation given when Polycarp appeared to me in a vision . . . and having put it together, as it was already pretty much worn out from age" [20, pp. 131-32]. Version B has a few changes in terminology as well as a slight difference in the name of the second copyist: Socrates becomes Isocrates, which chronologically might have been vice versa: "B. And so from this . . . copy [ek tou'tJn ton suggram- m'tin] of Irenaeus, Gaius made a copy [metegrapsato]; and from Gaius' copy [antigrapha] Isocrates in Corinth [made one]. Then in turn I, Pionius, wrote [ggrapsa] from the copy [antig- rapha] of Isocrates after searching it out according to a revelation from holy Polycarp, and having put it together, as it was already pretty much worn out from age" [20, p. 132]. We have already seen above in the citations from the Shepherd of Hermas (Vision 2.1.4) the problem of copying a manuscript which had no separations between words: "I copied the whole document letter for letter, because I could not make out the syllables." Any good Greek paleographical manual will attest to this phenomenon in its fac- similes [31]. As far as the act of reading is con- cerned, we have seen in Vision 2.1.3 of the Shepherd a mention of reading, where the usual anagignosko is used; and in the Acts of Pilate (Latin) XI.9, where the usual legere appears. The terms in Greek from the literature sur- veyed for this paper have been ade- quately covered in Lampe [27, svv. anagignosko, andgn&sis, andgn6sma, anagn5stis]. Legere is employed in the last cited passage in this paper, from the Acts of Peter (below). But other works among those surveyed brought out several terms for the opening (un- rolling) and closing (rolling up) of the papyrus roll. In the Greek Acts of Pilate the verb asphalizo "to close" is used: "After they had written these rolls [biblia] and closed them [aspha- lisamenoi], they gave half to the high priests and half to Joseph and Nico- demus" [12, p. 332]. The verb aspha- lHz, to the best of my knowledge, is not covered by Birt, nor is this shade of meaning represented in the lexica [27, pp. 252-53; 14, p. 266]; examples involve "closing a gate," etc., with the basic idea of "securing" a thing. An- other term which appears in a passage already cited for bibli on is the verb periptu'sso, whose basic meaning is to "enfold" or "wrap around," with a later semantic development into the conno- tation of "embrace." Since the object of the verb in this passage is a roll containing a letter, the obvious trans- lation is "roll up." James [22, p. 109], however, renders it as "kiss"; but it would appear that later liturgical usage (kissing the gospels, etc.) has unduly influenced his translation. Lampe [27, p. 1070] cites this passage, but renders it as "fold up a letter"-a thing which was ordinarily not done to papyrus writing material, since it had a tenden- cy to become brittle; and "rolling up" was the usual way to close a document. The German translation of Michaelis agrees with the writer's rendering: "und rollte den Brief wieder zu" [32, p. 176]. The passage itself reads as follows: "Now they handed over to him the roll containing the letter, and Joseph took it, read it, and rolled the letter up [peripu'xato ten epistol9n]" [12, p. 268]. Along this train of thought two Latin terms were encountered: aperire for
348 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY the "opening" of a book, and involvere for "closing"-actually "rolling up," or even more graphically describing the actual process, "rolling in" from the Latin Acts of Pilate and the Acts of Peter (so-called Vercelli Acts), respec- tively: "Then Annas and Caiphas opened up [aperientes] the roll of paper and began each to read to himself" [12, p. 422]. "Now Peter entered the dining hall and saw that the gospel was being read. He rolled it up [in- volvens] and said . . ." [21, 1:67, lines 29-30]. This use of involvere as "librum claudere" is covered by the Thesaurus linguae latinae [ 1 1, 7.2: 263] which cites this very passage for the meaning. EPILOGUE The texts covered in this brief sur- vey certainly come nowhere near ex- hausting early Christian literature, since the writer's original intention was to cover only the Greek and Latin texts of the Old and New Testament Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha. How- ever, the Apostolic Fathers were in- cluded not only because of their early provenance, but because of the con- venience of reference to a ready-made collection. Since the word "alphabet" actually occurred in a work of Irenaeus (who is not among the Apostolic Fathers) as well as in the Gospel of Pseudo-Thomas, the former reference naturally was included, but Irenaeus was not read through for bibliological terms. In fact, I am aware of the other early Christian Fathers (for example, Tertullian, Clement, and Origen) that still await research for bibliological terms. The Greek writers particularly need this coverage, since the standard lexica do not supply the full examples that are usually available for Latin in the Thesaurus linguae latinae. Thus we have seen that even Lampe's lexicon, which is on the whole quite excellent, is not always completely satisfactory in this exiguous area of lexicography. REFERENCES 1. Birt, T. Das antike Buchwesen in seinem Verhdltnis zur Literatur. 1882. Reprint. Berlin: Scientia Aalen, 1959. 2. Wattenbach, W. Das Schriftwesen im Mit- telalter. 3d ed. 1896. Reprint. Leipzig: S. Hirzel, 1957. 3. Arns, E. La technique du livre d'aprks saint Jero6me. Paris: E. de Boccard, 1953. 4. Witty, F. J. Writing and the Book in Cas- siodorus. Catholic University Studies in Medieval and Renaissance Latin Language and Literature. Washington, D.C., 1967; Ann Arbor, Mich.: University Microfilm, 1967. 5. Diringer, D. The Alphabet: A Key to the History of Mankind. 2 vols. 3d ed. Lon- don: Hutchinson, 1968. 6. Altaner, B. Patrologie: Leben, Schriften und Lehre der Kirchenviter. 2d ed. Frei- burg: Herder, 1950. 7. Altaner, B. Patrologie: Leben, Schriften und Lehre der Kirchenviter. Edited by A. Struiber. 7th ed. Freiburg: Herder, 1966. 8. Dekkers, E. Clavis patrum latinorum. Sacris erudiri 3. 2d ed. Steenbrugge: In Abbatia Sancti Petri, 1961. 9. Schwartz, E. "Zwei Predigten Hippolytus." In Sitzungsberichte der Bayerischen Aka- demie der Wissenschaften, Phil.-Hist. Ab- teilung, no. 3. Munich, 1936. 10. Refoule, R., and de Labriolle, P., eds. Ter- tullian: Traite' de la prescription contre les h6r6tiques. Sources chr6tiennes, no. 46. Paris: Editions du Cerf, 1957. 11. Thesaurus linguae latinae. Leipzig: B. G. Teubner, 1900. 12. Evangelia apocrypha. Collegit atque recen- suit Constantinus de Tischendorf. 2d ed. Leipzig, 1876. 13. Irenaeus, Saint. Contra haereses. Edited by J. P. Migne. Patrologia series graeca, vol. 7. Paris, 1882. 14. Liddell, H. G., and Scott, R. A Greek-En- glish Lexicon. 1925. Rev. ed. Oxford: Ox- ford University Press, 1940. 15. Bekker, I. Anecdota graeca. Berlin, 1821.
BIBLIOLOGICAL TERMS IN EARLY LITERATURE 349 Reprint. Graz: Akademische Druck- und Verlagsanstalt, 1965. 16. Krummbacher, K. Geschichte der byzan- tinischen Literatur von Justinian bis zum Ende des ostromischen Reiches (527-1453). Handbuch der Klassischen Altertumswis- senschaft, vol. 9, pt. 1. 2d ed. Munich, 1897. 17. Tolkiehn, J. "Lexikographie." Paulys Real- Encyclopadie der classischen Altertumswis- senschaft. Vol. 12. Stuttgart: J. B. Metzler, 1925. 18. The Apostolic Fathers. With an English translation by Kirsopp Lake. Loeb Classi- cal Library. London, 1912-13. 19. Lightfoot, J. B. The Apostolic Fathers. Ed- ited and completed by J. R. Hamer. Lon- don, 1898. 20. Bihlmeyer, K. Die Apostolischen Vaiter. Sammlung ausgewahlter Kirchen- und dog- menge Schichtlicher Quellenscriften, edited by W. Schneemelcherg. 2d ed. Vol. 1, no. 1. Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 1956. 21. Lipsius, R. A., et Bonnet, M. Acta aposto- lorum apocrypha post Constantinum Tisch- endorf denuo ediderunt. Leipzig: Herrmann Mendelssohn, 1891-1903. 22. The Apocryphal New Testament. Newly translated by M. R. James. Corrected ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1953. 23. Barlow, C. W. Epistolae Senecae ad Pau- lum et Pauli ad Senecam. Papers and Mono- graphs of the American Academy in Rome, no. 10. Horn: Berger & Si5hne, 1938. 24. Fritzsche, 0. F., ed. Libri apocryphi Ve- teris Testamenti graece . . . accedunt libri Veteris Testamenti pseudepigraphi selecti. Leipzig, 1871. 25. Stephanus, J. Thesaurus graecae linguae. 9 vols. Paris, 1831-65. Reprint. Graz: Aka- demische Druck- und Verlagsanstalt, 1954. 26. Haeberlin, C. "Betrage zur Kentniss des antiken Bibliotheks- und Buchwesens: III. 1: Zur griechischen Buchterminologie." Centralblatt fur Bibliothekswessen 7 (1890) :271-302. 27. Lampe, G. W. H., ed. A Patristic Greek Lexicon. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1961-69. 28. Blatt, Franz. The Latin Josephus (I. Intro- duction and Text: The Antiquities, Books I-IV). Acta Jutlandica: Aarskrift for Aarhus Universitet, vol. 30, pt. 1: Human- istik Series, no. 44. Copenhagen: Univer- sitetsforlaget I Aarhus Ejnar Munksgaard, 1958. 29. McCann, Abbot Justin, ed. and trans. The Rule of Saint Benedict in Latin and En- glish. London: Burns & Oates, 1952. 30. Seneca, Lucius Annaeus. De brevitate vitae, 13.4. 31. Roberts, C. H. Greek Literary Hands, 350 B.C.-A.D. 400. Oxford Palaeographical Handbooks. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1956. 32. Michaelis, Wilhelm, ed. Die apokryphen Schriften zum Neuen Testament. Bremen: C. Schiunemann, 1958.