THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Volume 53 JANUARY 1983 Number 1 WOMEN'S LITERARY JOURNALS' Mary Biggs2 This article reports findings of a questionnaire survey, conducted in spring 1980, of 26 literary magazines edited by and for women. The information gained is discussed in the context of the little-magazine movement as a whole. Women's little magazines, it is discovered, share the independence of purpose, the commitment to encouraging unknown writers, the financial and publishing instability, and the low circulation figures which typify the general run of little magazines. However, they differ in their group styles of editing, their identification with feminism, the preference they give to women as contributors and subjects, and in their emphasizing of social goals over aesthetic concerns. During the last decade, increasing numbers of women have entered the predominantly masculine world of little-magazine editors. Len Fulton, who runs Dustbooks press and is coeditor and publisher of the standard directory in the field [1], has been one of the few men in that world to 1. This research was conducted in connection with a course taught by Howard W. Winger at the University of Chicago. I am grateful to Professor Winger, and also to W. Boyd Rayward, who reviewed an earlier version of this article and offered important suggestions for revision. I am especially grateful to the editors of the 26 participating journals. 2. University of Chicago, Graduate Library School, 1100 East 57th Street, Chicago, Illinois 60637. [Library Quarterly, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 1-25] ? 1983 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-2519/83/5301-000 1$0 1.00 1
2 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY recognize and acknowledge women's recent impact. For example, in a 1974 article on the small presses, he noted "new directions and initia- tives": "The feminist movement is so large and so far-reaching that it dwarfs all else in some ways . . . [giving] incredible breadth to the whole [small press] movement [2, p. 73]. More than four years after that article was published, TnrQuarterly produced an ambitious special issue on post-World War II American little magazines [3]. Billing their product as an updating, in different format, of Hoffman, Allen, and Ulrich's definitive 1946 study [4], the editors declared their intention to include articles on all types of maga- zines-all trends-that had emerged in the new era [5]. Yet despite a plethora of essays devoted to individual publications and a long overview and analysis of nonfeminist black literary journals [6], not one article in this issue is devoted to littles published by, and expressly directed to- ward, women; not one article mentions them. Mary Kinzie coedited the issue. but only one woman appears on the list of sixteen issue advisors, and a concluding bibliography of 84 "significant" littles lists only one women-oriented publication [7]. Because of this neglect, I decided to undertake an investigation of women's littles: their purposes, operating procedures, and their rela- tionship to the little-magazine movement as a whole. Survey Methods The first problem was identifying magazines to be included in the study. Many little magazines which are edited or coedited by women are not specifically geared toward women writers or readers. And a few which have male staff members consider themselves "feminist." Furthermore, nmany (probably a majority) of women's publications are much more interested in nonfiction prose than in promoting the creative arts. Be- cause I wished to limit my study to women-oriented journals devoted entirely to creative literature or with a creative emphasis, I selected titles by reading the descriptive entries in directories compiled by Joan and Chesman [8], Katz and Richards [9], and by checking all of the listings indexed under the subject "Women" in the sixteenth edition of Fulton and Ferber. I also skimmed advertisements in women's publications. This method of identifying titles imposed one limitation: because the directories were published one to two years earlier, the newest journals would not be included. A second problem-this one unavoidable-is the tendency of little magazines to bounce in and out of business, to change addresses, change titles, change policies. A high proportion of entries in Joan and Chesman (copyright 1978) were no longer accurate.
WOMEN'S LITERARY JOURNALS 3 But, with those limitations, I identified 49 women-oriented and -edited literary magazines.3 To each of these, I sent a questionnaire which included questions concerning financial status and history; circulation volume; fund-raising strategies; size, structure, gender, minority affiliations, ages, compensa- tion, length of service, and methods of engaging editorial staff mem- bers; selection criteria and procedures; production processes; general operating policies; thematic preferences; and aesthetic and political biases. Twenty-six completed questionnaires were returned-twenty-four re- porting on currently publishing journals and two on journals which had ceased publication (see the Appendix). Of these 26 journals, 2 may have been chosen erroneously. The first was Dark Horse, which does not "purposely project a women's image."4 However, because its ten-person editorial board was composed entirely of women, and its selection policy specified nonsexism, I decided to include Dark Horse in my study. The second error concerns the now-defunct Country Women. Although poetry sometimes appeared in its pages, this journal stressed how-to articles for self-sufficient rural women. Responses from Country Women are used very selectively in this paper. Of the remaining twenty-three questionnaires, seventeen were re- turned as undeliverable or with a message that the journal had stopped publishing. Staff members on 2 additional journals indicated their inten- tion to cooperate, but finally did not due to lack of time. (One of these, Chrysalis, ceased publication soon afterward.) Only four mailings, or 8.2 percent, elicited no response at all. In addition to conducting this survey, I read as many issues as possible of each cooperating journal. In several cases, this amounted to the entire run, in others to a few issues, and in five cases to only one recent issue.5 Little Magazines and Women's Littles: The Same Only Different Little magazines controlled by men, and those created by and for women, share the problems and opportunities of noncommercial pub- lishing, as well as some common assumptions and purposes. Most liter- ary journals exist chiefly to provide exposure for worthy material which, 3. I decided to exclude one magazine Primavera (1212 East 57th Street, Chicago, Illinois 60637)-because I serve on its editorial board. 4. Throughout this paper, direct quotes not attributed to a source are drawn from completed questionnaires. 5. The Women's Collection held by the Special Collections Department of the Northwest- ern University Library (Evanston, Illinois) and administered by Sarah Sherman holds many, though not all, of these titles.
4 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY because of subject matter, style, language, length, or the author's obscu- rity or notoriety, would not find ready acceptance in, say, the New Yorker. Littles cherish their independence, fear co-optation, and take great pride in their indifference (which can amount almost to contempt) regarding submitters' worldly reputations. The littles also share inade- quate funding, weak sales, heavy dependence on grants and editors' wallets, irregular publication schedules, short life spans, and unevenness in format and quality. Yet as we look beyond these similarities, crucial variations emerge- variations which tend to dictate differentiated editorial structures and selection policies. As Joan and Chesman observed, "women's publishing is no more an off-shoot of the male small press than feminist politics is an off-shoot of the male Left from which many Feminists emerged.... feminist publishing is also feminist politics" [8, p. 2]. Women's Literary Journals: Background Women participated in editing American little magazines from the time of their inception. Margaret Fuller pioneered as coeditor (with Ralph Waldo Emerson) of The Dial (1840-44), which was perhaps the first American little [4, p. 7]; Harriet Monroe founded (1911-12) and single- handedly ran Poetry [10, p. 689]; and Margaret Anderson and Jane Heap published, "on sheer will power," the Little Review (which some- times had a feminist slant) from March 1914 through May 1929 [4, pp. 52-66]. In the 1950s, poet/editors Diane DiPrima and Daisy Aldan, among others, were instrumental in bringing Beat writers to public attention. For the most part, however, these were editors who happened to be women. They gave no conscious preference to manuscripts from women or to the needs and interests of women readers. Not until the last ten to fifteen years have there been significant numbers of women literary editors for whom gender is basic to literary purpose. Historically, subjects of special importance to women, and of which women have unique knowledge, have been largely absent from pub- lished literature. In the 1950s, women writers and artists, regardless of their subjects, were more firmly excluded than they had ever been from most serious small journals. In literature, it was the decade of the passionately masculine Beats; in the larger society, it was the era of idealization of domesticity and creation of the "feminine mystique." Daisy Aldan explains that lists of contributors to fifties littles do not reflect the true proportion of the sexes because women so often sub- mitted under initials or under men's names in order to win acceptance. Once, she recalls, an editor told her: "Your poems are dynamic, colorful, exciting, but too strong for a woman" [11, pp. 268-69]. Writer Louise
WOMEN'S LITERARY JOURNALS 5 Bernikow remembers growing up during that period with the under- standing that "on the whole poetry ... was white man's turf" [ 12, p. 50]. June Arnold, novelist and cofounder of the feminist press Daughters, was already an aspiring writer in the fifties and early sixties, and she recalls with poignancy the sense that unless she could force herself "to work from male values," she "might as well save [her] pencil for the grocery list" [13, pp. 18-19]. Though the later 1960s may have been more hospitable to writers with feminine names, peculiarly female subjects seem to have been unaccept- able or at least controversial even among radical men in the days of the "Mimeo Revolution," which peaked during that decade.6 Caught up in the political and emotional bustle of a norm-smashing age which ex- tolled individuality and personal expression, young women became ea- ger to put their new experiences and perceptions into words. The feminist movement, which emphasized the worth of women's ideas and the need for communication among women, reinforced the impulse to write and publish. But the male-dominated small press afforded scant opportunity. Women had to create their own press and they did-very nearly from scratch. Feminist publishing was even less than feminist politics a chip off the male block. While women had learned social change politics in the civil rights and antiwar movements, they usually learned publishing on their own.7 Purposes at Cross-Purposes Fulton calls the alternative press "the last desperate assertion of the individual against the giant machine" [21, p. 94], and Felix Pollak offers a definition of the "pure littlemag spirit" that sorts well with the collec- tive editorial profile which emerges from articles and symposia, but, as we will see, contrasts sharply with the character of women's littles. According to Pollak, it is the spirit of "the loner, the rambunctious, intransigent, irascible, all-loving, asocial, rugged individualist, who is so nonconformist that he refuses to conform even to other nonconformists, who would not willingly join anybody or anything . . . who is the 6. Men's domination of left-wing thought and activity in the late 1 960s, the resentment it engendered in their women colleagues, and its ultimate stimulation of the contempo- rary women's liberation movement, have been documented by, among others, Marge Piercy [14, 15], Sara Evans [16], and Jane Alpert [17]. 7. Verne Moberg, who left a trade-publishing career to work for Feminist Press, is interesting on the subject of why women started their own presses [181. Accounts of the Women's Press Collective, which began as "one cranky mimeograph on a kitchen table," are also available and provide a vivid picture of the technical, interpersonal, financial, and distribution problems encountered by neophyte publishers [19, 201.
6 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY archetype of the elitist, the carrier of the elitist spirit . . ." [22, p. 297]. Against all of this engaging verbiage, three significant implications take form: (1) that most little magazines are strongly individualistic and are edited by one person or a small number of fairly autonomous people; (2) that freedom is prized above all other values by little-magazine editors and writers; and (3) that, while editors may claim literary aesthetics as their primary interest, certain social/political programs tend to occupy their minds and shape their choices. While these implications seem true of the little magazines in general, only the second holds for most wom- en's publications. The first is antithetical to their philosophy, and the third holds true only with a reversed emphasis. Most of my respondents said that their journals hew to "feminism" or at least "antisexism." Even where consciously political matter is at a minimum, work inspired by distinctively female experiences predomi- nates. This may not always be directly the result of editorial decisions. For example, Sing Heavenly Muse! would prefer more submissions deal- ing with sex-neutral topics and viewed as "women's subjects" anything women choose to write about. However, most other journals favored a focus on women, and almost all valued a consciously female perspective. This is, of course, a political preference which largely determines the nature of submissions and permeates all subsequent decisions. Asked if they had formulated a statement of purpose or policy, 24 of the 26 journals answered in the affirmative, and 22 of these included the statement. Only 2-Dark Horse and Gilt Edge, New Series-did not indi- cate a preference for women writers, women as subject matter, or an intent to provide a communication network for women. Twenty-two of the journals excluded men from editorial responsibilities as a matter of policy, while 2 more did not but were in fact run entirely by women. Only Bloodroot and Syzygy had male editors (one each), but this seemed not to rule out feminism. Syzygy was published by the Cincinnati Wom- en's Press, a "feminist project," and expressed particular interest in literature portraying women, while Bloodroot staffers shared, in varying degrees, "a feminist point of view." Both would consider submissions by men but gave preference to those by women. Indeed, only 5 of the 26 journals claimed to consider men's work equally with women's, and 2 of these carry oddly contradictory subtitles: Sibyl-Child: A Women's Arts and CultureJournal and Calyx: A Journal of Art and Literature by Women. Calyx coeditor Barbara Baldwin acknowledged that most men are probably put off by the journal's subtitle, and she seemed untroubled by the misunderstanding. "We have never," she observed, "received a piece by a man we were tempted to publish." In her next paragraph, she referred to Calyx as a publication "whose sole purpose for existence is to promote work by women" [23]. An additional 8 journals considered men's submissions, but favored those from women
WOMEN'S LITERARY JOURNALS 7 and frequently imposed restrictions as to subject matter or viewpoint. Kalliope, for example, accepted only material related to women in the arts; Primipara considered men "whose submissions come from their 'feminist' side"; and Sing Heavenly Muse! welcomed "the work of men who try to enter women's experiences with intelligence and empathy" [24]. Thirteen, or half, of the journals excluded men altogether. Some of these are emphatically feminist. Some are explicitly lesbian. But some journals which maintain an all-women policy resemble superficially any of the general literary magazines. In all, 16 respondents specified a feminist staff orientation, but they varied greatly in the degree of political awareness they said they ex- pect-and would accept-in literature, although these variations are not always easy to perceive by reading their journals. Feminist theories of literature are many and diverse, suggesting more serious conflicts than actually appear to exist. For some of my respondents, publication of women-centered work is desirable simply to assure that it will be written and published, and because it fulfills a personal need felt by them and presumably their readers. For other editors, publication of such work is viewed as a political act which will enhance women's strength and sol- idarity. The published work itself, however, might be the same. There- fore, the artistic content of the apolitical or less political women's jour- nals can be and often is comparable in attitude with those which are politically radical. The founding coeditors of Sinister Wisdom decided to publish their magazine because "every genuinely feminist work of art is a blow at the heart of patriarchal reality" [25, p. 127]. The Women's Press Collective has asserted bluntly: "Our art has to do with reinforcing attitudes that we want women to have.... It's a tool and that's the way we use it" [19, p. 8]. Second Wave, which bears the subtitle A Magazine of the New Feminism, claimed "no political line," but has stated that all accepted material "must be related to the theme of Women's Liberation" [26, p. 317], called itself a "forum for non-hierarchical, anti-capitalist, feminist perspectives," and excludes "'personal solution' or reformist" work. Many contemporary little-magazine writers-men as well as women-join with these editors in regarding their own creative work (poetry in particular) as properly instigator, herald, and celebrant of political and social change.8 "In the end," says Charles Allen, "the pervasive spirit of social protest which dominated so many little magazines may be seen to be their most significant contribution" [31, p. 970]. Although women have provided a fresh perspective on what James Moore calls "the links between poetry and politics" [27], those links have been forged and tested by extraestab- lishment artists of all times, beliefs, and groups. 8. See, for example, [8, p. 7; 27-301.
8 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY However, most of the 16 journals which acknowledged a bond with feminism also expressed, in their statements of policy, a resistance to didactic work. Calyx, for example, stated a dislike of "political polemic masquerading as art."9 This is consistent with the journals' professed aesthetic concerns. Most spoke-though rather vaguely-of insistence on "quality" or "professionalism." Only 10 expressed style preferences or any aesthetic biases; of these 10, 6 rather hazily specified a liking for "modern" or "experimental" work. However, none-as a reading of the publications confirms-exclude any style of expression, and only 3 re- spondents reflected at all upon possible relationships between political and social purposes and literary style. Their generally nonprescriptive aesthetic attitudes and prescriptive social attitudes differentiate the journals in my study from most other little magazines. It is clear, however, that women's publications of all political stripes do seek literary quality: phrases like "artistic excellence," "high literary standards," and "creative integrity" recur throughout my questionnaire responses. Yet, in most cases, politically determined qualifications of some sort must be met before the editors' aesthetic judgment is exercised, and this pairing of considerations can lead to curious logical conflicts.'0 Listen, for instance, to the contradiction in 1 respondent's statement: "We're left-oriented and feminist in emphasis, extremely choosy about the men's work we print, though we don't exclude them completely. The artistic quality comes first in just about everything we print." The Politics of Subject In times of great change . . . people naturally turn to the arts because it is the artists who are saying "Here is the new language to describe the change, the new rhythm which orders the pulse of the 9. Paula Bennett, coeditor of Focus [32], and Anyda Marchant, cofounder of Naiad Press [33], have commented on the negative impact which feminist politics can exert on women's art. 10. Stated political orientations are, of course, not fixed and can change in surprising ways, especially when there is staff turnover. Compare the following editorial state- ments from Sibyl-Child. In vol. 1, no. 1, founding editors Candyce Stapen and Patricia Gayet announced: "Our goal is to present the reality of women's participation in all the arts and to explore the variety of women's impact on our culture. Sibyl-Child is a journal founded, written, illustrated, printed, and distributed by women for women" [341. Four years later, in a collective editorial, the six-woman Sibyl-Child staff wrote: ". . . we want the men to know that they are encouraged to send their stuff too. And if it's as good as the stuff the ladies send, we will publish it!" 1351.
WOMEN'S LITERARY JOURNALS 9 change, the new images with which to rebuild . . "(James Moore, poet [27]). For . . . women writers in particular, there is the challenge and promise of a whole new psychic geography to be explored. But there is also a difficult and dangerous walking on the ice, as we try to find languages and images for a consciousness we are just com- ing into, and with little in the past to support us (Adrienne Rich, poet [36, p. 35]). As my examination of their issues demonstrated, the pages of women's journals are filled with poetry, fiction, essays, and graphics which focus on worldly matters like political activity and work-force participation; emotional experiences such as friendships between women, mother- daughter relationships, childhood, parenthood, love, sex, and social pressures to be pretty/thin/feminine/young; and the physical phenom- ena of puberty, menstruation, pregnancy, childbirth, breast cancer, menopause, and aging. This last group of subjects, omnipresent in women's publications, is rarely found in other literary periodicals. Also important are attempts to capture creatively the contributions of specific women-to celebrate heroic figures and to create role models. Fre- quently encountered are works focused on great women of history, myth, and literature, as well as on exemplary "ordinary" women. Such contemporary artists as Georgia O'Keeffe and Anna Akhmatova, and figures like Inez Garcia who have come to symbolize some aspect of women s situation, also inspire poems. Among the women most busily developing their own print forums have been lesbians. Gay writers have always found it difficult to locate markets for their work, but in the 1950s and sixties, quite graphic writing by men like Allen Ginsberg and James Baldwin was not only published but popular, while straightforward lesbian creations were likely to face opposition." 1 A number of book publishers'2 and journals arose, therefore, to provide an outlet for lesbian writing, although not all have limited themselves to lesbian subject matter or writers. Of the journals I surveyed, 5 are explicitly gay and have lesbian staffs-though 11. For example, Len Fulton, who founded and edited the avant-garde journal Dust (1964-7 1), recalls that a member of his editorial staff resigned over the acceptance of a lesbian poem [37, p. 4291. See also librarian Ann Allen Shockley's description of reactions to her novel, Loving Her [38]. 12. Among them are (or were, as the case may be): Daughters, Diana Press, Kitchen Table Press, Lavender Press, Metis Press, Naiad Press, Out & Out Books, Persephone Press, Spinsters Ink, Violet Press, and the Women's Press Collective. For more about lesbian publishing, see special issues of Sinister Wisdom on "Lesbian Writing and Publishing" 139, 401.
10 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY in other respects they differ considerably. They range from Albatross, the only humor magazine of the 26, which was unabashedly political and irreverent; through Sinister Wisdom, which (particularly before its 1981 editorial change) was intensely political in a broad radical sense which included and transcended sexual politics; to Focus, which uses lesbian material exclusively but has no apparent political preconceptions, and did not mention feminism on the questionnaire. Aside from the "lesbian focus," my Focus respondent explained, "our politics are pretty loose. We wish to record lesbian experience in this culture whether it is 'politically correct' in feminist terms or not. This has gotten us a 'gay is good' reputation." Two other journals had lesbian majorities within their edit- ing collectives, and the founding editor of 13th Moon, Ellen Marie Bis- sert, is a well-known lesbian poet, but none of the 3 were self-defined as lesbian publications. Asked whether any subjects are automatically excluded from consid- eration or customarily given preference, and what types of material editors would like to receive more and less of, 15 journals responded that they exclude some themes. Of these, 14 reject misogynistic, and 8 racist, submissions. "Ageist" material, heterosexual love themes, and antigay attitudes were each cited by 5 respondents as automatically excluded. Clearly some journals reject, as a matter of taste if not policy, subjects which they did not mention. For example, it is difficult to imagine, on the basis of their answers to other questions and the evi- dence of their published issues, any of the journals in my survey accept- ing work which they thought overtly racist or antiwoman. Appearing in many of the questionnaires, phrased in different ways, was an emphasis on positive views of women. In 1976, Louise Bernikow identified major themes of current feminist literature as "affirmation, connection, strength, and energy" [12, p. 54]. Women writers, she claimed, had at last overcome the helpless, suicidal feelings of earlier poets like Sylvia Plath and Anne Sexton.'3 My respondents tended to share the thematic preferences identified by Bernikow, though their answers showed that many women who submit material still write in the Plath-Sexton vein. Nine editors would like to see less work which is highly subjective or emotional, which reflects a "self-effacing" or "vic- timized" attitude-and seven said they flatly reject submissions dealing with violence against women, self-destruction, or general victimization. Most of the 26 journals stressed "strong woman" themes, both in theory and in their published products. Indeed, to the extent that editors actually exclude variant portrayals, they may be violating the often- 13. The inconsistency of Plath-Sexton attitudes and literary representations with the ideology of feminism has been expressed well by Jane Larkin Crain [41].
WOMEN'S LITERARY JOURNALS 11 stated purpose of presenting the full range of female experience within the constraints of literary quality. Women Communicating Although the two most apparent purposes of women's little magazines are to provide exposure for work written by and about women, a third and related purpose is the creation of communication networks. In a poem often cited by feminists, Adrienne Rich speaks of "the true nature of poetry. The drive/to connect. The dream of a common language" [42, p. 7]. The sense of literature as sharing and communication, of editors, writers, and readers as a contiguous interacting group, is unusually strong in women's literary journals. Indeed, Rich believes that before women writers took publication upon themselves, their self-awareness and artistic development were obstructed by lack of a sense of context, of a continuous tradition: ". . . each feminist work has tended to be received as if it emerged from nowhere" [43, p. 1]. The mere act of collecting between two covers many artistic descrip- tions by women of aspects of women's lives constitutes creation of a communication tool for a delimited group. When a minority sexual orientation and/or strong feminist orientation are added to a magazine's defining characteristics, the goal of communication becomes basic to it and, to judge by letters from readers which are sometimes printed, is at least partially realized. This goal was stated explicitly by some of my respondents-particularly those from Black Maria, Innerviews, Primipara, Sinister Wisdom, Second Wave, and Kalliope (which features interviews with women writers and artists); these magazines are perhaps most sensitive to their role as a medium of communication. In 1974, Second Wave ran an editorial which grappled with the problem of purpose and the goal of "connectedness," and stands as a classic contemporary feminist state- ment [44]. Printed above the last sentences of the editorial was a poem by Karen Lindsey which concluded: "alone we are blind/the enemy seizes the vision/dulls it, fills it with shadow./sister give me your light; take mine./alone, we see with their eyes/we are less than blind,/stay with me./ this is no small thing we hold in our hands,/and it is everything we have" [45]. A value related to communication is regionalism. Of the journals in my group, 1-Pnrmipara-imposes a within-state limit on submissions and, for the most part, distribution. Two additional journals admit to some regional favoritism but place a higher value on literary quality. Three more of the journals began as regional magazines but expanded. For example, Black Maria: Chicago Women Speak published its first 2
12 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY issues "to provide local women with a unique place in which to meet, speak, learn, and grow" [46]. In the third issue, however, "Chicago" dropped from the subtitle, and Black Maria became progressively less "local," drawing contributions from across the country, devoting more space to literature, and omitting editorial statements. Even in the absence of editorial content, political identity in some shape, some form, does pervade 25 of these journals. Even those which publish no essays or editorials at all, limiting themselves to poetry, fiction, and/or graphics, have a political statement to make. How does this affect the submission pool and, by extension, artistic quality? Only suggestive data can be proffered. Submissions and Selectivity The exclusion or limited representation of men's work presumably sifts out about half of all potential contributors. However, the very fact that periodicals exist which do not attempt to recruit men as editors, writers, or readers may stimulate many women to write and to submit their writing for publication. Such a result is the aim of these periodicals. None of the journals I surveyed was suffering from lack of submis- sions.14 Thirteen received more publishable work than they could print, and 7 found the proportion of publishable material received about equal to their capacity. Only 6 journals had difficulty finding sufficient pub- lishable submissions, and most of these were rather highly selective (as measured by acceptance ratios). One respondent noted that enough good work came in, but identifying it required reading through heaps of weaker submissions. Heaps of writing-collectively, mountains of writ- ing-seem to be littering editors' floors from coast to coast. Being over- whelmed by manuscripts is cited throughout the published literature, and frequently in responses to my questionnaires, as a major problem for all little magazines, with their harried, unpaid staffs and minimal office space. As a result, most of the journals were able to be quite selective. Acceptance rates varied from 1 to 98 percent (with atypical Innerviews on the high end), but the median rate was only 10 percent, and only Innerviews accepted more than 50 percent of submissions. Sixteen jour- nals accepted 10 percent or less; 11 accepted 5 percent or less; and 3 took only 1-2 percent. I did not attempt to determine how many submissions each journal receives, but I did find that acceptance rate 14. There is always an avalanche of poetry, but fiction, graphic art, essays, and photogra- phy seem to be in shorter supply.
WOMEN'S LITERARY JOURNALS 13 seemed unrelated to physical size or periodicity. I assume that a complex of factors, including location, range of distribution, journal age, variety of forms considered, organizational connections, and identification as a regional, lesbian, or strongly feminist publication, all affect volume of submissions and, thus, rates of acceptance. How the Littles Work Editorial Structure and Selection Traditionally, as we have seen, little magazines sprang from the foreheads of one or two highly individualistic writers with passionate aesthetic prejudices. Editorial collectives and boards have been atypical of little-magazine history [3, 4]. They are, however, customary among women's littles. This structural difference-almost certainly a reflection of the anticompetitive, procommunal feminist context from which wom- en's journals spring-distinguishes them most sharply from their non- feminist counterparts. Of the journals I studied, only 1-Connections-had a single editor. One other had two relatively autonomous editors, and a third was operated by a permanent managing editor with revolving departmental editors chosen from larger staffs. Of the 23 remaining journals, 13 were handled by collectives and 10 by one editor holding primary responsibil- ity, in cooperation with a collective or board. The distinction between collectives and boards is sometimes hard to make, but the former term implies stronger friendship ties among members, greater commonality, and a nonhierarchical method of arriving at selection decisions. Even when there was a chief editor, her associates usually did not act in strictly advisory capacities. In five cases, the editor had the final word, but in at least two of these, board members' opinions carried heavy weight. The other 18 group-edited journals most often reached selection decisions by consensus (10), majority approval (7), or both, depending on the situa- tion (1). Staff size was rather volatile on 4 journals, which, not surprisingly, tended to report some dissatisfaction with the collective-editing process. One respondent surmised that "personal and political difficulties" in a large, shifting group can jeopardize journal quality. Members were selected in a variety of ways; most frequently they came together through friendship or common participation in another group, such as a writing workshop or a women's organization. Five journals were open to volunteers with few or no qualifications; others were not open to new- comers or else imposed requirements. For instance, Sibyl-Child expected "excellent communication skills" and imposed a trial period before final acceptance, while Earth's Daughters, which welcomed only creative artists
14 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY into its fold, required submission of original manuscripts or a portfolio. Little magazines are often founded and staffed by people in their twenties or early thirties, and there is a tendency to regard independent publishing as a phenomenon of youngsters. However, this was not true of the journals I surveyed. For each of the 23 run collectively or by a board, I tried to ascertain members' age range; 19journals made useful responses to this question. Youngest members' ages ranged from 18-37, with a median of 24. Four journals reported at least one staff member 20 years old or younger. The age of the oldest member ranged from 28- 75, with a median of 42. The oldest participant listed by 6journals was in her thirties, by 9 in her forties, by 3 in her fifties, and by 2 in her sixties. Only 1 publication reported no staff over the age of thirty. Women's literary publishing, then, is not restricted to the youing. Variously aged women are likely to be found working together. The narrowest age range of workers on any single journal was 7 years (true of 2 journals), the widest 51 years, and the average range was just over 21 years- almost a generation. Despite their age diversity, staff members tended to share common interests and group identifications. Asked if editors shared "special characteristics, interests, group affiliations," 19 of the 23 group-edited journals responded affirmatively. Of these, 16 indicated that all editors were feminists, although 2 added qualifications. Seven collectives were entirely or mostly lesbian. Nine stressed that all members were active writers and/or visual artists. Mentioned less often were working-class backgrounds or sympathies (2), professional careers (2), and "radical" politics (2). Answers to this question revealed great variation in group cohesiveness and sharing of attitudes. Some respondents gave brief replies, saying only that all members were women or feminists. Others went into considerable detail. For example, the respondent from 1 journal which is notable for the deliberate political emphasis of its published issues, offered this statement: "Radical feminists, lesbian or bisexual; anti-nuke . . . four of us are writers, passionately and actively . . .none have professional commitment or much investment in the system... ." A unique statement, in content and tone, was made by the chief editor of Kalliope, who described herself as "a radical person who just happens to be a woman." She wrote: "We are all women who love art and literature and freedom.... We like men, too." The greatest advantage and disadvantage of shared editorship were summed up by one respondent who cited the advantage as "someone to do the work" and the disadvantage as "they seldom do any of it." Sharing of work (cited by 11); diversity of experiences, interests, and viewpoint (cited by 13); and shared aesthetic judgments (cited by 5), are seen as the principal advantages of group editing. Disadvantages are conflicts and confusion over definitions and allotment of tasks and uneven assump-
WOMEN'S LITERARY JOURNALS 15 tion of responsibility (cited in some manner by 12), slowness in reaching decisions on manuscripts and getting copy to press (9), and the necessity for frequent meetings (6). The "collective" ideal, in particular, may be difficult to realize, as it implies a high degree of harmony and consensus. Describing the origins of the book-publishing Women's Press Collective, Martha Shelley has said: "We started off as a collective because that was the thing to be, but we ended up as a collection because everyone's got a different point of view" [20, p. 121]. My respondents, however, seemed generally satisfied with their editorial systems. None of the 26 indicated plans or a desire to change, and several perceived no disadvantages. Literature about little magazines teems with accounts of titles which did not survive the resignations of their founding editors. Since littles have typically been run by one or a very few individuals, this is not surprising. However, the importance of editorial continuity was demon- strated by my group of women's magazines as well. Of 23 currently publishing journals (1 did not answer this question), 4 retained all of their original staff. (This includes the sole single-editor journal.) An additional 16 retained at least one founding member, and 2 of the oldest journals-Focus and Black Maria-reported members with five years' experience (though no founding members). Who Gets Published Since the first days of Poetry, little magazines have existed to encourage unknown or controversial writers. In the first place, they tend to believe that such writers are not welcomed by editors of established (especially commercial) periodicals. Beyond altruism, however, is the recurring fantasy of little-magazine editors-which very occasionally has become reality-that one day, while digging through a pile of mediocre submis- sions, she or he will discover a genius and write a chapter in literary history. Though this fantasy is a less clearly defined motivation in the case of a feminist, collectively run journal, it is probably never absent. Only four of twenty-six staffs gave special consideration to publishing the work of their own members, and a reading of the journals confirms that, in most instances, very little creative material is attributed to people listed on the title or editorial pages. While 10 group-edited journals had published at least some material by all current editors, in 18 of the 21 journals responding to this question, less than one-quarter of published work was staff written. The common stereotype of alternative press editor as frustrated author driven to create her own marketplace is, however, no doubt sometimes the case. It may be truest of magazines in their early years of operation; Gilt Edge, for example, was founded expressly to publish the work of its staff. If such a magazine survives, it becomes more widely known and begins receiving submissions from outsiders. Just as journals move from a regional to a national orienta-
16 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY tion, they may tend to progress to a more competitive mode of manu- script selection. In keeping with the small-press tradition of evaluating known and unknown writers with equal openness, almost all of 25 journals respond- ing gave no preference to previous contributors or to well-known writ- ers. The salty independence of these editors-and the cost it may ex- act-was revealed by the respondent who pointed out that it would be nice to have, as a drawing card, at least one established author in each issue. But she hastened to add that her collective's judgment was not affected by this wish: "We once turned down Joyce Carol Oates!"''5 Among the many women who have gained literary reputations, yet continue to appear regularly in the women's littles, are Audre Lorde, Adrienne Rich, Marge Piercy, Suzanne Juhasz, Susan Fromberg Schaef- fer, Louise Bernikow, and Joanna Russ. Some, like Lorde, Rich, and Russ, undoubtedly stay on at least partly for reasons of politics, personal satisfaction, friendship, or gratitude; much of their work would sell, and the women's journals can rarely pay. On the other hand, it is true today as it was seventy-odd years ago-when Harriet Monroe founded Poetry magazine-that there are many good writers and few commercial maga- zines which buy significant amounts of poetry and fiction. The verso of the title page of any book of poetry and many volumes of short fiction- including those published by big commercial presses-will acknowledge a string of obscure little magazines in which the pieces first appeared. The only nongender group preference admitted by more than one or two of the respondents was for members of minorities. Twenty-two respondents answered this question, and while 17 claimed not to favor minority authors, 5 did. Black and Latina submissions were particularly in demand, apparently because so few were received. It is their disdain for consideration of reputation and social connec- tions, their openness to all people writing within their ranges of interest, that most typify little magazines. And, as the abundant published trib- utes to the genre demonstrate,16 it is this which accounts for the addic- tive excitement, the lust for discovery, which are provoked in readers and editors. 15. The contributors' notes of some little journals become a vehicle for elaborate nose- thumbing at the value attached by mainstream editors to distinguished reputations. Witness these notes: "Elana Dykewoman is an ex-mental patient turned lesbian war- rior" [47, p. 52]; "She is an unpublished writer, a singer of Yiddish folksongs. . ." [48, p. 133]; ". . . black lesbian feminist, songwriter, performer, guitarist, crazywomon, gemini, who is presently living in Cambridge and having a grand old time" [49, p. 179]. 16. See, for example, [3, 4; 50-521.
WOMEN'S LITERARY JOURNALS 17 Costs and Income The largest single cost, and, two respondents said, a large "source of aggravation," is printing. In the days of the 1960s' Mimeo Revolution, currency and political correctness were paramount, and anyone with access to a typewriter and a mimeograph machine was potentially a publisher. All of the journals in my group commenced well after the onset of the revolution, and although they vary in professionalism of appearance, all seem to value it. Some of the older publications began with mimeo, but have switched to offset and improved their looks dramatically over the years. Several others have graduated from obvi- ously camera-ready typewritten copy to copy that appears typeset, while some continue to publish the former. Given the costs of printing, the perceived importance of a legible and preferably handsome format, and the scarcity of women printers, politics took a backseat to pragmatic considerations when staff members selected a shop. Only the spokes- women for Innerviews and Sinister Wisdom cited sex of the printer as their first consideration, and only they were produced by female-owned shops. The founding coeditors of the latter magazine took the stand that female editors should "recycle" women's money by doing business with other women, regardless of the financial disadvantages this may entail [25, p. 129]. For the majority, however, the most important considera- tions were price and quality, followed in descending order by location, speed, credit availability, and willingness of the printer to deliver. Fulton claims that in 1973, over one-third of little magazines handled their own printing and, for the most part, were producing letterpress or offset issues [2, p. 75]. But only 3 of my survey respondents mentioned any attempt to achieve technical independence, and none of the journals were presently self-printed. Even self-printing, however, would probably not suffice to stabilize the journals economically. If there is one universal condition in the diverse world of independent publishing, it is poverty [53-57]. Of the 24 cur- rently publishing (as of 1980) journals in my survey, only Innerviews- which was put out in budget format and had a built-in clientele- seemed nearly able (though not quite) to sustain itself through sales. Other journals were staying afloat by combining sales income with grant funding, private donations, or the contents of their editors' pockets. Although the journals' back pages might teem with interesting notices for other publications, these were often run free through exchange agreements. Only 8 carried paid ads. Of these, 1 (Focus) claimed to derive one-quarter of its income from the revenue; 2 derived 5 percent; 3 derived 1-2 percent; and 2 knew only that the amount was low. The proportion of funds derived from sales ranged from 8 to 90 percent, with the median 45 percent.
18 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Thirteen journals were receiving private donations (including editors' contributions) amounting to 2-75 percent of their total income, with a median of 10 percent. Although colleges and universities often sponsor literary journals, only 1 of the publications surveyed (Kalliope) was directly college funded. Excluding grants from public money, none of the others received regu- lar institutional funding. For the most part, they considered themselves truly independent, not beholden, and this places them in the most prized tradition of the alternative press-though, as we have seen, the majority accepted grant money, which theoretically carries potential for limiting their autonomy. The Grant System Eighteen, or two-thirds, of the currently publishing journals surveyed were receiving (or recently had received) grant funding in 1980, and of these, 13 relied upon it for half or more of their total income. The proportion varied from 5 to 80 percent, with a whopping median pro- portion, among grant holders, of 60 percent! Many respondents called attention to their heavy reliance on grants, and at the time of my survey, 6 were awaiting news of grant-awarding agencies' decisions before scheduling future issues. Neither of the 2 deceased publications had been grant recipients. Most of these grant funds flowed from state or federal coffers. Six journals got money from the National Endowment for the Arts (NEA), 10 from the Coordinating Council of Little Maga- zines (CCLM), which is itself NEA funded, and 5 from state arts coun- cils. In addition, 2 journals had had CETA employees. Such government largesse, a phenomenon of the seventies, led one alarmed small-press purist to decry, in 1978, the "Orwellian grants atmosphere" which he believed had "effectively and in principle co-opted" little magazines [58, pp. 652-53]. Though it is true that any type of external support carries the potential for infringement upon editorial freedom, the content of the women's journals does not manifest obvious establishment influence. The Consequences of Poverty In addition to doling out cash periodically, little-magazine staff members almost always donate their labor, and their work load can be overwhelm- ing. Only 2 of the journals I contacted were able to maintain any paid staff at all. One had a part-time employee in 1980, and another offered very small sums to one of its editors. Although overworked editors of independent literary journals entertain occasional fantasies about one day drawing living wages for their labor (for example, [44, p. 4]), such fantasies are typically not realized. Only 3 could pay rent for office space. For most of the others, editing was, as Sibyl-Child has put it, a
WOMEN'S LITERARY JOURNALS 19 "shopping bag lady" endeavor [35]. Writers fared little better: typically they received free issues in return for their work but no money. Only 4 journals paid even minimal sums, and just 1 of these was paying regu- larly. As all of the foregoing implies, most little magazines publish unpre- dictably, at best. Maintenance of a punctual, consistent publication schedule is a rare accomplishment. Depleted finances are the usual reason for delays and cessations. In the larger world of little magazines, where a single editor is often in control, editorial exhaustion or loss of interest are also common causes [4, p. 5; 56, p. 297]. Women's journals, with their different editorial structures, may survive one or even a few resignations, though editorial continuity remains important, and many group-edited journals rely heavily on the commitment of one woman. Disbanding because a fundamental political or aesthetic goal has been achieved is sometimes given as a third reason in commentaries on small magazines (for example, [59]), but none of my respondents mentioned it. The high priorities they place on providing space for women writers and creating channels of communication probably preclude philosoph- ically based discontinuance, since these objectives are continuous. In 1974, with the Mimeo Revolution burned out and grant funding on the rise, Fulton found that the average age of small-press journals and book publishers younger than ten years old was 4.28 years [2, p. 75]. And in 1977, 67 percent of titles listed in the CCLM catalog had com- menced publication within the previous seven years, 91 percent within seventeen years. Of the journals included in Hoffman, Allen, and Ul- rich's voluminous 1946 bibliography, only 8 were still alive [54, p. 10]. The average age of the journals I investigated was 5.3 years in 1980. Focus, begun in 1970, was the oldest; Helicon Nine and Kalliope, new in 1979, were the youngest. Of the 2 which were no longer in print, Country Women had published from 1972 to 1979, Sow's Ear only from 1977 to 1979. Both, however, were actively seeking funds when I questioned them and hoped to resume publication. When fortified with deep commitment, little-magazine staffs have an uncanny ability to spin money from hopes. Yet the wolf never deserts the doorstep for long; I found no evidence that older, more established women's periodicals were economically more stable than newer ones. Of the 10 journals in my group which were less than five years old, only 2 had ever had to delay publication of an issue due to lack of money; none had ever ceased publication. But of the 14 journals which were five years old or more, 1 (founded in 1975) had had to cease for three years and had only recently resumed; 2 (founded in 1971 and 1972) had experi- enced both delays and total cessations; and 9 more had had to delay issues. One of the remaining, more solvent, 2 journals was Primipara,
20 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY which is small, employs a low-priced format, and is blessed with found- ing editors who agreed at the start that they would subsidize the maga- zine as their personal contributions to women's arts. Most of the jour- nals, whether young or old, showed evidence of serious strain. None was turning a profit. The length of a magazine's life is not, of course, a measure of its contribution. As editor James Bull wrote of his publication: "Whether American Haiku endures for 6 or 60 issues, the essential point lies not in the inevitability of its death, but in the significance of its life" [51, p. 23]. Indeed, some seasoned observers insist that high birth and death rates among small magazines protect the vitality of the genre [51, p. 15; 60, p. 47]. Circulation Journal circulation figures are slippery, and it is difficult to judge their significance. Several of my respondents were trying to boost circulation; this sounds commonsensical, but such a desire is far from universal among little-magazine editors. When publishing is motivated by aes- thetic interest primarily, rather than by a social purpose or the wish to foster communication, circulation is often considered much less significant. When he began Contact in 1932, William Carlos Williams declared, "It can never be a question of its being read by a million or by anybody, in fact" [61]. Such vulgar matters as circulation and sales were beneath the great poet, but they are, in fact, beneath many other editors as well, and perhaps they cannot be increased very much without dis- sipating the "littlemag spirit" or at least the editors' scarce time and energy. Distribution is a problem: relatively few outlets exist; the market for serious literature (especially poetry) is small; hundreds of little maga- zines compete for sales and display space with one another; and editors lack the funds, time, incentive, and knowledge to launch promotional programs. During the past decade, women's bookstores have multiplied, creating a natural, though still very small, outlet for women's literary journals. The very fact that these journals are directed to a specific audience may increase their actual readership while narrowing their theoretically potential readership. A major obstacle faced by readers attempting to keep up with literary littles is their sheer overwhelming number and sameness of intent. Whether these factors are a boon to women publishers is problematical. While some of the journals in my study were doing very well by little-magazine standards, others were not, and in any case, figures are misleading. Some journals may cite print runs rather than actual sales; others may quote "distribution" numbers, which-especially among women's publications-typically include doz-
WOMEN'S LITERARY JOURNALS 21 ens or even hundreds of copies given without charge, or at reduced rates, to reviewers, contributors, friends, feminist groups, prisoners, the elderly, mental patients, the disabled, students, and, under sharing agreements, to other journals. The publications surveyed claimed circulations ranging from 150- 200 to 8,000, with a median figure of 750 and an average of 1,309. It is significant that the journal with 8,000 subscribers was scrambling for funds, and that Country Women had a circulation of 10,000, and a fairly modest format, when it was forced to stop publishing. Stated circulation rates were not correlated with solvency. Indeed, the most-circulated, best-produced little magazines are least likely to be able to sustain them- selves on small grants and private donations and thus are the least likely to break even. High circulations, while gratifying to the editors and contributors, may be costly if many copies are given away or under- priced, and if advertising income is insignificant. In Conclusion In April 1982, slightly over two years after my original survey, I once again contacted the 26 responding journals to learn whether they were still being published and, if they were, their financial status. Twenty-three contributed this information. Among the remaining 3 was Sow's Ear, 1 of the 2 journals which, in 1980, had already suspended publication. Syzygy did not respond to letters sent to its 1980 address and had no entry in the most recent Dustbooks directory [1]. Sibyl-Child, the only nonrespondent included in that directory, could not be reached at the telephone number listed there. Respondents from Albatross and Solana advised that publication had been suspended indefinitely, due primarily to lack of funds, while the Greater Golden Hill Poetry Express had been halted by its editors to free time for their own writing; editorial resignations had also forced cessa- tion of Gilt Edge and Room. However, 17 of the 24 journals which were alive in 1980 announced that they were still publishing; in 1982, they had achieved an average longevity of 7.7 years. Focus, at age twelve, was the oldest. These editors were conscious of being exceptionally hardy survivors by little-magazine standards, and many of their replies rang with pride. Moving Out, for example, proclaimed the impending publica- tion of a "special 10th anniversary issue!" and Margarita Donnelly of Calyx urged me to note "many changes in the past 2 years." Ellen Marie Bissert, founding editor of 13th Moon, was eager to discuss the quality and quick sales of her latest (1980) issue ("my best") and the scheduled publication of 2 special theme issues-one on the history of women's literary journals.
22 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY As is the nature of things in the women's press, several titles had experienced editorial shifts. The most interesting occurred at Conditions, which had lost two of its four founders, all white women, and added five new members, including four "women of color," to form a "multi-racial/ multi-ethnic" collective. It was a change presaged by the journal's 1979 "Black Women's Issue" and the deep commitment to pluralism mani- fested throughout its publishing run. The financial health of the 17 titles had neither worsened significantly nor improved. In 1980, 13 of the 17 journals had been managing to meet expenses, often barely, and always thanks to some combination of grants, donated labor, and the support of one or more "angels." Four were in more precarious condition, running in debt. Two years later, Kalliope, the only journal sponsored by a college, had ascended from the questionnaire category of "in the red" to "in the black," but the others had not changed markedly, many continuing to publish only when favored by grant agencies. Two journals that in 1980 had been in danger of having to cease were still operating and still threatened by the possibil- ity of imminent bankruptcy. Meanwhile, the moribund journals had been replaced, and exceeded, by feminist newcomers. Among the several women's literary magazines begun in 1979 or later and not queried for my study are Azalea (1979), written by and for "lesbians of color" [62]; Iowa Woman (1979), focusing on the "midwestern woman" [1, p. 194]; The Deepest Valley Review (ca. 1980), decorated with photographs and drawings of famous women in history; and Snippets: A Melange of Women (1980), featuring material "on the varied aspects of the feminine condition-paper dolls, shrews, feminists-all, and more. . . . No biases" [1, p. 371]. As the 1980s proceed, the women's creative literary press remains lively, diverse, and predictable only in its unpredictability. Appendix Cooperating Publications An asterisk preceding a journal title indicates that I was unable to verify currency of the address given. All addresses of asterisked titles were correct as of spring 1980. All other addresses were current in spring 1982. Albatross (suspended), P.O. Box 2046, Central Station, East Orange, New Jersey 07019 Black Maria, P.O. Box 25187, Chicago, Illinois 60625 Bloodroot, P.O. Box 891, Grand Forks, North Dakota 58201
WOMEN'S LITERARY JOURNALS 23 Calyx, P.O. Box B, Corvallis, Oregon 97339 Conditions, P.O. Box 56, Van Brunt Station, Brooklyn, New York 11215 Connections, Bell Hollow Road, Putnam Valley, New York 10579 Country Women (suspended), P.O. Box 51, Albion, California 95410 Dark Horse, P.O. Box 39, Somerville, Massachusetts 02143 Earth's Daughters, P.O. Box 41, Central Park Station, Buffalo, New York 14215 Focus, Boston Daughters of Bilitis, 1151 Massachusetts Avenue, Cam- bridge, Massachusetts 02138 Gilt Edge, New Series (defunct), c/o Montana Review, Owl Creek Press, 2220 Quail, Missoula,Montana 59802 Greater Golden Hill Poetyy Express (defunct), c/o Feminist Poetry and Graphics Center, 2829 Broadway, San Diego, California 92101 Helicon Nine, P.O. Box 22412, Kansas City, Missouri 64113 Innerviews, P.O. Box 7516, Grand Rapids, Michigan 49510 Kalliope, Business Affairs Office, Kent Campus, Florida Junior College atJacksonville, 3939 Roosevelt Boulevard, Jacksonville, Florida 32205 Moving Out, 4866 Third Street, Wayne State University, Detroit, Michi- gan 48202 Pnrmipara, P.O. Box 371, Oconto, Wisconsin 54153 Room (suspended), P.O. Box 40610, San Francisco, California 94140 Second Wave, P.O. Box 344, Cambridge A, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139 *Sibyl-Child, P.O. Box 1773, Hyattsville, Maryland 20788 Sing Heavenly Muse!, P.O. Box 14059, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55414 Sinister Wisdom, P.O. Box 660, Amherst, Massachusetts 01004 (In spring 1980 this publication had a Lincoln, Nebraska, address; in January 1981 it experienced a change of editors.) Solana (suspended), 5712 Pennsylvania, St. Louis, Missouri 63111 *Sow's Ear (suspended), 3018 Pear Street, Antioch, California 94509 *Syzygy, 3901 Ledgewood Drive, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229 13th Moon, Drawer F, Inwood Station, New York, New York 10034 REFERENCES 1. Fulton, Len, and Ferber, Ellen, eds. International Directory of Little Magazines and Small Presses. 17th ed. Paradise, Calif.: Dustbooks, 1981. 2. Fulton, Len. "Touching the Biosphere." Amenican Libraries 5 (February 1974): 73-75. 3. Anderson, Elliott, and Kinzie, Mary, eds. TriQuarterly, no. 43 (Fall 1978). Subsequently reprinted in book form: The Little Magazine in America: A Modern Documentary History. Yonkers, N.Y.: Pushcart Press, 1978. 4. Hoffman, Frederick J.; Allen, Charles; and Ulrich, Carolyn F. The Little Magazine: A History and a Bibliography. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1946. 5. Anderson, Elliott, and Kinzie, Mary. "Prefatory Note." In [3, pp. 3-51. 6. Redmond, Eugene. "Stridency and the Sword: Literary and Cultural Emphasis in Afro-American Magazines." In [3, pp. 538-731.
24 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 7. Martin, Peter. "An Annotated Bibliography of Selected Little Magazines." In [3, pp. 666-750]. 8. Joan, Polly, and Chesman, Andrea. Guide to Women's Publishing. Paradise, Calif.: Dustbooks, 1978. 9. Katz, Bill, and Richards, Berry G. Magazines for Libraries. 3d ed. New York: R. R. Bowker Co., 1978. 10. Pound, Ezra. "Small Magazines." EnglishJournal 19 (November 1930): 689-704. 11. Barone, Dennis. "Daisy Aldan: An Interview on Folder." In [3, pp. 263-80]. 12. Bernikow, Louise. "Out of the Bell Jar." New Times 7 (October 29, 1976): 46-47, 49- 54. 13. Arnold, June. "Feminist Presses and Feminist Politics." Quest: A Feminist Quarterly 3 (Summer 1976): 18-26. 14. Piercy, Marge. "The Grand Coolie Damn." In Sisterhood Is Powerful, edited by Robin Morgan. New York: Random House, 1970. 15. Piercy, Marge. Vida. New York: Summit Books, 1979. 16. Evans, Sara. Personal Politics: The Roots of Women's Liberation in the Civil Rights Movement and the New Left. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1979. 17. Alpert, Jane. Growing Up Underground. New York: William Morrow & Co., 1981. 18. Moberg, Verne. "The New World of Feminist Publishing." Booklegger 1 (July-August 1974): 14-18. 19. "Ma Revolution: Women's Press." Workforce, no. 47 (September-October 1975), pp. 7- 8. 20. Shelley, Martha. Interview with Harriet Desmoines. Sinister Wisdom 1 (Fall 1976): 120- 22. 21. Fulton, Len. In Whole Cosmep Catalog, edited by Dick Higgins. Paradise, Calif.: Dust- books, 1974. Quoted in: Henderson, Bill. "Independent Publishing: Today and Yes- terday." Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 421 (September 1975): 94. 22. Pollak, Felix. "Elitism and the Littleness of Little Magazines." Southwest Review 61 (Summer 1976): 297-303. 23. Baldwin, Barbara. Letter to author, February 14, 1980. 24. Editorial. Sing, Heavenly Muse! no. 4 (Winter 1979), p. v. 25. Desmoines, Harriet, and Nicholson, Catherine. "Letter to Beth." Sinister Wisdom 1 (Fall 1976): 127-29. 26. Fulton, Len, and Ferber, Ellen, eds. International Directory of Little Magazines and Small Presses. 15th ed. Paradise, Calif.: Dustbooks, 1979. 27. Moore, James. "Poetry Is Connecting People." North Country Anvil, no. 15 (August- September 1975), p. 70. 28. Bennett, John. "Why Poetry Is Dangerous." North Country Anvil, no. 15 (August- September 1975), pp. 69-70. 29. Lamb, Myrna. Interview with Linda Thurston. Second Wave I (Spring 1971): 12-15. 30. Piercy, Marge. Interview withJonah Raskin. Unidentified clipping. Special Collections Department, Northwestern University Library. 31. Allen, Charles. "The Little Magazine in America: 1945-70." American Libraries 3 (October 1972): 964-71. 32. Bennett, Paula. "Three Young Poets and the Art of Poetry." Focus (n.d. [probably August 19781). 33. Marchant, Anyda. Interview with Barbara Grier. Sinister Wisdom 1 (Fall 1976): 116-19. 34. Stapen, Candyce Homnick, and Gayet, Patricia Hughes. "From the Editors." Sibyl- Child 1 (Winter 1975): unnumbered first page. 35. "Our Shopping Bag Lady Issue." Sibyl-Child 3, no. 3 (1979): 4.
WOMEN'S LITERARY JOURNALS 25 36. Rich, Adrienne. "When We Dead Awaken: Writing as Re-vision (1971)." In On Lies, Secrets, and Silence: Selected Prose, 1966-1978. New York: W. W. Norton & Co., 1979. 37. Fulton, Len. "Dust: A Tribal Seed." In [3, pp. 423-37]. 38. Shockley, Ann Allen. "The Black Lesbian in American Literature: An Overview." Conditions: Five (1979): 133-42. 39. Hodges, Beth, ed. Sinister Wisdom, vol. 1 (Fall 1976). 40. Hodges, Beth, ed. Sinister Wisdom, vol. 5 (Summer 1980). 41. Crain, Jane Larkin. "Feminist Fiction." Commentary 58 (December 1974): 58-62. 42. Rich, Adrienne. "The Origins and History of Consciousness, Part 1." In The Dream of a Common Language: Poems, 1974-1977. New York: W. W. Norton & Co., 1978. 43. Rich, Adrienne. "Foreword: On History, Illiteracy, Passivity, Violence, and Women's Culture." In On Lies, Secrets, and Silence: Selected Prose, 1966-1978. New York: W. W. Norton & Co., 1979. 44. "From Us: Thoughts on the Feminist Media." Second Wave 3 (Spring 1974): 2-4. 45. Lindsey, Karen. "Visions." Second Wave 3 (Spring 1974): 4. 46. Marge; Donna; Karen; and Kathy. "About Us." Black Maria 1 (April 1972): unnum- bered first page. 47. "Notes on Contributors." Second Wave, vol. 4, no. 3 (1976). 48. "Contributors' Notes." Conditions: Two (1977). 49. "Contributors' Notes." Conditions: Five (1979). 50. Swallow, Alan. "The Little Magazines" and "Why the Little Magazines?" In An Editor's Essays of Two Decades. Seattle: Experiment Press, 1962. 51. "Concerning the Little Magazines: Something Like a Symposium." Carleton Miscellany 7 (Spring 1966): 3-79. 52. Healey, James, ed. "Little Magazines: Too Much with Us? A Symposium." Prainre Schooner 48 (Winter 1974/75): 317-26. 53. Hitchcock, George. "On Kayak." In [3, pp. 438-49]. 54. Anania, Michael. "Of Living Belfry and Rampart: On American Literary Magazines since 1950." In [3, pp. 6-26]. 55. Sergeant, Howard. "How to Pay?" Times Literary Supplement 63 (August 6, 1964): 713. 56. Hornick, Lita. "Kulchur: A Memoir." In [3, pp. 281-971. 57. Whittemore, Reed. "On Editing Furioso." In [3, pp. 100-1 101. 58. Stefanile, Felix. "The Little Magazine Today." In [3, pp. 648-651. 59. Creeley, Robert. "On Black Mountain Review." In [3, pp. 248-621. 60. Olson, Mark; Judson, John; and Boudreau, Richard. "An Interview on Little Maga- zines" (interview with Felix Pollak). In [3, pp. 34-49]. 61. Williams, William Carlos. "Comment." Contact: An American Quarterly Review 1 (Febru- ary 1932): 7-9. 62. Conditions 8 (1982): 184.