THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Volume XII JANUARY 1942 Number i TWO MAJOR APPROACHE S TO THE SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY OF READING' HANS MULLER R QEADING has only recently emerged as an object of spe- cialized study. From time to time various interest groups have tried to grapple with the practical prob- lems of reading whenever such problems seemed to require solu- tions within the framework of particular occupational or pro- fessional pursuits. As long as the results of efforts of this sort proved of immediate social welfare value, no need was felt to define the theoretical bases upon which the solutions had been arrived at. The bases were simply taken to be set, as a matter of course, by the practical issues under consideration. A few illustrations may suffice to bear out this contention, namely, that whenever reading behavior is studied, a frame of reference is either taken for granted or explicitly indicated; that is, investigations are rarely carried on in a conceptual vacuum. Thus an educator who ha1s set himself the task of de- veloping reading ability and reading tastes in pupils may en- gage in research which compares the effectiveness of different I The author wishes to acknowledge his indebtedness to Professor Herbert Blumer, of the Department of Sociology of the University of Chicago, whose concepts and point of view greatly influenced the writing of this paper, and to Professor Douglas Waples, of the Graduate Library School of the University of Chicago, who generously took time to read the manuscript and extend advice and criticism. I
2 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY ways and means of bringing about his educational objectives.2 Teachers and school administrators may wish to ascertain the reading preferences of children, adolescents, and adults, in order to be able to select curricular materials in accordance with those preferences.3 A psychiatrist may be interested in studying the extent to which reading is capable of performing a remedial function in cases of different neurotic and psychotic conditions; he may also concern himself with the symptomatic character of reading so that reading records may be utilized for diagnostic purposes.4 A publisher may profit from his knowledge of the typical reading needs and interests of different literate groups in the population; magazine editors, for instance, conduct peri- odic surveys which are "directed at discovery of reader-re- sponse to material in a specific issue."s The armed forces of a nation can derive much benefit from an understanding of the role of reading in building and maintaining military morale.6 The uplifting and character-building potentialities of reading may likewise become a major concern of ministers of religion. Ways and means of promoting a wide diffusion of knowledge through books constitutes another important area of research, in which librarians and social reformers are particularly inter- ested. In every one of these illustrative fields of possible research the pragmatic objectives are clearly indicated and constitute the ultimate frame of reference. A somewhat different situation arises, however, when reading is studied "academically," that is, divorced from any immediate social welfare concern. Here 2 W. S. Gray (ed.), Reading in general education (Washington: American Council on Education, I940); W. S. Gray, Summary of investigations relating to reading (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, I925); Paul Witty and David Kopel, Reading and the educative process (Boston: Ginn, 1939). 3 Franklin Bobbitt, Curriculum investigations (Chicago: University of Chicago, I 926). 4Cf. Douglas Waples, "Reading studies contributory to the social sciences," Li- brary quarterly, I (193I), 297. S M. V. Charnley and Blair Converse, Magazine writing and editing (New York: Cordon, I938), p. 139. 6 "The army library program," Library journal, LXVI (I 94), 446-47.
THE SOCIA4L PSYCHOLOGY OF READING 3 the aim is usually not so much the control of a baffling concrete situation as it is the elucidation of the reading process in a more general context. The difference is perhaps only a superficial one, since all genuine, that is, nonfictitious, problems must be grounded in concrete experience. Nevertheless, a consideration of the contrast is illuminating in at least one respect: it points to the indispensability of a conceptual framework of some sort. Whereas the social welfare type of investigation is set within a clearly circumscribed frame of aims and objectives (usually of a professional sort), the more academic researches, of which dissertations and many university press publications are repre- sentative examples, are frequently either eclectic in their choice of fundamental principles or else lack a well-defined conceptual frame of reference altogether. What this paper intends to show is (i) how the adoption of different frames of reference affects the kinds of problem that are selected for investigation and (2) how different frames of reference determine the choice of certain methods of investiga- tion and the rejection of others. These two questions will be dis- cussed with reference to studies of reading within the general field of social psychology. According to Blumer, contemporary social psychology is dom- inated by two divergent views which may be labeled (i) the stimulus-response approach and (2) the symbolic-interaction ap- proach. These two approaches, which are also frequently, though less descriptively and less accurately, referred to as the objective and the subjective emphasis, respectively, differ in their conceptions of original human nature, of group life, of so- 7 Herbert Blumer, "Social psychology," in E. P. Schmidt (ed.), Man and society (New York: Prentice-Hall, 1938), chap. iv. For a more extensive statement see Blumer, "Method in social psychology" (unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Sociology and Anthropology, University of Chicago, I928). The contrast between the two major approaches in social psychology has also been discussed by other scholars in the field, but there is, unfortunately, no uniformity in the way the two approaches have been labeled. Blumer's designations were chosen for this paper since they seemed to be most descriptive and least subject to misinter- pretation. Reuter's terms, corresponding to those of Blumer's, are (X) neurological social psychology and (2) social-interaction social psychology (E. B. Reuter, "Some observations on the status of social psychology," American journal of sociology, XLVI [19401, 293-304).
4 THE LIBRARY QUAR TERLY cial conduct, and of personality. Only a very sketchy descrip- tion of these two approaches-sufficient for the comprehension of the implications for reading studies-needs to be given in the present context. The stimulus-response approach (emphasizing the objective phases of behavior) conceives of human nature as a bundle of neuromuscular reflexes which develop-very largely through the process of conditioning-into habits. Group life is thought to consist essentially of social stimulation; that is to say, indi- viduals respond to social stimuli in the environment on the basis of their habit-systems and attitudes. These habit-systems and attitudes are defined as tendencies to respond, and these tendencies are considered to be ultimately lodged in the nervous systems of individuals. Differences between individuals can, ac- cordingly, be explained in terms of differences in the receptivity to stimuli and in terms of differences in the nervous conductiv- ity of different human organisms. Most contemporary social psychologists tend to follow the stimulus-response approach, even though its essentially physio- logical basis is not always given explicit expression. Theoretical exponents of this approach (or of slight variants of it) are, among others, F. H. Allport,8 Max Meyer,9 I. P. Pavlov,"o and John Watson.", The symbolic-interaction approach (emphasizing the subjec- tive phases of behavior) conceives of human nature as essen- tially plastic and as characterized by a set of impulses which manifest themselves in the stream of incessant activity. These impulses give rise to what G. H. Mead called "acts." An act is defined as a total span of activity, usually originating in a felt dissatisfaction, restlessness, or disturbance in ongoing behavior. Impulses are assumed to be aroused by such disturbances, and 8 Social psychology (New York: Houghton Mifflin, I924). 9 The psychology of the other-one (Columbia, Mo.: Missouri Book Co., 192X). '0 Conditioned reflexes: an investigation of the physiological activity of the cerebral cortex, trans. and ed. G. V. Anrep (London: Oxford University Press, 1927). 11 Behaviorism (rev. ed.; New York: Norton, 1930).
THE SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY OF READING 5 before an act can be considered completed, the impulses that have been aroused must reach consummation. In this process of striving toward the satisfaction of an impulse, the individual forms wishes or images of goals, and, in order to reach these goals, he is forced to define the situation in which he finds him- self in terms of common understandings and expectations (sym- bols) shared by his culture group. IThus social interaction is not a simple matter of responding to stimulations but rather a mat- ter of responding to, or interacting with, the meanings of a situa- tion or an event. These meanings involve subjective interpreta- tion; they represent the product of 1oth the purposive activities of the individual and the group expectations and folkways which he shares with others. The symbolic-interaction approach finds its theoretical ex- ponents in C. H. Cooley,I2 G. H. Mead,"3 and W. I. Thomas.'4 John Dewey is also related to this camp of social psychologists, his main contribution consisting of a very penetrating criticism of the stimulus-response point of view.'5 These rather abstract descriptions of the two major emphases in approaches to problems of social psychology will become more intelligible as their implications for studies of reading are pointed out in the pages to follow. In comparing the two ap- proaches it should be kept in mind that in the past much more research has been produced along the stimulus-response line than along the symbolic-interaction line. Hence in any attempt at conducting a fair comparison it is necessary to make a clear distinction between theoretical possibilities and fundamentally inescapable limitations, on the one hand, and practical feasibil- ity and accidental shortcomings, on the other hand. I2 Human nature and the social order (New lYork: Scribner, 1902). 13 Mind, self, and society, ed. C. W. Morris (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1934). '4 W. 1. Thomas and Florian Znaniecki, "Methodological note," The Polish peasant in Europe and America, Vol. I (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 19I8-20). IS "The reflex arc concept," Psychological treview, III (I896), 357-70. See also his Human nature and conduct (New York; Holt, I 922).
6 THE LIBRAfRY QUA4RTERLY THE STIMULUS-RESPONSE APPROACH TO READING If we adopt the stimulus-response approach, we may con- veniently break up the reading process into two typical spans of response activity, namely, (a) the selection of reading matter by an individual and (b) the effects of reading on individuals. a) In the selection of reading matter the environment is con- ceived of as containing a multitude of stimuli in the form of books, pamphlets, magazines, newspapers, etc. These objects in the environment are assumed to exert a pressure upon the sensory organs of the individual who happens to be exposed to them. They appeal to him with different degrees of intensity and in different directions. If an appeal is strong enough, and at the same time "hits a soft spot" in the individual's psycho- logical makeup, a response is expected to occur in the form of book selection. This way of viewing the book-selection process clearly invites certain lines of research: I. The available mass of reading matter needs to be classi- fied according to the external stimuli that presumably induce people to purchase or borrow publications, and in this attempt at classifying potential stimuli such taxonomic categories as format, legibility, length, recency, inclusion of illustrations and pictures, color of binding, types of display, relative popularity of the author, and attractiveness of the title suggest them- selves. 2. Another line of investigation would deal with the distribu- tion of print, that is, the extent to which different types of pub- lication are accessible to different groups of people. It is obvious that stimuli are wasted, so to speak, unless people are exposed to them. The investigation of ecological and geographic factors influencing the relative density or spread of agencies of distribu- tion (such as bookstores, newsstands, libraries, etc.)'6 becomes, O6 Cf. Grace 0. Kelley, Woodside does read! a survey of the reading interests and habits of a local community (Jamaica, N.Y.: Queens Borough Public Library, I935); L. R. Wilson, The geography of reading (Chicago: American Library Association and Uni- versity of Chicago Press, 1937); C. B. Joeckel and Leon Carnovsky, a metropolitan library in action (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1940).
THE SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY OF READING 7 therefore, extremely important in any attempt at estimating the possible degrees of exposure of different groups in the popu- lation to different types of publication. Equally important is the ascertainment of such limiting factors as the cost of publi- cations and the extent to which different publications have been suppressed or publicized in the schools, in libraries, in periodi- cals, in churches, in the movies, and on the air. 3. Turning to the organism itself, which is presumably ex- posed to these multifarious environmental stimuli in varying de- grees, a third line of research will tend to center around the de- termination of the relevant individual characteristics and traits. Among the more stable traits are age, sex, education, income, occupation, religion, race, and group-membership of readers; these are considered relevant only in their function as facilitat- ing or impeding influences upon the receptivity of an individual to environmental stimuli appearing in the form of printed ma- terials. This sensory receptivity is also thought to be affected by a multitude of more modifiable, that is, less stable, factors, such as attitudes, interests, aptitucdes, motives, and emotional states. These predispositions, however, are again not viewed as dynamic forces that may direct and guide human behavior; they are looked upon only in their function as conditioning fac- tors of the neural conductivity of an individual organism en- gaged in the process of receiving environmental stimuli and pro- ducing responses. 4. In the case of book selection the responses are overt and ob- jectively observable. The purchase of a newspaper, the borrow- ing of a book, the subscribing to a magazine are all clearly iden- tifiable responses to stimuli which the individual receives from the external features of the print-filled environment. A fourth step of research would be to record such responses and to relate them to the particular stimuli that aroused them. The ultimate aim of research of this sort is to make it possible to identify and describe the more or less regular mechanisms that allegedly connect the individual's choices of reading matter (responses) with the external features of print (stimuli). This requires the isolation of the stimuli in such a way that their specific effects
8 THE LIBRARY QUA4RTERLY in the form of responses can be reliably demonstrated. What the investigator is, therefore, almost inevitably led to is the setting-up of experimental situations in which all the relevant variables can be controlled. Given certain stimuli in the form of different types of publication-preferably in a closed com- munity-we may try to find out what people with different traits and predispositions choose to read. The determination of responses of different individuals to presumably identical stimuli'7 and the determination of responses of essentially iden- tical individuals to different stimuli'8 constitute the two main aims of this type of experimentation. Such research lends itself to the application of quantitative techniques and the generali- zations arrived at have a good chance of turning out to be suffi- ciently reliable for the guidance of practitioners in group prob- lems of prediction and control relating to reading situations. A serious criticism of this quasi-laboratory approach charges that the predictive formulas thus arrived at apply, by and large, only to the somewhat artificial situations from which they were drawn. Human behavior-in contrast to animal behavior- rarely consists of simple stimulus-response episodes, since it gen- erally involves subjective interpretation prior to the occurrence of a response. For instance, the act of an individual who is borrowing a novel from a library represents only a highly trun- cated span of activity which cannot be understood without giv- ing adequate account of all the relevant covert factors, such as impulses, desires, wishes, hopes, and fears, all of which com- bined determine to a large extent the character of responses. This criticism finds expression in Blumer's general remarks: In the study of human beings, one cannot confine one's self to a mere designation of the external factors which are playing upon such human beings and, subsequently, a designation of the kinds of reactions which these human '7 E.g., Erich Thier, Gestaltwandel des Arbeiters im Spiegel seiner LekItre (Leipzig: Harrassowitz, 1939). On p. 73 it is shown to what extent members of the working class, of the middle class, and of a group of college-trained people differ in their borrow- ing of library books on labor and social problems. I8 E.g., R. R. Shaw, "The influence of sloping shelves on book circulation," Library quarterly, VIII (I938), 480-90.
THE SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY OF READING 9 beings make to these factors. Rather, one has to take into consideration the kind of selective tendency or disposition which these human beings have which determines the way in which they are going to react to these external influences playing upon them.', b) In the study of effects of reading the situation is compli- cated by the fact that such effects are usually not overt reac- tions as in the case of book selection. Especially if a distinction is made between what might be called primary (immediate) and secondary (remote) effects, it can hardly be denied that all the primary effects are of a subjective nature. If reading has any influence at all, what is changed first-that is, prior to any overt response-are attitudes, emotional tensions, and subjec- tive states generally. Propaganda literature, for instance, will show its ultimate (secondary) influence in the way people cast their votes; but before this overt voting behavior can take place, certain changes have to have occurred in the subjective political attitudes of individuals. Such attitude changes are exemplified by conversion, reinforcement of previously held notions, adop- tion of new points of view, weakening of the intensity of predis- positions through catharsis, and so on. Accordingly, present-day research in the field of reading ef- fects, if it adheres to the ideals of objectification and the stand- ards of scientific reliability, is confronted by a disconcerting dilemma: (i) it either limits its attention to overt responses which-as can be objectively observed-tend to follow reading experiences and thus exposes itself to the charge that it has neglected a consideration of the intervening subjective phases which allegedly constitute the crucial aspects of the reading act; (2) or it attempts to "catch" the effects occurring within the subjective phases by means of objective techniques (such as standardized attitude tests), which most critical observers in the symbolic-interaction camp do not regard as particularly suitable for getting at the actual modifications of the subjective, '9 Herbert Blumer, A4n appraisal of Thomas and Znaniecki's "The Polish peasant in Europe and America" ("Critiques of research in the social sciences," No. I [New York: Social Science Research Council, 1939]), p. 107.
Io THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY inner tendencies of individuals who have been exposed to given types of printed propaganda material.20 No matter whether we study reading along one or the other of these two lines, it becomes again necessary first to classify the potential stimuli issuing from the content. Such an analysis of the content of publications enables the investigator to iden- tify the stimuli that may be expected to impinge upon readers, provided that the categories which such an analysis uses have been selected with special reference to possible effects of reading and the predispositions of readers. Thus, a subject-classifica- tion of books, magazines, or magazine articles would be useless in this context unless the categories were related to differences in actual subject interests of readers. One of the most serious shortcomings of such a pioneering endeavor as Walter Hof- mann's Die Lektiure der FraU2I is the fact that its subject cate- gories-based as they are on conventional library classification -do not seem to be very closely related to the reading interests and reading satisfactions of people. This explains the extreme difficulties which Hofmann encountered in his attempt at inter- preting the impressive mass of data he had assembled: The subject groupings of books in the library-if they are to be used as valid instruments of research-must be constructed in accordance with the elementary forms of human reading interests. And our entire investigation [Die Lektuire der Fraul suffered from the fact that this fundamental principle could not be followed. We were only able to use expedient subject groupings as they were found in the experimental library. These expedient subject groupings (which did not represent what we should have wanted to use in an ideal set-up) were based on traditional academic concepts and classifications.22 Subject-classification of reading content represents, however, only one of several possible dimensions of analysis. Examples 20 A full discussion of the reasons for disqualifying some of these objective testing devices would fall outside the scope of the present paper. 20 Leipzig: Quelle & Meyer, 1931. 2 Ibid., p. 2i. The original of this somewhat free translation reads as follows: "Die Reagenzgruppen miussten, wenn sie vollwertiges Untersuchungsmittel sein sollten, im Zuge der Grundformen des menschlichen Interesses am Buch aufgebaut sein. Und hieran krankt unsere ganze Untersuchung. Wir konnen nur mit ganz behelfsmissigen 'Reagenzgruppen' arbeiten, so wie sie in der Versuchsbiicherei gebildet wurden. Diese behelfsmassigen Reagenzgruppen sind gebildet in Anlehnung an die traditionelle Be- griffsbildung der Wissenschaft."
THE SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY OF REAIDING II of other dimensions are readability (in terms of comprehensibil- ity to groups of different educational status), type of exposition (e.g., cold argumentation versus the use of sentimentalized terms), aesthetic qualities, traits of conduct that are either in- dorsed or condemned, types of goals sought, types of locale and social setting in narratives, social status of fictional characters, types of plot, etc. There is no limit to the number of dimensions in terms of which a content analysis may be carried out.23 The only inviolable rule is that the dimensions should be selected with special regard to the most probable satisfactions obtained through reading by different people. Theoretically there is, of course, no aspect of publication which may not be conceived of as a possible stimulus in the eyes of some readers. It is, there- fore, only the less relevant dimensions which are ruled out in the conduct of content analyses. A further line of investigation in this area of reading effects within the stimulus-response scheme would deal with the rela- tive distribution of more minute content elements in the reading matter by which individuals are assumed to be influenced. Such distribution can be demonstrated most objectively by means of frequency counts.24 It may, for instance, be shown that nation- alistic symbols in children's literature appear more frequently in some countries than in others.2s High frequency may be in- 23 For a full discussion of content analysis see Douglas Waples et al., What reading does to people (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, I940), chap. iv and Appendix B. 24 Studies using frequency-count methods are most commonly found in the field of political propaganda. The following may serve as illustrations: Bobbitt, op. cit.; Donald Hayworth, "An analysis of speeches in the presidential campaigns from I884 to I 920," !tuarterly journal of speech, XVI ( 930), 35-42; Susan M. Kingsbury, Hornell Hart, et al., Newspapers and the news (New York: Putnam, 1937); I thiel de Sola Pool, "The symbols of electoral programs in France" (unpublished Master's thesis, Depart- ment of Political Science, University of Chicago, 1939); A. C. Schreiber, "American attitudes toward Great Britain and Germany during the year 1939," (unpublished Master's dissertation, International Relations, University of Chicago, 1941); Douglas Waples and Bernard Berelson, "Public communications and public opinion" (mimeo- graphed; Graduate Library School, University of Chicago, 1941). A good example of a nonprint content analysis is Edgar Dale, The content of motion pictures (New York: Macmillan, I935). 25 Helen Martin, "Nationalism in children's literature," Library quarterly, VI (1936), 405-18. In order to avoid misunderstanding, it should be pointed out that Miss
12 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY terpreted as constituting a strong stimulus, and low frequency, a weak stimulus. On the ground of this assumption, the relative frequency of occurrence of a content element provides a clue for estimating the probable strength of the relevant response. Thus it may be predicted or assumed that in countries where children's literature shows a high frequency of nationalistic symbols, a strong feeling of nationalism will be induced in the younger generation. Such a hypothesis requires, of course, veri- fication before it can be accepted as true or probable. Precisely how such verification is to be conducted in a realis- tic and feasible way is not too easy to imagine. The difficulty is again one of isolating the stimulus. We do not know to what extent differences in the intensity of nationalistic sentiment among youth is due to nothing else but differences in the na- tionalistic tincture of the reading matter to which children in different countries have been exposed. There are a great many other factors than reading that might have influenced and shaped nationalistic feelings of a certain strength. Hence in his desire to be scientific, the investigator is again driven to the necessity of setting up situations in which all the relevant fac- tors can be controlled. One such possibility would be to select a closed community of children (e.g., an orphanage or a reforma- tory) and expose one group of children to literature which has a high frequency of nationalistic symbols and another group to literature which contains only a few nationalistic symbols but a large number of international symbols. The attitudes of both groups of children would have to be tested before and after the exposure. If any significant differences in attitude changes with respect to nationalism or internationalism are detected between the two groups after exposure to a sufficient quantity of the re- spective types of juvenile literature, they may be ascribed to the influence of reading, provided that it can be shown that such differences in attitude changes are not due to differences in pre- dispositions. Martin was not interested in ascertaining the effects of different types of children's books. Her problem was merely that of identifying the conditions that tend to affect the degree of acceptance or rejection of different types of children's books in different countries.
THE SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY OF READING 13 This type of experimental verification has frequently been applied to problems of educational psychology.26 In the field of mass communication the experimental approach has received wide use in the study of the influence of motion pictures: Briefly, the procedure has been to measure the attitude of a group of stu- dents by means of an attitude scale or a paired comparison schedule, to show the group a motion picture which has been judged as having effective value on the issue in question, and to measure the attitude of the group again the day after the picture has been shown.27 Essentially the same approach has been proposed as a "next step" in studies of the social effects of reading: The first step would be to select an observed effect of reading-e.g., greater sympathy toward the American Negro after reading Richard Wright's Native son. The next step would be to select groups of readers whose predispositions are known to differ ... . Such predispositions would need to be distinguished by reliable scales-scales which can be readministered after the members of each group have read the book. Such changes in attitude, in either direction, as the two scalings may record for each group would be taken with due pre- cautions, to show how far the influence can be ascribed to the book as against the readers' predispositions ... . The purpose is to analyze the responses of readers to certain selected publications when the readers are known to differ in certain predispositions which are presumed to qualify their responses to the reading.28 Once again it must be stated that sociopyschological experi- ments of this sort-even if we dismiss for the time being all legitimate doubts as to the very possibility of establishing a "closed system" in social experimentation-are open to serious criticism on the ground that the findings apply normally only to the rather artificial situations from which they were derived. Stimuli, so it may be argued, never act singly; they always 26 E.g., B. M. Sherrington, Methods of education in international attitudes ("Teachers College contributions to education," No. 595 [New York: Columbia University, '934]). 27 Ruth C. Peterson and L. L. Thurstone, Motion pictures and the social attitudes of children (New York: Macmillan, I933), p. xv. 28 Waples et al., op. cit., pp. 203, 205. It should be stated that this research proposal does not represent all that Waples and his coauthors envisage as needed research in the field of reading. It is evident that the formulation of this particular proposal is strongly influenced by considerations of feasibility in terms of available or anticipated research funds.
I4 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY operate in combination with other stimuli. In their mutual in- teraction two stimuli may either neutralize or reinforce each other, depending both on the character of the stimuli and on the particular purposive selective tendencies of the exposed or- ganisms. Hence, relatively little light is shed on the formation of attitudes-assuming now that the elucidation of this social proc- ess constitutes the aim of this type of research-by a meticulous attempt to determine the influence of a single kind of stimulus (e.g., nationalistic symbols in juvenile literature) in isolation from other print and nonprint stimuli. Furthermore, it is ques- tionable, as was previously indicated, whether an attitude scale is capable of measuring the complex total pattern of the results of past experiences with any acceptable degree of adequacy. SUMMARY OF THE STIMULUS-RESPONSE APPROACH In this critical discussion of the approach to reading behavior within the stimulus-response scheme an attempt has been made to indicate both the types of problem that might be selected for scientific investigation and the methods that are available in solving such problems. It was shown that the major interest would be to study in various contexts the allegedly constant types of connection (a) between the external stimuli of publica- tions and the responses made by individuals in the way they select publications for reading, or (b) between analytically dis- tinguishable content elements of publications and the effects of reading on different sorts of people in terms of either subjective reactions or overt behavior. The precise determination of the causal or covariational connections within each of these two types of stimulus-response spans constitutes the goal of re- searches in reading. The aim, then, is to arrive at generaliza- tions, principles, or laws which may serve as instruments of pre- diction and social control of group behavior. Two questions need to be answered at this point. One is: In what sense, if any, do the generalizations concerning group ef- fects of reading and of print stimuli apply to the prediction of individual behavior ? The second question is: Are abstract gen- eralizations and formulas of prediction necessarily the goal of
THE SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY OF READING IS the social scientist who is concerned about the illumination of reading behavior? If not, what else could be the aim of re- searches in reading? The first question can probably best be answered by quoting G. W. Allport: The argument for prediction is bedeviled by a failure to recognize two kinds of prediction: (a) actuarial prediction concerning whole populations of people and (b) individual prediction concerning the possibilities of action for a single person. Social scientists have confused the probability of action within a population with the probability of what a given individual will do. To say that 70 per cent of the population will go to the moving pictures this week does not mean that any given individual has a 70 per cent chance of going . To know what his chance is we must study him ..... The only way in which we can predict the chances that a given individual has of be- having in a certain way is to study him as an individual and especially his subjective mental processes with the aid of subjective categories.29 These remarks are directly relevant to studies of reading. Vir- tually all the systematic investigations of reading behavior con- ducted in the past30 have been concerned with what G. W. All- port calls "actuarial prediction." This does not mean that they have no potential value in guiding social action and in deter- mining the policies of print-distributing agencies. On the con- trary, if a librarian knows the relative appeal which different types of publication possess for different groups among the pa- trons of a library, he will be in a better position (than without this knowledge) to supply the public with the types of publica- tions they like, provided that satisfying the demands of library patrons is one of the objectives of a public library.3z Studies of the reading interests (or subject interests) in relation to ob- jectively determinable characteristics of readers, such as age, 29 "Supplementary statement," in Herbert Blumer, In appraisal of Thomas and Znaniecki's "The Polish peasant in Europe and tmerica," p. i85. 3? For summaries of such studies see W. S. Gray and Ruth Munroe, The reading interests and habits of adults (New York: Macmillan, I930); Douglas Waples, People and print (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, I937); and Waples et al., op. cit. 3X Cf. Leon Carnovsky, "The evaluation of public library facilities," in L. R. Wilson (ed.), Library trends (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1937). Carnovsky, although admitting the wide prevalence of this assumption, raises questions as to its legitimacy.
l6 THE LIBRAfRY QUARTERLY sex, occupation, and education, may be of great value to li- brarians, publishers, and others concerned with the dissemina- tion of knowledge.32 And yet, studies of this sort would have to make no explicit mention of the character of the subjective ex- periences which individuals undergo in reading. It is equally evident, however, that those who have to deal primarily with problems of individual behavior (readers' ad- visers in libraries, social workers, psychiatrists, etc.) will derive relatively little, if any, benefit from stimulus-response studies of reading, which of necessity (due to their sociopsychological preconceptions as well as the limitations of their methods of investigation) pay scant attention to the subjective phase of the reading experience. To do justice to the second question posed above, namely, the desirability of obtaining generalizations concerning reading behavior, would require a much more extended discussion than can be given in the present context. It may suffice to indicate that the wish to arrive at so-called laws of human behavior represents the attempt to make the social sciences pragmati- cally as serviceable as the natural sciences proved to be. Since the chief tools supplied by the natural sciences are scientific laws, the social sciences are supposed to perform the analogous function through the development of social laws. In order to enable us to predict and control human behavior, such as read- ing, the social sciences, so it is argued, must provide intellectual instruments in the form of universal propositions which indicate the normal effects of given factors under different conditions.33 The molding of public opinion through propaganda tech- niques represents an example of a very important stimulus-re- sponse type of situation where an increased knowledge of in- variant patterns of reaction would be extremely useful. How- ever, as was pointed out by G. W. Allport, actuarial generaliza- 32Cf. Douglas Waples and R. W. Tyler, What people want to read about (Chicago: American Library Association and University of Chicago Press, 193I). 33 For a more extended discussion of this problem see "Generalization in the social sciences," in Louis Wirth (ed.), Eleven twenty-six: a deade of social science research (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1940), pp. 227-73.
THE SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY OF READING I7 tions offer at best only a very scanty clue as to how a given indi- vidual will react in a given situation or what particular print stimulus will bring about a desired reaction in a given individ- ual. A more fundamental question may very well be raised, however, by asking whether human behavior can be predicted and controlled in the same mechanistic fashion as the events of natural science. Such a possibility would be denied by many students of human nature on the ground that the crucial part of behavior is the subjective phase. With reference to this subjec- tive phase some writers on social science methodology have gone so far as to adopt what might be labeled a defeatist atti- tude. Among librarians, Butler has, for instance, declared that science can not penetrate the self-consciousness of emotion for this is in- tangible and incommunicable: hope, happiness, aspiration, repentance, de- spair, and devotion are terms void of all external meaning. Yet these, in the last analysis, embrace the ultimate significance of the universe to each living man.34 Butler's rejection of science as a means of understanding the emotional phases of human behavior hinges, of course, upon his definition of the term "science." If he conceives of science as the application of rigidly mechanistic and so-called "objective" observational procedures, his frankly skeptical contention is probably partially justified. This (loes not, however, preclude the applicability (to the sphere of book selection and reading be- havior) of other methods in endeavors directed at exploring, understanding, explaining, predicting, and controlling the sub- jective aspects of human behavior. THE SYMBOLIC-INTERACTION APPROACH TO READING Belief in such a possibility comprises the heart of the sym- bolic-interactionists' position. Let us now examine how they would proceed to study reading behavior and what their aims of research in this field would be. They would begin their in- vestigation not with a consideration of stimuli but with an iden- tification-through observation or inference-of specific types 34 Pierce Butler, An introduction to library science (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1933), p. xii.
A8 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY of disturbance or inhibition in ongoing activity and with a con- sideration of inner experiences (such as planning, deciding, evading, daydreaming) which those obstacles tend to engender. Books and their contents have, thus, no meaning apart from the dynamic activities of individuals, and they have, of course, different meanings for different individuals as well as for the same individual on different occasions. Hence, to study books displayed in libraries and bookstores as invariantly constituted stimuli is, according to this point of view, of relatively little value. Considered hardly less futile is any analysis of reading content upon the expectation that individuals with given traits will react to such content in specifiable, more or less predictable ways. To put it plainly, the symbolic-interactionist is not much in- terested in determining how individuals will react to given con- tent elements in books or magazine articles. His interests center around the determination of the function which a given con- stellation of content elements does or may perform within a given total span of meaningful activity, that is, within the proc- esses of striving toward a goal, realizing an end, satisfying a wish, meeting difficulties, escaping an obligation, following a compulsion, carrying out a plan, and so on. The placing of an act of reading within a framework of such a total span (or series of spans) of dynamic activity constitutes the kind of explana- tion which is the ultimate scientific objective of the symbolic- interaction approach. Improved understanding and compre- hension of reading behavior along these lines-rather than the derivation of abstract laws of reading behavior-is, according to the symbolic-interaction approach, the only feasible and legiti- mate objective of researches concerning sociopsychological as- pects of reading. In such researches there would evidently be little opportunity for the employment of experimental procedures, the adminis- tration of attitude tests and similar devices, and the use of sta- tistical correlation techniques, since the duration of spans of activity that are relevant to reading behavior is normally much too long-covering, as it may, several years-to be detected and
THE SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY OF READING I9 adequately understood through brief cross-sectional tests. In- stead, recourse would have to be taken to methods which suc- ceed in discovering and identifying the subjective short-range and long-range tendencies in indivi(luals who are known to have come under the influence of print. Notable among such meth- ods are sociological and psychiatric interviews, the interpreta- tion of diaries, autobiographies, letters, and other personal docu- ments, and the use of case records of courts, reformatories, hos- pitals, prisons, social service agencies, and other institutions. The possibility of making case studies in the field of reading was explored in a preliminary way by W. S. Gray and Ruth Munroe.35 These studies did not pretend to be more than ex- amples of "interesting reading habits." Reference is made to them here only in order to point to the wide gap that separates these somewhat amateurish initial attempts in the field of read- ing from the impressive accomplishments in other fields of re- search, such as delinquency problems,'6 immigrants' adjustment problems,37 social service,'8 psychology,39 and personnel admin- istration.40 Possible sources and collections of case-history ma- terial bearing on the influence of reading have been indicated by Waples,41 but no respectable systematic collection of case studies emphasizing the reading angle seems to have been pub- lished as yet. Cases in which reading played an important role 35 Op. Cit., pp. 210-55. 36 Judge Baker Guidance Center, Boston, Case study, Nos. I-20 (Boston: Judge Baker Foundation, I922-23); Clifford Shaw, The jack-roller: a delinquent boy's own story (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1930). 37 Thomas and Znaniecki, op. cit. 38 Elizabeth S. Dixon and Grace A. Browning (eds.), Social case records: family wel- fare (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, I938); Charlotte Towle (ed.), Social case records from psychiatric clinics (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, i94I); Wilma Walker (ed.), Child welfare case records (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, I937). 39 H. A. Murray et al., Explorations in personality: a clinical and experimental study of 50 men of college age (New York: Oxford University Press, I938); J. E. W. Wallin, Minor mental maladjustments in normal people: based on original autobiographies of personality maladjustments (Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, I939). 40 F. J. Roethlisberger and W. J. Dickson, Management and the worker (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1939). 4x Waples et al., op. cit., pp. I75-77.
20 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY have, of course, been included in general collections, such as those by Wallin42 and Towle.43 If personal documents and intensive life-histories are resorted to, they should be used in combination with one another to the end of aiding in the identification of the dynamic determinants of individual behavior, in the light of which reading can be ex- plained.44 The investigator would have to select cases in which reading is known to have taken place, and his task would be considered satisfactorily completed as soon as he had succeeded in answering such questions as the following: What were the motives that prompted a given individual to select certain books, magazines, etc., for his reading? What benefits or in- juries did a reader receive from his reading within the frame- work of his particular strivings? How did reading facilitate or impede the reaching of a desired goal? To what extent did read- ing promote the deflection of drives and urges into socially use- ful or socially harmful channels? How much and in what ways did reading contribute to the relief or the increase of tensions? In none of these illustrative questions is reading matter taken as a mere stimulus; it is always considered something to which the individual resorts within a meaningful context of ongoing ac- tivity. The outcome of such research will not be an impressive numerical array of relationships but merely a modest contribu- tion to our insight into reading behavior of individuals and of internally cohesive social groups. By way of illustration, the delineation of a relevant hypothetical research problem might serve to clarify the preceding rather general characterization of the symbolic-interaction approach. Reading about health.-Many people who are (or imagine they are) afflicted with specific ailments are animated by a desire to know more about diagnosis, pathology, and therapy of their conditions. This desire may lead them to various sources of in- 42 Op. cit., pp. Si, 89, I96, 224, 257, 26I. 43 Op. Cit., pp. 47, 291-92, 398, 412. 44 A critical discussion of case-study methodology will be found in John Dollard, Criteria for the life history (New Haven: Yale University [for the Institute of Human Relations], 1935).
THE SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY OF READING 21 formation: friends, doctors, and Christian Science practitioners, as well as books, magazines, and pamphlets. Various problems are posed within this clearly motivated situation: What differ- ences in personality traits and other personal selective tend- encies may account for the fact that some people consult printed sources whereas others do not? What reasons do people give for consulting such sources? What use do different people make of the medical information they obtain through print? What motivates some people to attempt self-therapy, whereas others consult a physician as a result of their reading? What aspects of the reading matter may be held responsible for differ- ent types of subsequent behavior? Few of these questions can be answered in any other way than through careful interviews and the solicitation of personal testimony generally. Even where we are dealing with responses -as in the last of the above questions-the investigation would be vitiated by any attempt to produce such responses experi- mentally through a control of the stimuli, because we should then limit our attention to too short a span of behavior, and the unavoidable artificiality of the situation would alter the character of the motivating tendencies. The significant feature of the symbolic-interaction approach consists in its insistence on the fact that the starting-point of an investigation must be a disturbance of ongoing activity, which in this particular in- stance is ill-health (or anxiety about possible ill-health). All relevant subsequent behavior, including reading, is then inter- preted in the light of the desires, plans, hopes, frustrations, and fears which this particular disturbance has engendered. Many further illustrations could be cited, but since the types of problem selected for study would resemble those indicated in the case of ill-health, it may suffice to make only brief men- tion of a few further possible areas of personal and social con- flict out of which problems of investigation might emerge: (i) Maladjustment in marriage and frustrations during courtship might be related to dissimilarities in the reading habits of the partners. (2) Boredom and feelings of indifference or dislike to- ward one's immediate environment might be studied in relation
22 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY to the reading of thrillers and adventure stories. (3) Awareness of one's inadequate economic status and social prestige might be investigated in connection with the reading of novels which emphasize upward social mobility. (4) Thwarted ambition may be shown to find compensatory satisfaction in the reading of success stories. (5) Awareness on the part of intellectuals and armchair scholars of insufficient direct contact with the rough edges of life might be related to their preferences for books de- picting the life of peasants, fishermen, workers, and primitive people.45 In every one of these instances it is the subjective ex- perience of individuals which calls forth certain strivings and impulsive tendencies in ongoing activity, and they are in turn largely responsible for the coloration or meaning which the stim- uli selected by an individual have in the eyes of that particular individual and probably in the eyes of no one else. The probing into these meanings is, according to the symbolic-interaction approach, the most important, if not the only legitimate, task of social psychology. A fuller understanding and grasping of these meanings is alleged to afford the best possible means of predicting and controlling human behavior. CONCLUSION After having discussed the two major approaches to re- searches in reading-the stimulus-response and the symbolic- interaction approach, respectively-a few remarks should per- haps be made, in conclusion, concerning their relationship to each other. In other words, are they mutually incompatible or do they complement each other? In a general way, one may say that the two approaches operate on two entirely different planes of explanation which never touch each other. The sym- bolic-interactionists consider inner experience the medium through which reading influences operate; hence they contend that the operation of relevant factors should be studied in the texture of experience. Those who follow the stimulus-response approach, on the other hand, take this matter of "experiencing" 45 Cf. Geoffrey Gorer, "Certain hypotheses with regard to movies and radio" (mimeographed; copyrighted by the author, 1939), p. I9.
THE SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY OF READING 23 in reading, that is, the covert phase, for granted and thus confine their attention to overt reactions and objectively demonstrable influences of print. It may be helpful to visualize the total range of sociopsycho- lQgical fields of investigation that are related to reading along a continuous scale, as shown in the diagram. In the vicinity of X, the fields of investigation would contain only a small number of problems whose solutions require atten- tion to be paid to the subjective phases of experience, whereas near C there would be a large number of problems to which stimulus-response techniques are applicable. Fields of investi- gation around the point B on the scale would contain problems I00% I I Stimulus-Response >, O Approach l Symbolic-Interaction I PI n q 0 Approach A B C FIELDS OF INVESTIGATION of which an approximately equal number lend themselves to the application of the stimulus-response approach and to the ap- plication of the symbolic-interaction approach. Whether one or the other of these two methodological approaches is applica- ble to a given problem depends upon the nature of the problem and upon the way the problem has been formulated. A given problem, to which one approach is applicable, would have to be completely restated before the alternative approach could be applied to it. In this sense the two approaches may be regarded as incom- patible. There is a further sense, however, in which the two approaches fail to complement each other, namely, with refer- ence to their respective degrees of reliability and validity. The virtue of the stimulus-response approach consists in its high de- gree of reliability, whereas it is very deficient in its validity with reference to the area under investigation. The symbolic-inter-
24 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY action approach, on the other hand, possesses a high degree of validity coupled with a low degree of reliability. The point to be emphasized is that the deficiencies connected with either ap- proach cannot be met by resorting to the alternative approach, since the alternative approach can be used only after the prob- lem has been restated. It is, therefore, strictly speaking, not the same problem at all to which the alternative methodological ap- proach is applied. In order to make this important point as clear as possible, let us give an illustration: Suppose we wish to study the forma- tion of left-wing attitudes. Within the stimulus-response scheme we should try to identify the stimuli (such as radical books, short-wave broadcasts, movies, mass meetings) that may be presumed to have contributed to the production of left-wing attitudes. A preliminary survey of possible stimuli would pro- vide us with certain hunches as to the relative effectiveness of the different objects to which different individuals might be ex- posed. Verification of these hunches would require-as was pre- viously indicated46- a controlled social experiment, which could be expected to yield results of a high degree of reliability. The results would show, for instance, the proportions of voters with given predispositions who are swayed to the right or to the left by different types of propaganda literature. Findings of this sort, however, possess a rather low degree of validity as evidence of attitude formation, because the experiment would indicate no more than relative changes of distribution within a given group and would not inform us as to why those voters who underwent an attitudinal change did so or why those whose at- titudes remained constant did not undergo any changes. In- stead of teaching us something about attitude formation, our findings would indicate, by means of coefficients of correlation, only general tendencies of group redistribution after exposure to given propaganda stimuli; and such redistributions would be explained exclusively in terms of distributions of relevant pre- 46 See above, p. I 2.
THE SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY OF READING 25 dispositions and in terms of distributions of content elements in the propaganda literature.47 If, in order to increase the validity of our findings, we resort to the symbolic-interaction approach, we discover that the problem has to be restated. We would no longer be concerned with attitude formation in terms of relationships between stim- uli (i.e., books and pamphlets as well as relevant predisposi- tions) and responses (i.e., attitudes). Instead, the symbolic-in- teractionist would study an individual's life-history. An attempt would be made to identify the traumatic and other experiences which predisposed the individual favorably to radical influences. The difficulties he had to face at one time or another would be examined in order to discover whether his condemnation of the status quo in government could be interpreted as a projection of his personal insecurity. His motives on different levels of consciousness would be scrutinized and placed in contrast with his actual utterances. The position which he occupies in the so- cial scale and the extent of his social mobility would be related to his political views at different periods of his career. The rela- tive importance of various typical activities, such as reading, traveling, engaging in conversation, attending movies, and par- ticipating in group discussions, would be determined in relation to the gradual crystallization of his political attitudes. If com- petently conducted, an intensive study of this sort would suc- ceed in making the behavior of this particular individual intel- ligible to us; and the enhancement of the intelligibility of human behavior is, after all, the chief aim of social science endeavors. It cannot be denied that an account of this sort possesses a high degree of validity, but it is equally evident that its relia- bility is very low. It is unreliable in the sense that we cannot say with assurance what the chances were that the given indi- vidual behaved in the way he did behave and in no other way; nor can we predict, within a reasonably short range of errors of estimate, how this individual is going to behave under similar or 47 Cf. Bernard Berelson, "The effects of print upon public opinion," in Douglas Waples (ed.), Press, radio, and film in the national emergency (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 194I).
26 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY different conditions in the future. It seems equally unlikely that we can draw reliable inferences about the behavior of other indi- viduals from our detailed knowledge of the factors at work in a unique case. Even a large accumulation of comparable case studies would not enable us to formulate generalizations con- cerning attitude formation which would possess an acceptable degree of reliability-acceptable, that is, to the investigators following the stimulus-response approach. The point to be stressed, however, at this stage of the argument is that a re- course to the stimulus-response scheme would certainly not suc- ceed in increasing the reliability of generalizations concerning individual behavior. It seems that the deficiencies of the sym- bolic-interaction approach cannot be met by resorting to the stimulus-response approach, and vice versa. It is with these reservations in mind that we must view the following optimistic assertion of Waples: The variety of .... effects recorded in the case studies appears almost limitless, as against the halting precision of the group studies. One cannot examine the results of both types of study and escape the conviction that their effective combination in future investigations would greatly enrich the results.48 The same view has been expressed more recently by Stouffer: No detailed comments are needed about the important contribution of the case study procedure as a fruitful source of new ideas, which can be eventually set up as hypotheses for explicit statistical checking. Few statisticians, if any, will dispute that function of the case study ..... The statistician and the case study investigator can make mutual gains if they will quit quarreling with each other and begin borrowing from each other.49 On the methodological side the conflict between the statisti- cian and the case-study investigator corresponds to that be- tween the stimulus-response and the symbolic-interaction ap- 48 Waples et al., op. cit., p. I 15. 49 S. A. Stouffer, "Notes on the case study and the unique case," in Paul Horst et a., The prediction of personal adjustment (New York: Social Science Research Council, 1941), pp. 248-49. A full discussion of the differences between the accuracy of actuarial predictions and the accuracy of case-study predictions will be found in Paul Wallin, "The prediction of individual behavior from case studies," in Horst et al., op. cit., pp. 183-230.
THE SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY OF READING 27 proaches in social psychology. However, it is basically not mere- ly a conflict between different techniques, because the conflict can be traced to differences in the investigators' conceptions of human nature, of social living, and of personality. There are un- doubtedly many phases of life in which little more than a stimu- lus, a nerve current, and a response are involved. Whenever reading consists of such a simple reflex activity, it seems quite legitimate to conduct one's investigations within the statisti- cian's framework; but, when reading is viewed as a link in a long chain of events, it cannot be adequately understood with- out a knowledge of the complex pattern of individual motives, aspirations, frustrations, inhibitions, etc. Hence the case-study technique has to be resorted to whenever reading behavior is to be explained in terms of these dynamic factors. Waples and Stouffer are justified in believing that the two approaches can derive mutual gains if they borrow from each other; but with reference to the solution of a specific problem or the testing of a specific hypothesis the two approaches do not seem to be capable of illuminating each other very much, because a problem or hypothesis has to be completely reformu- lated before the alternative approach can be applied. Reuter seems to be correct in asserting that, even though most investi- gators are not aware of it, "the differences .... between the two present-day schools of social psychology are fundamental and apparently irreconcilable."50 l'o those following the stimu- lus-response approach, the social psychology of reading presents a rich and fruitful field of investigation, especially in the area of mass communications; whereas those who consistently operate within the logical framework of the symbolic-interaction ap- proach might go so far as to question or even deny the justifi- ability of a social psychology of reading as a separate line of aca- demic specialization, since reading would be of interest only as an incidental activity within the total pattern of human be- havior, which general social psychology studies. The one element which these two approaches do have in so Reuter, op. cit., p. 303.
28 THE LIBRARY QUJRTERLY common is their ultimate aim, namely, to supply instruments of prediction and control. The extent to which either of these approaches is successful in the attainment of this aim determines its usefulness and legitimacy. If it is possible-as it frequently seems to be-to predict distributions of human behavior and attitudes without making explicit reference to the character of the subjective experiences involved,s' the stimulus-response ap- proach deserves serious consideration. Similarly, the symbolic- interaction approach must not be neglected as long as we find that a fuller comprehension of the subjective phases of experi- ence enables us to predict individual and collective behavior more efficiently than without such knowledge. In this sense the two approaches to the social psychology of reading are com- plementary rather than contradictory. Both should be used wherever they are applicable. 5S The most convincing proof of this possibility is presented by the success of public opinion polls. Within the social psychology of reading the first step in this direction has been taken by Waples and Tyler, op. cit.