Camp Read-a-Rama® and Fully-Engaged Literacy Learning: Implications for LIS Education Clayton A. Copeland School of Library and Information Science, University of South Carolina, 108 Davis College, Columbia, SC 29208. Email: copelan2@mailbox.sc.edu Michelle H. Martin School of Library and Information Science, University of South Carolina, 217 Davis College, Columbia, SC 29208. Email: martinmi@sc.edu Literacy and literacy skill development remain critical concerns in the U.S. “Two of every three students in the U.S. do not have the necessary reading proficiencies to suc- cessfully complete grade-level work” (Allington, 2011). Camp Read-a-Rama, a summer day camp in South Carolina for 4- to 11-year-olds, creates innovative programming using children’s literature as the springboard for all camp activities. Activities connect with and reinforce concepts in children’s literature, thereby helping children learn to “live books” and understand connections between their reading and their lives. For six summers (2009–2014), Camp Read-a-Rama has provided fully-engaged, week-long themed literacy immersion experiences that seek to turn “summer slide” into “summer stride.” The purposes of this longitudinal, mixed methods study were: (1) to ascertain the impact of Camp Read-a-Rama’s interventions on helping children develop posi- tive attitudes toward reading; and (2) to determine best practices for literacy skill pro- gramming with children in libraries and the communities libraries serve. Findings offer compelling evidence that strategies employed through Camp Read-a-Rama program- ming positively impacted children’s attitudes toward reading and their interactions with books, a critical step in literacy skill development and improvement. Analysis of parent/ guardian evaluations revealed the following emerging themes as perceived impacts of Camp Read-a-Rama programming upon campers: increased love and enthusiasm for reading, improved reading and listening skills, and a belief that camp activities create a deeper understanding of books and vice versa. Findings suggest that integrating literacy skill instruction and programming into LIS curricula could better prepare librarians and LIS professionals to have a greater impact on literacy skill development among the children they serve. Keywords: literacy, children’s literature, summer reading camps, Youth Services, librar- ies, LIS education Introduction than those who excel at these skills from an early age. Hence, literacy and literacy Maya Angelou once said, “Elimina- skill development remain critical concerns tion of illiteracy is as serious an is- because without literacy, children face a sue to our history as the abolition of slav- future replete with limits—educational, ery” (Angelou). Angelou’s comparison economic, social, and otherwise. Research of illiteracy to slavery brings to the fore suggests that developing a positive atti- that those who fail to acquire reading tude toward reading and enthusiasm for and writing skills in childhood face far reading are critical steps toward literacy greater challenges throughout their lives skill development and improvement. For J. of Education for Library and Information Science, Vol. 57, No. 2—(Spring) April 2016 112 ISSN: 0748-5786 © 2016 Association for Library and Information Science Education doi:10.12783/issn.2328-2967/57/2/4
Camp Read-a-Rama and Fully-Engaged Literacy Learning 113 example, Smith (1988) found that “the Race, Ethnicity, and Socioeconomic emotional response to reading . . . is the Status primary reason most readers read, and probably the primary reason most non- According to Allington’s 2011 article readers do not read” (p.177). Given the “What At-Risk Readers Need,” “two of ev- critical importance of attitudes in literacy ery three students in U.S. schools have read- skill development, this study seeks: (1) to ing proficiencies below the level needed to ascertain the impact Camp Read-a-Rama adequately do grade-level work” (p. 40). In has on helping children develop positive 2015, only 36% of American fourth grad- attitudes toward and enthusiasm for read- ers and 34% of eighth graders scored at or ing; and (2) to offer proven best practices above the level of “Proficient” in reading for literacy skill programming with chil- (National Assessment of Educational Prog- dren in libraries and the communities li- ress). African American, Hispanic, and Na- braries serve. The study also recommends tive American students lag far behind White integrating literacy skill instruction and students in reading achievement: 46% of programming into LIS curricula to better White fourth graders read at the “Proficient” prepare librarians and LIS professionals to level in 2015, while only 18% of African meet the literacy needs of the children they American, 21% of Hispanic, and 21% of serve both in and outside of libraries. American Indian students read at this level. By eighth grade, 44% of White students Literature Review read proficiently, contrasting with 16% of African American, 21% of Hispanic, and Many American children and youth 22% of American Indian students who read lack the skills they need to function and proficiently (National Assessment of Edu- contribute in today’s twenty-first century cational Progress). Like the digital divide, society—a society that requires them to be this literacy achievement gap puts many multiliterate. National Assessment of Edu- non-White students at a clear disadvantage cational Progress (NAEP) scores indicate both in K-12 settings and in their level of that “roughly one-third of U.S. students preparedness for college-level work. read at or above the proficient level, one- Alexander, Entwisle and Olson (2007) third read at the basic level, and one-third assert that children from economically dis- read at the below basic level” (Allington, advantaged backgrounds are more likely to 2011, p. 40). Numerous factors influence lack reading proficiency. More specifical- when and how easily children acquire lit- ly, Lee, Grigg and Donahue’s 2007 study eracy skills. Some of these include: race, found that “Eighth graders who were not ethnicity and socioeconomic status; access eligible for free or reduced-priced lunch to books; ability or learning differences; scored higher than those who were eligi- family and community engagement, and ble, and those eligible for reduced-priced participation in summer enrichment activ- lunch scored higher than those eligible for ities. Motivation to read can also impact free lunch” (p. 31). One reason that these literacy skill development. Because Camp students tend to have lower reading profi- Read-a-Rama focuses specifically on pre- ciency is that they “experience a decline in venting and reversing summer reading reading comprehension over the summer loss, this literature review will concentrate months, known as summer reading loss” on how race, ethnicity and socioeconomic (Kim & White, 2011, p. 64). status impact reading; summer reading loss and intervention programs; important Summer Reading Loss and Intervention elements of literacy skill development and Programs maintenance; and family and community engagement. Barbara Heyns’ 1978 book, Summer
114 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE Learning and the Effect of Schooling program in high school versus just 13 per- (1978), was one of the first works to establish cent of the low SES group. There are large the connection between academic achieve- differences in high school non-completion ment gaps and both family socioeconomic and college attendance as well. Based on status (SES) and race/ethnicity. Heyns information covering the four years after found that reading and achievement gaps the panel’s on-time graduation in spring increase more significantly over the sum- 1994, over a third of the low SES group mer months than they do during the school and just three percent of the high group are year. Since Heyns’ publication, the corre- ‘permanent dropouts,’ meaning dropouts lations between summer reading loss and who at approximately age 22 still lack high academic achievement or student learning school certification of any type. Whereas outcomes have been continually affirmed, almost 60 percent of the high SES group as have correlations between socioeconom- attended a four-year college by age 22, just 7 ic status, summer learning and academic percent of the low SES youth did so (p. 171). achievement. While summer learning loss occurs for all students to a degree, students Benson and Borman (2010) established in lower socioeconomic groups experience the significance of neighborhood social greater losses than students in higher socio- context for students’ reading achieve- economic groups. Alexander, Entwistle and ment levels at school entry and for read- Olson (2007) used data from their Balti- ing achievement growth over the summer. more-based Beginning School Study (BSS) Graham, McNamera, and Van Lankveld’s to examine the consequences of “seasonal (2011) Canadian study further supports learning differences” during the elementary the claim that summer vacations may cre- school years for later learning and academic ate significant gaps in the learning cycle. achievement. The study examined student The authors assert: “Such a gap may be achievement records and testing scores of particularly detrimental for vulnerable then-9th grade students beginning when children such as those with lower academ- the students were in first grade. Findings ic achievement due to learning and lan- indicated that the early years of schooling guage disabilities, lower socio-economic are foundational for students and ultimately environments or learning in a language determine the skills students will have to other than their native language” (Graham support all of their subsequent or later learn- et al., 2011, p. 575). Hence, summer learn- ing. Moreover, “Out-of-school experiences ing loss is both disproportionate among account for the majority of the achievement socioeconomic groups, according to race differences registered in the 9th grade, and and ethnicity, and contributes substan- these achievement differences, in turn, an- tially to the achievement gap (McCombs ticipate vastly-different high school place- et al., 2011; Allington et al., 2010, Kim & ments, modes of high school exit, and White, 2011). patterns of post-secondary attendance” (Al- exander et al., 2007, p. 172). Because the Important Elements of Literacy Skill Baltimore County Public School System Development and Maintenance (BCPSS) enrollment is largely low-income, the researchers consider socioeconomic 1. Students should read books that are rankings, “high SES” and “low SES,” rela- matched to their reading levels and tive. However, achievement gaps by “high interests. According to Allington and SES” students versus “low SES” students Gabriel, in successful reading pro- were alarming. Student records indicate: grams, “Every child reads something he or she chooses.” They further assert, sixty-two percent of high SES children “Students read more, understand more were enrolled in a college preparatory and are more likely to continue read-
Camp Read-a-Rama and Fully-Engaged Literacy Learning 115 ing when they have the opportunity to the motivation (Allington & Gabriel, choose what they read” (2012, p. 10). 2012; McKool, 2007; Park, 2011). The experience of choosing in itself Furthermore, according to Park (2011), boosts motivation, and offering choice students who have intrinsic motivation makes it more likely that every reader to read read more and have greater suc- will be matched to a text that he or she cess than those who are extrinsically can read well. In addition, students motivated. Jim Trelease (2009), author should receive reading instruction, of The Read-Aloud Handbook, further and scaffolding should be employed to affirms that “Across the world, chil- make sure that what children read they dren who read the most, read the best. can read successfully. Allington and And that includes all social levels— Gabriel (2012) note: “Reading at 98 rich or poor, urban or suburban” (n.p.). percent or higher accuracy is essential Trelease asserts that because humans for reading acceleration. Anything less seek pleasure, children must like read- slows the rate of improvement, and ing to make a habit of it, and one of anything below 90 percent accuracy Trelease’s strongest recommendations doesn’t improve reading ability at all” for getting children to enjoy reading is: (p. 12). “Read aloud to them, even as infants,” 2. Students should have access to a con- and “As the child grows, so too does tinuous supply of reading material and the time you should spend reading in access to the texts of their choosing one sitting, from a few minutes to at (Allington & Gabriel, 2012; Alling- least 20 minutes, from picture books to ton, et al., 2010; Kim & White, 2011; chapter books” (n.p.). Applegate and McKool, 2007). In Access for All: Applegate (2010) challenge teachers Closing the Book Gap for Children in to “take up the pursuit of thoughtful lit- Early Education (2001), the authors eracy” and not to equate reading only offer rich evidence for the importance with literal recall but to engage stu- of young children having quality ac- dents in lively discussion about books cess to books. They write that children (p. 233). They conclude their paper, should have access to a large supply of “A Study of Thoughtful Literacy and books (300 or more by some counts) Motivation to Read,” by warning of on a wide variety of topics and from the dangers of reading programs that various genres, and they should have teach students only to recall but not an inviting space for reading. Further- think about what they have read. These more, children need time to engage programs: with books, and teachers and parents may succeed in producing sizeable should ensure that children can discuss numbers of children who appear books with others and use books for technically proficient in reading. But fantasy play (Neuman, S., Celano, D. if the children who pass through these C., Greco, A., Shue, P., 2001). All of programs are not engaged in thought- these elements contribute to children’s ful responses to what they read, we run successful and positive engagement the risk of producing huge numbers of with books and reading. children who see no use for reading in 3. Students should be motivated to read, their lives. That illusion of educational and adults should give them literary success may come at a very high price experiences that will enable them to indeed (p. 233). discover the motivation that is unique 4. Adults should help students develop to them. Students who are motivated to positive attitudes toward reading by read achieve more than those who lack engaging them with books and the en-
116 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE joyment of the narratives. Awaken the is cited as one of the single-most impor- power of helping children think about tant factors in a child’s literacy skill de- what they read and stimulate their in- velopment. More specifically, Flouri and tellectual curiosity (Collins & Svens- Buchanan (2004) found that parental in- son, 2008). Research demonstrates volvement in a child’s literacy practices that helping children think about what has a more powerful impact than other they read and stimulating their intel- family background variables, including lectual curiosity are powerful motiva- socio-economic status (SES), family size, tors for reading. or parental educational attainment. Fam- 5. Combine activities and singing with ily engagement also largely determines reading. This helps children under- language and emergent literacy (Bus, van stand what they are reading. In her Ijzendoorn & Pellegrini, 1995). Parental/ 2014 Library Journal article “Why Caregiver involvement with reading ac- Music Matters,” Sarah Bayliss notes: tivities in the home has significant positive influences not only on reading achieve- A growing body of research is affirm- ment, language comprehension and ex- ing the central role of music in early pressive language skills (Gest, Freeman, literacy. Music has been proven to do Domitrovich & Welsh, 2004), but also everything from boosting numeracy to on children’s interest in reading, attitudes developing empathy among children; toward reading and attentiveness in the from improving speech-language delays classroom (Rowe, 1991). Hence, when the to augmenting comprehension. One Public Library Association (PLA) and the study from the Music-Science Lab at Association of Library Services to Chil- the Ben-Gurion University of the Negev dren (ALSC), divisions of the American showed that young children who played Library Association, examined the tradi- hand-clapping games had better cogni- tional approach of focusing on children in tive and social skills than those who library storytimes, they realized that this didn’t (p. 20). was counterproductive. Parents/Guardians are the key to early literacy engagement; Bayliss also comments on the role mu- hence, they built their 2004 national ini- sic plays in developing the vocabularies of tiative, (“Every Child Ready to Read”) young children: “Songs introduce words (ECCR), now in its second edition, around they might not encounter somewhere else” parent education (“Every Child Ready to (p. 20). Mother Goose on the Loose, Betsy Read”). PLA and ALSC “concluded that Diamant-Cohen’s award-winning musical public libraries could have an even greater storytime program for “one- to three-year- impact on early literacy through an ap- olds and their caregivers” that thousands proach that focused on educating parents of American libraries have adopted, incor- and caregivers. If the primary adults in a porates “rhymes, songs, instruments, and child’s life can learn more about the im- puppets. The goal? To foster language, portance of early literacy and how to nur- motor skills, and self-confidence” (Bayl- ture pre-reading skills at home, the effect iss, 2012, p. 20). Hence, connecting read- of library efforts can be multiplied many ing with music and other means of inter- times” (“Every Child Ready to Read”). active engagement helps children to learn The program concentrates on five early and gives them positive associations with literacy practices (stated in terms that any books and reading. parent/guardian can understand): “sing- ing, talking, reading, writing, and play- Family and Community Engagement ing” (“Every Child Ready to Read”). Camp Read-a-Rama integrates all of these Family and community engagement practices but also effectively erases dis-
Camp Read-a-Rama and Fully-Engaged Literacy Learning 117 ciplinary boundaries by making seamless Camp Read-a-Rama offers a plethora of and invisible activity transitions from art opportunities each day for campers to in- to music to writing to reading to crafts to teract positively with books—alone, with swimming to movement to reading to sci- one another, with staff and/or with invited ence to puppetry to math to reading and guest readers from the community. An more. hour and a quarter to an hour and a half daily of D.E.A.R. Time (Drop Everything Program Background and Read) replaces traditional rest time after mid-day lunch. A full-sized camp- Camp Read-a-Rama, a summer day ing tent, known as the “reading tent,” is camp for 4- to 11-year olds, combines always pitched indoors during camp, and books and reading with interdisciplinary at appropriate times, campers can enter outdoor activities, educational fun, and the tent, sans shoes, for reading or sharing traditional campcraft. The program im- books with others. During the remainder merses children in learning while simulta- of the camp day, campers learn to “live neously helping them develop and main- books” through connecting the literature tain literacy skills. Camp Read-a-Rama is with songs, sign language, drama, move- directed by Dr. Michelle H. Martin, Pro- ment, science, writing, games, arts and fessor and Augusta Baker Chair in Uni- crafts, swimming, and more. The staff versity of South Carolina’s School of Li- place children into activity groups on brary and Information Science (SLIS) who Monday that remain in place throughout holds a Ph.D. in English, specializing in the week; these groups always include a Children’s Literature, and Dr. Rachelle D. range of ages—which fosters close friend- Washington, who holds a Ph.D. in English, ships between older and younger camp- specializing in Language and Literacy Ed- ers. Staff always place siblings and family ucation, specializing in English Language members in different groups to encourage Arts and currently serves as the Executive independence and new friendships. Age Director of the Honors Program at Allen diversity within the groups facilitates op- University in Columbia, South Carolina. portunities for younger students to have Camp operated out of Clemson University mentors among the older campers and for from 2009 to 2011 and out of the Univer- older campers, whether enthusiastic, strug- sity of South Carolina from 2012 to 2014. gling, or reluctant readers, to read aloud to In September 2014, Read-a-Rama became appreciative younger audiences, and gain a 501(c)(3) and in 2016 received federal reading confidence. trademarking. The camp is staffed primar- The structure of Camp Read-a-Rama ily by college students and graduates who emphasizes the goal of literacy immersion have participated in a Read-a Rama ser- while it also builds leadership skills in the vice learning project and/or have studied staff. During pre-camp training in early college-level Children’s or Young Adult summer, which includes at least 40 hours literature in LIS, English, Education, or of professional development, each staff Art Departments. Each week of Camp member or staff pair plans approximately Read-a-Rama has a theme and employs a 15 hours of programming for a particular literacy immersion approach to help read- week. Those who plan the activities serve ers—both reluctant and eager—gain new as “point people” for bringing to life the literacy skills and increase their interest theme and the set of books selected for in learning to read and in reading to learn. that week. There are several fixed daily The program espouses a focus on “100% activities: morning “Harambee time” (a engagement 100% of the time” because Swahili word meaning “coming together”) (the second mantra) “Dead time will kill when a staff or guest reads aloud to all of your program.” the campers; swimming several times per
118 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE week; and closing time at the end of the various sites in Clemson (rural) and Co- camp day, when another read-aloud takes lumbia (urban), including a charter school, place and campers get a sneak peek at the churches, university facilities, and a cabin next day’s activities. Each week camp- in the woods. The directors have made ers take a theme-related field trip. These a concerted effort to recruit site partners have included adventure walks, indoor that would position Camp Read-a-Rama rock climbing, water parks, hotel kitchens, in communities with a high percentage of and a university carillon bell tower. Oth- children most impacted by summer read- er events include Family Literacy Night, ing loss, and the camp directors and staff when the campers present a program to raise funds for “camperships” (scholar- their families that showcases the week’s ships) to enable children to attend camp book(s) and what they have done and who can do so only if provided financial learned throughout that week. Family Lit- assistance. As a result of these efforts, the eracy Nights also give staff and directors enrollment for Camp Read-a-Rama has the opportunity to impart useful advice to always been diverse, attracting attendees parents/guardians about how to continue from a cross-section of the cities in which the excitement for reading that camp fos- they have been held and from an array of ters. Below is an excerpt of the camp flier racial, ethnic, familial, and socioeconomic for Summer 2014. backgrounds. The campers also represent Camp Read-a-Rama has been held at diversity in reading ability and motivation.
Camp Read-a-Rama and Fully-Engaged Literacy Learning 119 Passionate readers readers who read far Rama campers and their parents/guard- above grade level, reluctant readers, strug- ians from summers 2012, 2013, and 2014. gling readers, and readers who read far be- Of 169 parent respondents, 81% of their low grade level are all represented. Staff children attended camp one year; 13% at- receive training in diversity, inclusion, tended two years, and 5.9% attended all and diverse children’s literature as a part three years the research was being con- of their initial and ongoing professional ducted. It should be noted, however, that development for Camp Read-a-Rama. Camp Read-a-Rama has operated for five summers in Clemson and three sum- Method mers in Columbia—with two summers of sites in both locales—and a few camp- This study represents the first phase of ers have attended camps in both Colum- a longitudinal research agenda initiated bia and Clemson. The age of the campers by the Read-a-Rama research team: (1) ranged from 4 to 16 (since Counselors- to explore both the short and long term in-Training are technically campers), but impacts of Camp Read-a-Rama program- 16% of the total campers were four and ming upon children’s enthusiasm for and five years old, 16% were six, 23.1% were overall attitudes toward reading; (2) to use seven, and 18.3% were eight. Hence, the what we have learned from Camp Read- largest portion of our campers came to us a-Rama to offer best practices for literacy when they were acquiring basic literacy skill programming with children in sum- skills. Parent/Guardian and camper par- mer reading camps, schools, pre-schools ticipants represent diverse cultural, racial, and libraries as well as in the communities familial, socioeconomic, and educational libraries serve. The study also suggests backgrounds. Participants reside in urban, that integrating literacy skill instruction suburban, and rural cross sections of their and programming into LIS curricula could communities. In total, Camp Read-a-Ra- better prepare librarians and LIS profes- ma serves approximately 100 campers per sionals to assume greater roles and make summer, but 169 parents/guardians com- increased, measurable impacts upon liter- pleted the research surveys over the three- acy skill development among the children year period. they serve. The study’s longitudinal ap- proach ensures opportunities to document Data Collection continuing development and sustaining impacts of Camp Read-a-Rama on partici- Pre- and post-surveys of the campers pants’ enthusiasm for reading and literacy and their parents/guardians were com- skill development. bined with semi-structured interviews with parents/guardians. Pre-surveys were Research Question conducted at the beginning of each par- ticipant’s Camp Read-a-Rama experience For this study, the researchers exam- each summer. Post-surveys were con- ined the following as a primary research ducted immediately following camp at- question: tendance each summer. In addition to the annual collection of pre- and post- surveys RQ1: How does Camp Read-a-Rama and completion of semi-structured inter- programming impact campers’ attitudes views with parents/guardians, participant toward reading and literature? post-surveys and interviews with parents/ guardians were repeated approximately Participants six months after camp attendance in 2012. Communication with the many of the chil- Participants included Camp Read-a- dren and parents/guardians has been on-
120 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE going throughout all years of camp, since and other commitments. As a result, the many campers also attend fall and spring researchers were not always able to collect Read-a-Rama events (1.5-hour long free all data desired for this study. In addition, programs at local public libraries) and hol- when age and/or reading level of a camp- iday day camps each year. er prevented the camper from being able to independently respond to the survey, Data Analysis one of the researchers read the questions aloud and recorded the camper’s answers. Qualitative data analysis of interviews Hence, the accuracy of the recording of with all participants was completed by the response depended on the researcher’s generating transcripts from recordings. ability to understand the child’s answer- Using a Grounded Theory approach, the -a variable that is eliminated for children researchers then employed thematic de- who can answer the questions themselves. velopment. We independently read and re- For this reason, the results presented in read transcripts from the interviews. Next, this essay will focus only on the parents’ we independently coded the data until pat- responses and not those of the children. terns and themes emerged. After each re- In addition, while some parents/guardians searcher completed coding, we compared completed both the survey and the follow- the themes that developed from our indi- up interviews, some only completed one vidual analyses of the data. We discussed component or the other, which limited our the themes and documented their fre- ability to assess how parents felt their chil- quency to reach a consensus on emerging dren’s attitudes toward reading changed. themes. Quantitative portions of the study This study accomplished triangulation were analyzed using dependent samples via comparative analysis of qualitative analysis techniques to test for significant components with quantitative compo- changes in attitude toward reading due nents. Trustworthiness of the qualitative to the Camp Read-a-Rama intervention. components of the study was further es- Content analysis was employed to analyze tablished by recording, transcribing, and qualitative responses within the survey independently coding all communications data; researchers verified correlations be- with participants. The researchers, includ- tween independent raters. (See appendices ing the authors of this study and a graduate A and B for samples of the camper and student, then coded and analyzed the data. parent/guardian surveys.) Findings and Results Methodological Considerations/ Limitations Children’s Attitudes Toward Reading There are several methodological con- In addressing how Camp Read-a-Rama siderations. First, Camp Read-a-Rama ex- impacts campers’ attitudes toward read- ists to make South Carolina a more liter- ing and literature, the results of the study ate state, one child and one book at a time. revealed that there was a statistically sig- Participation in this research came second- nificant difference in pre- and post-parent ary to campers’ participation in camp as surveys concerning campers’ attitudes to- a fun and educational experience. Survey ward reading. In 2012, 26 parents/guard- completion was integrated into the camp ians responded to the pre-survey, 20 to the program at the beginning and end of each post-survey. Wilcoxon Signed Rank Tests, week. Availability of parents/guardians used for comparing samples to assess how was limited at times. Campers’ attendance their means compare, revealed a P value of was sometimes less than perfect because 0.317, indicating the difference in the me- of conflicts with family summer vacations dian scores between pre- and post-surveys.
Camp Read-a-Rama and Fully-Engaged Literacy Learning 121 In 2013, 39 parents/guardians responded Table 1. Parent/Guardians’ to the pre-survey, 40 to the post-survey. Perceptions of Impact on Campers’ The resulting P value was 1.000. In 2014, Attitudes Toward Reading. 72 respondents completed the pre-survey, 53 completed the post- survey. The result- Post- ing P value was 0.007, indicating a statisti- Pre- participation cally significant difference in the parents’/ participation Perceived guardians’ pre- and post- surveys in 2014. Hopes Impacts These results, combined with qualitative Enthusiasm for 64.3% 67.1% data, suggest that the improvement in reading campers’ attitudes toward reading was a Knowledge of 74.3% 75.7% result of their participation in Camp Read- books a-Rama. Figure 1 illustrates the compari- son of the matched scores (responses of parents who completed both pre- and post- your child’s attitude toward reading?” and surveys), showing that in pre-surveys, possible answers included: very enthusi- 64.3% of parents felt that their children astic, somewhat enthusiastic, neutral or had a positive attitude toward reading, and reluctant. In the pre-survey, 4.5% indicat- in post-surveys, 67.1% of parents felt this ed that their children felt reluctant about way. Furthermore, when asked about their reading, but in post-surveys, this number children’s knowledge of books, 74.3% decreased to 2.1%; 14.5% said their chil- of parents in the pre-surveys vs. 75.5% dren felt neutral about reading in the pre in the post-surveys responded positively, surveys, while 9.5% said the same in the indicating that parents felt their children’s post-surveys. The histograms in Figure 2 knowledge of books increased as a result illustrate this change (See Figure 2). of their participation in Camp Read-a-Ra- The decrease in the number of parents ma (See Figure 1 and Table 1). who said their children felt reluctant or The number of parents who said their neutral about reading is significant because children felt reluctant or neutral about as we have noted in the literature review, reading decreased between pre- and post- motivation to read and attitude toward surveys. The question asked, “What is reading strongly impact the acquisition and growth of literacy skills. We also note that 81% of parents said that their children felt “somewhat enthusiastic” or “very enthu- siastic” about reading in pre-surveys, and the total of these answers increased in the post-survey responses to 88.5%. Hence, while Camp Read-a-Rama’s literacy im- mersion approach helped reluctant read- ers become more positive about reading, it also contributed to those who already have a positive attitude toward reading become even more enthusiastic about reading (See Table 2). Open-ended, qualitative parent/guard- ian responses from all three years of the study also point to the positive impact Figure 1. Parent/Guardians’ Perceptions of of Camp Read-a-Rama on children’s at- Impact on Campers’ Attitudes Toward Read- titudes toward reading. The following ing. comments exemplify parental responses.
122 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE Figure 2. Parents’ overall impressions of their children’s attitudes toward reading. Note: 0 = most negative possible; 1 = most positive possible. “He’ll have positive feelings towards any the children who were the most reluctant camp he attends and will think more cre- or least enthusiastic about reading before atively, having experienced books through beginning their Camp Read-a-Rama expe- all 5 senses.” Another parent noted: “Yes, rience. Both quantitative and qualitative he likes books whereas he thought it was a data support that the methods employed chore. Now he can’t wait to read.” A par- by Camp Read-a-Rama, which are built on ent for whom English is not the family’s strategies gleaned from literacy research, first language remarked: “I hope she can positively influence children’s interactions enjoy books more and more, to be specif- with books and reading. ic, English books. As you know, English is not her mother tongue, so this program Additional Impacts of Camp will be a good opportunity for her to make Read-a-Rama Programming progress in reading English books.” In follow-up surveys and interviews in Camp Read-a-Rama integrates the arts, December 2012 (6 months following camp movement, swimming, games and various attendance) and again in the summers of other activities into book-centered pro- 2013 and 2014, parents/guardians cited nu- gramming. Qualitative data from parent/ merous instances of once-reluctant readers guardian surveys revealed a perception not only loving to read but taking initiative that interdisciplinary and hands-on activi- within their own schools and social groups ties played an important role in helping to initiate reading clubs with their friends, their children develop greater enthusiasm thereby creating their own communities of for reading. A 2012 parent commented: readers. Other children continue asking to “I think this is the most effective part of arrive at school early or to depart late to the program. By tying books with what visit the school library. Perhaps especially the children are doing, it makes them [the significant to these findings is that many books] become interesting and motivation- of the children who: (1) experienced the al,” and another parent wrote that connect- greatest perceived gains in enthusiasm ing books with activities will make his/her for reading as well as their motivation to child “Realize that everything is centered read; and (2) initiated leadership roles of around reading.” A 2013 parent wrote: encouraging their peers to read belong to “It has emphasized for him how impor- socially and economically prescribed “at- tant reading is for all aspects of life” and risk” populations. They are also among another wrote: “I believe that the integra-
Camp Read-a-Rama and Fully-Engaged Literacy Learning 123 Table 2. Parents’ Beliefs about Their Children’s Attitudes Toward Reading, Pre-attitude and Post-attitude. Pre-attitude Frequency Percent Valid Percent Cummulative Percent Valid Reluctant 5 2.8 4.5 4.5 Neutral 16 9.0 14.5 19.1 Somewhat enthusiastic 39 22.0 35.5 54.5 Very enthusiastic 50 28.2 45.5 100.0 Total 110 62.1 100.0 Missing System 67 37.9 Total 177 100.0 Post-attitude Valid Reluctant 2 1.1 2.1 2.1 Neutral 9 5.1 9.5 11.6 Somewhat enthusiastic 43 24.3 45.3 56.8 Very enthusiastic 41 23.2 43.2 100.0 Total 95 53.7 100.0 Missing System 82 46.3 Total 177 100.0 tion of such activities will positively effect proach works to get children excited about [sic] her reading and that she will engage reading. As Collins and Svensson (2008) in a meaningful learning experience.” Oth- suggest, children who have a positive at- er 2014 comments included the following: titude toward reading and books develop “The integration of activities with reading literacy skills more easily (p. 82) has been positive; reading is fun when you The coding of the qualitative questions have the right books and right environ- in the parents/guardians surveys and in- ment”; “It can take kids on a journey in terviews revealed the following themes their minds and changes the way they look concerning how Camp Read-a-Rama im- at things and think about things,” and “He pacted their children’s literacy: has expanded what he thinks books can inspire people to do.” Others commented 1. Improved reading and listening skills; that camp helped their children see read- 2. Increased reading fluency; ing as a “fundamental,” “fun” factor that 3. Social skill development; “impacts every other part of life.” These 4. Increased quantities of reading; comments and the themes identified as 5. Increased variety in the subjects and constituting common threads throughout genres children chose to read; the three years of this study suggest that 6. Improved ability to focus when read- Camp Read-a-Rama’s full immersion ap- ing.
124 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE Essential Elements of Camp racial and ethnic backgrounds, nation- Read-a-Rama alities, sexual orientations, socioeco- nomic backgrounds, physical and cog- After six summers of creating literacy nitive abilities as well as those from immersion camps and integrating proven different neighborhoods. strategies from literacy research into Camp 5. Interdisciplinarity and creativity: the Read-a-Rama’s programming, the follow- staff strive to integrate innovative ac- ing have emerged as elements essential to tivities into the program that children the success of the program: would generally not do at home; the 1. Superior staff: Camp Read-a-Rama directors encourage staff to move be- staff are well equipped to facilitate yond paper bag and paper plate crafts excellent programming both because and not to be afraid of messy activities. they participate in intensive profes- 6. Teaching children to “live books”: sional development at the beginning of we help children to connect everything the summer and throughout the camp they do with books and every book season and because we strive to hire with something they do. students and college graduates who un- 7. Parental engagement: during weekly derstand fully-engaged programming. Family Literacy Nights and through The staff is diverse (in terms of abil- frequent communication with parents/ ity, culture, ethnicity, socioeconomic guardians at the start and end of the status, and gender), and the majority camp, the staff and directors encour- come to us well versed in children’s age continuing positive literacy prac- literature and in using books with chil- tices at home. Of utmost importance dren effectively. Those with less expe- is helping families to see reading as rience leave us well versed. an integral part of everything they and 2. Low staff-to-camper ratio: Camp their children do on a daily basis. Read-a-Rama has maintained a 1 to 8. Community engagement: Camp Read- 5 ratio for the youngest campers and a-Rama has invited mayors, university no more than 1 to 7 for all campers. presidents, university deans and direc- This not only ensures the safety of tors, nurses, football, basketball and the program but it also helps establish swim team members, librarians, teach- close relationships between campers ers, parents/guardians and more to and staff. Though they do not count share books with the campers. This en- as adult coverage for campers, Coun- courages campers to see that one never selors-in-Training (ages 14–17) pro- outgrows enjoying good books and vide additional hands for helping with that being a lifelong reader and a suc- campers while it gives them valuable cessful professional go hand in hand. leadership training. 3. Diverse literature: Campers always The Future have available to them high quality and high interest literature. Each camp site The purpose of Camp Read-a-Rama keeps a dynamic on-site library that re- is to improve literacy rates among young mains responsive to the needs and re- children. Camp Read-a-Rama has gar- quests of the campers, staff and parents/ nered a rather loyal following over the past guardians throughout the camp season. six years, with many campers attending for 4. Diversity at all levels: Camp Read- multiple weeks and/or multiple summers; a-Rama fosters an accepting environ- further research will investigate whether ment where campers interact with the campers who attend Camp Read-a- campers and adults of different ages, Rama for multiple weeks indicate a more
Camp Read-a-Rama and Fully-Engaged Literacy Learning 125 positive attitude toward reading than those and strategies for school communities who attend for only one week. and libraries to employ with children and For the camp to be most effective, it families in developing and improving lit- must be replicable in new areas. We plan eracy skills and fostering positive attitudes to expand the Camp Read-a-Rama pro- toward literacy. Librarians and others in gram on a statewide and ultimately a na- the education arena have a common goal tionwide level. By expanding the program, of providing learners with the skills they the camp can serve a greater need base, need to function as information literate especially in cities with high populations individuals and as citizens who are fully of students with a low SES, a high rate of prepared to contribute to the 21st century failure in school, and a high dropout rate. society. Camp Read-a-Rama’s developers refine Various LIS professional associations procedures and practices each summer have a demonstrated role in both teach- and remain open to feedback from parents/ ing and promoting literacy to children and guardians, campers, and staff to enable the youth. Just a few examples include: “Reach program to better serve the educational Out and Read,” a program that trains pe- and social needs of the children who attend. diatricians to use books both to assess the While this model could be used as an effec- child’s development and to encourage tive method for addressing summer reading bonding between parent and child; and loss in children from families with lower “Every Child Ready to Read,” a partner- SES and minority children with limited ac- ship between the Public Library Associa- cess to summer enrichment programs, we tion (PLA) and the Association of Library also believe that all children can benefit Services to Children (ALSC) that focuses from the approaches that Camp Read-a-Ra- on educating parents/guardians and care- ma has honed over the past six years. givers about the roles that families can play in helping children develop early lit- Importance of the Study and eracy skills. Through Empowering Learn- Implications for LIS Education ers, the most recent guidelines for school libraries, the American Association of Camp Read-a-Rama strives to prevent School Librarians (AASL) identifies read- and reverse summer reading loss and in- ing as a “foundational skill for learning, crease reading motivation for students. personal growth, and enjoyment” (AASL, Immersion strategies, whereby reading 2009, para. 3). The Institute of Museum and reading aloud are combined with sing- and Library Services (IMLS) serves as alongs, performing arts, outdoor educa- one of the partners for “The Campaign for tion, and interactive activities that relate to Grade-Level Reading,” through which it is the books being read, are used to engage advocating for the “leveraging of museum children and ignite a passion for reading. and library resources in a nationwide effort Ultimately, Camp Read-a-Rama seeks to to turn around a crisis in early learning, have a lasting impact upon the campers’ exposing children to reading and learning learning outcomes and their attitudes to- experiences in the critical early years and ward reading, literacy, and literature. This keeping them learning through the sum- study lays a critical foundation for under- mer months” (“Campaign for grade-level standing the effectiveness of Camp Read- reading,” 2015, para. 1). Without ques- a-Rama and its programming and instruc- tion, these initiatives are making a posi- tional approaches. In doing so, the study tive impact. The magnitude of the literacy posits that Camp Read-a-Rama could be a crisis is such, however, that in addition to model for literacy programming that com- their traditional library programming for bats summer reading loss. Furthermore, it families, librarians are increasingly being may offer proven instructional methods called upon to provide reading instruction
126 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE and related literacy support to children and gramming (including reading instruction). families. These outcomes are also an essential piece Reports from library employees and of a call to action to offer pre-professional administration as well as LIS profession- and continuing education opportunities for als across the nation present evidence of a literacy skill instruction in LIS education. strong need to provide librarians with the skills necessary to further support read- Acknowledgements ing instruction for young library patrons. In the summer of 2013, the University of The authors are grateful to USC students South Carolina’s School of Library and Kayla Washington and Jasmine Williams Information Science and College of Edu- for invaluable assistance with this article cation partnered with Richland Library, as well as to statisticians Wilma Sims and one of the largest library systems in South Robert Petrulis, and students Ruiqin Gao Carolina, to offer a Science of Read- and John Waelde for research assistance. ing Institute. The Institute was designed for public and school librarians, parents/ Appendices—Surveys and guardians, reading tutors, and teachers Interview Questions wanting to enhance their skills for provid- ing effective reading instruction to child Appendix A: Sample Camper Survey beginning readers. Consisting of six 21/2- hour workshops, this Institute provided Camp Read-a-Rama Camper instruction and hands-on applications with Pre-Survey the nuts and bolts of reading instruction. Sessions focused on phonemic aware- Name: ness, alphabetic principles, automaticity, vocabulary development, comprehension, Age & Grade: print concepts, assessment, access to print materials, and using assistive technolo- 1. Have you been to Camp Read-a-Rama gies to enhance instruction with struggling before? readers. Participants also gained experi- ___ Yes ence with using culturally relevant texts ___ No and illustrations to aid learning. One hun- If yes, how many summers? dred percent of the participants indicated ___ My 2nd summer that their knowledge of implementing ___ My 3rd summer literacy activities with young readers in- ___ My 4th summer creased. Post-survey responses indicated that all participants gained a greater un- 2. Can you read by yourself? derstanding of the importance of consider- ___ Yes ing culture and background when helping ___ No children to select books. All also realized ___ Almost the importance of illustrations in literacy acquisition and gained resources for em- 3. How do you feel about reading? ploying interventions for learning differ- ___ I love to read ences and disabilities, employing assistive ___ I like reading ok technologies to aid learning and attending ___ I hate to read to the role family engagement plays in lit- eracy. Outcomes of the Science of Read- 4. When other people read aloud to me ing Institute demonstrate the effectiveness ___ I love to listen of initiatives to help librarians further de- ___ I like listening ok velop their skills with early literacy pro- ___ It’s boring
Camp Read-a-Rama and Fully-Engaged Literacy Learning 127 5. I think that reading and learning to 15. Where is your favorite place to read? read are ___ very important 16. What is your favorite book? ___ kind of important ___ not very important Appendix B: Sample Parent/Guardian Survey (pre and post are the same) 6. When I read I ___ think I’m good at it Camp Read-a-Rama Pre-Survey ___ think I’m ok at it Parent’s/Guardian’s Name: ___ think I’m not good at it Child’s Name: 7. For me reading is ___ very easy Number of Children: ___ kind of easy Child’s Age & Grade: ___ kind of hard ___ very hard Date: 8. My family believes that learning to Parent’s/Guardian’s level of education: read is ___ very important 1. If your child has gone to other sum- ___ kind of important mer day camps before, what type of ___ not very important camps has he/she attended and for how many summers/weeks? 9. I think that libraries are ___ a great place to visit 2. What was your child’s attitude about ___ an ok place to visit returning to Camp Read-a-Rama this ___ a boring place to visit summer? 10. When somebody gives me a book for 3. Is your child reading independently? a present, I am ___ Yes ___ very happy ___ No ___ kind of happy ___ Not quite ___ unhappy ___ mad 4. What is your child’s attitude toward reading? 11. How often do you read at home by yourself? ___ very enthusiastic___ somewhat enthusiastic 12. How often do you read at home with ___ neutral someone else? (List who you read ___ reluctant with.) 5. Your child 13. What books have you read lately? ___ reads very frequently ___ reads frequently 14. What do you like to read? ___ reads only when required ___ fiction picture books (not real) ___ non fiction picture books (real) 6. What is your child’s attitude toward ___ chapter books reading aloud to others? ___ magazines ___ very enthusiastic ___ poetry ___ somewhat enthusiastic ___ graphic novels/comic books ___ neutral ___ other: ___ reluctant
128 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE 7. What is your child’s attitude toward 14. Which of the following do you feel being read aloud to by others? has been impacted by your child’s ___ very enthusiastic previous participation in Camp Read- ___ somewhat enthusiastic a-Rama? ___ neutral ___ Phonemic awareness ___ reluctant (awareness of letters) ___ Enthusiasm for reading 8. Your child believes that learning to ___ Increased knowledge of new read is books ___ very important ___ Willingness to read to/with others ___ somewhat important ___ Changes in the treatment or ___ not very important handling of books (physically)___ Improved reading ability ___ Improved reading fluency 9. How would you describe your child’s (hesitates/stops less) confidence level about reading? ___ Attention span for reading or ___ very high listening to books being read ___ high aloud ___ somewhat high ___ somewhat low Comments on any of the impacts ___ low above: ___ confidence depends on the reading task and/or difficulty 15. Would you recommend Camp Read- 10. For your child, reading is a-Rama to other families? If so, why? ___ easy If not, why not? ___ somewhat easy 16. Because Camp Read-a-Rama inte- ___ somewhat difficult grates the arts, movement, swimming, ___ difficult games and many other activities into ___ very difficult book-centered programming, how do you feel the association of books 11. Your family believes that learning to with all of these other activities has read is impacted your child’s attitude toward ___ very important literature and reading? ___ somewhat important ___ not very important 17. What do you feel the long-term im- pact of your child’s participation in 12. Your child believes that libraries are Camp Read-a-Rama will be? ___ a great place to visit ___ an ok place to visit Appendix C: Post-Camp Read-a-Rama ___ a boring place to visit Parent Interview Questions 13. How does your child feel about re- 1. Your name(s): ceiving books as gifts? 2. Your child(ren)’s name(s) and age(s): ___ very enthusiastic 3. How many years have they attended ___ somewhat enthusiastic Camp Read-da-Rama? ___ neutral 4. Can you describe the reason for send- ___ disappointed ing them to camp?
Camp Read-a-Rama and Fully-Engaged Literacy Learning 129 5. Can you describe any changes in their “Every child ready to read.” (2015). American Li- attitudes toward reading you have no- brary Association. Retrieved February 28, 2016, ticed? from http://everychildreadytoread.org/. Flouri, E. & Buchanan, A. (2004). Early father’s 6. Can you describe any changes in their and mother’s involvement and child’s later edu- reading abilities? cational outcomes. British Journal of Education- 7. Can you describe any other changes al Psychology, vol. 74, 141–153. you have seen in them after they at- Gest, S.D., Freeman, N.R., Domitrovich, C.E. & tended Camp Read-a-Rama? Welsh, J.A. (2004). Shared book reading and chil-dren’s language comprehension skills: The mod- 8. Is there anything else you’d like to erating role of parental discipline practices. Early add? Childhood Research Quarterly, 19, 319–336. Graham, A., McNamara, J., & Van Lankveld, J. References (2011). Closing the summer learning gap for vul- nerable learners: An exploratory study of a sum- AASL (American Association of School Librar- mer literacy programme for kindergarten children at-risk for reading difficulties. Early Child Devel- ians). (2009). Outline of guidelines. Retrieved from http://www.ala.org/aasl/standards-guide- opment and Care, 181(5), 575–585. lines/outline Heyns, B. (1978). Summer learning and the effect of schooling. New York: Academic Press. Alexander, K., Entwisle, D., & Olson, L. (2007). Lasting consequences of the summer learning Kim, J., & White, T. (2011). Solving the problem of gap. American Sociological Review, 72(2), 167– summer reading loss. Phi Delta Kappan, 92(7), 180. doi: 10.1177/000312240707200202 64–67. Allington, R. (2011). What at-risk readers need. Lee, J., Grigg, W., & Donahue, P., (2007). The na- Educational Leadership, 68(6), 40–45. tion’s report card: Reading 2007. Washington, DC: National Center for Education Statistics. Allington, R., & Gabriel, R. (2012). Every child, ev- ery day. Educational Leadership, 69(6), 10–15. Maya Angelou Quotes (n.d.). Retrieved February 25, 2016, from http://www.brainyquote.com/ Allington, R.; McGill-Franzen, A.; Camilli, G.; Wil- quotes/quotes/m/mayaangelo578775.html. liams, L.; Graff, J.; Zeig, J.; Zmach, C.; Nowak, R. (2010). Addressing summer reading setback McCombs, J. S., Augustine, C. H., Schwartz, H. among economically disadvantaged elementary L., Bodilly, S. J., McInnis, B., Lichter, D. S., & students. Reading Psychology, 31(5), 411–27. Cross, A. B. (2011). Summer counts: Making summer programs part of the learning equation. Applegate, A., & Applegate, M. D. (2010). A study of thoughtful literacy and the motivation to read. National Civic Review, 100(4), 25–26. Web. 3 Reading Teacher, 64 Feb. 2016. doi: 10.1002/ncr.20081(4), 226–234. School Li- McKool, S. (2007). Factors that influence the de-Bayliss, S. (2014). Why music matters. brary Journal, 60 cision to read: An investigation of fifth grade (7), 20. students’ out-of-school reading habits. Reading Benson, J., & Borman, G. (2010). Family, neighbor- Improvement, 44(3), 111–131. hood, and school settings across seasons: When National Assessment of Education Progress do socioeconomic context and racial composi- (NAEP). (2015). The nation’s report card: tion matter for the reading achievement growth Reading 2015. Washington, DC: National Cen- of young children? Teachers College Record, ter for Education Statistics. Retrieved from 112(5), 1338–1390. http://www.nationsreportcard.gov/reading_ Bus, A.G., van Ijzendoorn, M.H. & Pellegrini, A.D. math_2015/#reading?grade=4 (1995). Joint book reading makes for success in National Institute for Literacy. (2009). Developing learning to read: A meta-analysis of intergenera- early literacy: Report of the national early lit- tional transmission of literacy. Review of Educa- eracy panel. Retrieved from http://lincs.ed.gov/ tional Research, 65, 1–21. publications/pdf/NELPReport09.pdf “Campaign for grade-level reading.” (2015). Work- Neuman, S.B., Celano, D.C., Greco, A.N., Shue, P. ing with museums and libraries. Retrieved from (2001). Access for all: Closing the book gap for http://gradelevelreading.net/resources/working- children in early education. Newark, DE: Interna- with-museums-and-libraries. tional Reading Association. Collins, F., & Svensson, C. (2008). If I had a magic Park, Y. (2011). How motivational constructs in- wand I’d magic her out of the book: The rich lit- teract to predict elementary students’ reading eracy practices of competent early readers. Early performance: Examples from attitudes and self- Years: Journal of International Research & De- concept in reading. Learning & Individual Differ- velopment, 28(1), 81–91. ences, 21(4), 347–358.
130 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE “Reach out and read.” (2014). Reach Out and Read. Smith, F. (1988). Understanding reading: A psy- Retrieved February 29, 2016 from http://reachou- cholinguistic analysis of reading and learning to tandread.org/. read (4th ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. Rowe, K. (1991). The influence of reading activity Trelease, Jim. (2013). The read-aloud handbook. at home on students’ attitudes towards reading, Seventh edition. New York: Penguin. classroom attentiveness and reading achieve- Trelease, Jim. (2009). Ten facts parents should ment: An application of structural equation mod- know about reading. Jim Trelease’s website. Re- elling. British Journal of Educational Psychol- trieved from http://trelease-on-reading.com/10- ogy, 61, 19–35. reading-facts-brochure.pdf.