The Library's Role in Society Today? RALPH R. SHAW WHEN I WAS last in (I leave this blank so that you can fill in the name of the state, province, or country) I discovered the least common denominators of librarianship. Whether I visited big D, little a, double ell, a, s or big D little e, little el, h, i, or any other changes you want to work on this theme, sooner or later we got to the crucial questions; questions which abroad I was presumably expected to be able to answer because I was an American and America had overcome all this, or if in the South I was presumably able to answer because I came from the North where all this had been taken care of, or in the West because in the East we had the population density and money to have solved everything, or if in the East, the questions might come from a children's librarian who wanted to know the answers because presumably I knew about special libraries to which he thought these problems did not really apply, or if talking to a special librarian, then the questions were posed in the light of my knowing something about governmental research libraries, which by some magic, added to the total federal budget, had solved all these problems; and Til leave it to you to add all the other changes that can be wrung from this. Interestingly enough, the first question is not money. That is the second question. The first question (generally stated as a fact or as an excuse for the state of the art in the area or library being visited) is that of prestige of the librarian. This explains and justifies everything and blames it all on someone else. It usually takes the form, more politely of course, of saying "but you do not understand because in my country (or region, or type of library) people do not appreciate libraries and librarians and we are, therefore, not able to do things as you do them or as we should like to do them. 177
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP I think that we can agree that as a profession, the general image of the librarian falls somewhat below the image of the classic professions in any country. Whether this is something that librarianship can claim as its unique province or whether it is something in which we share because of the general public schizophrenia in relationship to anything remotely representing the image of an egghead is moot. Certainly in some instances it is tempered, at least in part, by what the publics see us do or get from us. The second universal question, viz., how do we go about getting more money, so that (presumably) we could solve all the problems which are now unsolved, may be related to the first. Nevertheless, whether at home or abroad, these appear to be the most generally expressed alibis for our shortcomings. An alternative that I do not like particularly well, but which seems to me to have more justification than assuming that it is all the other fellow's fault that we are not universally respected or that we do not receive the recognition in salary and in library budget that we think we need is that in whatever total scoring system there is which adds up the contributions of each of us to the advancement and welfare of society, the awful fact may be that we are getting what we deserve; or as Shakespeare allegedly wrote, "It is not in our stars. . . ." To be sure, the world is out of joint. Clearly there is something out of balance in a system that spends $5,000 per child sending him through grade school and high school, which at best can teach him to use books and libraries as a way of life, and then does not spend as much to provide him with reading materials throughout life as it spends sending him through one grade of ele- mentary school. Clearly there is something out of balance in a system that spends $50,000 per year on physical support of research men, and then will not spend one per cent of that amount on intellectual support of his research. Clearly there is something out of balance in our system of teaching and scholarship at the college and graduate level when eminent li- brarians, faculty, and university administrators, having paid lip service to the library as the heart of the institution, increasingly insist that the heart beat must be kept down because if it is not they will soon or sometime reach a level at which they will have to do without an additional finger or a toe (usually called a faculty member) because the library will cost so much. 178
The Library s Role in Society Today? Clearly we are bemused when we spend ten or twelve million dollars of public money to develop a machine to do a small piece of a par- ticular job of retrospective searching (without thinking the job through) and then cannot get a fraction of that amount for books to support teaching and research. In a society designed around planned obsolescence we are the custo- dians and preservers; and we are not particularly imaginative in doing that. Our devotion to the hard-cover book, justifiable as it may be, gets mixed up with all sorts of cross currents that we do not understand and that we do nothing about. Somehow we have made the book ah object of veneration to the point that it is not used by "everyman" if there is any way of getting around it. For example, if we sold hard- cover books in the same way and at the same price that we do paper- backs, it is exceedingly doubtful that we should sell anything like the hundreds of millions of pieces that now go as paperbacks. A paper- back has not, to date at least, taken on the "remember-to-wash-your- hands . . ." aspects that a hard-cover instills, and by and large, except for a limited number of eggheads and egghead paperbacks, there is no feeling that a paperback has to be taken home and preserved. It is difficult to decide whether assigned reading, or penurious pro- tection and preservation, or the cult of veneration of the book as a physical object is most to blame for this state of affairs, but whatever the cause, there can be little doubt that we have developed a society in which we, the generality of us, simultaneously hold recorded infor- mation in high regard and avoid it to the greatest extent possible. And now, who should we blame for this state of affairs if we do not blame ourselves? Who but librarians are the keepers and forwarders of the word ? When faced with an opportunity to express the highest aspirations of our profession how do we meet the challenge? For example, we have been discussing, for several months, an opportunity offered by the Seattle exposition to present to millions of people a portrait of the library of the future. Who but librarians can be expected to create and project that picture? And who has done it? Similarly, in repeated studies I have posed the question to library administrators and staffs as follows: Suppose we opened the public treasury to you and gave you a steam shovel and trucks to haul the money away. Suppose there were no limitation on the amount of money you could take except your own judgment of what is best for the public you serve. Suppose there were no limitations such as lack of staff 179
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP or of suitable staff. Suppose you could do this over as many years as were necessary. Suppose, in a few words, there were no excuses and no reasons why you could not supply the optimum in library and biblio- graphical services. What would you do? Think of how you yourself would answer this question, and you will have a good cross section of the answers I have received. We are faced again with this question in the form of an opportunity to present the library of tomorrow at the New York World's Fair, where it can be exposed to between seventy and one hundred million viewers; and this time we do not have the excuse of lack of time for planning since the Fair will not open for about two more years. What do we have to tell the people? They depend upon us for leadership in this field. We are living in a world in which the pen is increasingly and more obviously becoming mightier and more important than the sword, and indeed the sword has become so heavy that the sole hope of survival of the race is that no one quite dares wield it because of the great probability that it will eradicate himself as well as his foe. This points to even greater reliance on the word as a form and a force for the deed. In addition to the urgency this lends the word as a force for preserva- tion of our way of life, the increasing complexity of our society de- mands wider education and more continuing education as we pass increasingly into the new industrial and social revolutions that are taking place all around us. This substitution of forces has progressed rapidly in our society. Once upon a time an alleged insult or wrong might have been settled by a duel, but that is no longer the fashion. Character assassination, sometimes in more venal and obvious form than others, has far out- distanced the physical act, and this art is practiced not only by public figures and private individuals in all countries, but as major strategy and as basic national policy in all totalitarian countries. It is probably an oversimplification of this changing world to read it into the context of Oscar Wilde's Ballad of Reading Gaol. You re- member: Yet each man kills the thing he loves, By each let this be heard, Some do it with a bitter look, Some with a flattering word, The coward does it with a kiss The brave man with a sword! 180
The Library's Role in Society Today? It seems doubtful that we can construe the popularity of Perry Mason as compared with Sabatini's swashbucklers as a change in the mores. No greater personal courage is required in a skilled swordsman who challenges a tyro than there is in a man with control of the communi- cation media who challenges an ordinary mortal to a public ordeal by innuendo and slander. It would appear that the tools of combat, like the tools of achievement in agriculture, medicine, chemistry, commerce, and manufactures have changed radically and that the word has greatly increased in its power for good and for evil. Not only has the fundamental role of the word changed, the quantity of words needed to conduct the more complex affairs of our modern world has multiplied. The family operating a colonial farm did not have access to much information outside what they could store in their internal memories, and could get along without it. The man making decisions about a modern automated plant must deal not only with vast mechanical, financial, marketing, and personnel problems; he must, because automated production does not fulfill its promise unless prodigious runs can be made continuously over a long period, be able to reach sound conclusions on a vast array of political, social, and general economic factors and trends, domestic and foreign, which are more important than the mechanical and electronic details in determi- nation of whether a production line can be automated. And if we needed further evidence of the increasing impact of automation on our civilization we need only look at the current monthly reports of in- creasing unemployment going hand in hand with increasing production. The day of the blue collar worker is coming to an end and he needs retraining in the newer and higher skills that are increasingly in de- mand. Another factor complicating the role of the library as the bearer and disseminator of the word is inherent in the nature of the library as a social institution. The more it changes, the more it remains the same in addition to changing. Books are not only bearers of supplementary storage for utilitarian purposes, they continue and will continue to satisfy the hunger of both child and adult for inspiration and recreation and for continued support of both formal and informal education. Viewed in this context, the library as we have thought of it in the past can continue to do the jobs it has done in the past at the levels it has performed them in the past, or even add some refinements to these, and if it does no more than that it will probably continue to receive support at its present level (possibly corrected to uniform purchasing 181
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP power - which has not invariably happened to date) . These functions are important and neither these nor the other functions indicated by the changing responsibilities of communication outlined above can be carried out effectively if the core of librarianship is not mastered and if we cannot do a workmanlike job of library housekeeping and of providing our current services. These services are substantially the somewhat shopworn dreams of the giants of our field in the nineteenth century; what are our dreams of the twentieth century and where are our dreams for the twenty-first? Modern society cannot exist without the additional services that it must have in our changing world and if libraries as they have been in the past do not satisfy these new social needs then society will, and indeed must, create new mechanisms to satisfy its needs. We have seen the beginnings of this process in many ways; most notably in the de- velopment of so-called information centers as well as the active, and currently much misguided, attempts to solve some of these problems by mechanization. It seems to me, therefore, that the library must expand its functions to meet added needs, with full recognition of the awful impact of the changing role of the word in society. This calls for the planning of bolder programs than we have been prone to do in the past and the design of new and more effective systems to satisfy these urgent needs. We are now getting into a position in which we are faced not only with the wonders of the child's world as he unfolds it through his first books, and that remains part of the fiber of our society, but with the sharpening of the tools with which we deal, and which now may be decisive in the history of our civilization. Our peaceful and withdrawn ivory tower is being demolished by the new role that is forced upon us. We are faced with grave responsibili- ties that we have just begun to recognize. Adequate definition of these new responsibilities will require the joint effort of the best minds of the country - in libraries, in the world of letters, in the world of com- munication, and in all the other areas in which people toil in the mazes of man's mind. This calls for more than one-man decisions, so, prayerfully, I pass the problem on to you. 182