Jane Maud Campbell was born on March 13, 1869, in Liverpool, England, of parents of Scottish descent, George and Jane (Cameron) Campbell, who had met and married in Petersburg, Virginia. Maud Campbell was one of seven children, the first of two daughters born after the birth of five sons. During the American Civil War, patriarch George Campbell’s shipping business, primarily transporting cotton, tobacco, and other dry goods, for the Confederacy, had made the large Campbell family at home on both sides of the Atlantic, in England and Scotland as well as in the United States. From the 1870s and into the 1900s, after an abrupt end to his shipping enterprise, George Campbell tried to recoup his losses by redirecting his energy and resources to the tanning industry with attempts in Burkeville, Virginia; Charles Town, West Virginia; and, finally, in Harrison, New Jersey, near East Orange. After the death of her mother, Campbell’s father, on August 28, 1873, married as his second wife, Rosalie Higgenbotham of Richmond, Virginia. George and Rosalie Campbell lived at that time in Liverpool but soon bought an estate near London in Dulwich, Surrey. George Campbell and his second wife were to have five sons. The young Maud Campbell was taught until the age of ten by governesses at the Campbells’ home in Dulwich. While living at Dulwich, in June 1876, George Campbell and Rosalie entertained his friends, Jefferson and Varina Davis, for the last time. Family members recall this famous visit when four-year-old Anne Campbell rode on Mr. Davis’s shoulders, holding onto his head from her precarious perch. At age twelve, Maud Campbell was educated at a girls’ school near Richmond, Virginia. George Campbell, who did not find female schooling in Virginia up to his standards, sent Maud at age fourteen and Anne at age twelve to Edinburgh, where they lived with their grandmother, Ann (MacDonald) Campbell, on Dalrymple Crescent, on the same block where Robert Louis Stevenson lived. While there, the two young women attended the Ladies College of Edinburgh University: Maud studying literature and Anne, music. Maud graduated first and earned a certificate from the Edinburgh School of Cookery and Domestic Economy, while waiting for sister Anne’s graduation. She and Anne were present in London at the Jubilee celebration of Queen Victoria in 1887 before coming to the United States and settling with their family in East Orange, New Jersey. During the next two years, Campbell made two return trips to Scotland: the first, to settle her grandmother’s estate, and the second, to visit friends and family in Scotland and travel for six months in Switzerland. Shortly thereafter, Campbell immigrated to America permanently to be with her father in East Orange, near where he made his final attempt at the tanning business, and where, for a brief time, he collaborated with his friend, Thomas Alva Edison. Library Service with Immigrants in Newark Having spent the early years of her adult life as the caregiver and nurturer for her extended close-knit family and, for a time, as bookkeeper for the family tanning supply business in West Virginia with brother Willie, Maud Campbell was thirty-two years old before she exerted her independence. In 1901, she applied for and, after a competitive examination, secured a position as assistant in the reference department of the Newark Public Library, where she was the only staff member able to type. Campbell had no formal library training. George Campbell was quoted as saying “Maudie saw the notice of an exam for librarian and tried it without telling anyone. They phoned her to come, and she went ahead nicely, beginning at $25 a month” [1–5]. Working under the tutelage of Frank P. Hill, director of the Newark Public Library, and, later, of his successor, John Cotton Dana, Campbell learned the principles of librarianship. Her duties as reference librarian brought her into contact with various charitable and educational institutions throughout the Newark community, most of which worked with immigrant clientele. She lectured on the resources and services available through the public library, and, as a result of these contacts, she established traveling libraries and deposit stations in stores throughout the bustling metropolis of Newark, with a foreign-born population of over 30 percent at that time. After a period of eighteen months of “efficient service,” to quote John Cotton Dana, director of the Newark (NJ) Public Library, Campbell was offered the position of public librarian at both Perth Amboy and Passaic, the New Jersey cities with the largest immigrant populations. Notwithstanding the high praise of Dana, who referred to Campbell as “a very competent woman,” the fact that Campbell was an immigrant herself undoubtedly swayed the boards of both public libraries. Campbell chose Passaic [6–11]. Library Service with Immigrants in Passaic and New Jersey Located in the industrial northeast of New Jersey, Passaic was the city where the rags-to-riches Scottish immigrant, Peter Reid, had made his fortune in textile manufacturing. The new Jane Watson Reid Memorial Library, named in honor of Reid’s wife and opened in early 1903, was situated in the heart of the Dundee district of Passaic, where Reid’s textile mills flourished. Reid and the library trustees of Passaic took satisfaction in the knowledge that the Reid Memorial branch as well as the main library in the Passaic City Hall would be administered by an immigrant of Campbell’s ability. As a progressive reformer, Campbell was motivated by a sense of urgency to do what was possible for the immigrants crowding into Passaic. She was not afraid or reluctant to seek advice. She learned from other librarians, library trustees, library benefactors, community leaders, politicians, editors of the foreign-language press, and immigrant themselves. She never turned down an opportunity to share what she had learned at state, regional, or national library association conventions; church services; or meetings of patriotic societies, charitable institutions, or social welfare organizations [12–23]. Campbell’s remarks to the 1903 American Library Association annual conference in Niagara, New York, revealed her vision for public library service in Passaic or any small town in America as a purely democratic institution existing to serve the will of its constituents and for the librarian as a proactive advocate for all segments of the community [5, p. 18; 15, pp. 51–52]. The 1903 address, published in the Library Journal, helped to establish her reputation as a speaker and communicator, talents that would place her before countless audiences throughout her career. The reaction of her friend and former colleague in Newark, Clara Whitehill Hunt, was revealing. Hunt, who had followed former Newark (NJ) Public Library director, Frank Hill, to the Brooklyn Public Library, where she was superintendent of the Children’s Rooms, wrote William Coggin Kimball, chairman of the board of trustees of the Passaic Public Library, to tell him “how beautifully your representative carried off the honors for Passaic last night.” Hunt advised Kimball that “you’d better get a tight grip on your librarian, for she made a hit in the ALA” [24]. Campbell was an active participant in the debate within the American public library community regarding the efficacy of providing collections of books in foreign languages. The US citizenry at large at the turn of the twentieth century were of two minds: the provision of foreign-language books was viewed as either a natural extension of library service to immigrant taxpayers or an unnecessary hindrance to their learning of English and a waste of tax dollars. Activist librarians like Campbell supported the former service philosophy. Campbell’s strategy for helping immigrants to adjust to life in Passaic involved getting to them before they could speak English and before they were exploited by corrupt politicians, cornered by well-meaning but unwelcome proselytizers, arrested for breaking laws of which they were ignorant, or otherwise disenchanted with America and Americans. Campbell was convinced that library work with immigrants, rather than being merely an enlightened gesture on the part of librarians, was a dialogue, a give-and-take proposition in which both parties benefited [17; 25–26]. In 1904, in an address delivered to the Long Island Library Club in Brooklyn, Campbell described the public library as a bridge to opportunity for poor and intellectually starved potential American citizens as well as preserver of humanistic culture. Campbell, who spoke only English and perhaps a bit of Gaelic, never seemed to find the language barrier an insurmountable obstacle, communicating her humanitarian concern for people in need through the universal language of compassion, sympathy, and genuine understanding [5, p. 18]. Campbell convinced the board of trustees of the Passaic Public Library that in order to serve the immigrant population, the library had to provide books, periodicals, and newspapers not only in English but also in the foreign languages spoken by its various constituencies. The library should provide books and technical guides for industries employing immigrants, newspapers, instructional aids, and periodicals in immigrant languages, particularly those containing information about the customs, history, and government of the United States and the laws, statutes, ordinances, and regulations regarding health, sanitation, employment, and education that were enforced in the city of Passaic and the state of New Jersey. Materials to fulfill these educational needs and to provide a source of relaxation and escape from the long hours in the factories and mills and the constant strain of domestic duties were secured, and library hours were extended to accommodate the lifestyles of working immigrants [8; 23, pp. 101–2]. Campbell turned to the leaders of the immigrant community for assistance in selection, acquisition, and cataloging of foreign-language books. The editors of the foreign-language press, often scholars in their own right, were generous with newspaper space for advertising the library’s foreign-language acquisitions and holdings. She consulted with local immigrant booksellers and established foreign-language book dealers throughout the country, who advised her on availability, quality, and turnaround time to be expected when importing foreign-language materials. She tapped the expertise of the immigrant literary and cultural societies, whose members, being thoroughly versed in the literatures of particular ethnic or national groups, were able to assist her in cataloging the foreign-language materials. A Hungarian bookseller in the neighborhood took her to his stall in the dilapidated attic of a livery stable where she found books in Hungarian and purchased seventy-five in the first half hour. In a similar chance encounter, she persuaded an Italian barber to help catalog the Italian books that she had bought for the reading room [5, p. 18]. The result of this collaboration was a collection of books in English, as well as eleven foreign languages—French, German, Dutch, Italian, Hungarian, Russian, Bohemian, Slovene, Polish, Hebrew, and Yiddish—that was available to library patrons in Passaic. With the exception of the books in French, German, and Dutch, languages of the old immigrants, the remaining eight languages were languages spoken by the new immigrants. In the 1904/5 annual report of the Passaic Public Library, Campbell included a statistic that proved that the immigrants were appreciative and enthusiastic readers: “in twelve months the five hundred and fifty books, in the eleven foreign languages we then had, were borrowed 11,114 times” [13, p. 10; 23, pp. 101–2]. Campbell turned the Passaic Public Library into a haven for rest and relaxation for working adults, and, for children, a quiet place where they could study and complete their school assignments, without the constant interruptions associated with the crowded tenement lifestyle. Under her leadership, the Passaic Public Library became a community center for programs for adults and youth [21, pp. 135–36]. The library served as a club room for social groups and debating societies and a recreation area where patrons could play checkers, chess, ping-pong, and other games, and also served as the classroom where continuing education opportunities were always available, including Americanization classes, sewing classes, and lectures on topics of immediate and vital interest to immigrants. Exhibits of European arts and crafts attracted foreigners inside the library. Once inside, the unassimilated immigrants would notice books about the history of their new country in languages they could read and dictionaries with the names of tools used in the nearby mills where they worked. Campbell remarked that “it is a poor introduction to America to learn its laws only through breaking them because of not being able to read posted signs” [5, p. 18; 13, p. 10; 17]. The library provided space and scheduled time for a series of free lectures in English on topics of general interest to the immigrant community. The leaders of the foreign societies, notably the Italian, Slovene, Polish, Bohemian, and Hungarian, approached Campbell with the proposition that they would provide lecturers in their respective native languages if the library would provide the space for the scheduled lectures. She was receptive to their proposition, and it became the standard practice to have lectures given in English and then in the languages of the nationalities or ethnic groups sponsoring the events [8; 23, p. 103]. When social ills were apparent and called for reform, Campbell could always be counted upon to defend the policy of free immigration, provide books in foreign languages, lobby for a fair wage for immigrant laborers, or petition health and sanitation officials for more frequent inspections of tenements. Campbell, a cultural pluralist, believed that American culture was an amalgamation of cultures, each offering a unique gift to the building of American society. The word “multiculturalism” was not yet in vogue, but it would have been appropriate in the early decades of the twentieth century to describe the work of Campbell and other librarians working with foreign-born populations. The compulsory education laws requiring the regular attendance at public schools of children under the age of fourteen assured at least a minimal education for immigrant children, including instruction in the English language and the inculcation of American ideals and values. Campbell realized that the evening schools for adult immigrants were not as successful because they were not available in all communities throughout New Jersey on a year-round basis and their establishment, rather than being mandated by state law, remained a local option. The same narrow rationale that the provision of foreign-language books in public libraries was a hindrance to learning English also surfaced in the argument that evening school teachers should speak and understand only English. The logic was that adult immigrants would hear only the language that they were expected to master. A further complication to this already difficult situation was the fact that most evening school classes were composed of adult immigrants of more than one nationality [20, pp. 101–3; 27–28]. Campbell discussed her ideas about increasing the educational opportunities for adult immigrants in New Jersey with Passaic Public Library trustee William Coggin Kimball. He was serving concurrently as chairman of the New Jersey Public Library Commission, along with New Jersey Supreme Court Justice John Franklin Fort, later to be governor of New Jersey. Both Kimball and Fort were impressed with Campbell’s ideas and the expertise demonstrated in her library work with immigrants in Passaic [29]. Kimball helped Campbell to gain an interview with New Jersey Governor Edward Casper Stokes. Two months later, on April 10, 1906, Governor Stokes, acting upon the authorization of the New Jersey legislature and granted only the previous day, appointed Campbell a member of a commission of three, along with John Dyneley Prince, a professor at Columbia University in New York, and D. F. Merritt, of Montclair, New Jersey. The 1906 New Jersey Immigration Commission, whose charge was “to inquire into and report upon the general condition of the immigrants coming into or residents of this State,” was the first state commission, according to Robert Watchorn, then US Commissioner of Immigration, “to treat the immigration problem in a rational and systematic way.” Campbell, the first woman appointed to a New Jersey commission, was presented a unique opportunity to improve adult immigrant education [23, p. 104; 30–33]. On March 30, 1906, Campbell’s father George, a native of Scotland, and then residing in East Orange, New Jersey, was admitted to US citizenship. It is almost certain that Maud Campbell helped her father through the naturalization process as she had done for immigrant patrons in Passaic. Family records indicate that Maud Campbell assumed that she was naturalized along with her father, being a member of his household. Technically, this would have been the case if Maude Campbell had been a minor child and not a thirty-seven-year-old adult. It is also highly likely that Maud Campbell was told by immigration and naturalization officials that it was not necessary for her to go through the process since she resided in her father’s household. This incident illustrates how lax officials were about the naturalization process for English-speaking white immigrants from the British Isles. Naturalization made it possible for George Campbell to vote; Maud Campbell, along with all American women until 1920, the year of the passage of the Nineteenth Amendment to the US Constitution, was denied the vote [4, 34–36]. Also, that summer of 1906, at the ALA Narragansett Pier Conference in Rhode Island, Campbell joined James Hulme Canfield of Columbia University and Arthur E. Bostwick of the Circulation Department of the New York Public Library, to present a three-part forum on “Books for the Foreign Population.” All three speakers were convinced of the need for basic books in simple English and foreign languages on American educational and political systems and employment opportunities throughout the country. Determining the source or sources of fiscal support for such materials was really the crux of the debate. Canfield proposed that the ALA study the issue of public library service to immigrants and to work in close cooperation with the National Educational Association. Bostwick suggested reliance on civic and patriotic societies to supply these materials rather than the ALA. Campbell called on librarians to solicit the advice of immigrant community leaders on the best or most helpful books on subjects of interest to immigrants. Alluding to her appointment to the 1906 New Jersey Commission on Immigration, she called on the ALA and state library associations to “agitate for” the appointment of state commissions on immigration “to investigate the general condition of non-English-speaking residents, with the view to their education and enlightenment upon the principles and policy of our government and institutions, and the rights and opportunities of its citizens” [36–40]. Librarians throughout the country, particularly branch librarians, librarians of small libraries, and foreign-language department librarians, read the print versions of these remarks in the pages of the Library Journal and, in turn, shared in print their own observations, opinions, and successes with the Americanization process. Ironically, an unsigned editorial in the July 1908 issue of New York Libraries warned that the danger in Americanization work was not that foreign languages would be retained too long by the foreign born but that in a generation or two they might be lost as an element of culture in American life. Nevertheless, Campbell, and progressive librarians, having gained experienced in dealing with more than one immigrant group, saw library service to immigrants in the light of internationalism, a step away from Americanization and a step closer to cultural pluralism or multiculturalism [23, 33, 37]. As her part in the work of the 1906 New Jersey Immigration Commission, Campbell garnered the support of the foreign societies in New Jersey. She visited the president of the National Slavonic Society in New York and solicited his help in convincing the affiliated societies in New Jersey to send letters and petitions to Governor Stokes stating their support for the establishment of a permanent governmental agency to handle immigration affairs. As a result, Governor Stokes received an avalanche of letters from immigrant leaders. The 1906 commission completed its mandate in December of that same year. At a banquet in Princeton, New Jersey, the commission had concluded that the education of the adult immigrant was the key to successful assimilation. Campbell voiced her support for the establishment of evening schools on a statewide basis, similar to the experimental schools for Italians in Passaic and Princeton, and also schools for adult immigrants in Trenton and Burlington. The commission published and distributed a primer in Italian and English for the adult Italian immigrant learning English. Governor Stokes, who referred to Campbell as “a most progressive woman,” concurred with her findings and those of the other commissioners and lauded their efforts on behalf of New Jersey [41]. The 1906 New Jersey Immigration Commission did not publish a report of its findings and recommendations. As a direct result of the work of the 1906 New Jersey Immigration Commission, in 1907, the New Jersey legislature passed a law that encouraged, but did not mandate, communities throughout New Jersey to set up evening schools for adult immigrants. The 1907 adult immigrant education law provided for the boards of education of any New Jersey school district to establish public evening schools for the instruction of foreign-born residents over fourteen years of age in English and civics. Another section of the law, dealing with the funding of these evening schools, included the provision that the state would match any funds raised by a school district for the maintenance of public evening schools for immigrant adults. There was still no requirement for the establishment of evening schools on a statewide basis [42]. Despite these oversights, the 1907 New Jersey adult immigrant education law set the pattern for other states, including New York, California, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, and Rhode Island, that followed the example of New Jersey and appointed commissions to survey the needs of immigrants on a statewide basis [43]. Addressing the provision of foreign-language books in public libraries serving immigrant populations continued to be a nationwide concern. From 1907 to 1916, the ALA Publishing Board addressed this need by publishing in its Foreign Book List series a total of seven guides for the selection and acquisition of books in German, Hungarian, French, Danish, Norwegian, Swedish, Polish, and Russian. In 1908, under the auspices of the New Jersey Public Library Commission, Campbell compiled the bibliography of recommended titles in the Hungarian language for public libraries, which was later adopted for use by the League of Library Commissions. In the introduction to her Selected List of Hungarian Books, Campbell described the guide as “simply a list of books which Hungarians are proud to recommend and pleased to read themselves.” She gave the credit for its publication to a Hungarian immigrant scholar and editor in New York and members of the Hungarian literary society in Passaic [23, p. 102; 44, p. 1; 45]. In May 1910, Campbell decided to leave her position in Passaic in order to concentrate her efforts in the area of adult immigrant education. Campbell saw her move as the natural outgrowth of the experiences she had gained in the cosmopolitan industrial center of Passaic. On May 7, 1910, at the meeting of the board of trustees of the Passaic Public Library, Campbell’s friend and supporter, trustee William Coggin Kimball, and Passaic’s mayor, Bird W. Spencer, presented her with a citation that extolled her ability, tact, industry, inspiration, and advocacy for the poor and foreign born of Passaic [46–49]. Adult Education with Immigrants in New York State The desire to pursue her ideas in the field of adult immigrant education, coupled with an employment opportunity offered by Anne Morgan, daughter of philanthropist and businessman John Pierpont (J. P.) Morgan, prompted her to accept a position as education secretary for the recently organized New York City Committee of the North American Civic League for Immigrants (NACLI). The NACLI, founded in Boston in 1908, was an active Americanization group, an outgrowth of a conference of social workers and reform-minded citizens sponsored a year earlier, in February 1907, by the International Committee of the Young Men’s Christian Association in New York City. NACLI membership was Anglo-conformist in philosophy and conservative in economic interests. The NACLI advertised itself as not being concerned with the highly political issue of admission or exclusion of immigrants but with the more humanitarian issues of protection, education, distribution, and assimilation of immigrants once they had arrived in the United States. In addition to Boston, the NACLI established branches in New York and Philadelphia. The NACLI sponsored extensive programs of lectures in English and foreign languages to evening schools, which were published as Messages for Newcomers to the United States and distributed to public libraries throughout the United States. In 1908, the New York State Immigration Commission was appointed by Governor Charles Evans Hughes to investigate the condition of immigrants throughout New York State. In March 1909, the commission recommended the establishment of evening schools for immigrants that would speed the process of Americanization. There being no organization to take over its work and to see that the legislation it had recommended was enacted, the commission’s former members approached the leadership of the NACLI. Hartmann refers to the 1908 New York State Immigration Commission as the first in the country, when actually it was second to the 1906 New Jersey Immigration Commission on which Campbell served. In December 1909, the administrative district under the auspices of the NACLI New York City branch was expanded to incorporate New York State. In early 1910, the newly renamed NACLI New York Committee accepted the recommendations of the New York Immigration Commission as its mission. Campbell began her duties with the NACLI New York Committee in the summer of 1910. By September 1910, the committee had been successful in getting the New York State legislature to pass the immigration bills recommended by the 1908 New York State Immigration Commission, including the major bill to establish the New York Bureau of Industries and Immigration to oversee immigrant affairs, from banking and employment to legal aid and education. Campbell coordinated the establishment of classes in English and citizenship for newly arrived immigrants in New York City. In order to address and assess the needs of immigrant children covered by the compulsory education laws, the NACLI New York Committee, using ships’ manifests at Ellis Island, compiled lists of the names of school-age children entering the port of New York. These were then transferred to the proper school authorities in permanent and temporary educational facilities throughout New York State. By March 1911, the NACLI New York Committee was successful in convincing the federal authorities to assume the responsibility for providing such lists to school authorities not only in New York but also in New Jersey, Massachusetts, Illinois, and other states where the majority of immigrants might establish residences. Campbell’s responsibilities with the NACLI also included the on-site development, implementation, and supervision of programs to facilitate the Americanization of the immigrant laborers and their families in temporary labor camps falling outside the jurisdiction of local school districts. In December 1910, the NACLI New York Committee established an experimental camp school in Valhalla, New York, the site of one of the construction camps building the Catskill Aqueduct to serve the needs of New York City. In Valhalla, Campbell worked with adult immigrant workers and their families, largely Italians, Poles, Russians, and Austrians. In January 1911, the NACLI New York Committee again expanded its jurisdiction to include the state of New Jersey. Shortly thereafter, the newly renamed NACLI New York–New Jersey Committee convinced New Jersey Governor Woodrow Wilson to appoint the 1911 New Jersey Immigration Commission. The 1911 commission, like its predecessors, was charged to investigate the conditions of immigrants with regard to their welfare and distribution as well as industrial opportunities available to them. Without state funding, the 1911 New Jersey Immigration Commission had to rely on the financial support of civic-minded individuals and the NACLI New York–New Jersey Committee. The 1911 commission was unable to get legislation passed to establish a permanent state agency to handle immigrant affairs, as had been done in New York State, and, as such, accomplished nothing of significance other than producing an informative report of its findings. The NACLI New York–New Jersey Committee advanced its work in the construction camp school at Valhalla. By April 1911, a special assembly hall was opened to take care of the educational needs of immigrant children, women, and men. A day school was operated in the hall for the children, while in the afternoon, classes in home economics and sewing were held for the women and girls. An evening school for the immigrant men provided instruction in English and preparation for citizenship, the two facets of the Americanization process. During the summer of 1911, Campbell experimented with a new invention with the potential to revolutionize the educational process: the movie camera. She visited movie houses in the area to learn the techniques of operating it and got hints on projecting the films from her father’s friend Thomas Alva Edison. Beginning in June, using a horse and covered wagon for transportation, Campbell provided moving pictures with musical accompaniment provided by phonograph recordings to a circuit of fourteen temporary labor camps situated along the construction route of the Catskill Aqueduct. The moving-picture shows presented advice on health regulations, personal hygiene, state and federal laws, the naturalization process, and technical instruction on various aspects of aqueduct construction. The experiment, which lasted eighty-seven days, reached over seven thousand viewers. Several construction contractors agreed to purchase the moving pictures and projection equipment to inaugurate recreational programs for the immigrant laborers in other temporary labor camps. In the September 1911 issue of the Catskill Water System News, one such contractor described the Valhalla construction camp school as producing “a better class of men, a better camp, and a higher standard of living than is generally found, which all makes for efficiency.” To round out these educational activities, recreational activities eventually included a popular moving-picture show every Saturday night and a dance once a month. Campbell saw the necessity of providing leisure activities, since the only other diversions for the construction workers after eight hours of manual labor were gambling and drinking [43, pp. 38–63; 50–54]. Under the auspices of the NACLI, Campbell maintained a full schedule of lecturing. In April 1911, she presented an address on the social and educational needs of immigrant women to social workers at a meeting of the New Jersey Conference of Charities and Correction held at Princeton. She acknowledged the prejudice against immigrants manifested in the constant calls from the US Congress for immigration restriction and voiced her advocacy for the suffrage of women, both native born and foreign born. She was dismayed by the widening of the generation gap between immigrant parents and their children, which was unwittingly exacerbated by the exposure of immigrant children to the Americanizing influence of the public schools. Campbell believed that “the most difficult problem with the immigrant woman is to make her appreciate the advantages of education, which to her is something only for the men and children” [55, p. 14]. She experimented with creative ways to lure immigrant women to take part in educational opportunities offered by the NACLI. Sewing, cooking, and child-care classes were often the “bait” to get immigrant women out of the confines of their homes and the congested immigrant community. Campbell exposed immigrant women to the Americanizing influence of hearing spoken English and gave them a forum to share everyday experiences with other Americans in the making [55]. In 1911, the 1907 Federal Immigration Commission included the telling statistic that “the great majority of the injuries and fatalities in the mines occur because the foreigner does not understand words of command” [50, p. 29]. Campbell was convinced that the problem lay in the lack of age-appropriate materials for teaching English to adult immigrant laborers. To remedy this lack, the NACLI New York–New Jersey Committee wrote and printed a series of elementary English lessons, based on everyday words and phrases used in the construction work at the temporary labor camps, and arranged in parallel English-Italian and English-Polish, since the majority of the laborers were Italian and Polish immigrants. Pamphlets and leaflets explaining the naturalization requirements for first and second papers and the basic laws of the United States, including child labor and compulsory education laws and sanitary regulations, were also prepared and printed in English and the foreign languages spoken by the construction workers and their families. The construction camp school in Valhalla, initiated on an experimental, localized basis under Campbell’s direction, became the model emulated throughout New York State. The New York State legislature passed a law, introduced initially by the New York State Department of Education, that required that public schools, which were established for laborers in temporary construction camps engaged in public works projects, should be maintained out of the funds designated for these public works projects, making access to education by immigrant laborers legally sanctioned in New York State [50, pp. 29–31; 43, pp. 73–76; 54, p. 15]. Library Service with Immigrants in Massachusetts In early 1913, the NACLI recommended the appointment of a state immigration commission for Massachusetts. By May 1913, the lobbying efforts of the NACLI were successful in getting the Massachusetts legislature to appoint the 1913 Massachusetts Immigration Commission, charged to investigate fully the status and general condition of immigrants. The educational opportunities of immigrants were to be assessed, but this commission was the first to examine and document the existing public library resources, services, and facilities available to immigrants. The Massachusetts Free Public Library Commission (MFPLC), under the direction of Charles Francis Dorr Belden, was a step ahead of the Massachusetts Immigration Commission. Approximately two months earlier, on March 25, 1913, Belden had submitted to Governor Eugene Noble Foss a recommendation to provide library service to the immigrant population scattered throughout Massachusetts. The recommendation alluded to the fact that since the fall of 1912 the MFPLC had been investigating the possibility of providing statewide service to cities and towns serving immigrant clientele, especially those communities whose tax valuation was under $600,000, and that the response to their initial efforts had been enthusiastic. Belden recommended that the Massachusetts legislature appropriate funds for “the employment of a special field agent or secretary who can study the problems involved.” The field agent would “select the books, cooperate with existing associations, and visit the local foreign societies in different towns, and interest the librarians, trustees, teachers, and others in the furtherance of their activities with the foreign population.” Belden reassured Governor Foss that “libraries are recognized as wholly non-political and non-sectarian, and therefore have a special opportunity to welcome newcomers to this country and interest them in all that pertains to good citizenship” [50, p. 17]. Governor Foss saw in this recommendation a politically expedient way to ward off the potential problems often associated with a large, un-Americanized immigrant population scattered throughout the state. Two days later, on March 27, 1913, Governor Foss forwarded the MFPLC’s request to the Massachusetts legislature, warning that the fulfillment of the request would not solve all the problems associated with immigration but that to do nothing was to court disaster. On May 16, 1913, less than two months after Belden’s initial proposal, the Massachusetts legislature passed a law authorizing the MFPLC to “appoint an agent or secretary to direct educational work for the benefit of the alien population of the commonwealth at a salary … not exceeding two thousand dollars” [56, pp. 17–19]. Belden immediately began a national search to fill the new position [56]. In the meantime, Campbell had relocated to Massachusetts and secured a temporary position as social agent of the Boston Dwelling House Association while she searched for permanent employment [57–58]. In late May 1913, approximately one week after the Massachusetts legislature had approved the bill authorizing the appointment of an agent for coordinating library work with foreigners on a statewide basis, the Massachusetts Library Club held its annual meeting at Williams College in Williamstown. Belden was in attendance and listened with particular interest to the two speakers for this event, both having been engaged to speak on the topic of library work with foreigners: John Foster Carr, of the Immigrant Publication Society of New York City, and Jane Maud Campbell, formerly of the Passaic Public Library [59]. Campbell’s address, entitled “What the Foreigner Has Done for One Library,” recounted her experiences working with the immigrant populations in Passaic and also with the 1906 New Jersey Immigration Commission. Belden was impressed with her belief that the library’s influence should spread beyond the library’s walls into the community at large, and with her confidence that librarians would be transformed through their contacts with immigrants [23, pp. 100, 106]. Belden later offered her the position of Director of Library Work with Foreigners. On June 30, 1913, barely one month after the Massachusetts Library Club meeting, Belden wrote Edward F. Hamlin, executive secretary in the State House in Boston, and asked that he submit to Governor Foss and the Massachusetts legislature the name of Miss J. Maud Campbell, who became the first person “appointed by any State to give her entire time and thought to immigration problems in their relation to the social problems of library work” [60–62]. Beginning her duties in September 1913, Campbell was immediately called upon to share her experience and expertise with the newly appointed 1913 Massachusetts Immigration Commission, appointed earlier in May 1913. Campbell conducted a statewide survey of library resources and services available to immigrants, which necessitated numerous visits and conversations with library officials and immigrant leaders in cities and towns with immigrant populations throughout the state. She provided the commission with an accurate but bleak description of the situation in Massachusetts with regard to library work with immigrants: “of 99 libraries reporting a foreign-speaking population in their territory, only 61 have any foreign books” [56, 61, 63–64]. Campbell’s efforts on behalf of the immigrant communities in Massachusetts were limited to small towns with a tax base of less than $600,000, a figure soon upgraded to $1,000,000. Campbell determined that the best way to serve the needs of the scattered and shifting populations of immigrants throughout the state was to establish traveling libraries of books, both in foreign languages and in English for beginners, to be circulated on a rotation basis at the request of town libraries serving immigrant populations. Within two weeks of her employment, Campbell began her circuit by train to libraries throughout Massachusetts, in her words, “to awaken the social conscience” [5, p. 19] of librarians and would-be advocates for immigrants. Although the legislature had seen the need for helping immigrants statewide, the library staffs and trustees across the Bay State were not as convinced or committed. Campbell’s niece Fay Campbell (Reed) Kaynor, in her research on her Aunt Maudie, discovered that “all across the state of Massachusetts, from Provincetown to North Adams and from Southwick to Haverill, at a rate of three times a week, the public librarians of Massachusetts had their social consciences awakened, their patriotism redefined, their prejudices pointed out, their opportunities designated, and their best sources of foreign books listed geographically” [5, p. 19]. Campbell prescribed library-sponsored festivals that would bring the lore, crafts, music, and dance of home countries into the lives of these families and bring the young and old together. Kaynor continued that “she was always bridging gaps—between generations, between old and new homelands, between leisure and learning, between home and library, and between what existed and what was possible.” Campbell pointed out the inconsistency that existed between what was preached to immigrants on their arrival in the United States, specifically to leave the industrial cities for farming opportunities in the more healthful rural areas, and the lack of agricultural leaflets written in languages the immigrants could understand [5, p. 19]. By early 1914, when the Massachusetts Immigration Commission’s report was issued, nineteen traveling libraries in three languages (French, Italian, and Polish) had already begun their circuit throughout the state. In their final report, the commission had recommended that the MFPLC “receive an increased appropriation, so that it may greatly extend the traveling foreign language feature of its work” [64, pp. 17, 152]. Campbell was able to increase the number of traveling libraries, due largely to the additional financial support of foreign societies, notably the Dante Alighieri Society and the Circolo Italiano; American patriotic societies, including the National Society of the Colonial Dames of America and the Daughters of the American Revolution; and the Boston-based women’s organization, the Woman’s Education Association. Included in the traveling libraries, in addition to primers in English and aids for immigrants preparing for naturalization, were foreign-language and simple-English titles about American laws, history, government, and customs, including the immigrant’s guides in Italian, Polish, Yiddish, and English published by John Foster Carr’s Immigrant Publication Society; pamphlets on child care and home economics issued by the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company; and textbooks on first-aid and other health-related topics supplied by the American National Red Cross in Italian, Polish, Lithuanian, and Slovene. Foreign governments also donated books, notably the King Oscar’s Traveling Libraries of books in Swedish for Swedish-speaking immigrants. The traveling library service grew from nineteen libraries in three foreign languages in 1913 to sixty libraries in eight foreign languages in 1914. In less than ten years, there would be 280 traveling libraries, including books in twenty foreign languages. Campbell reported in the MFPLC 1913/14 annual report that “a start has thus been made in breaking down the prejudice that has existed against foreigners using the libraries” [62, p. 9; 56, pp. 18–25; 63, p. 136; 64, pp. 17, 152; 65–71]. Campbell, a life member and active participant in the Massachusetts Library Club, the forerunner of the Massachusetts Library Association, used its Bulletin to provide bibliographies of foreign-language materials, which were targeted at small to medium-sized libraries. In one bibliography, for example, Campbell made recommendations for purchase of the one best periodical, in terms of style, content, price, and availability, in twenty languages—Arabic, Armenian, Bohemian, Croatian, Danish, Finnish, French, German, Greek, Italian, Norwegian, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Slovene, Spanish, Swedish, Syrian, and Yiddish. With the financial support of a Boston civic group, the Old South Association, Campbell addressed the dearth of suitable foreign-language materials for immigrant adults by contacting authors and lecturers in Massachusetts and surrounding states, urging them to produce books and pamphlets that could be used by libraries throughout the country, and encouraging them to deliver lectures in foreign languages to immigrant audiences in town halls and public libraries [66, pp. 24–25; 67, p. 21; 69, pp. 266–72; 72–80]. In 1915, the MFPLC, again in financial cooperation with the Old South Association, engaged Alberto Pecorini, editor of an Italian newspaper in New York, Il Cittadino, to lecture in Italian on the opportunities for Italians in America. Pecorini’s lectures to Italian audiences called on Italian immigrants to learn English, attend evening schools, use public libraries, and keep their children in schools. Due to Campbell’s influence, Pecorini eventually published in 1920 his history of the United States written in a bilingual format, English-Italian. Pecorini’s The Story of America became a popular textbook for the adult Italian immigrant learning English [56, pp. 20, 25; 65, pp. 14–15, 17–18; 66, pp. 22–23; 67; 81, pp. 22–24; 82, pp. 22–23; 83, pp. 20–21; 84, p. 14; 85–88]. Beginning in 1916, the MFPLC, in cooperation with Simmons College in Boston, offered annual summer institutes for Massachusetts librarians that featured classes in and discussion groups on various aspects of librarianship. Campbell’s round tables on Americanization and library work with immigrants were regularly offered. Also, that same year, Campbell’s acquaintance with Corinna S. Canoutas, the wife of Seraphim George Canoutas, a Boston lawyer and writer, resulted in the publication of a cookbook and handbook on child care written in Greek. The recipes in the Greek cookbook called for ingredients available in American grocery stores and were adapted to the lifestyles of Greek immigrant mothers [62, p. 10; 72; 77, p. 20; 78, p. 67; 89–91]. Also, in 1916, the ALA Publishing Board published Campbell’s second bibliography in the Foreign Book List series, Selected List of Russian Books. In the introduction, Campbell gave full credit to two Russian scholars who, because of their familiarity with Russia and the Russian book trade, were “in a position to judge just what sort of books would be most appreciated by the Russian people who use our public libraries” [66, p. 25; 92]. During Campbell’s early years with the MFPLC, she lived in Brookline, Massachusetts, a suburban community within a short commuting distance of her office at the Massachusetts State House in Boston. In 1914, Campbell’s father, George, after the death of his second wife Rosalie, moved from East Orange, New Jersey, to live with her in Brookline and to renew their close relationship. Campbell also welcomed into her home her niece and nephew, Georgia Campbell Waterman and Thomas Tileston Waterman, the children of her sister, Anne (Campbell) Waterman. The time at home in Brookline was happy for the family-oriented Campbell, who kept the public and private sides of her life very separate. Family members years later were amazed to discover that their modest Aunt Maudie had been a firebrand in her day. In the fall of 1917, George Campbell was in a trolley accident and lived only a few months longer. He died December 2, 1917, almost a year before the conclusion of World War I. Campbell, along with niece and nephew Georgia and Tom Waterman, moved from Brookline to a residence on the north side of Boston’s Beacon Hill district, two blocks from her office at the Massachusetts State House, and close to a thriving Italian neighborhood in the North End [1–5]. During World War I, Campbell planned and implemented programs for non-English-speaking soldiers, temporarily stationed in Massachusetts. Confronted with troops who did not speak or understand commands or instructions in English, the armed forces personnel at Camp Devens intensified their efforts to provide courses in English for non-English-speaking recruits. Camp educators turned to the MFPLC for assistance in obtaining English textbooks written in the foreign languages understood by the immigrant soldiers. Although the virtual standstill of the book trade with European countries thwarted efforts to provide foreign-language library service during wartime, the MFPLC was able to supply small quantities of English textbooks in twelve of the foreign languages spoken by the servicemen stationed at Camp Devens, and, through the traveling library service, supplied additional recreational and educational books. As a special service, the MFPLC provided lecturers in foreign languages for hospitalized soldiers, who often understood neither their physicians nor their officers and fellow soldiers. Captain Ernest J. Hall, an army officer in charge of morale at Camp Devens, wrote Campbell on December 20, 1918, approximately a month after the armistice was signed, and thanked her and the MFPLC on behalf of the foreign-born soldiers, who deeply appreciated “the possibility of reading good literature in their native tongue.” Hall remarked that the availability of books in Arabic, Armenian, Finnish, French, Greek, Italian, Lithuanian, Polish, Portuguese, Russian, Swedish, and Yiddish had been of “great assistance to the military authorities in maintaining a good spirit among the men, and in developing them mentally while in Camp Devens” [82, pp. 25–27]. Between 1919 and 1921, Campbell’s reputation had grown from statewide and regional to national. Her services as a consultant for library work with immigrants were in demand not only by small- to medium-sized libraries in the Northeast but also by large urban library systems in cities serving immigrant communities in the Midwest, notably Detroit and Cleveland. During her consultation work in Cleveland, she met a fellow activist and cultural pluralist in Eleanor E(dwards) Ledbetter, librarian of the Broadway branch of the Cleveland Public Library, who would in the 1920s through 1930s chair the ALA Committee on Work with the Foreign Born. Campbell’s reputation as a consultant and her acquaintance with John Foster Carr, founder of the Immigrant Public Society of New York City, an ALA employee during World War I, and first chair of the ALA Committee on Work with the Foreign Born (ALA CWFB), were undoubtedly factors in her appointment in 1920 to the ALA CWFB, one of the few committees to survive the failed ALA Enlarged Program, which had hoped to carry on successful programs initiated by the ALA Library War Service. The ALA CWFB had been established in 1918 at the end of World War II to raise the national consciousness on the rights and needs of immigrants for library service. Campbell served for two years on the committee [83, pp. 17–19, 22; 84; 93–99]. More national recognition of Campbell’s work in Passaic came in 1920 with the publication of John Daniels’s America via the Neighborhood. Daniels, a member of the Carnegie Corporation of New York’s Task Force on Americanization, was responsible for identifying the most successful social agencies and organizations, including public libraries, in the campaign to Americanize the immigrant. Daniels discovered that the most successful libraries were those extending their influence beyond the walls of the library into the community. Successful librarians were those who “conceive the library as an organic part of the community, which may be not only a place of books, but a general center with a broadly educational motive.” Daniels applauded her service in Passaic as “a convincing demonstration” of how libraries could cooperate with the immigrant community to affect its Americanization. In her introduction to the republished edition of Daniels’s study, Florence G. Cassidy pointed out that his study “exemplified sanity and objectivity in the midst of the strident voices and confused utterances of the period” [100, p. vii; 101–102]. By the time Daniels’s words appeared in print, Campbell had already applied the same methods initiated in Passaic at the state level in Massachusetts. In 1921, Campbell, at the age of fifty-two, was in the throes of a midlife crisis, brought on by the constant travel and numerous speaking engagements, and was disappointed that her salary with the MFPLC had not been increased throughout her seven-year tenure. She shared her concerns with family members in Virginia and West Virginia [1]. In September 1921, relatives in Roanoke, Virginia, wrote her about a position in Lynchburg: the Jones Memorial Library in Lynchburg, Virginia, was searching for a director. Upon notification of the opening, Campbell forwarded to the search committee her credentials for consideration and explained why she would desire to leave the security of her position with the MFPLC for the uncertainty of an underdeveloped library situation in rural Virginia. She mentioned that she looked forward to “the planning and launching of an institution as powerful in its educational and moral effect as a great public library can become” [103; 5, p. 50]. Her letter contrasted the new challenge with her former one of “jogging up already established libraries” as she had been doing in Massachusetts. It was apparent from her letter that she wanted to return to Virginia, where she had been raised in her early years. She would be near relatives in Charles Town, West Virginia, and Roanoke, Virginia. Campbell’s sister Anne (Campbell) Waterman was to settle later in Port Royal, Virginia. In 1928, the Colonial Williamsburg Restoration would attract her nephew Thomas Tileston Waterman, a nationally recognized architect and architectural historian [103]. Having made up her mind, Campbell had to resign formally. She was resolute in her decision to leave Boston, effective December 31, 1921, for Lynchburg. Even the possibility of an increase in salary, which was offered, was not sufficient to dissuade her [104]. The responses from her colleagues on the MFPLC as well as librarians, trustees, leaders of the immigrant communities, and “new Americans” across the state, expressed their collective concern that Campbell would be impossible to replace [105–106]. In the official announcement of Campbell’s resignation, which appeared in the MFPLC 1921/22 annual report, Belden assessed the impact of Campbell’s contribution to library work with immigrants throughout Massachusetts by recognizing that “under her able leadership the educational work in libraries for aliens attained a high standard” [88; 107]. It would be 1923 before Edna Phillips was hired to replace Campbell as Supervisor of Work with Racial Groups. (Phillips in the 1930 and 1940s would chair the ALA Committee on Work with the Foreign Born.) By 1923, Campbell had completed the first year of her twenty-five-year tenure as director of the Jones Memorial Library in Lynchburg, Virginia. It is ironic that Campbell left behind her in Massachusetts and the Northeast large immigrant populations still coming into the United States from southeastern Europe, Russia, and the Middle East. The new immigration would soon be greatly reduced by new Congressional legislation from 1921 to 1929. The resulting 1929 National Origins Act would be based on a quota system, which had been recommended much earlier in 1911 with the publication of the report of the 1907 Federal Immigration Commission [26, pp. 5–88; 108]. Community Library Service in Lynchburg In Lynchburg, Campbell transferred her advocacy to the improvement and extension of library services to working-class southerners, many of whom, because of the color of their skin, had suffered the same prejudices and discrimination as northerners who did not speak English. The problem that plagued liberal librarians in the South was the legal segregation of African Americans from participation in private and public facilities, including public libraries. Segregation was the result of the South’s interpretation of the Plessy v. Ferguson ruling of the US Supreme Court in 1896, which set the precedent that separate was equal. It would be 1954 before the Supreme Court finally struck down the 1896 ruling, deciding unanimously in Brown v. Topeka Board of Education that separate was inherently unequal [109]. From 1896 to 1954, a hopeless and un-American situation was imposed upon liberal librarians in the South, who knew in their hearts and from their library training and education the imperative to offer equal service, a vision that was still not fulfilled in the South with the acceptance of the 1939 ALA Bill of Rights. As in Newark, Passaic, Valhalla, and Boston, Campbell set about in Lynchburg to demonstrate “the ability of the library to keep our community happy and good-natured, even if we cannot hope to reform the universe” [15, p. 52]. The board of trustees had ordered that the hours for the Jones Memorial Library should be from 10 a.m. to 9 p.m., but Campbell always insisted that the library be opened each morning at 9 a.m. Under her administration the Jones Memorial Library made marked progress. According to the Lynchburg News on July 20, 1923, Campbell’s coming to Lynchburg was fortuitous to the city and the Jones Memorial Library. She oversaw structural alterations within the main building and the landscaping of the grounds [5, p. 50]. Campbell emphasized children’s work, adult education, reader’s advisory services, and the beginnings of library work with African Americans. Her work with African Americans must be viewed in the context of Jim Crow laws in the South that made integration of libraries, schools, and other educational agencies illegal. Shortly after her arrival in Lynchburg, in 1922, she inaugurated a program of sending truckloads of books from the Jones Memorial Library to various public schools, including the segregated African American high school, which continued to be of great assistance in classroom instruction. The first branch library was established at Fort Hill Club in 1922. The Dunbar branch for African Americans at the segregated high school for African Americans was set up in November 1923. Campbell appointed African American poet Anne Spencer librarian of the Dunbar branch. Spencer was instrumental in establishing the Lynchburg chapter of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP). J. Lee Greene, in his biography of poet Anne Spencer, Time’s Unfading Garden, describes Spencer’s first day at the Jones Memorial Library, the day she met Jane Maud Campbell. Although Greene does not identify “the librarian,” she was definitely Jane Maud Campbell. Greene recounts that Spencer in early December 1923 showed “the librarian” her copy of James Weldon Johnson’s The Book of American Negro Poetry (1922), which contained five of her poems. The librarian was impressed with Spencer and her poetry. “Soon afterwards, the board of trustees for the private (white) Jones Memorial Library met and decided to hire Anne Spencer to work at a branch of Jones to be set up in the black Dunbar High School” [110, p. 83]. Anne Spencer was known about Lynchburg as a “social heretic,” an epithet that could have been applied equally to Campbell. Greene illuminates the situation for African Americans in Virginia in the 1920s by paraphrasing data for 1924 contained in Monroe N. Work’s Negro Year Book (1925), which listed twenty-one public libraries for African Americans located in the South, the East, and the Midwest. Three were in the Virginia cities of Norfolk, Roanoke, and Lynchburg. Greene concluded that “since Lynchburg made the list, one can imagine the shortcomings of other public libraries for blacks at this time, for in 1925 the ‘library’ for blacks at Dunbar was more name than fact” [110, p. 84]. A third branch was started later at Robert E. Lee Junior High School. The Dunbar and the Robert E. Lee Junior High branches were later taken over by the public school system. Campbell thus worked along the fringes of the segregation laws by making sure that basic, albeit minimal, library resources and services were available to African Americans living and working in Lynchburg and that talent and potential such as that possessed in abundance by Anne Spencer was recognized. Spencer left her duties at Dunbar by 1945, shortly before the death of Campbell [110, pp. 82–88, 154; 111]. Encouraging the donation of maps, views, and papers documenting Lynchburg’s history, Campbell acquired a collection of the works of Virginia authors, making the Jones library a resource for scholars of Virginia history, literature, and genealogy. The Jones Memorial Library, a privately endowed white library but functioning as the public library of Lynchburg, eventually boasted an outstanding collection of Virginiana, considered one of the most complete aside from the well-known collections at the University of Virginia and the State Library of Virginia in Richmond. Living in Lynchburg suited Campbell. Her Lynchburg Dutch colonial house on Greenway Court was one of her nephew Tom Waterman’s earliest commissions for a new dwelling, his work being mainly in restoration. Custom designed for her way of life, her house gave her constant pleasure. Once having put her roots down in Lynchburg, she never again traveled to old holiday haunts like Ogunquit, Maine. She shared her home generously with house guests, dinner guests, and as a second home for her great nieces, Janet and Fay Reed, daughters of Campbell’s sister Georgia (Waterman) Reed, while they were at Randolph-Macon Woman’s College in the 1940s. The Jones Memorial Library acquired a limousine and chauffeur to help Campbell to make her rounds of branches, trustee’s offices, and civic meetings, including, for example, a series of meetings in which she worked with other city officials on plans for a city war memorial. When Campbell was in her sixties, she decided to economize by getting a driver’s license so that she could drive herself. Kaynor remembers her Aunt Maudie coming to Randolph-Macon Woman’s College to pick up her sister Janet and her for a weekend visit. “My classmates and I would know she was coming when we saw a big black limousine careening down the wrong side of Rivermont Avenue. This became a familiar enough sight so that local people driving to work simply hugged the curb for the few nerve-shattering moments while the library limousine was in their range” [5, p. 50; 112]. A special meeting of the newly organized Virginia Library Association (VLA) was held in Richmond, on November 25, 1927, to appoint a committee to formulate a plan that would embody the ideas of the Virginia Library Association (VLA) in response to the report of the Commission to Survey the Educational System of Virginia. In April 1928, on the first page of the first volume of Virginia Libraries, the official journal of the VLA, was an announcement of the formation of this statewide committee, chaired by J. Maud Campbell of the Jones Memorial Library in Lynchburg. The committee’s charge was to “formulate a plan which would embody the ideas of the association as to the stimulation, formation and support of libraries” [113, pp. 1–2]. Later in this same article, Dr. E. G. Swem was mentioned as being VLA president. Campbell was certainly one of the first presidents of the Virginia Library Association, perhaps succeeding Dr. Swem, for in the October 1929 issue of Virginia Libraries, she was referred to as a former VLA president [113–116]. Throughout the 1930s, the Jones Memorial Library was recognized as a research source, beginning in 1935 with its inclusion in the ALA Committee on Resources of Southern Libraries’ Summary of Information on Southern Research Libraries. In 1936 the library was cited by Harry Clemons in A Survey of Research Materials in Virginia Libraries, 1936–37, along with those in Richmond, Norfolk, Roanoke, Petersburg, Winchester, and Newport News, as being “effective public libraries.” In 1938, Robert Bingham Downs includes the Jones Memorial Library in the 1938 Resources of Southern Libraries: A Survey of Facilities for Research [117; 118, p. 93; 119]. Kaynor recalled that “in the 1920s, 30s, and 40s, a visitor to Lynchburg’s Jones Memorial Library nearly always encountered head librarian “Maudie” Campbell. You climbed the long flight of steps and paused to view the city from the portico before entering. … Inside, the head librarian, exemplifying thriftiness, frequently was taking a turn at the front desk. In the grand spaces of the Jones, Miss Campbell looked startlingly petite—but never insignificant. The white hair piled on top of her head and her ramrod posture told you that she was in command. Her sharp eyes smiled a welcome but lost no time drawing out your errand” [5, p. 16]. Campbell, in weakened health, decided after twenty-five years’ service to the Jones Memorial Library to retire as of January 1, 1947. When announcement of her resignation was made, James Owen Watts, chairman of the board, expressed his personal regret and that of other members. About a week later, a Lynchburg newspaper reported that “A Community Loss” had occurred on Thursday, January 9, 1947, referring to Campbell’s resignation. The editor wrote that Different patrons will miss Miss Campbell for different reasons. Those interested in the history of Virginia will miss her informed discussions and helpful commentary on the fine Virginiana collection she has acquired for the library and her ability to direct the searcher for information to other places where rare volumes could be found. … A librarian in a community such as this learns to know it as do few of its citizens, and if as fine a one as Miss Campbell, exerts quietly but surely a very large cultural influence upon the city. We wish for Miss Campbell much happiness in her retirement, happiness of the kind which she has in large measure enabled others to have through the medium of the books she selected for them and in the manner of their dispensation. May she for many years continue in her capacity of citizen to exert the good influence that has marked her presence with us since 1922 simply through continued residence as a fine citizen in this community, and so in large measure compensate for her absence from the library. [120–121] Although her resignation was to have been effective January 1, she continued to serve through February 1 at the request of the board of trustees and after that time was confined to her home. Between the date of her formal resignation and the date of her death was a little less than three months. Jane Maud Campbell died April 24, 1947, at the age of seventy-eight, at her home. With her at the time of her death was her niece, Georgia (Waterman) Reed of Springfield, Massachusetts, who was like a daughter to Maud Campbell. In addition to Georgia Reed, Campbell was survived by a brother, Robert Campbell, of Buffalo; a number of nieces and nephews in this country including her nephew, Tom Waterman, of Washington, DC; two great nieces, Janet and Fay Reed, daughters of Georgia (Waterman) Reed, both students at Randolph-Macon Woman’s College; and two nieces, a great nephew, and a great niece in England. Trustees and staff members of Jones Memorial Library through respect to Miss Campbell announced that the main library and Fort Hill branch would be closed all day Saturday, the day of the funeral, with burial in Spring Hill Cemetery, Lynchburg [122–123]. Campbell was remembered for “her contributions toward making the library a popular place for many classes of readers and toward building in the community an appreciation of the value of books and of their study” [122]. Another obituary revealed her dedication to her profession, her personal wit and charm, her general knowledge, and her humanitarianism: “to the members of the Board of Trustees and the staff she was more than a librarian; she personified the institution. She was an interesting and charming friend, ready with her wit, directness and fund of knowledge to contribute to any subject of conversation. Her never failing loyalty to the best interests of the Library, as well as her ability to remember items of personal interest, endeared her to her associates” [124]. Researching Maud Campbell’s long and distinguished career awakened interest among her surviving family, notably her great niece, Fay Campbell (Reed) Kaynor, who kept all of her aunt’s papers and eventually donated them to the Arthur and Elizabeth Schlesinger Library on the History of Women in America at Radcliffe College, Harvard University. Campbell’s papers document her activities as a librarian whose interests spanned from library work with immigrants to adult immigrant education to service on state commissions on immigration to community library service [125]. Campbell was above all someone who understood how difficult it was to be different in a world that demanded uniformity. She left her indelible mark on multicultural librarianship by awakening the social consciences of librarians to the need for books and reading for all, regardless of legal status, socioeconomic status, race, or creed, and by pushing public libraries to be truly democratic institutions for the public good.