0- r ;I- 30 VA~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ o 3 CO)
PRESERVATION OF RARE BOOKS AND MANU- SCRIPTS IN THE HUNTINGTON LIBRARY, N OCTOBER of the year I902 the short-lived periodical known as the Bibliographer published an essay entitled "Of bibliophilism and the preservation of books," by Henry French, later identified as the great collector, Robert Hoe. In this article the author makes the unqualified state- ment that: Palatial fireproof buildings with imposing facades, monumental staircases and lofty halls and reading rooms, elaborate and learned classifications and systems of catalogues, with ingenious machinery for the almost automatic delivery of books to readers, however perfect and efficient, furnish no guar- antee for the proper care of literary treasures. Perhaps because of the relatively high proportion of unique and rare material in the Huntington collections, we have given a great deal of time and thought to the preservation of rare books and manuscripts. The belief that not only the present generation but generations for centuries to come will need to use these materials has caused us to develop a somewhat more ex- tended idea of actual library obligations, than the average re- search institution. The creation of "treasure rooms" in several large public and university libraries during recent years shows a definite trend toward conservation for posterity, making it clear that librarians in research institutions are becoming defi- nitely receptive to ideas other than those mainly governing the purchase and circulation of books. I had at first planned to' touch more generally on the broad subject of the preservation of books and manuscripts; on the possibilities of the photostat and other methods of photo- graphic reproduction for the purpose of conserving original ma- terial; on the restricted use of certain rarities; and on many I A paper read before the Large College and Reference Libraries Section of the American Library Association, New Orleans, April 2S-30, 1932. 375
376 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY other points of possible interest to a group of librarians who have or may some day have the responsibility of a rare collec- tion. But a letter received some time ago from Dr. T. J. Briggs, of the United States Bureau of Standards, seemed to indicate that a paper confined chiefly to methods of exterminating book- worms would be more timely. In answer to my inquiry Dr. Briggs said, "We have not made any experiments upon book- worm extermination.... We have been told that there is much difficulty with bookworms in libraries at New Orleans." I feel that under the circumstances New Orleans should bene- fit from the experience of the Huntington Library in extermi- nating bookworms, or, more specifically, the Sitodrepa panicea, as the species which infested our stacks is known in the United States; and consequently I shall devote most of my time to that subject. In the late spring of i928, much to our concern, signs of bookworm activity in the rare-book stack were noticed, some two hundred volumes having been recently damaged. In our initial efforts to combat these pests, we naturally turned for advice to older and more experienced libraries, in various parts of the world, having rare collections, knowing as we did that the ravages of bookworms had been going on for centuries, and thinking that the solution must already have been found. In this we were sorely disappointed. Dozens of inquiries were sent out, but their answers afforded us little help. A few libra- rians admitted that they were confronted with the same prob- lem, but confessed that they were at a loss to know how to cope with the situation scientifically. Some said that, while they were not bothered with bookworms, other book-destroying insects had caused great damage. Others reported that their libraries were free from all insect pests, and seemed a bit surprised to learn that there was a bookworm other than the human variety. Many remedies were suggested, not a few of which were rath- er humorous, in view of the varied diet of the Sitodrepa panicea. For instance, it was suggested that a little fine pepper sprinkled on the shelves would have a good effect. It would, but the good effect would be for the bookworm, not the library! Mr. F. H. Chittenden (whose short chapter on the Sitodrepa panicca
PRESERVATION OF RARE BOOKS 377 in L. 0. Howard and C. L. Marlett, The Principal household in- sects of the United States, published in Washington in I 896, is still considered the best entomological description of this spe- cies) says: The insect received its Latin name from its occurrence in dry bread (panis), and in Europe it is still known as the bread beetle, but its chief injuries are to druggists' supplies; hence the name "drug-store beetle." . . . It is especially partial to pepper.... In pharmacies it runs nearly the whole gamut of every- thing kept in store, from insipid gluten wafers to such acrid substances as wormwood; from the aromatic cardamom and anise to the deadly aconite and belladonna. ....... It has even been said to perforate tin foil and sheet lead, and that it will "eat anything except cast iron." No, the bookworm is not a myth, as so many of our colleagues believe. On the contrary, when we consider its universal dis- respect for almost everything, including arsenic and lead, and add to this the fact that in the beetle stage it has wings to facili- tate its movement from drug stores to libraries, it is indeed a grim reality and an ever-present menace. One institution advocated the use of ether, but failed to say whether it should be administered to the bookworms or the librarian! The situation at a large library in the tropics so alarmed the librarian that he was planning a trip to Europe and the United States to seek information that might help him solve his problem. He said in part: ''For big libraries in mod- ern buildings in tropical countries there is not yet enough expe- rience. We are trying also with chemics (using 'Flit') but this is not sufficient." Monsignor Tisserant, Pro-Prefetto of the Vatican Library, in answering our inquiry said: We have great trouble with bookworms; i.e., Sitodrepa panicea, which in Europe are better known as Anobium paniceum. The damages have been greatest since 1912, at which time the books were taken from boxes and shelved in stacks. Before this the bookworms had both wood and books to eat, but as we now have steel stacks, they eat more vigorously of the books. We used against them carbon disulphide in a zinc box, but the process was slow, as the box is small and the books to be disinfected many. We used cyanic acid gas against a caterpillar which ate the leather-bindings; the results were good, but we did not make other like experiments because the firm which we employed to do the fumigating disappeared.
378 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Monsignor Tisserant in later correspondence intimated that they are not satisfied with their attempt to solve their book- worm problem, and at the present time are seriously considering the installation of an exterminator similar to the one designed for the Huntington Library. But I am getting ahead of my story! Libraries in England were unanimous in their statements that they were free from bookworms, yet our infestation could be directly traced to a shipment of books received from that country about eight or nine years ago. A great number of these books had been rebacked, but now and then worm holes ap- peared in the new leather, indicating that the eggs at least, and probably some of the larvae, had not been dislodged while the books were being rebound. The United States Bureau of Entomology reported that they had "never made a thorough study of insects affecting books." "We have," they said, "fumigated libraries with h-ydrocyanic acid gas but primarily for the destruction of such external feed- ing pests as cockroaches and silverfish and such nuisances as bedbugs." While the Bureau of Standards stated that they had made no experiments upon bookworm extermination, they sent us a list of references which included C. Houlbert's Les insectes ennemis des livres (Paris, I903) and Arturo Scarone's El libro y sus enemigos (Montevideo, I9I7)-two of the most authorita- tive books concerned solely with insect enemies of books. From these two sources we learned much about the habits of book- worms. If you will pardon my translation from Houlbert's work, I should like to quote what he has to say about the Anobium or Sitodrepa paniceum, which he says is called vrillette du pain in France, brodkaifer in Germany, and "drug-store beetle" in the United States. Honor to whom honor is due! One can certainly consider this insect the most dangerous to our books and libraries; at the same time, it is one of the most prevalent, and it is perhaps not exaggerated to say that cight-tenths of the damage done in the bindings of books may be attributed to them. . . . The female drug-store beetle deposits its eggs near the surface of the binding or on the edge of the leaves, choosing the most favorable spots for the evolu-
BEETLE OF THE SPECIES Sitodrepa panicea PHOTOGRAPHED AT THE HUNTINGTON LIBRARY UNDER AN ULTROPAK MICROSCOPE (MAGNIFICATION, I IO). THE LARVAE OF THIS BEETLE ARE PARTICULARLY FOND OF OLD BOOKS AND MANUSCRIPTS
PRESERVATION OF RARE BOOKS 379 tion of their posterity.... As soon as the eggs are hatched, which takes place in about five or six days in summer, the young larvae penetrate into the interior of the book.... When the larvae are ready to be transformed into the pupal or chrysalis stage, they approach the exterior surface-back of the binding- which is the only free surface left them when the books are arranged side by side on the shelves of a library. The larvae then make themselves a little chamber somewhat larger than their ordinary passageways close to this free surface, and carpet the interior with a few threads of silk; it is in this narrow chamber that the small larva is transformed into a chrysalis. The full-grown beetle emerges from its pupal casing at the end of from fifteen to twenty days, and, in order to free itself, has only to pierce, with its jaws, the film of silk, which separates it from the outside; then it takes wing if the temperature is favorable. The circular holes which one sometimes sees in such great numbers on the back of old bound volumes are the exits. I have myself seen specimens during the various stages of their metamorphosis. The larva, chrysalis, and beetle are ex- tremely small, probably about two millimeters in length. The larva has a cylindrical, curved, white body, with dark mouth- parts, while the beetle is of a rather uniform brown color. We have brushed scores of larvae from infested volumes. Under favorable conditions it is possible for the drug-store beetle to develop from an egg within the short space of two months. Four generations of this species in one year are not unusual. Houlbert goes on to say: Each female lays about sixty eggs; the following numbers represent the offspring of a single female at the end of a year, presuming that half of each generation is composed of females: first generation, 30; second generation, goo; third generation, 27,000; and the fourth generation, 8io,OOO. After reading this account of the astonishing possibilities of only one small branch of the 170,000 known families of insects, I began to wonder if there might not be some truth in the state- ment recently made by an eminent British scientist, in effect that "it is not the rising tide of color or the interdestruction of the various races that threatens civilization, but rather the steady attack of the lowly insect." Fortunately, Houlbert assures us that: . . .all the individuals do not reach full growth; many die in the larval stage by the fate of parasites, or are devoured by a carnivorous species which attack them; others disappear because of the cold when they are not deeply
380 THE LIBRARY QUZRTERLY enough embedded in the medium which protects them. In spite of these causes of destruction, their propagation is still very rapid and very difficult to check. It is interesting to note that even these tiny grubs are the prey of still smaller insects.' No reference has been found to the propagation of these parasites to combat bookworms, but its possibilities in case of a major infestation should not be over- looked. Houlbert devotes several pages to various methods of ex- terminating the Sitodrepa panicea and, after rejecting.all fumi- gants but one- formaldehyde-is forced to admit, in summa- rizing the whole chapter, that ... the only advantage that formaldehyde presents over all the other sub- stances previously mentioned, is that it does not decompose organic matter, and that it does not visibly modify the colors. These are certainly precious properties, . . . but it is not even then the ideal disinfectant for libraries in- vaded by insects. By November, I928, the Huntington Library realized it was fighting a losing battle in using methods advocated by other institutions. At that time we were examining all suspected volumes carefully, dusting and brushing inside the covers as well as the pages, then subjecting the books to a three or four days' treatment of Oronite Light Solvent in an airtight metal case, and finally sprinkling them throughout with camphor powder and shelving them apart from the main files in a "convalescing ward," as it were, to be inspected from time to time for new signs of infestation. In May, I929, a new generation of beetles made their way into other volumes, and the vicious cycle began all over again. We were now extremely alarmed, and asked Dr. Tracy I. Storer, of the University of California Agri- cultural College, to make a survey of the whole situation. He informed us that we were probably confronted by a difficult problem, and would have to take strenuous measures to combat it if we did not want the drug-store beetle to be a constant source of trouble. He said, in effect, that no adequate chemical treatment is known by which the larvae of this particular spe- 1 Entedon longiventris, Eulophus pilicornis, and Meraporus calandrae.
PRESERVAITION OF RARE BOOKS 381 cies of beetle in their tunnels in books can be killed except by injecting poisonous gases into these tunnels, and that we should, therefore, confine our efforts to that type of fumigation, using only gases of known insecticidal and penetrating qualities. Acting on Professor Storer's advice we immediately insti- gated a series of experiments with hydrocyanic acid gas (HCN), carbon disulphide (CS,), carbon tetrachloride (CCI4), and a new fumigant, ethylene chloride, or dichloride (C2H,CI,); but each gas applied in the usual manner seemed to offer definite objec- tions. Bear in mind, also, that in each case we had to satisfy ourselves that there would be no deleterious effects on the mate- rials fumigated, either now or two centuries from now. This, of course, necessitated months of research which would have been difficult without the very kind co-operation of the Califor- nia Institute of Technology. We decided to apply an old method to a new problem. It was found that with vacuum fumigation almost perfect penetration could be obtained, and that it would not be necessary to open every book so as to expose as great a surface as possible to the fumigant. This meant that we could treat a great number of books in a relatively small chamber. In addition, we were in- formed that vacuum treatment would destroy the almost micro- scopic eggs of the Sitodrepa panicea, as well as the larvae, by rupturing the thin membrane at one end of the egg and allowing the poisonous gas to enter. We had at last found an excellent method of fumigation, but were still searching for an ideal fumigant. I thought until recently that we were the first to apply our method to the fumigation of books in a library; imagine my surprise, then, when I came across the following statement in a paper on "In- sect pests in libraries," read before the American Library Asso- ciation in 1879 by Professor H. A. Hagen, of the department of entomology at Harvard University: The different methods employed to kill the larvae [of bookworms] are mostly not indifferent, at least for the bindings. I should like to propose here a remedy perfectly harmless and perfectly efficient, namely, to put such rari- ties under the glass bell of an air pump and to draw out the air. After an hour the larvae will be found killed.
382 THE LIBRARY tUARTERLY Dr. Hagen referred only to the larvae; the egg, chrysalis, and beetle are harder to destroy. To insure full success an effective fumigant should be used along with the vacuum treatment. We had for some time been interested in a fumigant that had just come on the market, ethylene oxide (C2H40), but be- cause it was new we were naturally cautious, and our experi- ments with it were more extensive than with the gases men- tioned before. We were considering ethylene oxide as an insecti- cide, and carbon dioxide as a blanketing gas, since the former used alone is inflammable; but this meant having in the build- ing inflammable material in some form, however safe it might be as a mixture inside a fumigating chamber. The problem was solved when Dr. Arnold 0. Beckman, of the department of chemistry at the California Institute of Technology, who had been helping us with other experiments, discovered that ethy- lene oxide and carbon dioxide could be combined in a liquid that is neither inflammable nor explosive. This new fumigant is now being marketed under the trade name of "carboxide." A safe and effective fumigant at last being available, we de- signed, with the aid of Dr. Irving Gleason, chemical engineer for a company manufacturing vacuum equipment, a fumigator five feet in diameter by ten feet long, sufficiently large to accom- modate five or six library trucks full of books at one time, or the largest pieces of furniture, tapestries, and other objects of art. The actual operation of the apparatus is very simple and does not require the services of a trained engineer or a fumigating expert. Since its installation we have fumigated all suspected volumes in the rare-book stack, as well as foreign shipments showing the least signs of infestation. Until all books in the stacks have been fumigated there is, of course, the possibility of re-infesta- tion, but we feel that, with strict vigilance and ordinary pre- caution, our battle has been won, and we hope the "diet of worms"-as far as the Huntington Library is concerned-will once again be the good earth rather than priceless volumes. But there is another factor in the battle against book-destroy- ing pests (and here I think I may broaden the entomological reference advisedly)-that of "climate." Without realizing it
Co * ' co CI wO (A 0 C0u Co''v MUC C) W ~ ~ U ' i 0 c Cd 4 c ~* U~~~~~~o A4 oC 1 0~~~~~~~~ 0 vo CO mCO C) Ci) 6) C ~ ~~~f) c) .~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~b)o C)> p~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~i ~~~Z ~ ~ ~ ~~~~ U vC~~~~~~~~0 c w,~~~~~~~~~4- /
PRESERVATION OF RARE BOOKS 383 at the time, and for another purpose entirely, we had already created in our rare-book and manuscript stacks, atmospheric conditions which seem to retard the propagation of insect en- emies of books. Librarians are powerless to prevent the use of poor paper, leather, etc., in the manufacture of books, but can do much to keep volumes of such inferior character from deteriorating unnecessarily and to bring about the general use of more lasting materials in the future. Dr. Frank P. Hill and Mr. Harry M. Lydenberg have been of great service in facilitating the preser- vation of newsprint paper and in persuading a few newspapers to issue small editions on more permanent paper for deposit in certain libraries; and, as you know, the Bureau of Standards, under the auspices of the National Research Council and the Carnegie Corporation, is carrying on extensive investigations in the whole field of conservation of records. The results thus far obtained make us all conscious of the fact that custodians of books and manuscripts have long been negligent in this di- rection. A report on the progress of experiments was written by B. W. Scribner for the October, 1931 (Vol. I), number of the Library quarterly. Several preliminary surveys and observa- tions have already been published. One of these, concerned more directly with the subject of this paper, was recently issued under the title, "A Survey of storage conditions in libraries rela- tive to the preservation of records."' After reading it I began to wonder if I shouldn't have based the present paper entirely on ideal atmospheric conditions for bookstacks instead of devot- ing so much time to exterminating the Sitodrepa panicea. In this report the statement is made that: No library was able to control completely the variation of temperature and relative humidity within the narrow limits considered necessary for successful preservation of records and none attempted to minimize acidic pollutions of the air. The following external agents were considered to be of great consequence in dealing with the preservation of records: I. Light, particularly sunlight, attacks both the paper and fibers and the sizing material, producing "yellowing" and brittling. s In Bureau of Standards miscellaneous publicatsions, No. I28 (October, 1931).
384 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY The Huntington Library, realizing several years ago the dan- ger of sunlight admitted through ordinary window glass, took steps to avoid the hazard in the stacks. Moreover, we carried on rather extensive experiments to determine as far as possible the caliber of the rays penetrating into the various rooms from both natural and artificial light, and even investigated the advantages of certain types of window glass and electric lamps. As a result we installed actinic glass in the windows on the south side of the new reference room and blocked up those in the main exhibition room. At the present time experiments are being conducted to enable us to estimate the deteriorating in- fluence of existing artificial lighting conditions in the stacks over a period of two or more centuries. If these tests indicate that the lighting facilities are still unfavorable, corrective meas- ures will be taken. 2. The absorption of moisture containing sulphurous and sulphuric acids resulting from the combustion of coal and other present-day fuels, produces marked deterioration. Recent tests prove that our air-conditioning plant is success- fully removing practically all dust, acids, etc., from the air en- tering the stacks. In large cities it is extremely important to guard against this constant source of trouble. Tests made in London over a period of twelve months indicated that deposits amounting to 76,050 tons fell on that city during the year. This total included 6,ooo tons of ammonia, 8,ooo tons of sul- phite, and 3,000 tons of chlorine and chlorides, to say nothing of vast amounts of carbon and tar. 3. Successive changes in atmospheric temperature and relative humidity seem to exert a marked deteriorative effect, the phenomenon most frequently observed being that of brittling following prolonged storage in warm, dry places. The authors should have added here that excessive humidity is favorable to the growth of mold. Elsewhere they say that temperature and humidity should be automatically regulated within relatively narrow limits, and suggest a range of tem- perature from 65? to 750 F., and of humidity, from 45 to 55 per
PRESERVATION OF RARE BOOKS 385 cent. Our own investigation indicated that a temperature of 70? F. and a relative humidity of 50 per cent, maintained day in and day out, are ideal for the proper preservation of books and manuscripts. These precise conditions we have been able to maintain for about two years. Vellum manuscripts that curled and cracked when the humidity was low can now be conveniently handled with assurance that gold illuminations will not peel off. 4. Insects, worms, molds, and fungi also attack books in some instances. I have already touched on insects in general and bookworms in particular. The possibility of mold is also a constant threat to libraries. Not a few librarians and collectors were alarmed last summer at the development of mold on their books, and we had many inquiries concerning methods of preventing the growth of mildew and treatment of infected volumes. Well- developed specimens were discovered on a file of newspapers in one of the largest libraries in the West, and the situation was so alarming that its librarian tried to interest a California college in establishing a fellowship to investigate means of combating this menace to libraries. Valuable records in a vault of a city hall in Southern California were in danger of being damaged by mold. I have even seen it growing on steel files where it could only have subsisted on the superficial film of polish and on the moisture in the air. One of the best private collections in Cali- fornia is endangered, and its owner is considering the installation of an air-conditioning plant. I wish I could take time to tell more of my observations in this regard, but it will suffice to say here that the species of mold liable to invest volumes! cannot develop under atmospheric conditions that are ideal for books. Engi- neers are likely to recommend raising the temperature of a room to a very high degree in order to lower the relative humid- ity. This remedy might be more dangerous to books than mold itself, and should be resorted to only in extreme cases. Tem- porary relief may be had by using anhydrous calcium chloride to absorb some of the moisture in the air, and there are, I be- I AIspergillus niger van Tieghem is a common species in California.
386 THE LIBRARY QUIRTERLY lieve, other satisfactory means without resorting to excessive heat. Long before the Bureau of Standards discovered the ideal atmospheric conditions for libraries, the Huntington Library was maintaining them, day in and day out, without variation and with reasonable assurance that no foreign substance was en- tering the stacks; yet the authors of the "Survey of storage conditions in libraries,"' in summarizing their report, again call attention to the fact that: ". . . No library was able to control completely the variation of temperature and relative humidity within the narrow limits considered necessary for successful preservation of records, and none attempted to minimize acidic pollutions of the air." Progress in controlling these conditions at the Huntington Library had obviously not come to their attention. There is no doubt that this important phase of library econ- omy has been sadly neglected. Too often the initial cost of in- stalling an air-conditioning plant has prevented library boards from considering it, but still more frequently the benefits of such a system have not been fully appreciated. At the present time we are consulting with a California scien- tist (who discovered the cause of, and perfected a remedy for, the dark brittle spots oftentimes found in newsprint paper), with the hope of finding means of preventing or arresting the development of "foxing," so often found in books and so im- perfectly understood. Our observations in this regard will not warrant a definite statement as to whether or not the atmos- pheric conditions mentioned as ideal for books will also prevent foxing. Perhaps the researches on the preservation of records now being made by the Bureau of Standards will throw some light on this important question. THOMAS M. IIAMS THE HUNTINGTON LIBRARY SAN MARINO,CALIFORNIA I In Bureau of Standards miscellaneous publications, No. I 28 (Oct., 193I).