THREE GENERATIONS OF THE SOVIET INTELLIGENTSIA LEOPOLD H. HAIMSON I O PF THE many issues that have been reopened in the healthy atmosphere of puzzlement and controversy that has enveloped Western studies of the Soviet Union since the end of the Stalin era, perhaps the most im- portant has been the broad question of the attitudes and role that the Soviet intelligentsia may be expected to dis- play in the future development of the Soviet system. It might, of course, be observed that the uncertainty which now prevails about this question merely illustrates once again the truth of the old adage that there are no experts on the Soviet Union, only persons of vary- ing degrees of ignorance. Yet it might perhaps be useful to consider precisely in what respects the developments of the post-Stalin era have cast a shadow of doubt on the assumptions about the Soviet intelligentsia that we had come to entertain during the last years of Stalin's life. I think it may be fairJy stated that nothing about the developments of the post-Stalin "thaw"-including the op- portunities that they created for many of us to come into much closer contact with the Soviet intelligentsia-has tended to change our picture of the ex- ternal pressures to which, during the Stalin era, and even in its aftermath, the intelligentsia was subjected by the regime-of the process of ideological indoctrination that they underwent in childhood and youth, of the nature of the political controls that governed their adult lives, of the rewards they could expect for conformity, and of the penal- ties they might have to pay for defiance. In these respects, our image of the Stalin era has now become considerably more precise and more shaded, to be sure; we now have a far clearer picture of the exquisite variations in the pen- alties that the regime imposed on re- calcitrant intellectuals and academicians -from demotion to provincial institu- tions and administrative exile in north- ern Russia and Siberia to imprisonment in concentration camps or ultimate liquidation. We also now know consider- ably more about the institutionalized methods of accommodation and avoid- ance that intellectuals used and the regime tolerated, even at the height of its ideological campaigns in certain dis- ciplines-such as the curious migration of Soviet logicians from the naked glare of the Institutes of Philosophy to the more private haven of the various In- stitutes of Mathematics that took place during the official craze about "dialectic logic." Still, the basic picture remains unaltered: the ubiquitous courses in diamat ("dialectical materialism") were and continue to be as sterile and as boring as we surmised they were; Essenin and so many other brilliant literary figures did in fact disappear; Zoshchenko was not, and for that matter still is not, allowed to publish.1 Yet notwithstanding the apparent reliability of our knowledge of these con- ditions of Soviet intellectual life during the past quarter of a century, two broad areas of uncertainty concerning their effects appear to me to have been ex- ' Zoshchenko has died since these lines were written. 254
THREE GENERATIONS OF THE SOVIET INTELLIGENTSIA 255 posed in the glare of the post-Stalin "thaw." The first of these centers on the nature of the internal responses that Soviet in- tellectuals actually make to the pres- sures to which they are subjected: At any one time, to what degree are individ- uals' minds and hearts actually molded by the pressures of the regime? To what degree and in what specific forms do they actually absorb the values and styles of thought that it seeks to impose upon them? And, if variations occur in these internal adjustments, what signifi- cant causes underlie the variety of indi- vidual responses? Inherent in the second area of our present uncertainty about the Soviet in- telligentsia is the even broader and more complex question of the relative per- manence or impermanence of the con- ditions that totalitarian systems create: Assuming that at any particular time the members of the intelligentsia responded to the pressures of the system with a particular pattern of attitudes, of values, and of thought, what can we say about the relative permanence of the pattern of these responses? What are we in a position to predict concerning their future evolution? One should, I think, be frank to admit that in the years since Stalin's death a quite radical change has occurred in our thinking about the two broad problems that I have just raised. In the immediate postwar period we witnessed a prevalent tendency among Western observers to view the Soviet system, as, indeed, all totalitarian societies, through largely Orwellian eyes-as altogether omnipo- tent systems endowed not merely with a capacity to control the overt behavior of their subjects but also with the mon- strous ability to manipulate their every feeling and every thought. By virtue of this extraordinary ability that they were presumed to possess, these systems were then regarded as almost rocklike mon- oliths, largely impervious to pressures of change. At best, certain observers foresaw the possibility that conditions might gradually arise under which ex- ternal pressures on Soviet intellectual life would be significantly reduced, but only because the new Soviet intelligent- sia-as, indeed, the entire generation of the "new Soviet man"-would have ful- ly internalized the values and rules of the system. In such a world of faithful, depersonalized automata, totalitarian- ism by terror would have been super- seded by an even more sweeping totali- tarianism by consent. If many succumbed to such night- marish visions during the last years of Stalin's life, it would appear that most recently, as if by some sort of internal dialectic, our thinking about the Soviet intelligentsia has swung to an opposite extreme-to the image of a contempo- rary intelligentsia generally seething with unrest and discontent and to the optimistic picture of a future in which the members of this intelligentsia, ever more powerful and ever more discon- tented, will subject the Soviet regime to irresistible pressures for fundamental changes. The violent swings of opinion that have occurred during the last five years concerning the current attitudes and outlook of the Soviet intelligentsia and the deductions that may be drawn from them for the future provide the clearest indication of the uncertainty of our present knowledge and conclusions about these two questions. Yet the prob- lems are so fundamental, the issues that they raise appear so central in the for- mulation of our expectations about fu- ture contacts with the Soviet Union, that
256 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY some treatment of them, however incon- clusive it may prove, would appear in order in this discussion. II In attempting to gauge the impact that the Soviet experience has had on the contemporary intelligentsia, it is, first of all, necessary to bring to mind that after forty years of Soviet rule we now find represented on the Soviet intel- lectual scene a variety of groups of dif- ferent ages and social origin, which have been subjected in the course of their de- velopment to environmental influences of quite different character and inten- sity. These four decades in the life of the intelligentsia have encompassed a vari- ety of complex, interacting processes and patterns of change: changes in the character and appeals of official ideol- ogy, as gradually, from the vision of an unrealized revolutionary utopia, this ideology was transformed-partly into a set of ritualistic utterances and prac- tices, partly into an elaborate system of rationalizations for already existent, sta- bilized institutions; changes in the in- telligentsia's relationship to authority, as the still relatively free and, in some respects, even antiauthoritarian intel- lectual climate of the early and middle 1920's was gradually replaced by the rigidly orthodox intellectual atmosphere and the ubiquitous controls of the Stalin era; changes in the social composition and in the sense of social identity of the intelligentsia that reflected, in turn, the great social overturns and dislocations of the late 1920's and early 1930's and the subsequent stabilization of Soviet so- ciety; and, last but not least, the changes of emphasis in the intelligentsia's intel- lectual pursuits and concerns that oc- curred in the wake of the "Second So- cialist Offensive," with the emergence, full-grown, of a technologically and sci- entifically oriented society. Each of these processes and patterns of change has left its mark on the members of the contemporary Soviet intelligentsia, but the precise character of their imprint has differed substantially from one group of the intelligentsia to another. Perhaps the most notable of these variations, or at least the one that strikes the Western visitor most forcibly, is the difference-indeed, the psychological distance-between generations. A visi- tor quickly draws the impression that, after forty years of turmoil, the con- frontation between adjoining age groups has become marked by a gaping chasm that almost no meaningful continuities, no significant points of contact, appear to bridge. Three major age groups stand out in one's image of this confrontation: the generation that had already reached intellectual maturity before the Bolshe- viks' seizure of power, or at least before the imposition in the 1930's of totalitar- ian controls over Soviet intellectual life; the middle generation of the intelligent- sia, the generation of those, between, say, the ages of thirty-five and fifty, who spent almost all their adult life stifling under what has come so quaintly to be called "the Cult of Personality"; and, finally, the group of young men and women, who, while largely educated under Stalin, have begun to make their presence felt on the intellectual scene only under the more clement and chaot- ic conditions of the post-Stalin "thaw." The survivors of the pre-revolution- ary generation of the intelligentsia are now few in number. Yet one is struck by the extraordinary prominence and influ- ence of the position that they still exer- cise on the intellectual, particularly the academic, scene. One finds these aging symbols of the past-complete, down to
THREE GENERATIONS OF THE SOVIET INTELLIGENTSIA 257 their redingotes, pinces-nez, and small Van Dyke beards-still occupying the major chairs in Russian universities. One finds them still editing the major works published by the Academy of Sci- ences and still scurrying, with a busy and proprietary air, about the halls and offices of its various institutes; occa- sionally, one even finds them, in their studios or salons, eagerly presiding over gatherings of young adepts of literature and the arts. How do these men seem to be faring after four decades of war, revolution, penury, and terror? They seem much older, of course, more frayed and more fragile, but at the core they appear re- markably unchanged. Through these years of continuous pressure and stress most of them have managed somehow to hold onto the basic interests, the values, and personal style of life that they origi- nally carved out for themselves, and even their energy, their zest for exist- ence, seems unimpaired. While talking with one of these aging figures, it some- times seems as if one were resuming a conversation-interrupted for thirty or forty years-exactly at the point where one had left it: the names of the same au- thors, the titles of the same books, are cited; the same intellectual and aesthet- ic standards, the same basic likes and dislikes, are expressed. All this is not to imply that these men have maintained an active, or even a passive, belligerence toward the Soviet regime. Quite the contrary, most of them seem to have made their peace with it, if only by burying themselves in the confines of their professional work. Indeed, at those critical moments when the world threatened to engulf them, many made the pragmatic, crass com- promise of writing books or delivering lectures, in no word of which they be- lieved. And even now, while occasional- ly indulging in a smirk of satisfaction as they bask in the glow of the measure of recognition that the post-Stalin era has brought them, they generally display in their conduct the prudence, or at least the circumspection, of wily old men. Yet what really appears most worthy of emphasis is how minimal an impress the pressures of the last forty years seem to have made on this generation of the intelligentsia. To be sure, the regime did largely succeed in controlling the nature of their writings and public ut- terances, although even in this sphere its success was not unqualified. At the very height of the Stalin era, many, par- ticularly among the literateurs, appar- ently continued to seek their own truths and to record their own thoughts; and, while the products of their efforts could not usually be published, they often re- ceived wide circulation in manuscript form. (To this day, some of the poems most popular in certain intelligentsia circles have never appeared in print.) Most important of all, the regime failed to effect any significant changes in this generation's inner thoughts and inner values, and it did not even really sub- due their will. Despite the rules of cau- tion that they had to learn, despite the repeated experiences of torment and self-humiliation that they had to under- go, many of these old men have some- how managed to survive without any fatal injury to the integrity of their in- ner selves: their sense of personal iden- tity and personal dignity, their interest in and zest for life, have remained mira- culously intact. I vividly recall the passing comment of a prominent literary historian of this generation, during a visit to a bookstore, about a series of volumes that he him- self had edited. Pointing to the more re-
258 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY cent volumes in this series, he explained to me, with complete aplomb and in im- peccable, if somewhat dated, French slang: "These particular volumes still smell, I'm afraid-they appeared a little too early." I remember another conver- sation, about Russian historiography, with a stout and generally formidable- looking old Russian historian, the au- thor of monumental works on the early history of Russia. At the end of this talk, during which he had cited only standard pre-Soviet works on the sub- ject, he observed, in the most casual manner: "It is a pity that Miliukov never finished his book on Russian his- torical thought; nothing to make up for it has been published in recent years." The fact that Miliukov, a prominent leader of the liberal Kadet party and the first foreign minister of the Provi- sional Government in 1917, has been de- nounced for many years as an arch re- actionary had not, ostensibly, entered my interlocutor's mind. And, finally, as typical of the tone that this generation imparts, I recall a talk with an aged and sickly writer, a Jew who had suffered much in the hands of the regime during the last years of Stalin's life. De- spite all the disappointments that he had undergone, this ailing old man was still genuinely filled with hope, and, brushing aside my own expressions of skepticism, he valiantly strove to infuse me with his rosy nineteenth-century faith in the in- herent goodness of the Russian people and in the vast promise of modern sci- entific progress. The sources of the inner resilience, of the inner security and assurance, that the members of this generation com- monly display appear largely to have been drawn, I think, from the old intel- ligentsia traditions and style of life to which they have so tenaciously clung. The manifestations of these traditions appear as varied as the character of these men's own early, pre-revolution- ary or pre-Stalinist experience. Many, particularly those who spent some of their student years in western Europe, have remained identified in their thoughts, in their values-even in their speech and their mannerisms-with the universal European culture that they absorbed during their youth. Others have sunk their roots deep in the his- tory and culture of the Russian past, and they have found in these traditions of the past a secure basis for their own identity. Others still have somehow kept intact-despite the experience of the post-revolutionary years-the touching cult of the People, the innocent golden Populist credo of the old intelligentsia Left. It might perhaps be said that for many of these men life came to a stand- still thirty or forty years ago, but the experiences of these earlier years has served them as a buttress and as a source of nurture to the present day. III The contrast between these old men of the Russian intelligentsia and those who immediately followed in their foot- steps is of dramatic and tragic propor- tions. If the survivors of the old genera- tion impress one with the continued pre- eminence of their position, the members of the second generation-the men and women who spent all their adult lives under Stalin's rule-strike one, by con- trast, by their lack of real vigor and in- fluence in many spheres of the contem- porary intellectual scene. What has hap- pened to this middle generation of the intelligentsia, an age group which usu- ally exercises so prominent a role in a country's intellectual life? To a degree, the impression that it is
THREE GENERATIONS OF THE SOVIET INTELLIGENTSIA 259 largely absent from the stage is, in fact, justified; for this, we must recall, is the generation that was most nakedly ex- posed to, and was most heavily decim- ated by, the ravages of the great purges of the 1930's, the carnage of the war years, and the obscurantist reaction of the postwar period. Yet physical blood- letting provides only part of the explan- ation, since many in this age group ac- tually managed to survive (indeed, in far more considerable numbers than their elders), and their physical pres- ence on the contemporary scene is by no means difficult to discern. These survivors are not all of a type. Some have the somewhat abrupt, "busi- ness-like" manners, the curious rigidity in personal intercourse, the broad, squarish, physical features characteris- tic of the "new" intelligentsia that was largely recruited from the ranks during the great social overturns of the 1920's and early 1930's, but some seem to re- flect just as unmistakably in their speech and mannerisms the imprint of intelli- gentsia descendance and upbringings. Many are to be found in positions of bu- reaucratic, or at least official, responsi- bility; they are administrators in uni- versities and institutes, party hacks of the press, literature, and the arts, who have spent all their lives organizing, controlling, and manipulating Soviet culture in accordance with changing of- ficial dogmas; but some have also sur- vived among the subjects of this official class-the scholars and artists who were compelled to produce under the stric- tures of the official keepers of ortho- doxy. Perhaps the most important distinc- tion to be drawn within the ranks of this generation, one which overshadows, even if it largely coincides with, the dif- ference between masters and subjects, "official types" and those whom they control, is the distinction between the immediate descendants of the old and the members of the "new" intelligent- sia, i.e., the men and women who were recruited from non-intelligentsia strata, usually through the party, in the post- revolutionary years. Between the oldest generation of the intelligentsia and their own immediate descendants, particularly in the fields of literature and the arts, there do appear to exist some notable differences, but they are largely differences of an emo- tional, rather than an intellectual, char- acter. In contrast to the impression of vigor and zest that most of the old men so abundantly convey, many of their "children" appear to be facing the fu- ture with a quite deeply felt feeling of futility and hopelessness. Indicative of their general mood is the answer that I received from a quite successful middle- aged dramatist-a pupil of Vakhtangov and thus one of the few prominent sur- vivors of the golden age of the Soviet experimental theater-when I asked this man what one might expect in the future of the younger (the third) gener- ation of the intelligentsia. "Nothing," was his reply, "nothing at all. The young people don't really want anything. They just want to construct little boxes. Art is dead; it will be hard, very hard to resur- rect." Such an aura of futility and defeat continues to be evoked by this group of the middle generation of the intelli- gentsia, despite the fissures that have appeared since Stalin's death in the edi- fice of official orthodoxy and the hesi- tant, limited, almost intangible, but nonetheless quite real, sense of move- ment that then began to permeate cer- tain spheres of Soviet intellectual life. Why this general and deep-seated pes-
260 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY simism? It might well be argued (par- ticularly in the light of the official re- action that has followed the Hungarian uprising) that this pessimism has been justified; but such an argument would not be particularly germane, for what needs to be explained is an attitude which, to a considerable degree, is con- fined to the members of this one gener- ation. While any answer must necessar- ily remain speculative, I would suggest that perhaps the most relevant fact is that the intellectuals in this age group have had to spend almost all their lives in a world out of control, a world which subjected many of them to early disillu- sionment and which compelled almost all of them, in order to survive, to sully themselves with gestures of abject sub- mission or compromise. And, most im- portant of all, unlike their elders, the members of this middle-age group had to travel on their arid journey without the buttress of a personal set of values and code of life, without the memory, however brief or remote, of a meaning- ful and unsullied past, in short, with- out the basis for an independent identity that could resist the incursions of their engulfing contemporary environment. Some of these middle-aged intellectu- als will occasionally wistfully refer in conversation to the intelligentsia's tra- ditional heroes and their works. But these are but secondhand memories with which they have no immediate connec- tions and from which they can draw lit- tle emotional comfort and resources. Most of these men appear to have come out of the long night of the Stalin era utterly spent, and if they look to the future with such apprehension, it is in part perhaps because they face it them- selves with no inner reserves of energy, of faith, of self-respect, left to contrib- ute. (It should be noted that those of the intellectuals of this generation who were subjected to administrative exile or im- prisonment during the Stalin era-and who, therefore, had little occasion or tendency to comnpromise-present a striking contrast to those who remained "free." The survivors of these deportees who have returned to the contemporary intellectual scene since the governmental amnesty appear remarkably unbroken. They seem assured, fearless-indeed, not unhopeful-and it is they who have now assumed whatever position of in- tellectual leadership this generation is still able to offer.) But the smell of defeat is not entirely confined within this middle-age group to those descendants of the older gener- ation of the intellectual class who re- mained in the main current of Soviet intellectual life throughout the Stalin era. To a lesser degree, such an aura- or, at least, the signs of almost equal uncertainty and disorientation-may now be discerned among many in the "new" intelligentsia that the party re- cruited from lower social strata and hastily trained in the late 1920's and early 1930's-discerned even in the most hardened bureaucrats whom one en- counters on the present Soviet cultural scene. To be sure, when one sees them -sitting behind their big desks or pre- siding at the head of their long, green- felt conference tables-these heavy-set "official types" of Soviet cultural life still look quite formidable, and they still dis- play considerable authority as they de- liver themselves of the latest platitudes of the official cultural line. And yet an observer quickly draws the impression, as he watches their dealings with their younger subordinates, that these men are largely going through empty mo- tions, that they have lost much of their
THREE GENERATIONS OF THE SOVIET INTELLIGENTSIA 261 confidence in the significance of their acts and in the importance of their po- sitions. What has happened since Stalin's death to upset so rudely the confidence and self-esteem of these men, who in their lifetime have successfully weath- ered so many crises? No doubt, they were, in some degree, puzzled and em- barrassed by the modest reassertion of traditional cultural values and by the attendant confusion in government pol- icy that occurred in the wake of the denunciation of the "Cult of Personal- ity." To a Western visitor, the mani- festations of their plight seem often quite comical: I well recall a session at one of the Institutes of the Academy of Sciences at which one such "official type" solemnly reproached himself for having failed to pay adequate attention in the past to, of all people, the Russian Idealist philosophers of the nineteenth century. But the significance of such ludicrous spectacles should not be over- drawn, any more than the "liberalism" of current government policies. After all, this is not the first time that these men have been faced with the necessity of having to praise one day what they had had to condemn the day before. It seems to me that the really signifi- cant blow that the bureaucrats of Soviet cultural life, and more generally the middle-aged group of the "new" intelli- gentsia, have had to suffer as the result of the post-Stalin "thaw" has been the shattering of the image that they had entertained of their relation not to the old, but to the new, to the officially spon- sored, culture. With all their servile con- formance to the twists and turns of gov- ernment policy, with all the personal ruthlessness that most of them displayed in "ideological" and bureaucratic in- fighting, many in this middle generation of the "new" intelligentsia, it must be remembered, were sustained throughout the Stalin era by an ideal which gave them energy and purpose. They viewed themselves during those long years not just as policemen or sycophants but as agents in the birth and shaping of a new and different culture, as participants in the creation of a new and different in- telligentsia-an intelligentsia that would be as energetic, disciplined, and down to earth as the old one had seemed to them anarchic and divorced from practical realities; a culture that would be as ra- tional and purposive, as successfully committed to vast collective efforts to master and control the earth on which it stood, as the old culture had seemed to them passive, diffuse-immobilized in the morass of formless and empty dreams. To understand the naivete and the crudeness of the vision, to account for the hardiness of its survival through the sordid vagaries of the Stalin era, one needs to recall that its keepers entered Russian intellectual life as outsiders, with no backlog of intellectual traditions or experience to guide them. The official ideology and cosmogony that they had absorbed (and further simplified) pro- vided literally the only key, the only frame of reference, that many of them had for the explication of intellectual phenomena; the role that the party had defined for them provided their only conception of proper and suitable activ- ity in the development of Russian cul- ture. Thus, being themselves so much the creations as well as the agents of the party in a world utterly divorced from their earlier experience, many of them had little occasion to question the par- ty's objectives or to doubt the legitimacy of their own mission. But now, after thirty years, this sense
262 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY of historic destiny has finally been un- done. This has come about partly as the result of the recent changes in the par- ty's policies but mainly, I think, because the culture these men had dreamed of finally came to life, and in the chaos of the post-Stalin era began to assert its presence. In the last analysis, what appears to have been most unsettling for these men in the changes that have occurred in the course of the post-Stalin "thaw" in the party's cultural line has not been so much the party's vague, hesitant ges- tures at ideological liberalization-ges- tures that were often retracted almost as soon as they were made. Rather, it has been the rising tendency on the part of the regime to indicate, in its references to the sacred dialectic of theory and practice, that the achievement of suc- cess, even in certain cultural spheres, depended in its eyes more on practical skill and experience-however delimited and circumscribed-than on the rituals of theory and dogma. It is, after all, precisely in this realm of professional ability and skill that the "new" intelli- gentsia of the middle generation cannot help sensing its inferiority to the young men and women who have begun to as- sert their presence on the contemporary intellectual scene. The men of the Stalin era have been partly defeated by the very measure of their success. The younger generation of the intelligentsia is proving itself, in the main, as rational, as purposive, as down to earth, as devoid of the "fatal" inclina- tion to vast and "frivolous" theoretical flights-in short, as seemingly "useful" and politically safe-as its makers could have dared to dream. At the same time, it is as steeped in certain scientific values and skills, as fully acclimated to certain forms of intellectual experiences and pursuits, as its makers were not. And it is precisely by virtue of these intellec- tual accomplishments-and limitations -that in many areas of intellectual life, the members of the younger generation have begun to express the sense of their superiority over the "new" intelligentsia of the Stalin era, and to assert the su- perfluousness of their tutelage. Yet the sense of conflict and psycho- logical distance that many in the middle generation of the "new" intelligentsia have begun to draw from their contacts with the young also reflects the measure of their historic failure. For what is also characteristic of most of the young men and women who have come to the fore is that while they do appear to be politi- cally safe, while they may have fully absorbed the general ideological frame- work and values that their makers sought to impress upon them, they take this framework and these values for granted, they perceive them as the limits rather than as the center of their world. As these young men and women look at the "new" intelligentsia of the Stalin era, most of them can only entertain and, to a degree, express an attitude of indifference, or even repugnance and disdain. Themselves dreamless or ani- mated by quite different and far more personal dreams, they cannot believe in, or often perceive, the large and inhu- man visions that animated them-their desire to strive and their willingness to strain for the realization of vast, imper- sonal collective endeavors; they can see in them only despotic, "uncultured," obsolescent men, who are ignorant of the very intellectual skills and scientific values in the name of which they pur- port to speak. "We still have far too many people who talk about things they don't know anything about," a young Soviet scholar
THREE GENERATIONS OF THE SOVIET INTELLIGENTSIA 263 told me within the hearing of an official of his Institute who had just delivered a long and windy speech. In the face of such verdicts by the very products of the culture that they strove so hard to mold, the bureaucrats of the Stali'n era and, generally, most of the "new" intel- ligentsia of the middle generation (what- ever the power and authority they may still hold) have finally begun to feel their age and some of the uselessness of their presence. IV The young men and women between the ages of twenty-five and thirty-five who are now making their way on the Soviet intellectual scene are truly the children of the Stalin era. All their lives they have known no other social order, no other ideology, no other explicit vis- ion of man and society, than those that the regime imposed upon them. And yet the gloomy forecasts to which so many in the Western world succumbed at the height of Stalin's rule-as they visual- ized his monolithic, all-pervasive totali- tarian state giving birth to a new race of depersonalized subjects-have somehow not come to pass. This is not to say that the failure of the regime has been unqualified or that the nature of its failure is by any means immediately apparent. Indeed, a West- ern visitor is likely to draw from his first contacts with most of the young men and women of the intelligentsia an im- pression of almost universal ideological uniformity-a sense of the most appall- ing kind of sameness about the assump- tions that these young people voice and particularly the terminology that they employ, whenever broad political, social, or philosophical questions are raised, Thirty years ago, a significant percent- age of the younger generation would un- doubtedly have rejected, or at least have ignored, official ideological categories; but today almost every one of them considers himself a "socialist" in politics and a "materialist" in philosophy, be- lieves in the "Marxist" interpretation of history, and generally venerates the "Leninist heritage"-about as unques- tioningly as an American schoolboy ac- cepts a stereotyped image of the Ameri- can "Revolution." It is only as a visitor's acquaintances become more intimate, and as his con- versations descend from the heights of generality and abstraction, that he dis- covers that, although official categories may be universally espoused and official terms universally employed by the mem- bers of this generation, these have ceased to provide a reliable guide to the character of individual tastes, attitudes, and thoughts. A young logician may call himself a "materialist"-and, if you prod him, comfortably defend the basic tenets of materialist philosophy-but this surface orthodoxy has not re- strained him from absorbing like a sponge the positivist outlook of most Western logicians into his thinking about the specific problems that he en- counters in his work. A young artist may consider himself a realist, even while he is searching in the Western and Russian aesthetic traditions for richer and more complex aesthetic forms. Young intel- lectuals, generally, may fervently aspire to a political and social climate that would be more open to free and indi- vidual self-expression, and at the same time stoutly proclaim themselves to be "Leninists." (The most extreme illus- tration of this in my experience was the argument advanced in a conversation by a friend of mine to the effect that, after all, Lenin himself had included repre- sentatives of other parties in the first
264 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY cabinet that he formed inimediately after the October Revolution.) All this is not to imply that the official ideology has now become easier to dis- card. On the contrary, as we have al- ready observed, this ideology is now al- most automatically accepted by the young, partly, one would suspect, be- cause it provides the only general con- ceptual framework and language that young people now know, but chiefly, I think, because of the fundamental change in meaning that, after thirty years, it has come to hold for them. Three decades ago this ideology was still rooted very largely in a distant vision of utopia, which could easily be denied, since it was admittedly unfulfilled. But now that it has been at least partially translated into relatively stable, realized institutions, it has become largely indis- tinguishable from the diffuse ethos of a way of life, in which from the very be- ginning of their existence the members of this generation have been inextricably absorbed. While this transformation of the ide- ology into the reflection of an all-en- compassing present has undoubtedly re- sulted in its much wider acceptance by the young, it has also made it infinitely more porous, if only because it has made it far more susceptible to personal in- terpretation. No longer resting on a dis- crete abstracted vision of the future, now merged instead with infinitely more concrete and differentiated perceptions of the world of today, the official ideol- ogy has lost thereby its ability to guard the thoughts and feelings of its keepers against the impact of their immediate experience. If an observer may well come to the conclusion that differences in social ori- gin-the distinction between "old" and "new" intelligentsia, rather than any distinctive characteristics of occupation- al roles and concerns-still represent the most important dividing line that may be discerned within the ranks of the middle generation of the intelligent- sia, he is likely to draw a contrary im- pression from his contacts with the third generation. The young men and women of the intelligentsia are the final prod- ucts of a society whose social institu- tions and class lines are becoming in- creasingly stable; and, owing to the much greater continuity of life-experi- ence that this stabler society affords or imposes, it is the nature of life-experi- ence and primarily the characteristic features of professional roles and pur- suits that have become the chief molds in which their attitudes and values are shaped. The last three decades have brought in the character of these professional roles a transformation so radical that it has been reflected ultimately in the very meaning of the word "intelligentsia." As late as thirty years ago, the term was still predominantly applied to those se- lected few in society who were presum- ably engaged in the exploration of new ideas, new forms, new values, and the criticism of existing ones. Despite a dec- ade of Soviet experience, it still con- tinued to reflect, however dimly, in its denotations the traditional view (which had been emphasized ever since the in- troduction of the term in the 1870's) that membership in the circle of the elect hinged, in the last analysis, not on occu- pational criteria or even on the mastery of any particular intellectual skill but rather upon the development of a self- conscious articulated world view that could, and indeed should, be opposed to the unconscious, conformist, Philistine instincts of the common herd. Tradi- tionally in Russian experience, this
THREE GENERATIONS OF THE SOVIET INTELLIGENTSIA 265 function of self-conscious social criti- cism-of acting (as the intelligentsia liked to conceive) as the articulate con- science of the nation-had been largely exercised through the medium of belles- lettres and literary criticism; and prob- ably as late as the 1920's Russian writers and critics (and only to a much lesser degree academicians) still continued to be viewed, and to view themselves, as the core of the intelligentsia, as the keepers of its intellectual traditions, values, and mores. But after thirty years a radically new definition of the term (officially introduced in the 1930's) has finally become dominant in general par- lance-the use of the term "intelligent- sia" simply to designate all those who are engaged in occupations that require a degree of intellectual and technical skill. This change in the language is, of course, merely a symbolic expression of a whole series of political, social, and cultural changes-of the "routiniza- tion" of the once revolutionary ideology of the regime that has come with the establishment and consolidation of a new social order; of the muzzling of Russian writers and critics and, more generally, of the large-scale suppression of all tendencies actually or potentially critical of official values that occurred in the 1930's; of the emergence, in the wake of a sharply accelerated industrial revolution, of a scientifically and tech- nically oriented society. It is in the characteristic physiog- nomy of the younger generation of the intelligentsia that the impact of these changes is now most faithfully reflected on the intellectual scene: it is to be dis- cerned not merely in the increased pro- portion of young men and women who are now engaged in scientific or techni- cal pursuits or even in the interests and attitudes that the members of this domi- nant group generally display; one can also observe it, only too clearly, in the general climate of the intellectual life of this generation. If one may define the characteristic orientation of the techni- cian as an interest in the application or implementation of "general truths" rather than in their discovery, it is prob- ably fair to say that such a "techno- cratic" orientation has become almost as characteristic of many of the young historians or philosophers whom one en- counters on the Soviet scene as it seems to be of most young scientists and tech- nicians. What are some of the typical features of the intellectual attitudes and values that the young commonly display? They are a genuine desire for profes- sional competence-an urge to assimi- late facts and to master the techniques required for their skilful organization and manipulation-combined with a certain narrowness of outlook, with the lack of any urgent desire to explore new intellectual horizons or to question basic theoretical assumptions; a rela- tively unquestioning acceptance of what are conceived to be the basic institu- tions and values of the existing political and social order, combined with a desire for greater security and greater mate- rial rewards; an almost equally auto- matic acceptance of higher political au- thority-indeed, a sense of reverence toward the state and its needs-com- bined with a deeply felt urge for auton- omy in one's professional role and for an insulated sector of private, personal life. As one goes down the list, it would almost appear as if the composite por- trait that emerges differs little from the picture that is often drawn today-at least in fashionable circles-of the quality that intellectual life has as-
266 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY sumed in contemporary Western so- cieties, and especially in the United States, under the impact of modern tech- nology and mass communications. And yet the analogy may be pushed too far: even if certain universal tendencies of the modern age have been at work in Russia, as they have in other countries, they have acquired a distinctive shape and flavor in the context of the Russian cultural scene. Some of the differences are only of degree: for example, the concern of most members of the younger genera- tion with the assimilation of facts and techniques-with the mastery of every- thing that is encompassed within their definition of professional competence- is even more serious and more sustained, while at the same time their intellectual horizon tends to be even narrower, their interest in any broad ultimate questions even flabbier, than is true of most of their Western contemporaries. I might cite the example of an extremely able and well-trained young Soviet logician of my acquaintance, who, although very well read not only in the narrow area of his specialty but also in the whole history of Western epistemology-from Aristotle, Leibniz, and Kant to Russell and Whitehead-is not in the least in- terested in the fundamental problems that obsessed these great philosophical figures. In part, one might account for this narrowness of intellectual interests in the light of the political controls, of the corset of official orthodoxy under which this generation still has to operate. But there are, I think, other, more signifi- cant, undertones to this feature of their mentality. First, one cannot help being struck by the degree of self-consciousness that many in this generation mamifest in thinking about the presumed attributes and prerequisites of their professional roles-about their skills, their manners, even their dress. The quality of this self-consciousness reminds one of cer- tain of the attitudes that in a much earlier age-in the eighteenth and at the beginning of the nineteenth century, to be exact-a nascent Russian intelligent- sia generally displayed, following the first flush of Westernization: a similar concern with techniques, with manners, with forms rather than with the more distant, if more basic, objects of their roles; a desire to be and especially to appear "cultured"; an acute conscious- ness of station, matched by equal uncer- tainty as to precisely what prerequisites this station entailed; deeply felt feelings of patriotism combined with an equally vivid sense of emulation of, and com- petition with, the West. In my own ex- perience the quality of this self-con- sciousness was most sharply evoked by an eager and well-meaning young Soviret curator who escorted me through the warehouse of the Russian Museum in Leningrad, in which many of the paint- ings in official disfavor still remain stacked, eternally confronting, in the shadows, the numberless rows of dis- carded busts and paintings of the late Joseph Stalin. As we proceeded on our tour of the warehouse, pausing from time to time to look through piles of un- framed canvases of Russian modernistic painters, ranging from early Chagalls and Kandinskys to the energetic prod- ucts of the expressionist school of the early and middle 1920's, my guide, who had conducted a Westerner on such a tour only once before, watched me like a hawk for the proper expressions of ad- miration or disdain. "Mr. Alfred Barr [the previous Western visitor] had been much taken with this black on black
THREE GENERATIONS OF THE SOVIET INTELLIGENTSIA 267 [or perhaps it was a white on white]. Didn't I find it interesting?" I didn't. And as the disparity between my unedu- cated taste and Mr. Barr's was gradually revealed, my guide's introductions to each canvas grew ever sparser and more tentative, and she eagerly seized on whatever lame and uncertain clues I was able to throw her way. Actually, of course, most members of the new generation are professionally quite competent, but the incident I have just cited is to some degree indicative of the solemn and almost Puritanical zeal with which they are straining to master the techniques, the forms, the details, of their professional roles, now that they have been liberated, or have liberated themselves, in some degree from detailed official supervision. But even this by no means provides the whole explanation for this genera- tion's almost obsessive concern with minutiae rather than with the broad problems of intellectual inquiry and scholarship. Their intense and narrow professionalism also represents, I be- lieve, a genuine form of self-emancipa- tion-the form that the young's demand for personal autonomy has taken in the wake of the all-pervasive political at- mosphere and controls of the past. In this respect, the younger generation's insistence on the sanctity of professional standards and criteria, on the all-im- portance of the mastery of facts and techniques, constitutes perhaps the safest, but also the most direct, channel for revolt against the political hacks of the Stalin era. And, by the same logic, the latter's insistence on the "ultimate" implications of various intellectual and professional concerns and therefore on the continued centrality of ideological norms and criteria has been their chief battle standard in the defense of their threatened stations. Thus, in the younger generation's de- liberately narrow and circumscribed professionalism, just as in other equally innocuous and unimpressive man ifesta- tions of their attitudes, such as the de- sire for a private apartment or the urge to engage, with their own friends, in informal leisure activities of their own choosing (even if these may involve but the collection of postage stamps), one may discern a general and deeply felt desire for the restoration of a measure of individual autonomy and personal privacy. It is essentially this same urge that is expressed -if in a more forceful and more direct fashion-in the one area of the intellectual life of the younger gen- eration in which, on occasion, ultimate problems of value are squarely faced and explicitly discussed, namely, the do- main of literature and the arts. Litera- ture has always been the inner fortress of the Russian intelligentsia, and in the contemporary works of young writers, and particularly of young poets, the traditional visage of the intelligentsia is even now to be discerned. To be sure, in the outlook of these young writers, the intelligentsia's traditional concern with ultimate questions and ultimate values has undergone one major, per- haps startling, transformation: no long- er is it typically expressed in the affirma- tion of broad, generous, and ambitious world views, pregnant with immediate political and social implications. After forty years of Soviet experience, it has now taken the form of a search for more modest, more personal, and, to my mind, more ultimate human values. The re- discovery of truthfulness rather than the discovery of truth, the defense of a code of personal dignity and personal honesty, the apprehension of the beau-
268 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY ties of nature, and of the beauties of love, the determination to endure but not to compromise-these are the themes that are frequently expressed in the poems (many of them unpub- lished) of the younger generation of writers and which occasionally spill through the net of official censorship in their published works of prose. Once again, the reason for the ex- pressly, resolutely, apolitical content of the preferred themes of many young Soviet writers should not be hard to surmise. What more direct, or at least more immediate, form could their revolt against the noxious, all-pervasive po- litical aura that enveloped the Stalin era and that still pervades so much of contemporary life possibly have as- sumed? In the last analysis, it is, I think, not illusory to infer that, in a variety of disguises-from the air of cynicism that its occasional styliagi ("zoot-suiters") proudly display like a badge of honor and the air of intense professionalism that most of its members so conspic- uously manifest, to the note of self- discovery and self-affirmation that is struck in the works of some of its litera- teurs-much of the younger generation of the intelligentsia is now earnestly en- gaged in an effort to defend, or at least in a search to discover, a private and autonomous sphere of the self. What does all this portend for the future? With all the urgency of their desire fot a measure of personal auton- omy, most of these young people, it must be recalled, continue to feel loyal to the foundations of their social order-to socialism and its values, as they vari- ously choose to define them. But, lest one be tempted to draw all too sweeping predictions from this indubitable pres- ent fact, one needs also to be reminded that the pattern of values and thoughts that a person consciously entertains at a particular moment does not neces- sarily reflect with any precision the com- plex and unstable balance between those elements that attract him to, and those that repel him from, the social order under which he lives. A sense of loyalty often represents the only real alternative to the almost intolerable bitterness and loneliness of a feeling of total alienation. If in the face of one's consequent un- certainty, a prediction still has to be ventured, however lamely, about the future attitudes of this generation, it would be that much will depend in the last analysis on the future policies of the regime. To this observer at least, most members of the younger genera- tion of the intelligentsia still appear willing to support an authoritarian po- litical order-an order, under which, as has been the case through most of Rus- sia's history, respect for higher author- ity would be combined with the recog- nition of some priority of state needs. But most of these young men and wo- men do not appear to expect of the fu- ture-and perhaps many of them will not even be willing to endure-the all- pervasive totalitarian controls, the in- vasion of all areas of human privacy and autonomy by the dictations of official expediency and official whims, that have been characteristic of the re- cent past. This diagnosis of their present outlook and aspirations should not lead us to feel either excessively despairing or especially self-righteous. Authoritar- ianism, after all, can assume a variety of vestments, and, through most of hu- man history, it is under its restrictions that individuals have had to seek, and often have managed to find, a measure of inner freedom and dignity.