THE UNITED STATES AND THE MOVEMENT FOR UNIVERSAL COPYRIGHT, 1945-52 MARION JAMES UNITED STATES DOMESTIC COPYRIGHT LEGISLATION, 1949-52 W<r rHILE the UNESCO Copyright Section was occupied on the v v international scene, events of history-making proportions had been occurring in the United States. In the years 1949-50 the question of interna- tional copyright had become involved with United States foreign policy in gen- eral, resulting in the first major change in the United States copyright law in forty years. Viewed in the light of the major chang- es needed, this step was a mere toehold, but the outcome was the amending of the United States Code by relaxing some of the restrictions regarding foreign works. H.R. 2285, introduced by Con- gressman Emanuel Celler, chairman of the Judiciary Committee, was a com- promise measure of no little importance.' The chief provisions of the Celler Bill were to give foreign publishers six months instead of sixty days to apply for ad interim registration, to protect a foreign work bearing notice of Ameri- can copyright for five years from the date of first publication abroad instead of six months from the date of applica- tion for copyright, and to permit the importation of fifteen hundred copies of a book in English to test the American market to see if the book would sell in quantities to justify its printing and pub- lishing in the United States.2 Two other provisions of the bill gave a foreigner applying for copyright of a book pub- lished in English or any other language the option of securing American copy- right by depositing one copy of the book and paying four dollars or by depositing two copies and a library card of pre- scribed form.3 The purpose of this sec- tion was to alleviate the monetary ex- change difficulties. Section 215 also per- mitted an American copyright owner to use the facilities of the United States Copyright Office in making arrange- ments with foreign countries in the mat- ter of deposit or registration.4 During the public hearing on the bill, domestic attitudes toward international copyright were exposed. So unusual was the agreement among all interested groups publishers, authors, printers, and manufacturers-that Congressman Edwin E. Willis of the subcommittee was moved to exclaim that he had "never seen a piece of legislation that every- body wants."5 The hearing progressed with no ap- parent opposition until the State De- partment representative, Thomas E. Bracken, presented a letter addressed to Mr. Celler from the Acting Assistant Secretary of State, Ernest A. Gross. The State Department opposed any com- promise on the manufacturing clause, 1 Congressional Record (81st Cong., 1st sess.), XCV (February 3, 1949), 819. 2 Congressional Record (81st Cong., 1st sess.), XCV (April 4, 1949), 3807. 3 Ibid. 4 Ibid. I U.S. Congress, Subcommittee of the House Committee on the Judiciary (81st Cong., 1st sess.), Relaxation of the Copyright Law as to Foreign Works: Ilearings on II.R. 2285 (Washington, D.C., 1949), p. 15. 219
220 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY believing that the entire clause should be repealed. The communication stated forthrightly that "the object of the pro- vision is purely and simply a concealed device to protect American printing and related industries from foreign competi- tion."6 Committee members were also reminded that the manufacturing clause is the kind of device which in other fields has been found harmful to the increase of United States exports abroad and that it was a source of embarrassment to the whole program for the reduction of artificial barriers to international trade in which the United States was vigorously taking leadership.7 The hearing was enlivened by the com- ment that legislation on the manufac- turing clause should be deferred until Congress had time to consider the Ha- vana Charter for an International Trade Organization. "The Department [State] is at present reviewing the manufactur- ing clause. . . . There is considerable doubt whether these provisions of our copyright law would be consistent with the obligations whigh would be assumed by the United States if the United States accepts the proposed charter."8 The State Department also ques- tioned additional formalities that would be a prerequisite to copyright protec- tion (i.e., the requirement of adding a catalog card in form and content satis- factory to the Register of Copyright). The committee was further informed that the use of the facilities of the Copy- right Office to forward copies of works to foreign countries with which satisfac- tory arrangements exist for deposit or registration was contrary to the trend in international copyright agreements, cit- ing the 1946 Inter-American agreement as an example of an attempt to break away from such formalities.9 A forewarning of the difficulties that the International Trade Organization might have was expressed by a member of the subcommittee, Angier L. Goodwin, who challenged the State Department representative from the standpoint of domestic economy. "Are we going to continue to hear that when ITO comes up for approval we must subjugate the American interests and American labor to a higher consideration that there is something which perhaps somebody across the sea may not like . . .?"' The representative of the Inter-Allied Printing Trades Council, Oscar R. Strackbein, then revealed why the print- ers were at long last in agreement with this compromise for relaxing copyright restrictions on foreign works. His first point was that, if the copyright law were modified, it would ward off any coun- try's challenging inconsistency with the International Trade Organization. Fur- thermore, and even more revealing, he stated that, if the question of copyright did come up under the International Trade Organization, it would be con- sidered through the machinery of that organization and not by an act of Con- gress which gives an opportunity for a public hearing." Congressman Willis completed the unveiling of the mystery of the sudden amicability among all par- ties concerned by directly questioning Mr. Strackbein as to whether the union would even be favoring H.R. 2285 if the Havana Charter of the International Trade Organization were not coming up for consideration.12 Other interested groups favored the bill, even though it was but a stopgap measure, on the ground that it would represent at least some progress should the Havana Charter fail to pass. Thus, for the first time in forty years, the book 6 Iid., p. 21. 7 bid. 8 Ibid. 9 Ibid. 10 Ibid., p. 25. 11 Ibid., pp. 26-27. 12 Ibid., p. 28.
MOVEMENT FOR UNIVERSAL COPYRIGHT, 1945-52 221 manufacturers, book publishers, labor unions, authors, and motion-picture in- dustries were all on one side, and with practically no discussion in either house of Congress the bill became a part of Ti- tle 17, United States Code, on June 3, 1949. The next step for supporters of the in- ternational copyright movement within the United States was a radical depar- ture from previous methods. United States domestic copyright laws became inextricably entangled in international trade agreements which came up before the House Foreign Affairs Committee in April and May, 1950. The Havana Charter for an Interna- tional Trade Organization had been pre- pared by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Employment and was de- signed to establish a code of interna- tional conduct to guide nations dealing with the fundamental problems of world trade and to create an agency within the United Nations to implement the code. The Charter referred to the reciprocal trade agreements mutually arrived at by members of the International Trade Or- ganization. The agreements had been signed in Geneva during 1947 by twenty- three nations, including the United States, were accepted provisionally by the Havana Conference, and were put into effect on January 1, 1948, by presi- dential proclamation.13 In order to be- come permanent in this country, they needed ratification by Congress. The support of such an organization had been included in the Democratic party platform in 194814 and was reiter- ated by President Truman in his message transmitting the charter for congres- sional consideration. [Reciprocal] trade agreements alone are not enough. These agreements do not touch certain important obstacles to the expansion of world trade. Subsidies, cartels, and many other de- vices have important effects in limiting trade or creating disadvantages for one country as compared with another. What is needed is co- operative action to attack the whole range of obstacles that stand in the way of broadening international trade. The Havana Charter is a major step toward achieving that objective. It was agreed upon by the representatives of 54 nations after more than 2 years of preparatory study and negotiation.", As a result, a House joint resolution au- thorized the President to accept mem- bership for the United States in the In- ternational Trade Organization.'6 In the book industry the opening move came long before the congressional hear- ing on the Havana Charter. Interested groups aligned themselves to promote or oppose the Havana agreement, in- cluding the copyright groups. For exam- ple, the Book Manufacturers' Institute joined an organization known as the Na- tional Labor-Management Council on Foreign Trade Policy, composed of one labor representative and one manage- ment representative from each industry.17 In previous attempts by the propo- nents of international copyright to re- move the manufacturing clause of the United States copyright law, the Book Manufacturers' Institute had voiced vigorous opposition. By means of recip- rocal trade agreements, tariff on books coming into this country had been re- duced, and now came the fear that the Havana agreement, which prohibited 13 62 U.S. Stat. at L. (1948) 1466. 14 "Comparisons between Democratic and Re- publican Major Planks," New York Times, July 15, 1948, p. 10, col. 3. 15 U.S. Congress, House Committee on Foreign Affairs (81st Cong., 2d sess.), Membership and Par- ticipation by the United States in the International Trade Organization: Hearings on H.J. Res. 236 (Washington, D.C., 1950), p. 3. 16 Congressional Record (81st Cong., 1st sess.), XCV (May 3, 1949), 5565. 17 "Reciprocal Trade Agreements: To Ratify or Not To Ratify," Publishers' Weekly, CLVII (April 8,1950), 1674.
222 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY hidden tariffs, would force the elimina- tion of the manufacturing clause in the copyright law."8 Publishers' Weekly, trade organ of the publishing industry, had long espoused the cause of international copyright. Pri- or to the Havana Charter hearings, that periodical, under the editorship of Fred- eric Melcher, forecast the lining-up of contending factions in which industries much more powerful than the book in- dustry would be vocal. Among those listed as generally opposed to ratifica- tion were American manufacturing in- terests concerned with protecting their home market from foreign competition, elements of labor that feared the pos- sibility of unemployment due to foreign competition, nationally minded groups suspicious of international bargaining, and groups which traditionally stood for high tariffs. The supporting factions as foreseen by Publishers' Weekly included the Truman administration, export man- ufacturers desirous of admitting foreign merchandise to this country so that dol- lars would be available for purchasing American goods abroad, manufacturing and importing organizations using labor in foreign countries, and the general pub- lic, including the schools and libraries, which would benefit from sales' competi- tion in this country.19 In an attempt to ascertain whether the interests of labor and management needed to unite to retain safeguards against unfair competition, Publishers' Weekly questioned heads of manufactur- ing departments of a representative num- ber of book publishers to determine to what extent American publishers were having manufacturing done in foreign countries. The results are not presented here as statistical sampling, but the re- plies do provide an introduction to some opinions expressed during the hearings on the Havana Charter. Publishers' Weekly found that no book was being manufactured abroad that could be pro- duced with profit in this country. The chief and almost only reason American publishers go abroad is to find a way to make ends meet on an expensive art book with lots of color.... To a printer it may look as though one book produced abroad easily leads to an- other, and another, and another. To publishers who sometimes hate even to go beyond their own city for their manufacturing, . .. the print- ers' worries seem needless. The consensus of the publishers questioned is that the number of books for which it might be economical to go abroad is very few indeed.... Although it has been argued for years that the United States industries cannot pay high wages and survive foreign competition based on "coolie wages," the fact is that union wages also are paid in for- eign countries. Moreover, in the face of foreign competition, American industries, including the book industry, year after year have success- fully been entering foreign markets.20 The Book Manufacturers' Institute, however, did not hesitate further to show its hand by decrying that the Ha- vana Charter was designed ultimately to bring about world-wide free trade. Publishers' Weekly continued to air the whole problem by stating: With the struggle brewing in Congress over the ratification of the Havana Charter and the activity of UNESCO on the international scene in relation to copyright and book tariffs, a con- cluding consideration is especially pertinent, not only to publishers and manufacturers of books, but to the book trade as a whole, book- sellers, librarians, and the reading public: Would lowered trade barriers in all countries and the elimination of the manufacturing clause barrier in this country contribute to interna- tional economic recovery and a broader under- standing between nations?2' 18 "UNESCO Free Trade Agreement Now Ef- fective," Publishers' Weekly, CLXI (August 23, 1952), 754. It "Reciprocal Trade Agreements: To Ratify or Not To Ratify,"op. cit., pp. 1673-74. 20 Ibid., p. 1674-75. 21 Ibid., p. 1676.
MOVEMENT FOR UNIVERSAL COPYRIGHT, 1945-52 223 Although the Havana Charter con- cerned international trade in its over- all aspects, those parts which might have impact on the United States copyright law aroused a sufficient number of in- terested groups so that their comments were given a place during the public hear- ing in April and May, 1950. A commu- nication from Luther Evans to Chairman John Kee of the House Committee on Foreign Affairs stated the position of the Library of Congress and the Copyright Office.22 Dr. Evans referred directly to the testimony of Willard Thorp, Assist- ant Secretary of State for Economic Af- fairs, who had earlier summarized the American laws which were inconsistent with the Charter. In all there were only six articles which raised any problem, and three of these related to copyright. In his memorandum Mr. Thorp took up the principle embodied in each of those six articles of the Charter, showed its relation to United States policy, and in- dicated changes in United States laws necessary to conform fully to the princi- ple. Articles 18, 20, and 45 of the Ha- vana Charter were indicated as being inconsistent with the manufacturing pro- visions of Title 17, United States Code, especially Article 45, which stated that members shall not use their copyright laws as disguised trade barriers.... These provisions [manufacturing clauses] in effect preclude any book in English from receiving copyright pro- tection in the United States unless every copy sold here (above quota of 1,500) is manufac- tured in the United States. The place of manu- facture of a book is obviously not necessary to protect the rights of the author. To the extent that these provisions deny copyright protection to books in English merely because the books are manufactured abroad rather than in the United States and because these provisions act as an absolute barrier to the importation of for- eign manufactured books in English which are copyrighted in the United States (above the quota), they are inconsistent with the provi- sions of article 18 concerning the internal laws and regulations, article 20 relating to import prohibitions and quotas, and article 45 con- cerning disguised trade barriers.23 Therefore, ratification of the Charter by the United States would require changes in Title 17 of the United States Code to conform to the Charter. Dr. Evans went on to state that the Library of Congress and the Copyright Office were opposed to the manufactur- ing clause and would be glad to see it eliminated. He pointed out that the clause did not affect the importation of books for which copyright protection is not desired and that it was too effective in prohibiting the importation of books in English for which protection is de- sired. A strong and comparatively new note was left by Dr. Evans in his con- cluding question of "whether the elimi- nation of the 'manufacturing clause' will do such serious damage to the American publishing and printing industry that an increase in tariff on books or the use of other measures . . . would be desir- able."24 Dr. Evans also announced that his office had already been assisting the Department of State in drafting a stat- ute for outright repeal of the manufac- turing clause. The positions of at least two other witnesses before the Foreign Affairs Committee hearing shed light on current divisions regarding the manufacturing clause. The American Book Publishers Council, Inc., representing approximate- ly 85 per cent of publishers (in dollar volume of trade books published in the United States), was represented by Ar- thur E. Farmer, their general counsel. Mr. Farmer explained that the publish- 22 U.S. Congress, House Committee on Foreign Affairs (81st Cong., 2d sess.), op. cit., p. 6. 23 ibid., p. 70. 24 Ibid., pp. 519-20.
224 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY ers favored outright repeal of the sec- tions of the copyright law which are bar- riers not only to free exchange of infor- mation and ideas but also to free inter- change of goods among the nations of the world. The publishers whom he rep- resented believed that the legislation necessary for repealing those sections of the copyright law should be enacted si- multaneously with the ratification of the Havana Charter. The book publishers supported the State Department's con- tention that the manufacturing clause violates the basic tenet of the Charter requiring the removal of restrictions on international trade, but they foresaw that ratification of the Charter without simultaneous repeal of the sections in the United States Code which were incon- sistent might result in chaos in the copy- right status of American authors and publishers.25 Another representative at the Charter hearing, and one who had often appeared in previous copyright discussions, was Mr. Strackbein, who at this time repre- sented not only the Inter-Allied Printing Trades Association but also America's Wage Earners Protective Conference and the National Labor-Management Council on Foreign Trade Policy. Mr. Strackbein's statement before the com- mittee did not directly bear on the ef- fect the adoption of the Charter would have upon the copyright law and the re- moval of labor's protection under the manufacturing clause. His arguments against the ratification were based on two other points-that the new organi- zation would duplicate much of the work of agencies already operating in the in- ternational field, such as the Interna- tional Labor Office, the Food and Agri- culture Organization, the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, and the Point Four setup. "In- stead of adding another organization and then appointing a 'Hoover Commit- tee' to unscramble the overlapping in- ternational bureaucracy, it would be better to avoid the proliferation of or- ganizations in the first place."-6 Mr. Strackbein further pointed out that, if the Charter should be ratified, it would remove control over the tariff from Congress to the executive branch of the government. Thus the principle of congressional responsiveness to the electorate as provided in the Constitu- tion would be broken down in this field. He urged that the committee report un- favorably upon the ratification of the Charter.27 The copyright difficulties occupied but a short time in the hearing on the Charter, but they indicated the bitter fight the International Trade Organiza- tion would have in Congress. However, the Charter was never brought before the session. Its withdrawal was loudly lamented by Senator Malone (Republi- can from Nevada), who defied the ad- ministration to have the Charter brought to the Senate floor.28 The failure of the committee to report out the necessary legislation to provide for membership by the United States in the International Trade Organization did not remove the copyright question from its involvement in reciprocal trade agreements. Publishers' Weekly reported in December, 1950, that legislation will now be introduced to create ad- ministrative machinery to strengthen the re- ciprocal trade provisions of GATT now already in effect with 32 governments. 25 Ibid., p. 541. 26 Ibid., pp. 160-61. 27 Ibid. 28 Congressional Record (81st Cong. 2d sess.), XCVI (May 1, 1950), 6060.
MIOVEMENT FOR UNIVERSAL COPYRIGHT, 1945-52 225 Under the terms of GATT . . . trade agree- ments for the reduction of tariffs and the re- moval of other barriers to world trade have been negotiated on a wide scale. It is understood that the present position of the Department of State is that the "manufacturing clause" con- tinues to be a hidden trade restriction and is just as inconsistent with GATT as it was with ITO.... The American Book Publishers Council . . . also feels that the clause impedes progress to- ward two major UNESCO goals, removing barriers to the flow of books and establishing of a universal copyright.29 Accordingly on May 10, 1951, a bill to repeal partially the domestic manu- facturing requirements was submitted by Congressman Celler.30 During the hearing on this bill, once again before a subcommittee of the Judiciary Com- mittee, twenty-one witnesses appeared for and six against it. The bill still re- tained that part of the manufacturing clause which required works by a citizen of the United States or an alien domi- ciled in the United States to be printed and bound in this country in order to qualify for copyright protection. The Celler Bill was only to amend the Copy- right Act by removing the manufactur- ing requirements applicable to foreign books and periodicals in the English language. The bill also revoked the ad interim provisions by extending copy- right time to twenty-eight years subject to renewal.3' H.R. 4059 was considered by its sponsors to be a trial run of how the UNESCO Universal Copyright Con- vention would be received in the United States. Among the proponents of the measure who testified at the hearing was its spon- sor, Representative Emanuel Celler, chairman of the Judiciary Committee. Representative Celler's position was that American exports of books are greater than imports but that, if indus- tries felt the need of protection, it should come under a tariff law on the importa- tion of books rather than under the copy- right law. He also stated that, in the battle for men's minds, ideas were as important as bullets, so that all barriers to free interchange of information should be lifted. Stressing the point that the manufacturing clause was endangering American copyright protection abroad, Congressman Celler reviewed the pre- carious position of American authors and publishers who must depend on a loop- hole in the Bern Convention for protec- tion. In reviewing and answering all pos- sible arguments against the lifting of the manufacturing provision, Mr. Celler re- minded the subcommittee that authors and publishers favor the bill and that they would be the last to favor a deluge of cheap, foreign books into this coun- try.32 In presenting the bill, both Congress- man Celler and Luther Evans explained to the committee that the whole effort of the compromise amendmenit was to improve international copyright rela- tions to the benefit of all interested groups, including manufacturers and la- bor who were still protected by the re- tention of that part of the manufacturing clause relating to American authors.33 Groups that were represented as favor- ing the bill, in addition to the Depart- 29 "Manufacturing Clause Issue Still under Con- sideration," Publishers' Weekly, CLVIII (December 30, 1950), 2621-22. "I Congressional Record (82d Cong., 1st sess.), XCVII (May 10, 1951), 5237. 33 U.S. Congress, Subcommittee of the House Committee on the Judiciary (82d Cong., 2d sess.), A Bill To Amend Title 17 of the U.S. Code Entitled "Copyrights" with Respect to the Provisions Relating to Manufacture: Hearings on H.R. 4059 (Washington, D.C., 1952), p. 2. 32 Ibid., pp. 85-86. 33 Ibid., p. 88.
226 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY ment of State, were the Western Print- ing and Lithographing Company, the Authors' League, the Association of American University Presses, the Ameri- can Library Association, the American Council of Learned Societies, the Amer- ican Book Publishers' Council, ASCAP, the Federal Bar Association, the Associa- tion of the Bar of New York City, the Register of Copyrights, and various pub- lishing houses-T. Y. Crowell, Johns Hopkins Press, Harcourt, Brace, and the Christian Science Publishing Company.34 The hearing on this Celler Bill was enlivened by the opponents, chief of whom was Judge Raymond Tiffany, counsel of the Book Manufacturers' In- stitute, who stressed that it had been his understanding that the proponents of the 1949 modification of the manufac- turing clause had promised not to seek further modification of the clause.3" This argument was answered by Mr. Fisher, Register of Copyrights, who denied that there had been any such compromise agreement. He pointed out that the ear- lier bill had, in fact, been initiated by Mr. Strackbein of the Inter-Allied Print- ing Trades Association, in the hope that its passage might avert a full repeal of the manufacturing clause as part of the United States adherence to the Havana Charter. Statements from the previous hearing, such as those by Dr. Evans and the State Department representatives favoring complete repeal of the clause, were quoted in answering this charge.36 Others who appeared in opposition to the bill were: Mr. Strackbein for the above-mentioned association, the presi- dent of the International Photo-En- gravers' Union, the International Press- men's Union; the International Typo- graphical Union, and Sam B. Warner, former Register of Copyrights.37 At the hearing examples were also cited of difficulties invoived in the United States copyright relationships with non- Bern countries, such as the Netherlands, Cuba, and Mexico. Considerable alter- cation came from quoting an article en- titled "Copyright Protection of Ameri- can Books in the Netherlands," by E. D. Hirsch Ballin. The article referred to Dutch court interpretations of the term "publication" as used in the Bern Con- vention. In the Netherlands Supreme Court decision mere distribution and sale in a Bern Union country was held not sufficient to constitute publication.38 In Cuba, although American works were entitled to protection under recip- rocal relations, it was explained that it was fairly common practice for Cuban periodical publishers to pirate American material. Cuba has a complex registra- tion system which discriminates against American citizens, so that the Copyright Office has been working with the De- partment of State in an attempt to rem- edy the situation.39 The most recent difficulty with Mexi- co arose from an interpretation by at- torneys of the Mexican Foreign Office that the reciprocal relationship between Mexico and the United States was no longer in effect, because Mexico had rat- ified the Washington Convention of 1946 and the United States had not.40 These illustrations of the problems American copyright proprietors were en- countering in foreign countries com- bined with the emphasis on the reminder that organized labor had authored a sim- ilar bill to relax manufacturing provi- sions in 1930, which bill had failed to pass merely because of a filibuster on an- a4Ibid., passim. 35 Ibid., p. 44. 36 Ibid., p. 155. '7 Ibid., passim. 38 Ibid., pp. 168-69. 9 Ibid., p. 213. 40 Ibid.
MOVEMENT FOR UNIVERSAL COPYRIGHT, 1945-52 227 other bill,41 resulted in the subcommit- tee's reporting favorably on the Celler Bill, H.R. 4059. At a meeting of the full Committee of the Judiciary, however, it was decided not to report the bill to the House. For the period of this survey this was the last attempt to amend the copyright law before consideration of the UNESCO Universal Convention. Proponents of the measure found voice for their disappoint- ment in Publishers' Weekly, when editor Melcher deplored the shelving of the Celler Bill. The increased overseas involvements which came with World War II and the years follow- ing have meant a trend away from old isola- tionism and toward recognition of the neces- sity of increased commercial and cultural in- tercourse between nations. Amcrican authors have had more requests for translation rights and American publishers found more activity in export markets, limited, though, by the lack of dollars overseas. The State Department, responding to the nation's need to be better understood abroad, launched its information libraries' program and helped stimulate the de- mand for American books. Such programs have been handicapped by the inevitable inquiry from every Foreign Office: if the United States wants to improve international cultural under- standing and exchange, why does it not join with the nations with which it most wants to co-operate in the long-tested practices of in- ternational copyright?42 UNESCO AND UNIVERSAL COPYRIGHT, 1949-52 Of importance because it marked the end of a purely national or international conception of copyright was the work toward a universal convention accom- plished in the period 1936-39 by com- mittees of experts appointed by the In- ternational Institute of Intellectual Co- operation in Paris and the Institute for the Unification of Private Law in Rome in co-operation with American institu- tions. In 1939 the time had seemed ripe for concluding a really universal con- vention, but World War TI interfered. Especially notable for their contribution to these efforts were the Belgian and Brazilian governments and the Bern Union.4 One of the chief reasons for establish- ing a universal copyright convention was that other countries besides the United States were unable to adhere to the Bern Convention without major changes in their domestic copyright laws. An inter- national copyright system which dis- criminates between national and foreign authors had become incongruous, since distance and difference of language were no longer barriers to the movement of ideas. Previous efforts to establish a world-wide convention had not been widely accepted because of the difficulty of agreeing upon an acceptable pattern. Most suggestions for international trea- ties had been built on an effort to change domestic laws to establish uniform stand- ards of copyright protection in all coun- tries. If a simpler, broad objective could be formulated providing equality of treatment in respective countries be- tween national and foreign authors, later improvements in copyright standards might be forthcoming. The steps toward such a convention, however, required cautious planning. During the years 1947-52, four commit- tees of copyright specialists, several questionnaires, two intergovernmental conferences, and five UNESCO general conferences dealt with the problem of international copyright. 41 Congressional Record (71st Cong., 2d sess.), LXXII (June 28, 1930), 11996-12018. 42 Frederic G. Melcher, "We Deplore Shelving of Celler Bill," Publishers' Weekly, CLXI (April 5, 1952), 1550. 43 Luther H. Evans, "Report ... of the Commit. tee of Copyright Experts," UNESCO Copyright Bulletin, II, Nos. 2-3 (1949), 158.
228 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY The chief aim of UNESCO in picking up the work already so carefully begun by previous international organizations was to arrange for a far-reaching modus vivendi which would assure a free flow of information, ideas, and works. To ac- complish that aim, full consideration had to be given to national and interna- tional practices as well as to the interests of the public, of authors, and of various industries involved in the diffusion of culture in general. Authorized by the Director-General of UNESCO as a result of a resolution at the Third General Conference in Bei- rut in 194844 to engage in a comparative study of copyright law, the Copyright Section prepared a questionnaire which was distributed in the autumn of 1948. The purpose of the survey was to learn the state of things as they existed. The inquiry was, therefore, addressed to gov- ernments of states, members of UNESCO, to other governments, to government and nongovernment organizations, and to private authorities on copyright in various countries. Before the first committee of copy- right experts met at UNESCO House in Paris to consider the replies to the ques- tionnaire (forty-eight replies out of six- ty), the Copyright Section collated the results. To provide an accurate sum- mary, it was necessary to analyze the copyright statutes of all countries, arti- cle by article. The laws were grouped systematically by the different subjects treated and then numbered for use in a classification scheme for a mechanical indexing system. Information was clas- sified on index cards according to sub- ject, country, and date and with use- ful source and bibliographic references. From this preliminary documentation reports were prepared on each of the important subjects likely to be consid- ered by the experts. This organizational work was further disseminated by print- ing it in full in the UNESCO Copyright Bulletin, so that the comparative study was available to all the specialists in the field.45 The attitude of the UNESCO Copy- right Division is of interest because it was also reflected in the decisions of the Committee of Experts. The main axiom on which the work . .. was based was that the assertion that Copyright Law was an obstacle to the free dissemination of thought was a heresy. It was the state of an- archy in the existing laws that constituted such an obstacle and should be suppressed.46 In July, 1949, seventeen experts met at UNESCO House to consider the re- plies. These specialists came not as rep- resentatives of their governments but in their individual capacities as copy- right experts. Also present were repre- sentatives from the United Nations and invited representatives from internation- al organizations of authors, industries, and jurists. Among the seventeen ex- perts were four from the United States- Luther Evans; Arthur Fisher, at the time Associate Register of Copyright; John Schulman, a New York lawyer; and Judge Charles Wyzanski of Boston. In using the documents which sum- marized existing copyright practices, the experts considered first a preliminary question: What might be the best means for taking a first step toward the estab- lishment of rules for protection of liter- 44 "Resolutions Concerning the 1949 Programme of the Copyright Division Adopted by the General Conference of UNESCO," UNESCO Copyright Bul- letin, II, No. 1 (1949), 54. 45 "Study of Comparative Copyright Law," UNESCO Copyright Bulletin, II, Nos. 2-3 (1949), 11-148. 48 "Summary Record of the Third Meeting of Committee of Experts, July 5, 1949," UNESCO Copyright Bulletin, II, Nos. 2-3 (1949), 190.
MOVEMENT FOR UNIVERSAL COPYRIGHT, 1945-52 229 ary, artistic, and scientific works which would be in harmony with national leg- islation now in force? Three possible means were considered by the committee at great length: general adherence to one of the existing international conven- tions, conclusion of new bipartite and multipartite treaties, or creation of a new commonly applicable convention uni- versally adopted by the greatest number of adherents and always open to adher- ence by others. The discussion of the first proposal, to secure more adherents to the Bern Con- vention, occasioned a healthy airing of views by various specialists. Among in- teresting suggestions was the one that there be a "bridge" convention between the Bern and Washington conventions. The weaknesses in each of those two agreements were then brought forth, es- pecially by B. G. Crewe of the London Board of Trade, who stated that, to build a bridge, strong buttresses were neces- sary; but, if the Berne Convention were satis- factory in that respect, it was not known wheth- er anything solid existed on the other bank among the four or five conventions prepared on the American continent. Should not the Ameri- can countries first agree on a single convention before asking UNESCO to start on a risky un- dertaking? Only then could a meeting of the members of the two Unions conclude, not a new convention, but an agreement as to the manner in which a member country of one Union could adhere to the other Union. If the Committee wished to do something for countries not be- longing to any Union, it should use another document for the purpose.47 It was granted that bipartite and mul- tipartite treaties allowed for exactitude and elasticity. Their extension on a world-wide scale, it was agreed, would contribute to greater confusion and com- plexity rather than clarify the situation and improve the free flow of cultural interchange. The committee preferred to recommend Judge Wyzanski's figura- tive suggestion of a "low-staircase" con- vention open to all and not in any way excluding the addition of new steps later.48 To construct the first of these steps was the duty of this committtee. Some of the discussions within the committee illustrate the general prob- lems involved in the delicate tasks that lay ahead in the construction of a uni- versal convention. It was feared by some experts that the existence of a low-stand- ard convention might be regressive in that some members of the Bern Conven- tion might withdraw from it and rely on the new agreement. But it was decided that the safeguards of the present con- ventions should be among the recom- mendations of the new agreement. Some countries in which literary achievement has not reached the level of other states feared that the reservation of translation rights might be lost. Because it was agreed, however, that the primary base of the new convention should be on the principle of national treatment, it was finally settled that no specific reserva- tion in this matter was necessary, as the protection of translations would be cov- ered by national law. The committee al- so recommended that it should not be necessary to require positive copyright legislation in any state as a condition to its becoming a member of the new con- vention. In other words, judicial deci- sions, administrative orders, or legisla- tion would be sufficient. Throughout the meeting of this first committee of experts it was reiterated that the drafting of the convention prop- er was the work not of the committee but of an intergovernmental conference. In order to take all necessary precautions, the committee anticipated that, should their proposed program be approved 47 Ibid., p. 188. 48 Ibid., p. 186.
230 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY by the Fourth General Conference of UNESCO, another questionnaire in the form of a request for views should be sent to member and other states. This questionnaire should seek information on the points indicated in the committee meetings as well as to what extent each state would require a reservation regard- ing the recapture of works which might be permanently in the public domain at the time the new convention might come into force. It was further agreed that the inquiry should request views on what each state felt about the protection of copyright interests of displaced persons. In addition, the committee's formal recommendations included these basic concepts: . . .UNESCO shall establish, after consul- tation with the United Nations, procedure suitable to lead to the adoption of a universal Copyright Convention. [Subject to reservations it was further recommended that] works origi- nating in any state, shall enjoy in every other contracting state the same protection, subject to the same conditions and formalities, if any, as is now or may hereafter be granted by that other state to works originating in it.49 At the Fourth Session of the General Conference in Paris in September, 1949, resolutions were adopted indicating the urgency of the improvement of copy- right on a universal basis. The Director- General was instructed to arrange for a critical study of copyright problems but to consider carefully at the same time the needs of authors, publishers, workers, and the public by inviting representa- tives of these groups to take part in all meetings. Further instructions dealt with the assembling of documentation that would be useful in drafting a univer- sal convention by inviting all states, whether members of UNESCO or not, to indicate their points of view on the timeliness of convening an intergovern- mental conference to prepare such a con- vention. From these replies and after the advice of a committee of experts, the Director-General was charged with the preparation of a report to the General Conference containing the detailed pro- posals on the procedure for calling an in- tergovernmental conference.50 The "Request for Views" was circu- lated among the states in January, 1950, but the time was too short to gather and summarize the replies before the Fifth General Conference convened in Flor- ence in May, 1950. At this General Con- ference, however, an important new pol- icy was adopted in shaping the structure of UNESCO's program. Up to this time the conference had concerned itself only with a short-term program outlining UNESCO's activities during the calen- dar year immediately following each ses- sion. At the Florence Conference, how- ever, a long-term program, called a "Bas- ic Programme" was adopted. As a re- sult of this long-term plan UNESCO in- dicated that copyright was not just its current responsibility but that it would continue to consider the protection of creative workers by studying and pro- posing appropriate measures to insure favorable conditions for creative activity, and it would encourage the harmoniz- ing of national legislation and interna- tional agreements already in force as well as the conclusion of a universal con- vention." In the short-term plan for 1951 in con- nection with copyright, the Director- General was authorized to submit to the Sixth General Conference proposals for an intergovernmental conference to 49Ibid., p. 162. 60 "Report of the Director-General to the Fifth Session of the General Conference . . . ," UNESCO Copyright Bulletin, III, No. 1 (1950), 115-16. "1 "UNESCO's Programme in the Field of Copy- right," UNESCO Copyright Bulletin, III, No. 2 (1950), 115.
MOVEMENT FOR UNIVERSAL COPYRIGHT, 1945-52 231 draw up a text for a universal conven- tion. It was also decided that, in addi- tion to the regular delegates to the Gen- eral Conference, member states should be invited to send specialists on copy- right in order to hold a meeting of ex- perts in connection with the general session.52 Meanwhile, the Third Committee of Experts to examine the replies to the "Request for Views" convened in Wash- ington, D.C., from October 23 to No- vember 4, 1950. The Library of Con- gress and the Copyright Office acted as hosts to fifteen experts from various countries plus representatives from the Copyright Division of UNESCO, the Bern Union, the Pan American Union, the International Labor Office, and many observers from governments and organi- zations interested in the question of universal copyright. The number of United States observers indicated the serious concern of many diversified groups who represented a cross-section of interests in the field of copyright, ranging from the creators to the ultimate users. Once again the experts were to delib- erate in their individual capacities and not as governmental representatives. On one important view requested by the questionnaire there was unanimous ap- proval in the replies received-that an intergovernmental conference should be convened to draft a universal copyright convention. However, the replies to the questions dealing with the specific prin- ciples on which a universal convention might be based brought forth a wide variety of comments from forty-two governments. With Luther Evans as chairman and with the use of subcommittees to exam- ine fundamental principles on which there was considerable difference of opinion, much was accomplished. One of the principles involved the attempt to find some formula so that members of the Bern Union might join the proposed universal convention without affecting their mutual relationships under the Bern Convention. The committee adopt- ed the proposal of the subcommittee in this matter by recommending that "in relations between countries which have adhered to the Berne Convention ... the aforesaid Convention and its revisions shall alone be applicable."53 This pro- posal carried several provisions to pro- tect works simultaneously published in a country of the Bern Union and in a country belonging to the proposed uni- versal convention but not to the Bern Union. As a further safeguard for the Bern Convention it was proposed that countries withdrawing from the Bern Union might invoke the benefits of the Universal Convention only in their rela- tions with countries not parties to the Bern Union. Other multilateral and bi- lateral agreements should be safeguard- ed, the experts felt, by a specific assur- ance in the proposed universal conven- tion. Other subcommittees dealt with such matters as assuring nondiscriminatory national treatment, the mitigation of obstacles of formalities, the problem of duration or term of copyright, transla- tion rights, works that had fallen into the public domain before entry into the convention, reservations, and provisions for periodic revision. In their recommen- dations on all these problems the prin- ciples of national treatment and sim- plicity rather than detail prevailed. A proposal by the United States ex- perts to limit the number of formalities required for universal copyright protec- 5Ibid., p. 116. 63 "Proposals of Experts," UNESCO Copyright Bulletin, IV, Nos. 1-2 (1951), 4.
232 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY tion in view of the national treatment principle upon which the new convention was to be based evoked considerable in- terest. Since formalities required by the United States are regarded as one of the serious obstacles in the way of the uni- versal convention, this proposal had great significance. Its purpose was to create a device adaptable in any language and in any country, so that an author's work would not be considered dedicated to the public. The universal copyright symbol suggested was a ? accompanied by the name of the author or other proprietor and the year of first publication of the work.54 The symbol then would take the place of the registration formalities re- quired by various national laws. This proposition of the experts contained many features not found either in other conventions or in the replies of the gov- ernments in the "Request for Views." The simple device exemplifies the ex- perts' attempts to lay down broad prin- ciples and to avoid exceptions and other details that would make the final draft a cumbersome and unacceptable conven- tion. The work of this group of experts was so successful that the way was definitely open to drafting a universal convention protecting literary and artistic works. In January, 1951, these recommenda- tions were sent by the Director-General of UNESCO to all governments to allow them to make supplementary sugges- tions. The thoroughness of the Copy- right Section, as the time approached to deal with the drafting of the convention itself, is shown in this "Supplementary Request for Views." Each government was provided with a brief account of the manner in which each problem under consideration was dealt with in the laws of the various countries, how that prob- lem was treated in international copy- right conventions, the views that had been expressed by forty-four govern- ments in their replies to the first "Re- quest for Views," and a brief account of the discussion during the meeting of UNESCO's Third Committee of Ex- perts, with that committee's recommen- dations quoted and annotated.55 Meanwhile, the UNESCO Copyright Division had been improving its facili- ties in the area of international liaison by co-operating with intergovernmental organizations concerned with copyright matters, especially the Bern Union and the Pan American Union. In July, 1950, UNESCO and the Bern Union conclud- ed a working agreement for strengthen- ing their relationship. A draft agreement between UNESCO and the Organiza- tion of American States (OAS) had also been approved by the Council of OAS and the Executive Board of UNESCO. The plan in this case was for a closer re- lationship between the Copyright Divi- sion and the Pan American Union." As a result of the co-operation UNESCO participated in the Second Session of the Permanent Committee of the Literary and Artistic Union held at Lisbon in October, 1950, and was also represented at the Conference of the International Bar Association in London in July, 1950; at the Congress of the Academy of Com- parative Law in London in August, 1950; and at the Congress of the Inter- national Confederation of Authors' and "4 "Recommendations of the Committee of Ex- perts," UNESCO Copyright Bulletin, III, Nos. 3-4 (1950), 18. 55 Arpad L. Bogsch and William S. Roach, "Com- mentary on the Supplementary Request for Views," UNESCO Copyright Bulletin, IV, Nos. 1-2 (1951), 9. 56 "Activities in the Field of International Copy- right . . . ," UNESCO Copyright Bulletin, IV, No. 4 (1951), 4-7.
MOVEMENT FOR UNIVERSAL COPYRIGHT, 1945-52 233 Composers' Societies held in Madrid in October, 1950.57 As a Program Commission of the Sixth Session of UNESCO's General Confer- ence, the Fourth Committee of Copy- right Experts met in Paris in June, 1951. Twenty-five countries had submitted replies to the "Supplementary Request for Views," and these suggestions served as the basis of the committee's work. Thirty specialists representing twenty- four countries prepared a preliminary draft of the Universal Convention. As a result of resolutions adopted by the General Conference the preliminary draft was sent to all governments of the world, whether members of UNESCO or not, with a request for their com- ments. The draft with some alternative solutions and other comments of the governments served as the basis for the work of the Intergovernmental Diplo- matic Conference which was convened in Geneva from August 18 to September 6, 1952.58 The crucial stage in the UNESCO program to foster a Universal Copyright Convention had now been reached. The convening of an intergovernmental con- ference constituted the first successful attempt to assemble the countries of the world in a meeting to establish such a convention. Throughout the many months of negotiations United States copyright groups had been kept well informed of progress toward the Universal Conven- tion by Luther Evans. At each step, Dr. Evans called a conference of the United States copyright experts, including Ar- thur Fisher, Register of Copyrights, Roger Dixon of the State Department, and John Schulman, one of the repre- sentatives of the United States at the UNESCO copyright meetings. As a re- sult, the positions of United States rep- resentatives at the international con- ferences reflected the opinions of Ameri- can creators and users of copyright ma- terial. The feeling among those concerned with the new convention and with the United States participation in it was that the areas of agreement were sur- prisingly large and that there was no point at issue that could not be success- fully resolved. But all this was dependent on one important change in the United States copyright law. The provisions of Article III (1) of the proposed conven- tion outlawed as a condition to copy- right the requirement that a work of for- eign origin must be manufactured in the country in which copyright protection is sought.59 At the Intergovernmental Copyright Conference in Geneva, agreement was reached among forty-five countries in- cluding the United States on the text of the Universal Copyright Convention along the general lines of the preliminary draft. The Convention was scheduled to come into effect when accepted by twelve nations, including four non-Bern coun- tries. The Conference also made provi- sion for administering the Convention by means of an intergovernmental com- mittee through a UNESCO secretar- iat.60 The signing of the pact on September 6, 1952, brought to an end the long ne- gotiations for the new Convention. For 57 "Current Activities in the International Field," UNESCO Copyright Bulletin, III, Nos. 3-4, (1950), 203-6. 58 "International Conference of Geneva for the Adoption of the Universal Copyright Convention," UNESCO Copyright Budletin, V, No. 1 (1952), 3. 59 "Draft of Universal Copyright Convention," UNESCO Copyright Bulletin, IV, No. 3 (1951), 8. 60 "Universal Copyright Convention," UNESCO Copyright Bulletin, V, Nos. 3-4 (1952), 34-35.
234 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY the United States the next step was to request once again congressional action on the manufacturing clause. Such ac- tion could not take place until the Eighty-third Congress in the spring of 1953. CONCLUSION The seven years 1945-52 found the United States in the role of sponsoring the movement for a universal agree- ment on essential points in copyright as a result of a foreign policy favoring par- ticipation in international organiza- tions. As the detailed UNESCO nego- tiations were traced, it was clear that precautions were many; but the situa- tion was involved and the opportunity of singular importance. The implications of a breakdown after these lengthy efforts to achieve a uni- versal convention were of great signifi- cance. For many years resentment against the application of the United States manufacturing clause to works of foreign origin had been growing. If, as a result of these long-term negotia- tions under the guidance of UNESCO, the United States did not join in the Convention, retaliation could be expect- ed. Other countries might have adopted similar manufacturing requirements, or they might have denounced copyright relations with this country. The method of achieving international copyright pro- tection by simultaneous publication in a Bern country would almost certainly have been barred. If there existed no other measure of progress in this period, the realization that there was no turn- ing back should be considered as one. The attitude of the new administra- tion in the United States toward inter- national trade agreements, with which copyright had become so much a part, would in a large measure determine whether a bill to repeal the manufactur- ing clause would be successful. In spite of great strides on the international scene and the compromise amendments to the United States copyright law in 1949, the United States appeared to be no closer to becoming an adherent to a universal convention than in 1891, when the Chase Act imposed the manufactur- ing restrictions. There were, however, many good rea- sons for optimism. The UNESCO sec- retariat was a functioning division. In the United States, a dynamic group of leaders with invaluable experience was constantly at work. Interest groups were featuring universal copyright articles in periodicals and resolutions, and a well- attended annual lecture series sponsored by the Copyright Institute in New York included international copyright among its featured topics. Finally; the United States government was committed to a foreign policy of aiding in world-wide economic recovery. The international copyright movement was no longer vic- timized by general apathy, and it might easily be swept along to success with trade agreements. The accomplishments in the years 1945-52 laid the ground- work for possible adherence to the Uni- versal Copyright Convention.