Teaching the Cataloging of Non-Book Media CAROLYN O. FROST A course in the cataloging of non-book media may need to include a number of diverse cataloging codes in addition to a wide variety of media. This breadth of scope can benefit from a consideration of questions on the nature of media. Related areas of concern are the objectives of an access system for non-book media, and the means by which these objectives can be achieved. The medium of film is provided as an illustra- tion of this approach. NON-BOOK MEDIA are assuming an increasingly important role in library collections, and the teaching of the organization of these materials has become more and more significant for the curriculum of library education. While one can readily identify objectives, methods, and tools which are common to the teaching of non-book media cataloging and to that of conventional cataloging alike, it is important that one recognize some special considerations which arise from the nature of non-book materials. This paper presents an approach incorporating some of these consid- erations, One such concern takes into account the fact that, for many if not most students, non-book materials are less familiar as media than the medium of the book. For this reason, an examination of the nature of media can be a valuable component of a course concerned in particular with the organization and description of such media. A second consideration is the lack of bibliographic standardization in non-book cataloging, making it necessary for the student to gain familiar- ity with a number of diverse cataloging codes. Frost is Assistant Professor, University of Michigan School of Library Science, Ann Arbor, MI 48109. 32
leaching the Cataloging of Non-Book Media An approach to the teaching of non-book cataloging will be outlined in terms of the following components: 1 . The consideration of the nature of a particular medium - its physi- cal and intellectual characteristics. 2. The determination, noting the characteristics listed in 1, of what is required for the effective use of the medium, and thus for its organiza- tion, access, and description. 3. The consideration of possible means of achieving these objectives and the examination and evaluation of existing means and alternatives. These three components will be discussed briefly in this paper, and an illustration provided using the medium of film as an example. Examining the Nature of Non-book Media. A key concern in the teaching of non-book media cataloging is how the various media now assuming prom- inence may be fitted into the framework developed for books and book- like materials. L. Asheim, in his introduction to the Conference on Dif- ferentiating the Media, provides some guidelines: "It follows that what [needs] exploration are the nature of the several media themselves, each in its own terms, and the analysis of the proper use of each medium based upon standards relevant to it. The librarian's traditional approach, re- vealed by our use of such terms as "non-book" and "non-print," still tends to apply literary criteria to all of the media, and picks as its touchstone the extent to which each other medium approximates the matter and manner of literary forms."1 Asheim's remarks which urge a consideration of the nature of the media are valuable for the structuring of courses on media in general, and can be applied here to the teaching of the cataloging of non-book media. An examination of the nature of different media is essential for a true understanding of the systems and devices which have been developed in librarianship for their organization and description. Such an approach can be of value for a variety of reasons. Since existing models developed for the organization of non-book media have been patterned after the book, signal questions throughout the course will be concerned with the suitability of this model. One can ask if a range of materials as diverse as non-book media can be dealt with in a system designed for a single, seemingly different medium. From this comes the question of whether there are generic qualities shared by most or all of the media. One can ask if present codes or systems developed for the treatment of media reflect these generic qualities. One can ask as well what implications the differences among the media have for the design of a standardized code which is to include diverse media. In part, this approach was anticipated by R. S. Angeli in a discussion of the development of a cataloging code for books: 33
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP From the objectives of bibliographical control: Derive the requirements of description. From the nature of the materials controlled: Derive the elements of description. From the necessity of describing numerous examples of a variety of materials: Derive the pattern of description. From these propositions: Derive the criteria for a descriptive code.2 Objectives for Media. The second major set of questions derives from objectives set forth for the organization and description of media. In cataloging, one can begin with Cutter's familiar "objects," and these objec- tives can then be modified and reduced to a generic form which can then be applied to library materials in general. Thus, for example, Cutter's "finding function," which is designed to enable a person to find a book of which the author, title, or subject is known, is extended to include media other than the book. Instead of taking the author, title, and subject for granted, we can ask: What is known about the object? What can be easily identified or remembered about the object? The tradition built up around Western scholarship associates a book with the name of the person re- sponsible for its intellectual content. But not all media have "authors" in this sense, and indeed the definition of "authorship" remains one of the most controversial issues in non-book media cataloging. One can consider extending the concept of author to "creator" (as has in fact been done in two non-book codes, A. Croghan's Code of Rules for . . . Non-book Media3 and the Association for Educational Communications and Technology's Standards for Cataloging Nonprint Materials.4 Instead of "author" as an access point, one may find it useful to turn instead to the names of persons whom the user will associate with the object. Cutter's objectives remain basically the same, but in addition one recognizes the need to determine for each medium the person who can be identified by the user as as- sociated with the work. In this way all works associated with this person are gathered together. Title as an access point to facilitate the finding function can be extended to the broader concept of "label" and to problems considered such as generic titles (for example, "Sonata No. 2," "Picture of an Antelope") and translations of titles (a recurring consideration for media such as musical recordings and films which transcend language barriers). Some of these questions are valuable in leading the student to think of non-conventional modes of access. In addition to the three main categories of author, subject, and title, there may be other properties associated with the medium that could serve as points of reference. This point can be applied even to books, as is considered in W.S. Cooper's article, "The Potential Usefulness of the Catalog Access Points Other 34
Teaching the Cataloging of Non-Book Media Than Author, Title and Subject."5 Visual materials, for example, have properties of color, form, and pattern, and to some users a particular geometric structure or a particular shade may be of primary interest.6 These aspects may be expressed verbally as access points and the items of the given property ordered under these access points. In considering less conventional and alternative modes of access, stu- dents are encouraged to look at existing systems and reference tools which could serve as models. For example, non-musical collections of sounds can be analyzed for the properties of those sounds and these properties can be expressed in indexed terms. Points of access can be the "subject" rep- resented, such as "locomotive," or the properties of the sound produced, such as "high-pitched whine."7 Access can be provided as well through the mode of symbolic represen- tation of the particular medium. A thematic index provides access to musical works through the use of musical notation. The first few bars or principal melodic idea for a musical work can serve to identify the work as a whole. Here the user, if he is familiar with the notation code, can approach the material in its own terms. For visual materials, students can explore the capabilities of self-indexing picture files and catalog cards with pictorial representations. Cutter's second function for the catalog can likewise be extended to arrive at objectives for the cataloging of non-book media. This second function is to show what the library has by a given author or in a given subject. With a more extensive range of media, libraries have a more extensive range of properties by which the items in a collection could be gathered. Questions arise such as: What is important about the medium from the user's point of view? Can this factor be used as a collocative point? Should one gather together works of different media because they share some intellectual content in common? The same work may appear in the form of a book, record, tape, or microform. Can a message be transferred from one medium to another? What about transfer from verbal to pictorial modes of communication? Means of Achieving Objectives. With the objectives of a catalog in mind, one can then proceed to the means by which these objectives can be fulfilled, and the requirements for bringing about such means, and from these to the consideration of codes through which a standardization of requirements is formulated. At present there is a relative lack of bibliographic standardization in non-book media cataloging. The systems developed for the cataloging, and to a lesser extent, classification of non-book media are in a state of flux. In recent times, no single code has yet assumed the authority which the Anglo-American Cataloging Rules has for monographs and serials. In- stead, codes emanating from different professional organizations, (e.g., 35
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP the Canadian Library Association, the (British) Library Association, the Association for Educational Communications and Technology, and the American Library Association) as well as a number of codes with less authoritative backing but by no means without influence have competed for the attention of non-book catalogers. The second edition of the Anglo-American Cataloging Rules will, in all likelihood, be recognized as a national standard, but it will probably be some time before the other codes cease to be used. It would be ill-advised in any course in the cataloging of non-book materials to be heedless of the codes already developed. These codes are of interest, as well, as foundations upon which the new Anglo- American code will be based. At the same time, the acquisition of a mastery of these codes in the sense which is usually expected for the Anglo-American code is unrealistic and unnecessary. Instead, it would be more useful to develop a framework from which to view the codes and their application. A consideration of the characteristics of media and the implications of these characteristics for the organization and description of them can provide such a framework. In addition, the broad-based analysis of codes has a value in its own right. Each of the codes can be compared and judged within the context of the requirements formulated in the course. The survey of codes includes the Anglo-American Cataloging Rules (AACR), the revised chapters 12 and 14 of AACR8 - which may be viewed as having the official backing of the American Library Association and the Library of Congress. The official codes of the Canadian Library Association (Nonbook Materials: The Organi- zation of Integrated Collections)9 and the (British) Library Association (Non- book Materials Cataloguing Rules),10 and the Association for Educational Communications and Technology (Standards/or Cataloging Nonprint Mate- rials) l 1 have more than academic value since they have served as sources of input for the new AACR. In addition, the less official codes of W. Hicks and A. Tillin (Developing Multi-Media Libraries)12 and J. T. Johnson (AV Cataloging and Processing Simplified)13 have had their influence upon school .media cataloging. The more theoretical and highly individual effort of Croghan (Code of Rules for . . . Non-book Media)14 has neither official sponsorship nor widespread acceptance in actual practice, but there is an imaginative and stimulating discussion which accompanies the code, and the original theoretical framework underlying the rules make it especially valuable for students. Altogether, this assortment of codes presents enough of a variety of approaches and formats to make a com- parative analysis valuable. Aside from the issues of cataloging substance, the codes themselves can be viewed as having properties and characteris- tics - such as style, language, scope, degree of consistency, general principles, and structure. One objective of the course is the recognition that traditional catalogs 36
Teaching the Cataloging of Non-Book Media are not the only means through which the catalog's functions can be realized. Often, the information in the card catalog can be supplemented by additional parts of the bibliographical apparatus. Reference aids for specific disciplines such as music, the fine arts, and for specific media such as films and recordings can not only serve as sources for information conventionally found in catalog entries (for example, verifying the name of a composer or author, the title of an artist's work); they can also provide additional access routes not brought out in conventional catalogs; for example, enabling a user to find a film by the name of a director or performer. On another level, some reference tools can serve as models for alternative types of access systems, as for example thematic catalogs in music, or picture indexes in art. The approach of the course is to consider first on a broad level, the kinds of questions that can be asked about the nature of media in general, and the objectives and requirements for access and organization. The several codes can be viewed as a whole with respect to a general compari- son of characteristics. After this general view of the problems, specific groups of media are considered. Theoretical and practical literature about a particular medium can then be examined, and the relevant sections of the codes considered. Practical exercises, in which students prepare catalog entries for specific examples of the media, help to illus- trate some of the theoretical problems in an actual cataloging context. The example of film is given here to illustrate the treatment of a particular medium. The students are first concerned with the physical and intellectual components of film, as well as with the relation of the whole film to its component parts: What constitutes the intellectual con- tent of a film? How is a film related to its script, or the book on which the script is based? What is the role of the sound track, or the purely visual element? Fortunately, with the recent recognition of film as a medium and art form in its own right, there is an interesting body of literature on the film and on film theory. Students are introduced to bibliographic guides to film literature; for example, P. J. Bukalski's Film Research: A Critical Bibliography with Annotations and Essays15 - as well as to specific works which consider the physical and intellectual components of film and modes of its production. One such guide is L. R. Bobker's Elements of Film.16 A number of discussions in the library literature consider the relationship of book to film; for example, Asheim's dissertation "From Book to Film; A Comparative Analysis of the Content of Selected Novels and the Motion Pictures Based Upon Them,"17 and the more recent article by V. W. Wexman, "The Transfer From One Medium to Another: The Maltese Falcon From Fiction to Film."18 Keeping in mind the way in which films are remembered and identified by viewers, the class can then consider objectives for a system of access and description: What and who 37
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP is to be included in the description of a film, and what is the priority of order to be accorded to the different elements of description? The exist- ing codes illustrate a broad spectrum of approaches to these questions. Exploring these differences of thought, the class can consider the people involved in the making of a film and their contributions to its intellectual or artistic content. Does any one person have primary responsibility? What role does the director play? the editor, cameraman, etc.? How does the director's role vary? What of the movie was conceived, written, di- rected, and produced by a single person? Such a question is justifiable in the light of the technology of the easily-operated film camera which enables the layman to produce his own film with relative ease. These questions about primary intellectual responsibility have relevance even apart from the issue of main entry, since the problems of added entries and priority of elements of data must still be addressed. In considering additional access points provided in supplementary reference sources, students are provided with an opportunity to look at the considerable body of reference works on the film to investigate possible approaches of access for actors, directors, screenwriters, composers, as well as additional descriptive information. For more extensive descriptive techniques and more complex modes of access of interest to a specialized film collection, H. P. Harrison's Film Library Techniques; Principles of Administration19 is of value. This paper has posed a number of questions which can be considered in the teaching of a course on the cataloging of non-book materials. The questions are designed to provide a theoretical framework with which to view practical cataloging problems. In some cases, the questions may illustrate significant aspects of problems with clear-cut solutions. In other cases, where a number of alternatives are posed - either by the provision of options in the codes, or by the presence of ambiguities in the presenta- tion of the rules - the questions may serve as guidelines leading to the most appropriate solution in a given situation. The questions are intended to serve the purpose of developing a basic understanding of the nature and unique qualities of the media being cataloged. With these qualities in mind, objectives for bibliographic de- scription and organization can be determined which are best suited to the medium, and the means of achieving these objectives can be identified and applied. The approach is based upon the premise that an understanding of what a medium is and how it works will enable the librarian to evaluate and apply existing systems, and to evolve future ones. It is designed in the hope that the student will develop a critical method of thinking about media which will be both intellectually stimulating and of practical value. Indeed, the development of a set of questions about the nature of 38
Teaching the Cataloging of Non-Book Media different media can also serve as a starting point in any course dealing with the use, selection, and management of media. Such an approach broadens the scope of the course - be it cataloging, selection, or use of materials - so that it is of interest and relevance to those whose interest is focused more upon media, as such, than on a particular library function. Also, for those who are primarily interested in a function, the approach can provide a different perspective on the possibilities and purposes of the function as applied to a variety of media. References 1. Asheim, L., and Fenwick, S. I.: [Conference Program] "Differentiating the Media: A Focus of Library Selection and Use of Communication Content." The Thirty-seventh Annual Conference of the Graduate Library School, August 5-6, 1974. University of Chicago, 1974. 2. Angeli, R. S.: The Need for a New U.S. Code. Library Quarterly, 26:318, Oct. 1956. 3 . Croghan, A. : Code of Rules for, with an Exposition of Integrated Cataloging of Non-book Media. London, Coburgh, 1972. 4. Tillen, A. M., and Quinly, W. J.: Standards for Cataloging Non-print Materials: An Interpretation and Practical Application. 4th ed. Washington, D.C., 1976. 5. Cooper, W. S.: The Potential Usefulness of the Catalog Access Points Other Than Author, Title, and Subject. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 21:112-127, March-April, 1970. 6. For an example, see: by Lewis, S.: Experimentation with an Image Library. Special Libraries, 56:35-38, Ian. 1965. 7. For an example, see: Breaking the Sound Barrier; Classifying and Filing Sound Effect Tracks at the Shell Film Unit. In: Collison, R.L.W.: Indexes and Indexing. New York, de Graff, 1969, pp. 133-136. 8. Anglo-American Cataloging Rules. North American Text. Chapter 12 Revised; Audiovisual Media and Special Instructional Materials. Chicago, American Library Association, 1975. Anglo-American Cataloging Rules. North American Text. Chapter 14 Revised; Sound Recordings. Chicago, American Library Association, 1976. 9. Weihs, J. R. : Non-book Materials; the Organization of Integrated Collections. Canadian Library Associa- tion. 1973. 10. Library Association. Non-book Materials Cataloguing Rules. National Council for Educational Technology. 1973. 1 1. Tillen and Ouinley, ref. 4. 12. Hicks, W., and Tillen, A.: Developing Multi-Media Libraries. New York, Bowker, 1970. 13. ]ohnson,].T.:AV Cataloging and Processing Simplified. Raleigh, N.C., Audiovisual Catalogers, 1971. 14. Croghan, ref. 3. 15. Bukalski, P. J.: Film Research; A Critical Bibliography with Annotations and Essays. Boston, G.K. Hall, 1972. 16. Bobker, L. R.: Elements of Film. 2nd ed. New York, Harcourt, Brace, Tovanovich, 1974. 17. Asheim, L.: "From Book to Film: A Comparative Analysis of the Content of Selected Novels and the Motion Pictures Based Upon Them." Ph.D. dissertation, Chicago, 1949. (especially part three: "The Medium.") 1 8. Wexman, V. W.: The Transfer From One Medium to Another: The Maltese Falcon From Fiction to Film. Library Quarterly, 45:46-55, Tan. 1975. 19. Harrison, H. P.: Film Library Techniques: Principles of Administration. New York, Hastings House, 1973. 39