THE ADOLESCENT IN SCHOOL ROBERT D. HESS A DOLESCENCE as we know it in the United States is virtually un- known in most societies through- out the world. Although there are rum- blings that come from observers' reports and the news services that the turbu- lence we associate with teen-age culture in the United States is spreading into urbanized, industrial sections of Europe, South Africa, Japan, and Australia, this country still offers the most obvious demonstration of adolescent storm and stress. However, it is not the exhibition of crisis and conflict alone that gives American youth culture its unusual fea- tures. As a subculture, as a period of personal experience, and as a defined phase of psychosocial development it contrasts with adolescence in other parts of the world. I wish to consider, first, the place of adolescence as a part of Ameri- can society; second, the central conflicts and crises of adolescents as individuals; and, third, the meaning of the high- school experience for the teen-ager. Perhaps the most prominent and sig- nificant feature of adolescence in this country is the fact that it has become such a visible and dramatic part of the social system. The impact of youth cul- ture upon adults comes in part from the vigor of teen-agers and in part from the strength of numbers. Teen-agers num- ber approximately seventeen million, a figure that will swell to twenty-four mil- lion within the next half-dozen years. This is a group not only vocal as indi- viduals but one that has public repre- sentatives speaking for it through maga- zines, motion pictures, television, re- cordings, and newspapers. In dealing with teen-agers, adults are puzzled and uncertain. On the one hand, we devalue and even depreciate teen-agers; we dramatize and exploit their aberrations in the daily press, the monthly maga- zine, the theater, and television. We ex- amine their problems in public confer- ences and in newspaper columns; we scream of their crimes in our morning headlines, but as a society we have not provided a place of respect and useful- ness for them which can challenge their imagination and abilities. The teen-ag- ers respond to both our condemnation and our confusion. They believe them- selves underrated, mistrusted, and as- signed to an inferior status. In a study which Irene Goldblatt and I conducted a few years ago we discovered that both teen-agers and their parents held false and distorted ideas about each other. Adults felt that adolescents were likely to overrate themselves and to overesti- mate their maturity; teen-agers actual- ly, on the research instruments we used, rated themselves in close agreement to the ratings they received from adults. However, they indicated that they ex- pected adults to underrate teen-agers grossly as a group and to minimize their maturity and sense of responsibility.1 1 Robert D. Hess and Irene Goldblatt, "The Status of Adolescents in American Society: A Problem in Social Identity," Child Development, Vol. XXVIII, No. 4 (December, 1957). These data come from parent-child pairs of adults and teen- agers. For a more detailed account of the signifi- cance of the images family members hold of one 17
18 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY There has been, in this country, an increasing tendency to prolong the peri- od of adolescence-that is, the length of time between puberty and the beginning of productive, or at least adult, roles in society. The initial signs and symbols of physical and social maturity appear with some frequency at the elementary- school level. The pre-adolescent often seems prematurely sophisticated and eager for adolescent heterosexual behav- ior. At the other extreme we have acted to delay the time the teen-ager can enter the labor market. This is accomplished both by legislation controlling the age at which an adolescent may accept em- ployment and by the demands of an in- dustrial society for highly trained tech- nical workers and for post-high-school education. For various reasons, the de- crease of gainful employment in the United States has been apparent since the early part of the century. As late as 1920, almost 60 per cent of boys sixteen and seventeen years of age were em- ployed. By 1940 only half that number held jobs. The proportion had risen to 36 per cent in 1950, reflecting an ex- panding labor market. The decrease is more marked for adolescents under age sixteen and less so for those older. How- ever, even in 1920, the proportion of employed was much smaller in this country than in countries such as Italy, France, and England, where, by age sixteen, approximately 80 per cent of boys were gainfully employed.2 The apparent rise in high-school and college marriages suggests that adoles- cents in their late teens are resisting this prolonging of pre-adult status. This seems to me to be an inevitable conse- quence of the lengthening of the teen- age period. If the teen-ager is urged to- ward maturity at an early age, we can scarcely be surprised if he refuses to re- main docile and childish but occasional- ly grasps the prerogatives of adults be- fore the adult world is willing to extend them. The relatively long period of adoles- cence is complicated by a second fea- ture: the ease of physical mobility, both in freedom to range far and with relative frequence and in access to means of transportation. The implication of this feature lies in its possibilities for extend- ing the world of experience and in the ability to escape the supervision of adults. This relative freedom offers the adolescent more opportunities for mak- ing his own decisions on a wide variety of social and sexual matters. This is not to suggest that these decisions are nec- essarily unwise. It does suggest, how- ever, that teen-agers have opportunity to assume responsibility over significant and potentially crucial aspects of their personal lives. Not only do teen-agers have freedom of action but they also have at their com- mand economic resources of remarkable scope and impact. The teen-age market is respected by industry. Clothes, pho- nograph records, books, and movies- are but a few of the products which at- tract the billions of dollars which teen- agers spend annually in the United States. Almost five million teen-agers have part-time jobs during the school year, working after school hours and Saturdays as clerks, gardeners, baby- sitters, and extra help in markets, serv- another and of the teen-ager in the family see Robert D. Hess and Gerald Handel, Family Worlds: A Psychosocial Approach to Family Life (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1959), chaps. i, iii, and v. 'See R. G. Kuhlen, The Psychology of Adoles- cent Development (New York: Harper & Bros., 1952), chap. iv.
THE ADOLESCENT IN SCHOOL 19 ice stations, and at home. During the summer vacation, twice as many are em- ployed. These are in addition to the three-quarters of a million who have full-time jobs. It is difficult to calculate the total income of teen-agers in this country, but estimates place the figure at approximately nine billion dollars a year.3 This is in addition to the money spent on them by their parents. This economic power permits them to exer- cise a strong, perhaps dominating, influ- ence over the popular-record industry, as we are painfully aware in the pro- tracted contemporary reign of "rock and roll." These three circumstances-a long adolescence, relative freedom of move- ment, and economic resources-contrib- ute to produce the most distinctive fea- ture of adolescence in this country-a teen-age subculture, somewhat apart from the main stream of society, which in a number of significant respects sets its own code of behavior. The trade mark of this subculture is its demand for differentiation from adult society and from the symbols of previous teen- age groups. The slang of the teen-age group changes constantly, so that the young adult is quickly out of touch with the peculiarities of verbal communica- tion that he had so recently used to show that he was "cool," "hep," "in the know," or otherwise an up-to-date knowledgeable member of his group. The lines of influence among teen-agers are very strong as they attempt to keep pace with the crowd, but they are by no means divorced from the values of the society or from the constraints exercised by adults. A recent study by Brittain indicates that, in the crucial decisions regarding ethical, moral, and career choices, they still tend to align them- selves with the standards of adult soci- ety, while in matters of lesser conse- quence they disdain the old-fashioned manners and behaviors of their elders.4 Contrast this picture of American adolescence with that of an adolescent in Italy, described to me recently by a visiting professor from that country. There, in the typical instance, the boy is expected to complete necessary school- ing by his early teens, after which he is apprenticed and expected to work full time. Childhood and adolescence, as we know it, both end abruptly and with lit- tle time for indulgence in the youth cul- ture that he may occasionally see in American movies. His energies are more controlled, more directed, by the soci- ety, and his indoctrination into adult roles and behaviors comes relatively early in life. How shall we evaluate the phenome- non of teen-age culture in the United States? It seems to me that a fair ap- praisal must view it not so much as a pattern of aberration on the part of our youth as a product of the complex so- ciety in which we live. We have greatly increased the devices of mass communi- cation in the last three decades and have made these generally available to ado- lescents, providing them with a knowl- edge of the world and its problems and opportunities, stimulating them to new and adult-like experiences. At the same time, we have tended to give children and adolescents more freedom and have relaxed the strict moral codes of a half- century ago. We have taken them off the labor market and delayed the time For a brief summary of the economic power and habits of teen-agers see "Teen-Age Consum- ers," Consumer Reports, XXII, No. 3 (March, 1957), 139-42. ' Clay Brittain, "Parents and Peers as Competing Influences in Adolescence" (unpublished Ph.D. dis- sertation, University of Chicago, 1959).
20 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY when they could assume the privileges of adults; nevertheless, we have tried to contain, by social and moral sanc- tions, the dynamic energy of youth. Al- though we have tried to place the blame for their mistakes on every available object-the family, the teen-agers them- selves, television, comic books, the cold war, the school, the church-we have yet to deal effectively with the problems that confront adolescents and, through them, ourselves. A description of the so- cial characteristics of the adolescent period only hints of the meaning which this phase of life holds for the individual teen-ager. Although we may concern ourselves with the impact made by youth upon institutions such as the school, the corporation, or the church, it is the influence youth culture has up- on the individual boy or girl that must eventually command our attention. There are many problems which face the adolescent as an inevitable part of the period of growth and development he has reached. The obvious and natural fact of physical growth, of changing physical dimensions and features, of sexual maturation, and of the uncer- tainty about the final results of this physical redevelopment are in them- selves sources of anxiety, or pride, and often shame and tears. We have made this aspect of the transition to adult- hood particularly stressful by creating national standards of physical beauty that can be achieved by a disappoint- ingly small proportion of our popula- tion. Coming to terms with physical re- sources that cannot be changed by diet, cosmetics, plastic surgery, the gym, re- ducing salon, or hairdresser is certainly one of the important problems which the adolescent meets. So must he also learn to make his way with his peers, to be unafraid to stand up and be counted, and to adopt a code which, whether deliberately or not, dictates his behavior. These problems, however, are insignificant in comparison with the central problem of American youth-a problem that we have largely created for ourselves and our children: the task of finding and maintaining a sense of personal social identity. The concept of personal identity, and here I am drawing from Erik Erikson's excellent definition and discussion is a condition of mental and emotional well- being which is represented in two areas: first, the individual person's sense of continuity and stability in his definition of himself and, second, the recognition of this individual person's identity and worth by the community of which he is a part.5 Identity implies individuality and reciprocal respect between the per- son and his peers; it means being recog- nized rather than unknown and re- spected rather than ignored. The oppo- site of identity is role diffusion, the feeling of uncertainty about one's place in the larger group or inability to com- mit one's self to an occupation or to a lasting relationship to another person. Identity derives primarily from two sources: sex-role identification and com- mitment to an occupation or career. Both these areas of behavior define a man or woman's place in the commu- nity, determine many of the significant details of personal life, and often dictate the cultural and social and economic levels in society in which they may be accepted. The development of a sense of individuality and of self-respect is founded upon these two central areas ' Erik Erikson, "The Problem of Identity," Jour- nal of the American Psychoanalytic Association, IV (January, 1956), 26-121.
THE ADOLESCENT IN SCHOOL 21 of psychosocial behavior; they repre- sent integration into a recognized seg- ment of the society and permit the in- finite variety of individuated versions of occupational and sex role that we have come to associate with individual personality. A society that presents a definite and unambiguous pattern of sex and career roles has little difficulty with identity and role-diffusion problems. In such societies children know at an early age the general routes to adult roles and the behaviors which will be expected of them eventually in the future. The choice of career is limited, and the posi- tion each career pattern holds in the so- ciety is evident. Our society, however, has a great number of highly complex, often contradictory, adult roles from which the teen-ager must choose. Stand- ards of achievement, of moral behavior, of family responsibilities, and of per- sonal excellence vary from group to group in the society. The great number of alternatives which we offer to our youth provides perhaps the most per- plexing identity problems. Our eagerness to be democratic par- ents, to help the teen-ager achieve his independence, and our own uncertain- ties in an era of great social and politi- cal change leave the teen-ager without clear direction, except that we keep him in public school, which might help or- ganize his energies and direct his atten- tion. In addition, he must grapple with the difficult problem of settling upon a course of action and commitment which will eventually lead to adult career. The complex set of roles offered by the adult society and the lack of adult direction combine to make the formation of iden- tity one of the most critical issues of this age period. A sense of drifting, of point- lessness, of living for the immediately gratifying are frequent experiences of adolescents, typified best, perhaps, by the contemporary phenomenon known as the "beat generation." It should not surprise us that they turn to each other for identity in groups, clubs, and gangs and are drawn to personalities who dramatize their problems through the mass media. The need to rely on the group to establish identity accounts for the popular tendency of social cliques, to the delinquent and non-delinquent, to give the group a name as a sign of solidarity to themselves and to their non-group peers. The complexity and ambiguity of role behaviors possible in our society apply to sex as well as occupational roles. The emancipation of women and the free- dom they have won to compete with men in a large and expanding number of fields have created role uncertainties for women and in turn for the men, who recognize the change in women and find traditional attitudes toward them no longer quite appropriate. Part of the complexity of role behaviors follows from the fact that there is relatively little consensus about behaviors and standards among the adult community. Within the same social group and along the same city block there may be pat- terns of behavior that range from strict, puritanical attitudes to casual accept- ance. The force of the parent's example is blunted by the examples of other adults. Yet, at some stage in his devel- opment, the teen-ager must take on his own set of ethics and acts and identify himself with one of the many possible alternatives open to him. The process of establishing an iden- tity or of dealing with the identity crisis is essentially one that the teen-ager must complete for himself. No matter
22 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY how much the adults around him may try to help, the final commitments, the subtle weaving-together and integration of all the elements that make up his per- sonality, must be achieved by the teen- ager himself. Identity formation is a task of the ego and cannot be relin- quished to an outside authority without serious threat to the autonomy of the individual person. In an ideal situation the high-school experience would afford the adolescent with opportunity to deal with both of the central strands of his identity crisis -sex role and career commitment. To a degree this is possible. However, sev- eral factors tend to emphasize his pre- occupation with sex-role behaviors (dating, social facility, demonstrating masculinity or feminity, etc.) during the high-school period and de-emphasize or postpone the problems of occupational or career choice. Thus striving for pop- ularity, interaction in social clubs, and the like are prominent aspects of the high-school non-curricular life. In mov- ing away from the authority of parents and other adults and in experimenting with the behaviors which they consider to be more "grown up," they turn to each other for support, for information, and for rules of approved behavior. They often relate to institutions, as the church or school, in these groups or cliques rather than as individuals. At school, church, YMCA, as well as in in- formal leisure activities, the cliques are the basic social units. The clique es- tablishes, in part, the rules for social be- havior, defining activities that are ap- proved and those that are rejected. While the influence of the clique or gang is strong, it is probably less overwhelm- ing than many parents fear. One of the uses that the teen-ager makes of the clique is illustrated by the views that teens and their parents displayed in a series of interviews conducted by one of our graduate students in the Com- mittee on Human Development. When asked about the relative merits of single or double dating, both teen-agers and parents agreed that they preferred double dating to single dating for high- school students. However, they gave discrepant reasons for this preference. The parents revealed an opinion that double dating tended to decrease the possibility of sexual activity on dates; the teen-agers seemed to be relatively unconcerned with this problem. To them the advantage of double dating was much less dramatic. As one girl ex- pressed it, "When four people are along, it's a lot easier to keep the conversation going. At least one of them can usually think of something to say." Thus the concern of the teen-agers was with whether they could properly and ade- quately meet the demands of a social situation, and they depended on one another for assistance. This portrayal of the tensions of ado- lescence suggests that the high-school period is a time of rapid and extensive learning, much of it completely outside the scope of the high-school curriculum. In fact, it may tend to reduce the in- terest and motivation for acquisition of academic knowledge. This may occur not only because the school is compet- ing with other interests but because the social clique or group may, sometimes deliberately, adopt a casual attitude to- ward intellectual activity. One high- school senior that we interviewed ex- pressed it in roughly these words: The fellows in our high school are more or less divided into three clicks. First, there are those who like school clubs like the Al-School League, who like to be school officers, and stuff
THE ADOLESCENT IN SCHOOL 23 like that. Second, there's my group, those who fool around all the time-the Aces, guys who belong to different boys' clubs. Last are a bunch of little sissy boys-the group who just comes to school to learn. Our group is more or less the most popular. All of us are crazy guys-kind of fun. To get into my group, you have to have a good sense of humor, go out for some sport, fool around in class-get average grades, know how to make out with the girls, be sort of tough, be able to take care of yourself, and don't chicken out of a fight. The social clique may also reinforce standards of scholarship and intellec- tual interests. In a high school where Professor Allison Davis and I have con- ducted research we have found that the clique or social club often had a formal or informal expectation of its members with regard to behavior toward the school in many respects. It tended to exhibit a characteristic way of reacting to the school authorities that varies from active co-operation to planned pro- grams for irritating and annoying teach- ers who, for various reasons, had at- tracted the dislike of the group. Such behavior was typically viewed by the teachers as the misconduct of an in- dividual when in reality it was the ex- pression of a group. Discipline against the individual member was usually in- effectual because of the reward and sup- port the individual member received from the clique. At the other extreme were cliques of students who prided themselves on tlheir intellectual ability and promoted tience clubs, chess clubs, and other mental endeavors. The atti- tudes of such groups are indicated by the remark of one-high school senior when asked if he intended to go to the prom. His reply was, "Why should I go to the prom? With the money I would spend, I could pay tuition for a semester at the state university." The adolescent's school experience and his behavior in the social club as well are strongly influenced by the so- cial class environment from which he comes. Whether it is the shadow of the slums or the privileges of the wealthy exclusive estate, the impact of social background intrudes upon the individ- ual from his earliest moment. It extends or limits his intellectual stimulation, de- termining to a great extent the use that he will be able to make of his genetic resources when he becomes an adult. The social background and the family through which its influence is exercised upon the young child molds the mental and, to a degree, the emotional faculties which the child brings to the school- room. The lower-class child comes to the classroom from a world which is geographically narrow and intellectu- ally barren. One of my students re- cently completed a case history of a lower-class girl who had lived on the South Side of Chicago for almost ten years but who had never in that time visited the downtown area or seen Lake Michigan. This is not an isolated ex- ample. The intellectual deprivation suf- fered by a lower-class child is almost impossible for the middle-class adult to comprehend. The preschool books and bedtime reading are virtually unknown. The range of ideas and the concepts for directing his thinking are limited to practical concrete situations and the im- mediate problems of maintaining an existence. In contrast, the middle-class child is urged toward intellectual experi- ence and is taught to reason and to deal with words and concepts, both verbal and printed. He is rewarded for mental effort and interest. His work at school receives careful and anxious supervision at home, and he readily learns the im-
24 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY portance of scholastic competition and achievement. The influence of social class extends outside the classroom to his social interaction with other pupils and with the school authorities. In high school the effects of social background begin to determine clique and other social groupings.6 Participa- tion in the formal school activities is limited by recognition of social status, on the part both of teachers and of pu- pils. The enrolment in various high- school curricular programs shows social class differences, with the middle-class student preparing for college and the lower-class student avoiding college- preparatory courses in favor of techni- cal training, commercial courses, or a collection of courses regarded locally as the least demanding of effort. For some students the foremost aim of effort in high school is to achieve graduation. For the lower socioeconomic groups, the non-college-bound population of the high schools, the values of a high-school education are but dimly understood, and in many cases the reason for con- tinuing is not so much to learn as to complete a task which the community has set for him, so that he will not be penalized for the lack of a high-school diploma. Unable to see the practical application of the material he meets in class and aware of the low social status that he holds in the informal social sys- tem of the school, the lower-class child may drop out before graduation with apparently little provocation. Of those who drop out before graduation, about 70 per cent blame the school or the school curriculum.7 This is not so much a criticism of the school as it is an illus- tration of the view of education held by the lower-class child. The competition between a job and continuing in school is a strong one for the lower-class student, especially as he considers his post-high-school plans. The present wage scale for skilled labor is such that the decision to go to college may mean for him the loss of several thousand dollars in earnings, in addi- tion to the expense of college, and with little promise that a college education will place him in a substantially higher- income bracket. While there is no ques- tion that, on the average, the college graduate makes more than the worker with only a high-school diploma, there are many individual exceptions to this. While the decision not to go to college is a sound one for many high-school graduates, there is a considerable number who have the ability and who could fi- nance a college education without seri- ous difficulty who still have no interest in higher education of any sort. There are, each year, approximately 60,000 high-school graduates in the upper one- fourth of academic ability who do not go to college; another 95,000 begin col- lege who will fail to graduate.8 A careful examination of the attitudes of teen- agers (and perhaps their parents) to- ward the educational system and toward education itself raises serious questions about the status of intellectual effort and formal schooling in our society. What does all this have to do with 6 See B. Neugarten, "Social Class and Friendship among School Children," American Journzl of So- ciology, LI, No. 4 (January, 1946), 305-13. 'Harold J. Dillon, Early School Leavers ("Na- tional Child Labor Committee Publication," No. 401 [New York, 1949]); Elizabeth S. Johnson and C. E. Legg, "Why Young People Leave School," Bulletin of the National Association of Secondary School Principals, XXXII (1948), 14-24. 'Robert J. Havighurst, "Discovering and Mo- tivating Scientific Talent," an address given at the St. Louis meeting of the American Association of School Administrators, February 24, 1958.
THE ADOLESCENT IN SCHOOL 25 the library? From my position of rela- tive ignorance about library science and the practical problems of library man- agement, I can borrow indulgence and comment freely. The first thing that impresses me is the incompatability that exists between the image of the typical library and the image of the typical teen-ager. Libraries in general are models of middle-class orderliness, docility, restraint, and courtesy. The library card is a symbol of intellectuality, of responsibility, with a touch of civic interest thrown in. Teen-agers present a picture of impul- siveness, lack of order, casual regard for responsibility, and a notable lack of respect for adult restraint. Whatever the term "square"? means to a teen-ager, I am sure he would often apply it to most people on both sides of the librar- ian's desk.9 I do not know what image the teen-ager has of the library and the li- brarian (and this is a point on which some useful research might be done), but from what we know of the teen- ager's attitudes toward adults and adult institutions it seems highly probable that it represents to him an extreme in adult restrictions and taboos on his typical modes of behavior. In addition, habitual and unnecessary trips to the li- brary will rarely add to his status and acceptance among his peers. In contrast to the library are other sources of read- ing material available to him. I refer to the elaborate newsstands of urban areas and even of relatively small towns, to the book sections of some museums I have seen, and to the magazine sections Df the local drugstores. Here he has rela- tively easy access, a great deal of color and dramatic display, a feeling of ex- citement and adventure in fantasy, and little pressure for proper behavior and conformity to the regulations of an in- stitution. The library is geared to the behavior and manners of adults and well-behaved children; the newsstand, the book section, and the pocket book display are tolerant and inviting. The library is designed, in part, to protect books; the newsstand is designed to ex- cite his imagination. If we were to plan a library center with the teen-ager and his youth cul- ture in mind, what might be the features of such a place? I can imagine libraries or extensions of libraries-reading and communication centers, perhaps-lo- cated near community recreational f a- cilities which would be designed for chil- dren and adolescents, with the under- lying purpose of attracting the teen- ager to the book or magazine and making them accessible to him with as little red tape and formality as possible. One might consider a facility which would include, in addition to a central area for reading materials, motion pic- tures (adventure, sports, current his- tory, natural history, professional ad- vice, and many others), records (both popular and classical), tape recordings, video-tapes, and other permanent rec- ords of mass communication. The phi- losophy of such a center would be to stimulate reading and the acquisition of information and vicarious experience across a range of mass communication from popular culture to the classics. I believe that teen-agers would respond 9 These remarks are intended to apply primarily to the voluntary use of public and school library facilities. They may seem inappropriate to persons accustomed to dealing with college-oriented, mid- dle-class teen-agers whose home experience has encouraged reading and intellectual activities. They are particularly appropriate, however, to the situ- ation that obtains for millions of adolescents from lower socioeconomic backgrounds.
26 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY with an enthusiasm that would astonish their elders and could incorporate such a center into their image of contempo- rary youth culture. Teen-agers want to read and to experience the unknown and the familiar through fantasy provided by the array of devices at our disposal. I scarcely need to add that reading and other fantasy experience can be a means for the teen-ager to learn both about himself and the outside world and so can assist him in the effort to meet successfully the crises of his chronologi- cal age and the historical era into which he was born. We cannot obscure the fact that he is headed into a complex and often contradictory adult world; we do him no favor by shielding him from the realities he is about to meet. It is more communication about people, about the society, and about the world that he needs. The adult world and the library as a central institution of communica- tion can help him in his search for a sound, productive, and creative social and personal role in the community.