The contemporary critique of literature for young people bears more than a trace of the nineteenth‐century concern that reading has both a powerful and an influential effect on readers. Anne Lundin writes that the very “Victorian horizons” of reception that “informed the criticism and commentary on children’s books in the late nineteenth century” [1, p. 52] continue into the present and include contemporary ways in which “children and their literature are both marginalized and mythologized” [1, p. 53]. As the old refrain “the right book, for the right child, at the right time” persists, librarians and critics continue to debate the parameters of this so‐called rightness. Contemporary critical redemptions of the Nancy Drew series, for example, serve as proof that the professional concept of “rightness” in terms of book recommendation is subject to historical revision. What, however, are we to make of those titles that currently occupy the position that the Nancy Drew series once occupied, those contemporary popular works that are subject to the scorn of professionals and the adult general public but whose popularity among young readers is notable? In the spirit of Shirley Foster and Judy Simons’s call for scholars to “rescue devalued texts from conventional critical hierarchies so that questions of literary exclusion and determinants of taste can be addressed with some understanding of their sources” [2, p. 19], I would like to examine The Clique, a contemporary popular series of novels for girls that has been criticized in the mainstream and professional media but that includes thematic content similar to some of the more lauded mid‐nineteenth‐century domestic fiction for girls. By making a thematic comparison of this popular twenty‐first‐century series with nineteenth‐century domestic fiction for girls (much of which is now considered “classic” literature), we can establish a tradition in girls’ writing more prevalent than perhaps has been thought and can, as we contrast the respective professional receptions of these works, consider how our selection practice is informed by a historically consistent impetus. Domestic Fiction for Girls and “Chick Lit” for Girls: Tracing a Similar Literary Path Domestic fiction for girls developed, in part, as a result of the gradual departmentalizing of children’s literature in accordance with the gender of the presumed reader. Lundin writes, “The decades of the 1880s and 1890s displayed a growing consciousness of gender and a more rigid classification of children’s books. … While books for the youngest readers tended to be more gender‐inclusive, those for older children divided largely into adventure fiction for boys and domestic chronicles for girls” [1, p. 37]. Sarah Wadsworth argues that the market for girls’ fiction was slower to develop than that for boys' writing, contending that “one reason for the recognition of boys as a separate audience well before girls was that the boys’ market was seen as including girls, while the girls’ market apparently excluded boys” [3, p. 25]. According to Beverly Lyon Clark, Louisa May Alcott’s Little Women “was perhaps the first American book explicitly directed to girls as an audience, at a time when children’s literature was just starting to undergo gender segregation” [4, p. 105]. Prior to the publication of this novel, girls, as Wadsworth notes, enjoyed fiction that would be labeled “boys’ fiction” and would likely have participated in what Jane H. Hunter would call the family reading circle, during which one member of a family would read aloud to the others. Victorian girls did read on their own; however, their reading material was carefully monitored. Hunter notes the guiding role that parents would have played then in a girl’s reading life, as “reading good books was of course a way of demonstrating virtue” [5, p. 71]. The development of a specific type of writing for girls likely grew, in part, out of a public concern for the reading of the young and as an extension of an existing body of women’s writing, the domestic novel. In the late nineteenth century, just prior to the juvenile series boom, librarians and other concerned adults worried about the effects of inexpensively produced sensationalist fiction on child readers. Although, as Gail Murray writes, young people “were not the original audience for such publications,” much of the criticism of this type of material “focused on its detrimental effect on children” [6, p. 80]. The presumed effects of sensational fiction were in marked contrast to those effects “good” literature would have on a reader. According to Wadsworth, literature for young people had “cultural work to perform,” namely, “preparing … girls for adulthood, and for girls this meant teaching them that a woman’s most valuable contribution was in using her feminine influence for good and virtuous ends within the context of the domestic sphere” [3, p. 27]. If, as Lundin posits, “girls’ books existed as a transition to adult reading and to prepare young women for their social roles ahead” [1, p. 38], a juvenile version of an existing genre for women—the domestic novel—would be the ideal solution to the perceived problem of girls’ reading. The domestic novel is considered a type of sentimental fiction that “offered an idealized form of what the Christian family should be” and soon became “obsessed with the power relations within the family and consequent violations of identity” [7, n.p.]. Of the domestic fiction published for girls, Murray relates that this genre, like its “adult” counterpart, was “written principally by women and focused on character development and moral suasion” [6, p. 52], and she alludes to the books’ functions as solidifiers of class and gender strata. Because young nineteenth‐century readers also read materials intended for a broad “adult” audience (a phenomenon that is noted in Lundin [1] and Hunter [5]), girls familiar with a diet of domestic fiction for women like Charlotte Brontë's Jane Eyre (1847) or Harriet Beecher Stowe’s Uncle Tom’s Cabin (1852) transitioned through what would now be considered “crossover” titles like Susan Warner’s The Wide, Wide World (1850) to Alcott’s Little Women (1868). Children’s books, too, would have been read by nineteenth‐century adults. As Lundin notes, “Six of the ten best‐sellers in the United States between 1875 and 1895 were children’s books: Heidi, Treasure Island, A Child’s Garden of Verses, Huckleberry Finn, Little Lord Fauntleroy, and King Solomon’s Mines” [1, p. 35]. As domestic fiction written for girls developed as a type of literature, it incorporated a number of devices that would become familiar not only to its own readers but also to readers of the women's version of the genre. Murray describes the common tropes of the domestic fiction novel and concludes that most of the stories written for young people introduce an “orphaned or partially orphaned protagonist,” exhibit an omnipresent “awareness of class difference,” and tend to use a character’s illness as “the catalyst for either religious conversion or moral reformation” [6, p. 60]. While Alcott’s Little Women does not feature an orphaned protagonist, the father is absent for most of the story, and the central sisters in the narrative are forced to strike out on their own to some degree to support the family. The situation of Alcott’s March family is certainly not as dramatic as the situation of Susan Warner’s orphaned and unwanted Ellen in The Wide, Wide World; however, Warner’s 1850 novel was as likely an influence on Alcott as Anne Scott MacLeod argues it was for Martha Finley’s Elsie Dinsmore, a novel published the same year as Little Women. Alcott’s Jack and Jill, a novel published twelve years after Little Women, includes more of the features traditionally associated with the domestic novel for girls: the main character is seriously injured in a sledding accident and confined to her bed but, with the guidance of a character MacLeod calls an “ideal woman,” emerges from her infirmary transformed. MacLeod observes that “Alcott’s Jack and Jill parallels closely an earlier [1872] and very popular girls’ story by Susan Coolidge (Sarah C. Woolsey),” and she notes the similarities between Coolidge’s What Katy Did and Alcott’s novel [8, p. 20]. As in Alcott’s book, Coolidge’s spunky female focalizer (Katy) falls victim to a crippling accident (she falls from a swing she had been forbidden to play on) but, following the example of her equally infirm role model (Cousin Helen), emerges from her illness a model of feminine decorum. These plot conventions and narrative themes grew common enough in nineteenth‐century literature for girls that they can be considered characteristic features of what was then a nascent genre of domestic fiction for girls. The prevalence of plotlines of redemption and characters who become role models for others in these nineteenth‐century stories for girls seems to follow a move from early century moralism to late century romanticism. As the girls' books discussed above developed from the general domestic fiction written in the mid‐nineteenth century and as they straddled the traditions of morality and romanticism associated with nineteenth‐century children’s literature, an interesting picture of this hybrid genre for girls appears. Domestic fiction, as a form of writing associated with an audience of women and girls, became heavily invested in perpetuating an idea of feminine identity as novels of this type increasingly “served as a prime conduit of character formation, effectively positioning mothers and daughters within the self‐sacrificial roles they were (by most accounts) preordained to play” [9, p. 142]. These textual features and the commonality of themes and situations across novels performed what Wadsworth would call “cultural work” and, in the words of Suzanne M. Ashworth, “delineated a white, middle‐class identity and diffused its ideals to the masses” [9, p. 143]. Thus, domestic fiction for women and girls took shape as a genre of contradictions, attached to both the authorization and the dissemination (of a narrow idea) of the female voice as well as to its own capacity for instruction and control. Contemporary “chick lit” written for girls appeared in much the same way that domestic fiction for girls materialized in the nineteenth century—as an outgrowth of an existing genre of writing associated with women readers and writers. Jennifer Scanlon describes chick lit as that “phenomenally successful body of girl‐centric fiction initiated with the publication of Bridget Jones’s Diary in 1997 … [that] most frequently feature[s] young, urban, professional female protagonists who, while not taking themselves too seriously, work through romantic, career, and body image trials and tribulations” [10, n.p.]. Rebecca Vnuk writes of chick lit’s similarities to and differences from the broader genre of “women’s writing,” noting “both mainstream women’s fiction and chick lit deal in similar themes—love, marriage, work, friendship—and are written by women for women. … Chick lit … is distinguished by its humor—wisecracking characters or ridiculous situations, usually involving work or dating” [11, p. 42]. Like the domestic novel, contemporary chick lit for women and girls is woman‐centered and usually woman‐authored; however, whereas the domestic novel focuses on the home and valorizes submission, chick lit’s preoccupation with the romantic status of the heroine is often conflated with concerns about her independent progress—at school or at work. Stephanie Harzewski has noted the debt chick lit owes to its nineteenth‐century predecessor: “Chick lit reinterprets the legacies of the novel of manners and domestic fiction’s marriage plot, chronicling the heroines’ fortunes on the marriage market and assessing contemporary courtship behavior, dress and social motives” [12, p. 41]. While chick lit for girls didn’t surface out of a concern for young women’s reading, its appearance as a distinct genre of young adult and intermediate literature is, like domestic fiction for girls, related to the popularity of the adult version of the genre among young people. The movie version of the “first” novel of chick lit for women, Bridget Jones’s Diary, and the subsequent publication of similar novels featuring hip, young heroines, likely attracted adolescent readers to the genre. In addition, Meg Cabot, a popular writer for young adults (her Princess Diaries series of books for teens has spawned two movies of its own), has also written chick lit for women; this author has become a crossover success, carrying her readers across publishing age lines. Christine Meloni reports that the first example of chick lit written for girls is considered to be Louise Rennison’s Angus, Thongs, and Full‐Frontal Snogging [13], a novel written as diary entries “like those of her adult contemporary Bridget Jones” [14, n.p.]. This book generated a number of sequels, all of which are considered part of the author’s Confessions of Georgia Nicholson series. These premier examples of chick lit for women and chick lit for girls appeared as British imports in the U.S. market, and it is this glamorous “foreignness” that distinguishes both of these first novels. Domestic fiction for girls and chick lit for girls share a number of the same characteristics; in fact, a discussion of the formulaic elements of each reveals more similarity than difference. Like their nineteenth‐century prose sisters, chick lit for girls may feature a symbolically orphaned character—the “outsider” at school abandoned by her friends or first boyfriend, or the “new girl” thrust into a strange and sometimes unfriendly environment. While chick lit for girls may not employ a seriously ill character as a literary device to encourage readers to contemplate their own morality and mortality, the trials of the novels’ heroines involve the resolution of a fear of social “death” by way of exclusion from a popular or exclusive clique. Whereas domestic fiction for girls discourages negotiation of established parameters of womanhood, chick lit for girls may be critical of current styles and manners and emphasize the heroine’s attempt to “navigate high school life” [15, par. 10]. Joanna Webb Johnson argues that both domestic fiction and chick lit for girls “shar[e] much common ground” [16, p. 144]: the heroines of each “all arguably evolve during the course of the stories, presenting lessons learned and reaching for higher moral ground” [16, p. 145]. Like domestic fiction for girls, chick lit for girls appears as the result of an assembly of influences: a distinct “little sister” version of chick lit for women, contemporary chick lit for girls appeared in the space between two distinct trends in young adult publishing. In the 1990s, critics lamented what they considered to be the prevalence of the “bleak book” for young adults. A panel discussion was devoted to “edgy” young adult novels at the ALA Annual Conference in 1998, during which the DK Ink senior editor Richard Jackson noted the trend and the popular response to it in the media: “When reviewers today worry about bleak stories, they are worrying, on behalf of the audience, about the readiness of young readers to face life’s darkest corners” [17, n.p.]. One year later, Booklist columnist Michael Cart also observed that “the mainstream print media” had been “buzzing about a ‘new’ trend in publishing: the spate of what journalists are calling ‘bleak books’” [18, p. 248]. The publication of Rennison’s book in 2000 was a marked change of pace, because although Angus, Thongs, and Full‐Frontal Snogging does purport to describe its teen heroine’s trials and tribulations [13], it is a distinctly light and humorous offering. This novel, and the chick lit for girls that would follow, represents a departure from the other children’s and young adult literature genre that grew in popularity in the 1990s and early 2000s: fantasy. Just as domestic fiction for girls was an outgrowth of a genre of women's writing and settled into a fissure between literary impulses in children’s writing, so chick lit for girls, the junior version of chick lit, distinguishes itself from the “bleak” books and Harry Potter–inspired fantasies of its generation. The publication of both types of literature—nineteenth‐century domestic fiction for girls and contemporary chick lit for girls—reflects a mode of production invested in the definition of and, following this, the targeted marketing to a distinct audience of young women. In a discussion of the segmentation along gender lines of children’s literature in the nineteenth century, Wadsworth writes of the symbiotic relationship between author and audience: “Just as [William T.] Adams helped to define not only the boys’ series but also the audience for boys’ books, so Alcott, as the most important contemporary American author to write books specifically for girls, was instrumental in defining, shaping, reinforcing, and revising the qualities, interests, and aspirations of the girls who comprised that market” [3, p. 19]. Clark suggests that Alcott’s decision to write with an audience of girls in mind was not entirely her own and asserts, “Alcott consciously set out, in Little Women, to write for girls, in response to her editor’s request” [4, p. 113]. Although Clark goes on to indicate the crossover appeal the novel exerts—in terms of gender and age—in the nineteenth century and today, her hint that the nineteenth‐century novel was a form of publication somehow targeted to a gendered audience and that this targeting (as it was “requested” by Alcott’s editor) was in some ways a marketing strategy, is notable. This same targeting strategy is evident in professional discussions of chick lit for girls. Kit Alderdice’s 2004 article for Publishers Weekly describes Rennison’s “discovery” of a niche market in writing for girls in terms similar to Wadsworth’s; quoting Cynthia Eagan, a senior editor at Little, Brown, Alderdice writes, “Louise Rennison identified girls’ cravings for funny, more sophisticated material featuring protagonists their own age” [15, n.p.]. If both Alcott and Rennison can be seen as the earliest writers of domestic fiction for girls and chick lit for girls, respectively, it is especially interesting to glimpse what seems to be a strategic consideration of a gendered audience in the creation of their works. The Clique and Its Nineteenth‐Century Sisters: A Thematic Comparison The Clique series (written by Lisi Harrison and published by Little, Brown under the auspices of the book‐packaging company Alloy, Inc.) is a popular chick lit paperback series aimed at preteen girls and designed to ride on the coattails of similar novels for older teens (which, in turn, follow the new tradition established by their own adult counterparts) like the Alloy‐produced Gossip Girl and A‐List series. Harrison’s series contrasts the lives and attitudes of its two main characters, Massie Block, a twelve‐year‐old “queen bee” at her exclusive Westchester, New York, private school, and Claire Lyons, the daughter of Massie’s father’s best friend who is forced to move into the guesthouse on the Block property after her father loses his job and the family relocates from Florida. Whereas Massie and her best friends—dubbed “the Pretty Committee”—are stylish, jaded, and preoccupied with fashion, boys, and status, Claire is uninterested in clothes and gossip but still longs to become part of Massie’s exclusive clique. Because of its mass‐market means of production, the liberal sprinkling of its narrative with designer brand names and popular culture references, and its association with popular series fiction, The Clique is an example of the type of popular literature that libraries are reluctant to purchase. As Patty Campbell wrote in 1996 of the quality‐versus‐popularity divide in collection development decisions, “librarians, who have perhaps been made a trifle paranoid by their perception that the commercial success of series paperbacks is eroding financial support for quality fiction, have begun to see the situation in simplistic terms of good guys and bad guys” [19, p. 776]. Ten years later, Campbell, perhaps in a fit of her own paranoia, labeled The Clique and its mass‐market sister series “YA chick‐lit style at its worst” [20, p. 488]. Meanwhile, Wolf addressed The Clique and other similar series in a New York Times article, calling the series “scary” and “creepily photorealistic” and warning parents against their purchase [21]. This type of critique of young people’s literature—and of girls’ fiction in particular—is not new, however; it represents only the latest chapter in the history of young people’s reading interests and practices. Nineteenth‐century domestic fiction for girls, like contemporary chick lit for girls, enjoyed popular status but garnered little critical attention beyond mention in library catalogs and selection guides. Although the popularity of Alcott’s Little Women has endured and it enjoys classic status today, Clark notes, its critical reception has been historically varied [4]. The same might be said about Warner’s The Wide, Wide World, famously redeemed by Jane Tompkins in her 1985 Sensational Designs, or about Coolidge’s What Katy Did, discussed, along with what the authors call other “devalued texts” (like Little Women and The Wide, Wide World) in Foster and Simons’s What Katy Read: Feminist Re‐readings of “Classic” Stories for Girls, 1850–1920 [2]. As critics look back and reread and reconsider and, as Foster and Simons write, “rescue” girls’ texts of the past, “questions of literary exclusion and determinants of taste can be addressed with some understanding of their sources” [2, p. 19]. This same work can be done with contemporary fiction as well, and as I have traced the similarities in lineage between nineteenth‐century domestic fiction for girls and twentieth‐ and twenty‐first‐century chick lit for girls, I draw from historical examples of domestic fiction for girls to call attention to those themes in The Clique, as a representative series of chick lit for girls, that appear as echoes of the literary past. Two major themes emerge, both in the primary texts of domestic fiction for girls and chick lit for girls and in the secondary, critical discussions of them: social class and its meaning, and the domestic sphere and its significance. While Campbell criticizes The Clique and other contemporary chick lit for teens, calling such literature “dramas of social class” [20, p. 489], this literary recognition of class and status is not particular to contemporary girls’ fiction. Stephanie Foote identifies the presence and negotiation of class issues in Little Women, for example, writing that the novel’s depiction of the characters’ growing awareness of “which feeling to have about which kinds of people” is an indicant of the characters’ (and, by extension, the reader’s) awareness of the codes of behavior in an increasingly stratified society [22, p. 68]. Similarly, the characters in Warner’s The Wide, Wide World and Cooldige’s What Katy Did demonstrate recognition of the manners and conducts associated with class. Because these novels fall into a larger tradition of domestic fiction (for girls and women) and because the definition of this form is linked to the novels’ depictions of the home and woman’s domestic sphere, it is especially interesting to note the ways in which this space has been historically constituted and, I argue, in which it remains circumscribed. Class in The Clique and in Domestic Fiction for Girls Like the domestic fiction of the nineteenth century, The Clique series concerns itself with issues of class and, while the contemporary narrative pays much attention to the details of the lives of the wealthy, the novels are primarily sympathetic to the middle‐class character. In the series, middle‐class newcomer Claire plays the role of what Ashworth calls the “homespun heroine” [9, p. 143] and, although she is criticized by her upper‐class schoolmates, and Massie in particular, for being unfashionable and unsophisticated, receives the warmest portrayal. When, on Claire’s first day of school, she accepts a ride in Massie’s family’s limousine and gapes at the mansions in which Massie’s friends live; Massie barks at Claire’s attempt to take pictures, “Everyone lives like this around here, so you better get used to it” [23, p. 35]. After the girls arrive at school, Claire’s “eyes widen” when she sees the “parking lot … filled with Mercedes, Jaguars, Lexus SUVs, BMW convertibles, and even a few limos” [23, p. 47]. Claire mentally compares this parking lot to the one at her old school, which “just had yellow school buses and a few beat‐up Toyotas and Hondas that belonged to teachers” [23, p. 47]. These scenes reinforce the class difference between the two girls that had been established in a conversation Massie has with her limousine driver when she asks him about Claire’s family: “Are they poor?” Massie asks, saying the word “poor” “the same way her mother said ‘fat’” [23, p. 15]. Issac, the driver, responds in the negative, noting, “Not everyone can afford everything they want” [23, p. 16]. This scene—almost a reversal of a scene in Little Women, Foote argues—is an example of “status dissonance,” which “centers on how others perceive the ambitions and limitations of the March family” [22, p. 71]. When Meg is invited to attend a series of dances hosted by a wealthier family, she is, in Foote’s words, “overtaken by a host of negative emotions that center on the different kinds of value accorded to different social actors” [22, p. 71]. Meg overhears some of the posh guests gossiping about the March family, and herself in particular, in much the same way Massie gossips about Claire. The scene in The Clique in which the existence of what she considers “poor” people is made real to Massie reads the same way in which this scene from Little Women might if told from the perspective of the wealthy guests. With this exchange, Massie, her family, and, by extension, her wealthy friends become markers for higher society, while Claire and her family, though (according to the limousine driver) not “poor,” are of lower class. Massie’s conversation with Isaac appears in the first pages of the first book in the series and serves to set up a system of contrasts (between wide‐eyed Claire and snappy Massie and between middle‐ and upper‐class life) to which the series will continually allude. Just as domestic fiction for girls camouflaged discussions of class by referencing the importance of the seemingly class‐nonspecific trait of “refinement,” The Clique, too, codes its references to class in contemporary terms, using a language of brand names to signify the middle‐ and upper‐class status of the characters. At the time when the production of domestic fiction for girls was increasing, explicit discussions of class were, ironically, considered déclassé, though status issues and the concurrent symbology of class were tacitly noted and understood. MacLeod notes that although nineteenth‐century Americans would have been reluctant to acknowledge the presence of a class system, “class attitudes were most evident in the authors’ sensitivity to differences in manner and deportment,” and the attention given to this system of differences belies this supposed disinterest [24, p. 116]. Writers made allusions to class in domestic fiction for girls in a code of sorts, emphasizing the importance of refinement and, especially, “gentility” (the nature of which, Gillian Avery writes, was “something that preoccupied many of the earlier American writers for girls” [25, p. 174]). This same device can be found in The Clique. Although the characters do not explicitly identify themselves as upper class or middle class, many of the novels’ plots revolve around the middle‐class character’s attempt to fit in with her wealthy classmates. Many of these attempts to fit in involve comparisons of the brand names of clothing each character is wearing to confirm her class status. Deirdre F. Baker calls this coding system “that other language of American culture—brand names” and notes that “each of these names has precise significance and is used precisely—assuming the reader/consumer knows the reference” [26, p. 684]. In Massie’s milieu and the world of The Clique, specific clothing stores and brands have either positive or negative connotations. On a trip to the mall, Massie notes that the “cheap knockoffs” found in the midpriced women’s clothing store The Limited “had always been an endless source of jokes among her friends” [27, p. 5]. Sneakers with the Keds brand are equally suspect; as Massie’s friend Kristen decrees, “Better dead than Ked” [23, p. 45]. In comparison, the brands worn by Massie and her friends, which include Versace, BCBG, and Prada, are given the stamp of approval. Only once is the significantly higher cost of designer fashions like these mentioned, and when it is, the price is noted with disbelief by Claire. Upon sneaking a peek at the price tag on an “Alberta Ferretti halter” that Massie’s friends bought her as a gift, Claire asks herself, “How can a top thinner than toilet paper be that expensive? … [the price tag said] seven hundred and eighty dollars. $780.00!!!” [23, p. 42]. The placement of this sole revelation of the cost of Massie’s clothing in the first fifty pages of the first book in the series serves as a reference—not unlike the reference point created when Massie asked Isaac about Claire’s family’s “poverty”—against which the rest of Massie’s fashion choices throughout the series can be measured. In the language of the series—which has already positioned Massie and Claire as character foils—Massie’s clothing stands as a symbol for her upper‐class status while Claire’s clothes (she wears the offending Keds) become markers of her lower station. The attention paid to fashion—particularly brand‐name fashion—and its meaning is not a literary phenomenon restricted to contemporary texts; nineteenth‐century domestic fiction for girls, too, included purposeful descriptions of characters’ dress. Explicit descriptions of clothing prove equally as meaningful in domestic fiction for girls; here, too, the rules for appropriate adornment are specific and sometimes contradictory. In Coolidge’s What Katy Did, the appearance of two distinctly dressed characters in succession serves to distinguish between “genteel” fashion and tawdriness. When the titular character, Katy, invites a school friend for a visit, she is surprised at her guest's appearance: “About half‐past ten Imogen arrived. She was dressed in a light‐blue barege, with low neck and short sleeves, and wore coral beads in her hair, white satin slippers and a pair of yellow gloves. The gloves and slippers were quite dirty, and the barege was old and darned; but the general effect was so very gorgeous, that the children, who were dressed for play, in gingham frocks and white aprons, were quite dazzled at the appearance of their guest” [28, p. 65]. Foster and Simons argue that Imogen’s presence, and Katy’s eventual disinterest in the girl she found at first to be so glamorous, represents a “romantic distortio[n] of womanhood” that is shattered when Katy realizes that Imogen is “vulgar and self‐dramatizing” [2, p. 116]. Massie, too, is just as “vulgar” and self‐important as Imogen, and Claire’s fascination (and ours) with her is not unlike Katy’s interest in Imogen—an interest, it may be noted, she eventually “outgrows.” Katy doesn’t outgrow her fascination with another figure whose style is described in Coolidge’s novel: her invalid cousin, Helen. When Katy meets Cousin Helen for the first time, she is wearing “a sort of loose traveling thing of pretty grey stuff, with a rose‐coloured bow, and bracelets, and a round hat trimmed with a feather” [28, p. 77]. Later, Katy finds Cousin Helen “lying on the sofa all dressed for the day in a fresh blue muslin, with blue ribbons, and pretty bronze slippers with rosettes on the toes” [28, p. 80]. Katy is taken with Cousin Helen’s prettiness but worries that her relative’s decoration makes her “worldly.” When she asks Cousin Helen if it is “worldly to have pretty things when you’re sick,” Cousin Helen replies, “Pretty things are no more ‘worldly’ than ugly ones, except when they spoil us by making us vain, or careless of the comfort of other people” [28, pp. 79, 80]. In its appropriate context, it would seem, “pretty things” are not only appropriate; they can even inspire the wearer. While Foster and Simons aptly identify Cousin Helen as an “archetypal fictional figure of the period, the sofa invalid who becomes an icon of gendered moral excellence,” they focus on what they call Helen’s “self‐abnegation” and not on her pleasing appearance [2, p. 113]. Foster and Simons argue that Helen’s function as the domestic angel involves “advis[ing] and comfort[ing] the erring or suffering” [2, p. 113] in the home, and as she attends to this activity—and redecorates the room in which she will be bound—her appearance in Katy’s family’s house gives the home “a different air.” Beautification—of others’ souls, of herself, of her room—is Cousin Helen’s gift, and these are significantly conflated during her visit. The lesson in What Katy Did involves not a dismissal of adornment or care for one’s appearance; instead, Cousin Helen emphasizes the importance of the manner in which this practice is carried out. Cousin Helen’s advice is one example of the advice domestic fiction for girls offered its readers regarding the appropriate limitations to fashion and fashionable expression; The Clique offers similar guidance. When Massie learns that some classmates are planning a boy‐girl Halloween party “so that everyone would be talking about them and not [Massie] for a change” [27, p. 9], Massie publicly humiliates the would‐be party planners by announcing her own party first. While it would be easy to feel embarrassment for the two girls Massie shames in front of their classmates, the narrative reveals, through the description of their clothing, that these young women’s plans are akin to social climbing and that they are not in Massie’s league. Instead of sporting “caramel‐colored highlights … [that] made [her eyes] sparkle, just like her stylist, Jakkob, had promised” and fashionable clothes that flatter her body (like Massie’s “brown suede miniskirt that made her butt look even perkier than usual” [27, p. 1]), Massie’s Halloween party competitors make unwise sartorial choices that reveal their lower‐class positions. Becca Wilder, one of the conspirators, wears “girly chiffon tops” that “always loo[k] out of place on her stocky physique,” and her hair “h[angs] flat and lifeless” [27, p. 29]. Becca’s friend and coconspirator is characterized by her “addiction to spray tanning” that leaves her skin “constantly orange” [27, p. 29]. In the world of The Clique, clothing should not only be “sexy, sophisticated and whimsical” but should also look good on the wearer, as this care with appearance signifies wealth and privilege. Becca and her friend might be wearing fashionable items, but their execution is incorrect and therefore less meaningfully classy. In this context, Becca and her friend become like What Katy Did’s Imogen, who, Foster and Simons write, “act[s] out … the fantasies which she has imbibed from romantic literature” [2, p. 115]. Becca and her unnamed friend are “acting out” a fantasy of their own romantic heroine—Massie—and, just as Imogen’s odd imitation proved laughable, their attempts as mimicry fail as well. While it would seem that the series’ emphasis on the “fabulous life” of the upper‐class characters and the scorn The Clique’s narrative holds for girls like Becca who just can’t get it right would make the novels a type of aspirational fiction, the plots of each underscore the triumphs of the middle‐class Claire. Just as MacLeod observes about domestic fiction—“broadly speaking, the social attitudes set out in the stories were those of democratic middle class society, which disapproved of snobbishness and fashionableness” [24, p. 98]—the same is true about The Clique. Claire is, indeed, enamored of Massie’s lifestyle and endeavors to join her popular group of friends; however, the best friend she finds on the first day of school turns out to be much more loyal than Massie’s gang. Even when Massie and company try to embarrass her in public, Claire manages to come out on top. When, on Claire’s first day of school, Massie’s friends try to humiliate her by dripping red paint on the seat of her chair, she is sent to the nurse’s office by a male teacher who thinks she has started her period. Once in the nurse’s office, Claire is allowed to choose a replacement outfit from the school’s lost‐and‐found box, which turns out to be stuffed with the type of designer clothes Claire’s family would not normally be able to afford. Claire is also the first of the girls in The Clique to get a boyfriend, a fact that horrifies Massie. When Claire confirms that she and her crush are, in fact, boyfriend and girlfriend, Massie is shocked: “Claire had a real boyfriend before she did. That was not supposed to happen” [29, p. 11]. Joyce Irene Whalley notes a similar literary trend involving the rewarding of the morally pure protagonist, writing of “the practice of virtue [that] would invariably bring temporal rewards” in eighteenth‐century children’s morality literature [30, p. 66]. J. S. Bratton traces this theme through the nineteenth century and documents such stories, “in which virtue and hard work are straightforwardly met with material reward” [31, p. 149]. In The Clique, Claire’s tolerance of Massie’s and her friends’ practical joke brings her the reward of expensive (albeit used) clothing and, later, a boyfriend; these returns for good behavior represent social capital in the girls’ world. Although The Clique's name‐brand‐peppered narrative betrays a fascination with the life of the upper class, the novels reveal a unique type of unhappiness and dissatisfaction associated with privilege. This is not a new message in literature for girls, and it operates here, as in domestic fiction for girls, to congratulate the middle‐class character. MacLeod observes the presence of this attitude in midcentury domestic fiction, noting that in literature, “unless they were also virtuous, the wealthy characters were surely miserable, in spite of their riches” [24, p. 86]. Certainly wealthy but definitely not virtuous, Massie worries that her money and fashionable wardrobe aren’t enough to secure her place in her private school’s social hierarchy. She entertains a moment of panic when she hears about Becca and her friend’s plans to host their peer group’s first boy‐girl party and worries, “Am I slipping? Are people starting to look at me as a popularity has‐been? … Why didn’t I think of the boy‐girl party? It should have been my idea. I always think of everything first” [27, p. 9]. In a later novel, Massie faces a threat of a different kind: one of her friend’s cousins has come to visit, and although this cousin’s wardrobe is distinctly déclassé and features boots that “aren’t even made of real leather” and “the latest knockoffs from Contempo Casuals [an inexpensive girls’ clothing store]” [29, p. 59], the stranger’s confidence and professed knowledge of teenage boys makes her a popular figure among Massie’s friends. When the cousin alludes to the fact that, at thirteen, she is no longer a virgin, Massie scoffs at her “overshare,” but “deep down inside, [she] was starving for more [information]” [29, p. 65]. In the face of this voice of experience, Massie’s fancy clothes and status symbols mean nothing; other girls even start to copy the visiting cousin’s style, in spite of the fact that Massie has publicly criticized the girl. Although the cousin ultimately proves to be a conniving kleptomaniac on whom the girls exact revenge, the moments in this story in which Massie is forced to consider the relative value of her moneyed style hint at the conclusion domestic fiction for girls drives home: the lives of the wealthy are likely “miserable.” Little Women offers the most blatant example of this type of comparison as, Foote writes, the homes of the Marches and their more privileged neighbors, the Laurences, are compared. According to Foote, the descriptive language that warmly depicts the modest March home in comparison to the “cold” Laurence mansion “privilege[s] the social value of the Marches, even as it privileges the economic value of the Laurences” [22, p. 70]. In The Clique, Claire, as the underdog heroine, is the socially privileged character; however, the descriptions of Massie’s family’s wealth and their luxuries are offered competing attention. The Bedroom and Domesticity in The Clique and in Domestic Fiction for Girls The sanctity of the home and the family is a theme that, critics observe, permeates nineteenth‐century domestic fiction. According to Avery, such sentiment “can be encountered over and over again in children’s books of the last century” [25, p. 161]. Similarly, the place of women in this domestic idyll “can be found in countless … books of the period” [25, p. 173]. Although a nineteenth‐century heroine may come from a privileged background, Avery observes, “the American writers for girls insisted that their heroines must devote themselves to domesticity” [25, p. 174]. Even rebellious heroines, like the title character of Coolidge’s What Katy Did, would soon learn to embrace domestic virtues when, typically, “an accident or emotional crisis [led] to enlightenment and converted [the rebel] into the perfect domestic angel” [32, p. 128]. While female readers today are unlikely to find the same brand of domestic encouragement in their literature, a subtle emphasis on what cultural studies critics call girls’ “bedroom culture” can be found in much girls’ fiction. In The Clique, the sanctity of the main characters’ bedrooms (and, in one volume, their temporary “girls only” clubhouse) is notable as the fictional activities contained within these settings recall both domestic ideals and bedroom cultural mores. The girl’s room as a separate sphere in which its occupant might prepare for domesticity is a phenomenon, argues Hunter, born in the nineteenth century. Hunter contends that the “complex design of the Victorian house … embodies cultural preoccupations with specialized functions, particularly distinguishing between public and private worlds” [5, p. 95]. One such private world would be the girl’s room, as it provided a “perfect opportunity … for practicing for a role as mistress of a household” [5, p. 97]. The girl’s room may also be considered a symbol of the Victorian girl’s passage from childhood to womanhood when, MacLeod writes, “puberty would be for her the beginning of her imprisonment in ‘the woman’s sphere’” [8, p. 29]. MacLeod argues that the presence of this theme of transition in fiction for girls signifies the import of this development from girlhood to adulthood to womanhood: “It is surely significant that so many women who wrote ‘girls’ stories’ chose as their subject the transition from childhood to adolescence, or, more accurately, to young adulthood” [8, p. 14]. The style of such stories embodies this thematic concern as, writes MacLeod, they were “intensely domestic and interior” [8, p. 14]. This preoccupation with domesticity has carried over to contemporary fiction, as in The Clique, in which female characters find peace and room for self‐expression in their bedrooms. The term “bedroom culture” was coined by Angela McRobbie and Jenny Garber to describe what they considered to be the nexus of contemporary girls’ culture. In their influential 1975 essay “Girls and Subcultures,” the two authors observe that “girls negotiate a different leisure space and different personal spaces from those inhabited by boys” [33, p. 120]. The location of this leisure space is determined in part by the types of commodities directed exclusively toward the adolescent female market and by the activities these commodities encourage. Although some forms of popular music may be taken up and appreciated by an audience of boys and girls alike, McRobbie and Garber write that girls use the associated posters, records, and magazines “in a different context from those in which boys us[e] them” and note that the activities girls tend to participate in around these commodities—“the rituals of trying on clothes, and experimenting with hair‐styles and makeup”—“were home based activities” [33, p. 115]. McRobbie and Garber conclude: “It might be suggested that girls’ culture … operated within the vicinity of the home, or the friends’ home” [33, p. 115]. In their summary of research related to girls’ bedroom culture, Jacqueline Reid‐Walsh and Claudia Mitchell explain that the relegation of girls to the bedroom “was largely the result of parental control, whereby girls’ actions and activities were restricted more to the private sphere, while boys were allowed to roam more freely in the public space of the street” [34, p. 175]. Because these contemporary observations about girls’ bedroom culture are reminiscent of the nineteenth‐century interest in girls’ domesticity, it is especially interesting to consider the significance of the bedroom in The Clique. Massie’s bedroom is the locus of her control, and her concern with its neatness and stylishness reflects its importance to the character and within the series. Everything in Massie’s room is white—“the leather chaise by the bay window, the sheepskin rug, the painted brick walls, the dozen fresh tulips, and her flat‐screen Mac” [23, p. 3]—with the exception of “the fluffy purple duvet [which] was the only burst of color” [27, p. 47]. The room is further accessorized with Massie‐sized mannequins that she has made to her measurements every year and on which she assesses potential outfits. When Claire moves into Massie’s room while her family’s house is being renovated, the room’s usual order is disturbed, and Massie can barely look at the “six boxes and two scuffed‐up army‐style duffel bags … without feeling like her eyes were going to bleed” [29, p. 83]. Although she initially thinks having Claire as a temporary roommate will be fun, Massie begins to feel like “Claire’s stuff was sucking up the oxygen in her room and making it difficult for anyone else to breathe” [29, p. 91]. Massie hosts what she calls “exclusive” sleepovers in her bedroom, tries on clothes before her mirror (the narrative notes that she tilts her head to the right when assessing a new outfit because “the off‐center angle helped her see what she looked like through someone else’s eyes” [27, p. 47]), and sings along with pop music, effectively animating the rituals McRobbie and Garber describe. Massie is hesitant to tell the members of the Pretty Committee that she and Claire will be temporarily sharing a bedroom because she fears that the thought of the two of them sharing such close quarters will make them jealous. When her friends note that Claire’s wardrobe has been expanded to include some of Massie’s clothing, Massie realizes that “this probably wasn’t the best time to tell her friends that Claire would be sharing her bedroom. They were acting a little jealous, and she didn’t want to rub it in their faces” [29, p. 44]. Even though Claire spends time with a separate group of friends, her all‐access pass to Massie’s inner sanctum expands what the Pretty Committee might perceive as Claire’s influence further than just living on Massie’s property would allow. The bedroom is equally important to the main character of What Katy Did; the decoration of the room and its sanctity are emphasized in this domestic tale. Katy’s Cousin Helen provides the inspiration for Katy’s own decoration of her room; when the ill cousin visits, Katy notes the slight changes Cousin Helen made in the room in which she would be staying. “All the house was neat, but somehow Aunt Izzie’s rooms were never pretty,” observes Katy; Cousin Helen’s smart rearrangement of furniture allows Katy to see “at once that the Blue room had never looked like this” [28, p. 80]. Later in the story, when Katy, too, is confined to her room, Cousin Helen encourages her to make her sickroom “such a delightful place that [visitors] will want to come to you” [28, p. 112]. When the family celebrates Valentine’s Day together in Katy’s room, it is “bright and inviting” and adorned with trinkets and decorations Cousin Helen had been sending her. The gradual change in Katy’s room serves as a metaphor for her development into what Cousin Helen names “The Heart of the House.” When Cousin Helen comes again to visit, “she saw the change” in Katy: “the gentle expression of her eyes, the womanly look, the pleasant voice, the politeness, the tact in advising others, without seeming to advise” [28, p. 166]. The change the room has wrought has been chronicled in What Katy Did in the same way the presence of the multiply mature “Massie mannequins” in her room demonstrates Massie’s own growth. Massie’s bedroom—where she tries on clothes and makeup and experiments with hairstyles—is a symbol of her early adolescence; in the developmental space between girlhood and womanhood, her room is a pure white that she fantasizes “messing up” with her crush. When cousin Nina appears at one of Massie’s Friday night sleepovers, she judges Massie’s room to be an indicant of her immaturity: “‘I’ve never seen an all‐white room before. It’s so innocent and virginal. And look.’ Nina pointed to the mannequins. ‘Maysee still plays with dolls’” [29, p. 93]. Massie immediately flares at this accusation and retorts, “Those are not dawls. And they probably cost more than your entire—” until she is cut off by a friend [29, p. 93]. Massie’s secret wish, however, is revealed in a fantasy she has about tearing apart her own bedroom. Massie was “so tired of her mother nagging to her keep [sic] her room ‘spotless’ and couldn’t think of anyone she’d rather mess it up with than Cam Fisher” [35, p. 31]. She dreams of inviting Cam over to her house and leading him up to her bedroom in a scene heavy with seduction (“‘What about your mother?’ Cam would ask”): Cam would plug his iPod into her speakers and blast some Strokes song. … Then Massie and Cam would start pulling the books off her bookshelf and hurling them to the floor. They would tear the goose feathers out of her down comforter and throw them at each other like they were having a snowballfight. They would toss her CDs around like Frisbees and yank the evenly folded sweaters out of her walk‐in closet and lob them into the air. … They would wrap toilet paper around her mannequin and write their names with lipstick on her bay window. They would be laughing so hard Massie’s stomach would start to feel like she had just done a thousand crunches. But she would ignore the pain because she’d be having too much fun. [35, p. 30] The entire fantasy scene is a literal and figural deflowering; Cam “plugs his iPod” into Massie’s “speakers,” they rip apart the bed and careen around the room, and even though the experience would hurt, she would “ignore the pain because she’d be having too much fun.” The scene is distinctly sexual; the room’s destruction represents the subversive impulse Massie has to go against her mother’s desire that Massie's room (and her person) remain pure. Massie’s fantasy “deflowering” of her bedroom is rendered in a distinctly different tone than that of a surprisingly similar scene in The Wide, Wide World; a comparison of these reveals a historical change of mind regarding girls’ purity. In The Wide, Wide World, Ellen, the protagonist, takes special pains to put the bedroom she occupies in her aunt’s home “in beautiful order” [36, p. 144]. When, as she lies ill in bed, a mischievous neighbor pays her a visit, Ellen worries that the other girl will destroy the room she has worked so hard to right. The other girl, Nancy, takes advantage of Ellen’s weakness and mocks her as she opens her closets and trunk until “all her nicely stowed piles of white clothes were ruthlessly hurled out and tumbled about; her capes tried on; her summer dresses unfolded, displayed, criticized. Nancy decided one was too short; another very ugly; a third horribly ill‐made; and when she had done with each it was cast out of her way on one side or the other as the case might be” [36, p. 211]. In this scene, Ellen’s purity is threatened against her will (her “white clothes” are the first items mentioned, and they have been “ruthlessly hurled out and tumbled about”)—by another women, no less. Nancy’s removal of Ellen’s clothing from her trunk renders the girl symbolically naked and, on top of that indignity, makes her body the target of Nancy’s scorn. In Warner’s version of the bedroom defilement, Ellen is not in control, and the experience is as frightening as it is messy; in Harrison’s version, Massie’s pleasure comes from the freedom of control the fantasy allows her. Although Massie fantasizes that the destruction of her bedroom would be pleasurable and exhilarating, Ellen’s real experience of that destruction proves distressing; however, both scenes share a common premise. Both rooms are expressions of the characters’ will and control: “spotless” status notwithstanding, Massie takes full credit for the design of her room and its all‐white palette, while Ellen conducts organizing efforts without the permission of her aunt. The drama of both novels’ scenes in which these inner sanctums are destroyed is enhanced by the implied contrast between the rooms before and after the destruction. If the rooms are symbolic of both characters’ (pure—attested by the cleanliness and whiteness of each) inner worlds, the destruction of each—by fantastic design or force—becomes a deflowering for both. The attitudes both novels take toward this scene of destruction are similar as well. Following Nancy’s visit, Ellen cries “heartily … from nervous vexation” and can be calmed only by the reading of hymns from a book a stranger had given her to direct her prayer from “that sinful heart of [hers]” [36, pp. 213, 73]. Massie, too, finds comfort in meditating on her fantasy; we know that any real destruction of her room would be met with outrage in the same way Claire’s visit to her room proved irritating. Massie’s bedroom, like the home in domestic fiction, is the terrain in which her spiritual and material desires are realized and embodied. Tompkins writes that “the home” in domestic fiction “operates in these novels as a basis of religious faith that has unmistakably worldly dimensions” [37, p. 165]. Similarly, Massie’s room is the place where her luxurious and enviable wardrobe is stored, where her physical growth is recorded and monitored in the form of her collection of mannequins, and where she imagines her first romantic encounter. Tompkins draws from Warner’s The Wide, Wide World to illustrate the way in which the home was used to symbolize the promise of domesticity: “an extraordinary combination of sensual pleasures, emotional fulfillment, spiritual aspirations, and satisfaction in work accomplished” [37, pp. 166–67]. When Ellen visits the home of Mrs. Vawse, a character whom Tompkins judges has “achieved the greatest spiritual victory” [37, p. 167], she is taken by Vawse’s small but clean and white house. Tompkins calls Mrs. Vawse’s home a symbol of “spiritual purity and … physical beauty in which holiness and pleasure are combined” and argues that the lesson Ellen (and the novel’s reader) learns from Mrs. Vawse is “that piety and industry, both activities over which a woman has control, can set you free” [37, p. 168]. Although readers of the contemporary The Clique series may not have the same massive designer wardrobe Massie boasts, they might look to Massie’s example in terms of tidiness and orderliness and absorb the encouragement the series offers to readers to keep their sexualities firmly within the fantasy realm. Conclusions From the Future, the Past A comparison of the themes found in the twenty‐first‐century popular series for girls The Clique with the themes associated with mid‐nineteenth‐century domestic fiction for girls reveals a striking number of similarities. The lineage of both genres—domestic fiction for girls and chick lit for girls (of which The Clique is a part)—are similar as well; both girls’ genres grew out of an established genre of writing for women and emerged, in part, as a result of the popularity of the “adult” genre among young reading audiences. As representative works of chick lit for girls, The Clique series owes a debt to the domestic fiction tradition that informed the creation of the girls’ version of the genre. As in domestic fiction, The Clique novels show an intense interest in class and its concomitant display; while domestic fiction coded descriptions of class in terms of an idea of “gentility,” the contemporary series uses a language of brand names to delineate the upper and middle classes. The term “domestic fiction” evinces an interest in the domestic sphere, and in relation to its valorization of what McRobbie and Garber call “bedroom culture,” The Clique pays similar attention to the home and a girl’s place in it. The presence of these similar themes in fiction for girls written more than a century apart is especially noteworthy, as are the comparable attitudes these excerpts convey relative to these themes. The interest in gentility and the limitations of appropriate female behavior, with particular regard to dress, is present in The Clique as well as in representative domestic fiction titles. The examples drawn from What Katy Did, which serve to delineate the acceptable ways in which women should adorn themselves and the fine line between tawdriness and prettiness, reveal textual “lessons” similar to those taught by The Clique. In The Clique, the brands that are acceptable are made explicit; however, the mere consumption of these brands is not what determines a consumer’s ultimate fitness. There is an “art” to the consumption and display of fashion; the way in which a girl wears her clothing is as important as the clothes themselves. This point is driven home in the Clique installment entitled Revenge of the Wannabes, in which Massie and Claire compete to design their school’s new uniform. When, after a series of mishaps, Massie and Claire find themselves on the same design team, Massie agrees to allow Claire’s dreaded Keds to be part of their proposed uniform. Although another team beats Massie and Claire by switching the ballot boxes in which students cast their votes for the best uniform, we readers know that their uniform—Keds included—was the real winner. That Massie and her team were able to pull off their Keds‐inclusive uniform speaks to the contemporary idea of gentility that The Clique series ultimately promotes. Furthermore, the attitudes related to domesticity present in The Clique are surprisingly similar to those encouraged in literature for girls of the nineteenth century. As in the passage from What Katy Did examined above, The Clique describes the girl’s bedroom as her “safe” space, in which she can literally try on different identities and fantasize about her future (in Massie’s room, she fantasizes about sex). Hunter calls the nineteenth‐century girl’s room “the staging area for her own calisthenics of self‐discipline” [5, p. 96]. In What Katy Did, the titular character’s sickroom becomes the arena for her transformation from a girl who “tore her dress every day, hated sewing, and didn’t care a button about being called ‘good’” [28, p. 3] to one who was called the “Heart of the House.” Similarly, Massie’s room effects a significant conversion; in The Clique, however, Massie’s room is both the sphere in which Massie affects the most power and the passageway through which Claire is allowed entrée into Massie’s exclusive world. It is only after Claire moves into Massie’s room that she becomes an official member of the Pretty Committee; thus, the space serves as a sanctuary of transformation for Claire. While the attention to consumerism that permeates The Clique would seem, on the surface, to valorize the wealthy lifestyle associated with Massie and her Pretty Committee, the series ultimately congratulates the middle class in the same way in which domestic fiction for girls did. The details of Massie’s shopping expeditions, and of her regular wardrobe changes, form a particular and significant part of the series narrative; however, the glimpses we are allowed of Massie’s unhappiness and concern with the maintenance of her social status reveal an insecure and less admirable character. Claire triumphs morally in each installment and is rewarded with both material goods and intangibles: in the first book, she finds a group of friends who don’t care what she wears, and she scores designer jeans from the school lost‐and‐found; in the second, the Pretty Committee tries to embarrass her at a Halloween party, but her unorthodox costume ends up attracting the attention of Massie’s crush. As the established symbol of the middle class, Claire is the series’ primary heroine. While one might argue that domestic fiction (for both women and girls) appeared as a means of constructing the female position within a world that was rapidly stratifying and in which a middle class was emerging from an industrial revolution, perhaps the chick lit for girls—particularly that chick lit known as “privileged” chick lit—appeared (and continues to appear) as a means of reexamining female subjectivity in an increasingly technological world in which class stratification is becoming even more layered. While The Clique seems to allow space for the female characters to consider their emerging sexualities, the limits of sexual expression are made clear. Claire does eventually kiss the boy she likes; however, any further activity is discouraged both literally and symbolically. The visiting cousin, Nina, who boasts of her sexual experience, is an attractive figure to all the girls except Massie, but when her true nature is revealed, the girls’ alliances shift back to Massie, whose more explicit sexual thoughts remain fantasies. And because the girls’ allegiance returns to Massie—who “deep down inside,” the narrative reveals, “is starving for more [information]” that Nina would be able to provide about the mysteries of sex—Massie (and the reader) remains in a blissfully ignorant state, as Nina’s secrets are never told. This ignorant state is similar to that of the Victorian “focus on the mystique of sexuality, rather than its mechanics,” as Hunter writes [5, p. 45]. Of this ignorance, Joan Jacobs Brumberg writes, “The ideal [nineteenth‐century] American girl was always naïve—attractively so—and she was untarnished by knowledge, or even thoughts, about what the Victorians discreetly called the ‘sexual connection’” [38, p. 143]. Both Massie and Claire remain “attractively” naive throughout the series, while the character who brags of her experience is unceremoniously shunned by the girls. In an afterword to the 1987 edition of what she calls “the Ur‐text of the nineteenth‐century United States,” The Wide, Wide World, Tompkins writes that the role of Ellen, the novel’s main character, is “not so much the antithesis of the [male] hero’s [traditional role in literature] as a transformation of it” [39, pp. 585, 600]; it is this transformation of the hero’s role that allows a female figure to remain central in the text that makes Warner’s novel both remarkable and influential. Tompkins compares Ellen’s story to the pilgrim’s progress, “the long journey toward sainthood [that] imitates the male model of striving for worldly success” [39, p. 600]. Although Ellen achieves success through a harsh self‐discipline that would ultimately involve the quieting of any individual impulses beyond piety, the placement of a woman at the center of such a narrative should be noted. Jo March, of Little Women, participates in a similar journey toward domesticity by finding that her “ambitio[n] for fame and renown, for fortune and comfort, for gentility as well as for freedom, can all be accommodated in the middle‐class household” [22, p. 82]. The only way to overcome what Foote calls the “structural or economic inequalities” [22, p. 82] that limit the March sisters’ abilities to be, in the case of Jo, famous authors or, in the case of Amy, famous artists, a turn toward the “domestic ideal” is necessary. This same story is told in What Katy Did, as Katy learns to temper her individuality and become the center of her own family’s home. In each novel, the central character experiences tremendous and even painful losses through which she must suffer, all of which serve to turn each heroine toward her “natural” place in the home. Similarly, if each volume of The Clique is read as one part of a greater whole, each novel’s central conflict can be seen as a step forward—effected by the heroine’s triumphant emergence from humiliation and strife wrought by peers—on a journey toward a similar ideal. The Clique's Claire is on a pilgrim’s progress toward popularity, and in the series, popularity is signified by conformity to a certain brand of femininity. How to balance her sense of herself—in the terms used by the “little women” of Alcott’s novel—how to maintain her “castles in the air” until “these hidden stores of ours / Lie open to the Father’s sight / May they be rich in golden hours / Deeds that show fairer for the light” [40, p. 524]. The Politics of Recommendation Historians have noted that when The Wide, Wide World, Little Women, and What Katy Did emerged, they quickly became best sellers; however, the critical reception of these stories has been historically varied. Similarly, the novels that make up The Clique have reached best‐seller status in spite of their lukewarm reception by professional critics. Tompkins reports that “when The Wide, Wide World first appeared in 1850, it caused a sensation in the literary marketplace. No novel written in the United States had ever sold so well. … Critics praised it in the pages of the North American Review, The Nation, and the Literary World” [39, p. 584]. Although, as Foster and Simons write, modern critics of Warner’s novel have argued that the book “articulates more radical or iconoclastic possibilities of female autonomy and empowerment” than readers might initially believe, nineteenth‐century readers “accepted the fiction as an accurate picture of their own lives in many respects, and also drew on it for social and spiritual guidance” [2, pp. 41, 37]. Similarly, Little Women was “enormously popular” upon its first publication (in two volumes) and, Clark argues, “this popularity reflects a certain institutionalization of Alcott, especially in schools and libraries” [4, pp. 102, 107]. Nineteenth‐century literary critics were less interested in the novel; however, Clark writes, “despite highbrow dismissals and scholarly silence, critical activity with respect to Alcott revived … then waned, then waxed … [and] subsequently accelerat[ed]” [4, p. 122]. What Katy Did, too, was considered less than rebellious when it was published (and popularly received); however, MacLeod writes, its readers today can hear the “cry of outrage beneath the smooth and proper surface” [8, p. 22]. These nineteenth‐century novels were welcomed by readers in the same way the serial installments of Harrison's The Clique are anticipated and greeted by their twenty‐first‐century readers. Scholarly work related to The Clique is all but absent; perhaps this series, too, needs a century to excite the academic imagination. In light of their similarities—in lineage and theme—to contemporary chick lit for girls, the regarded place of Little Women, The Wide, Wide World, and What Katy Did within academic and critical discourse stands in high contrast to The Clique's dubious position. One might argue that contemporary criticisms of The Clique are related to its writing style and its literary quality; however, the texts of both popular and professional critiques betray this claim. The popular as well as the professional media express more concern for the novels as potential influencers of teen behavior and consumption than as works of (popular) literature. When Campbell argues, for example, that in the hands of “more skilled and responsible writers [than The Clique's author, Lisi Harrison]” better contemporary chick lit has been produced, the real critique seems to hinge on Campbell’s assessment of the plots of The Clique and its popular sisters that “glorif[y] shallow materialism”—a moral argument, to be sure [20, p. 489]. School Library Journal’s reviews of the first and the third books in the series betray an attitude of disdain toward the series as a whole: of the first book, the reviewer Diana Pierce writes, “The cruelty of the clique [is not] redeemed with any sort of satisfying ending” [41, p. 143]; of the third, Alice DiNizo argues that the book “is not for every collection” and recommends other novels for “not‐so‐wealthy” and “country” teens [42, p. 128]. The Young Adult Library Association’s placement of the first book in the series on the 2005 list of “Quick Picks for Reluctant Readers,” which, writes the Quick Picks Committee, does not consider “the literary quality of these books … [an] essential criteri[on]” [43, p. 8], is another clue to the professional perception of the series as one that exists outside the literary canon. These assessments, which discount literariness and foreground an unspoken and even undefined idea of “appropriateness,” are what ultimately inform the place of books like The Clique novels in the critical and professional communities. The professional and popular perception of The Clique as a less than literary offering and, thus, as a conditional purchase or, in the case of its placement on the Quick Picks list, a means to “change” a reluctant reader into an avid reader brings the discussion of the series to a point at which what Barbara Herrnstein Smith calls the “contingency of value” of any object must be considered. Smith writes that the nonutilitarian value of any work is in constant fluctuation, because those influences that determine the worth of an object—“our individual needs, interests, and resources”—“are themselves functions of our continuously changing states in relation to an environment that may be relatively stable but is never absolutely fixed” [44, p. 31]. In terms of this argument, the individual “needs, interests, and resources” of any reader of The Clique, combined with his or her place in history and the environment, will determine how he or she values (or doesn't value) the series. The critiques of the series (above) come from a somewhat homogeneous population: first, the readers and writers of such critiques are adults, all of those quoted above are women, and the majority of them have relationships to libraries and youth services. The young readers and fans of the series likely occupy a different demographic and are probably, in the majority, teenage or “tween‐age” girls and may or may not have relationships to libraries as patrons. Smith argues that the different assessments of the value of a common object—in this case, the young readers’ versus the professional adults’ assessment of The Clique—derive from the same impulses. The issue of which group’s values are accepted within the dominant culture is one of power; the values espoused by the more powerful group become the “accepted” values. Libraries, librarians, and critics of young people’s literature have a distinctly powerful position in this system of contingent values; in fact, the history of library service is predicated on this position of library power. Lundin writes that the early library’s “ambitious mission” was “to shape a community’s thinking” [45, p. 19]. The library’s selection of materials, predicated on the idea of “the power of books for good or ill and the necessity for guidance” [45, p. 19], constitutes the primary means for the library to achieve this goal. Where services for children are concerned, the children’s librarian and selector of materials for children finds himself or herself in a position of power to influence the concept of literary value among a distinctly less powerful subset of the community: children. What material is valued and what material is not is contingent not only on a dominant idea of literary “value,” broadly construed, but also on the belief in the power that the book may exert on the especially vulnerable child, as well as on the significantly greater capacity for an adult to choose appropriate material for that child. In Lillian Smith’s The Unreluctant Years, a book considered to be among the first of its kind in its focus on the criticism and selection of children’s fiction, the author explains the importance of a “quality” childhood diet of reading: “Childhood is the impressionable and formative period, so receptive and so brief that a child has less need of and less time for the mediocre than an adult” [46, p. 6]. Because childhood is such a transitory but formative period, Smith argues, it is especially important that those in that stage waste no time with reading material not considered worthwhile by critics. Librarians charged with selecting literature for young people have historically taken this statement as the veiled warning that it is; if we read Smith’s words as a prediction of the dire consequences of inappropriate reading during a short, crucial period, the issue of literary selection becomes one fraught with anxiety. The place of mass‐produced and popular fiction in a library’s young adult collection has been historically contested, as libraries and librarians consider the wealth of material available for purchase in terms of their often slender budgets and, in competing terms, with the anxious process of selection. Library selection policies are written to check any uncertainty and are meant to ensure the purchase of material that meets the curricular and extracurricular interests of the population; however, as Lundin notes in a historical account of the selection standards set by librarians, “libraries serve as the ‘genteel setting,’ in Dee Garrison’s words, for the promotion and arbitration of morals and manners through a defined print culture. What a library collects is a microcosm of valued and validated literature” [45, p. 30]. That is, by recognizing its position as a powerful subject in the arena of contingent values, the library ensures that any material it collects will be considered valuable, if only because the library collected it. As an institution with a vested interest in the maintenance of its own authority, the library is thus, in Smith’s terms, “called upon repeatedly to devise arguments and procedures that validate the community’s established tastes and preferences, thereby warding off barbarism and the constant apparition of an imminent collapse of standards and also justifying the exercise of [its] own normative authority” [44, p. 40]. In the course of this process, “public librarians generated a rhetoric of guidance that created and helped maintain a dichotomy between different types of fiction and reading, between what has variably been labeled popular … and … elite” [47, p. 113]. Ultimately, the placement of The Clique in the category of the popular and the criticism of it in terms of what some might argue are its dubious influences do little to authorize the value judgments made by the young readers of the series. While it is unlikely that every young person who reads The Clique becomes a series devotee, the power of the readers who do enjoy Harrison’s series is evident and exemplified by its best‐seller status. These readers are not the passive recipients of the text that critics might fear them to be, and an examination of Harrison’s Web site devoted to The Clique offers proof of this claim. Here, readers participate in message boards, read letters written to the author that are featured in Harrison’s Letter of the Month column, and even submit corrections to the site when they discover continuity errors (including grammatical errors) in the text of the novels. In this way, these vocal readers are doing the same things Foster and Simons set out to do in their critical monograph of girls’ fiction, namely, to “explode the fallacy” of rejection as “futile” in “any serious critical consideration of such material” as that written for girls [2, p. xiii]. Foster and Simons’s positions as academics, the publication of their work by an academic press, and their access to critical and historical resources to support their arguments grant them a more powerful ground from which to challenge historical contingencies of value. Why should we have to wait for the young readers of The Clique to reach (or not) similar pinnacles before we listen to their critical voices?