READING STUDIES CONTRIBUTORY TO SOCIAL SCIENCES A SUGGESTION TOWARD CO-OPERATIVE RESEARCH fact that many if not most of the more objective studies of library problems made to date have been made by students in other fields is variously regarded in library circles. Some derive satisfaction from this token that librarianship presents problems of sufficient size and weight to attract the attention of competent students in architecture, business administration, economics, education, law, political science, psychology, sociology, statistics, and other academic disciplines. Others deplore the necessity of looking to non- librarians for much of the evidence needed to constitute a li- brary science, their objections finding support in the evident fact that such evidence can only be interpreted adequately for librarians by persons experienced in library work. Still others are not much concerned whether such studies are made or not, since their results seldom bear directly upon the particular duties that now engage the librarian's efforts. If one may disregard this middle group, who will doubtless disregard this article, the argument is confined to the groups at either extreme. Both demand more evidence concerning the needs to be met by the library, but they differ as to the agency best qualified to secure the evidence. So stated, there is only one sure solution for the dilemma- employ both professional and non-professional agencies to the full. All that remains is for librarians to formulate the problems that invite co-operative re- search and then to hold up their end of co-operative studies. Any university faculty includes one or more specialists in the fields to which the librarian must look for technical assistance in his study of professional problems. Since the desired collab- orators in other fields are thus within easy reach of the faculty and graduate students of at least ten library schools, why do the anodes and cathodes so rarely combine to produce a spark? 291
292 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY A convincing answer to this question is contained in a brilliant paper by С. Н. Judd1 which discusses the elements of co-opera- tive research. In a sentence, his point is that co-operation can- not be had for the asking. He ridicules the naive view that academic folk are eagerly looking about for opportunities to co-operate. As a matter of fact, the overproduction of investi- gators has resulted in a high degree of competition. Before A will co-operate with B, it is incumbent upon В to demonstrate that the results of the project will contribute to A's personal objectives. This relates to our present discussion by emphasizing the need for librarians to formulate interdisciplinary problems with reference to the present interests of the desired collaborator. Needless to say, the more the representative of the library school knows about the other subject, and vice versa, the easier it will be for him to secure co-operation from representatives of the particular field. Because of the lack of fundamental research upon library problems to date, it may be necessary for the library student to go more than halfway at the start. But the richness and scope of the data of mutual interest to librarianship and related disciplines will inevitably lead students to secure it. Librarians will benefit in any case. But librarianship will benefit more if experienced librarians take an active part in the plan- ning and conduct of the work. What follows is an attempt to indicate certain points of con- tact between studies of adult reading and sociology. Many problems are of mutual interest to students in each field, though for widely different reasons. It is hoped that a tentative state- ment of such problems may not merely facilitate co-operative research with the social studies, but that it may encourage simi- lar statements of problems in other areas that offer an equal promise of effective collaboration with librarians. It should be evident that the more we know about reading, the more we know about readers, who are said to constitute about 95 per cent of the total population. Hence the sociologist 1 "How can American educational forces best co-operate?" School and society , XXXIII (1931), 351-56.
READING STUDIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES 293 is inescapably interested in such data. Facts about the reading of typical social groups are useful in defining group cultures. By revealing the characteristic attitudes and interests of the many subgroups composing any given community, they make for better understanding of the community as a whole. Evi- dence concerning the relative demand for and consumption of reading upon particular issues, such as employment legislation, the chain store, or child labor, provides a valid basis for the analysis of public opinion on these issues. Furthermore, data of the sort now available in correlation studies of group reading in- terests in contemporary subjects afford statistical measures of social integration. Such illustrations might be continued to much greater length. The proper study of mankind is man. But the man in the street is not easy to get under the microscope. Hence the stu- dent of society is ever on the alert to discover evidence which not only may reveal patterns of social attitudes and social be- havior, but in which variable elements may be controlled. Because reading is a highly universal source of both recreation and information, and because valid data on the reading be- havior of adult groups have been found to yield high statistical reliabilities, it would appear that these data meet both require- ments. It is customary, of course, for community-survey schedules to ask for the number of books in the homes, the magazines and newspapers subscribed to, the use made of the public library, and the like. Such data, however, come far short of the types of evidence useful to the sociologist that are being obtained by more intensive studies of adult reading now in process. An out- line description of such studies follows this statement. The studies are given under four groups; namely, "the reading popu- lation," "the status of reading," "the character of reading on social issues," and "the effects of reading." It may be of interest to comment briefly upon the studies of each group and to indi- cate certain types of evidence that should be useful both to sociologists and to students of reading as such. The first group of studies concerns the reading population.
294 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Aside from rough estimates of national literacy and ratios of newspaper-, magazine-, and book-readers to the total popula- tion, very little is known about the consumers of the large and rapidly increasing volume of magazine and book publication. The sociologist is interested not merely in knowing what the issues are that most people like to read about; he also wants to know what sort of people are accustomed to regard reading as a source of useful information upon any subject of general con- cern. The latter question is being studied in terms of charac- teristics according to which the readers of any given type of literature may be distributed. Subscribers to particular news- papers, for example, have been distributed according to sex, economic status, city wards, and occupation. Generous sam- plings of groups representing skilled and unskilled labor, civil servants, school and college students, housewives, business and professional men, whose reading proclivities are known, have been distributed according to age, amount of schooling, and social environment. In some cases groups of readers have been distributed according to intelligence, race, parental occupation, and personality ratings. If such evidence continues to accumulate it should soon be- come possible to define the characteristics of individuals who do systematic reading on subjects of general concern, even though such reading is confined to the newspaper. From similar data on the consumers of recreational reading, the sociologist may draw useful conclusions concerning the scope of fiction as a form of public recreation. The extent to which the librarian should benefit by more exact definition of the reading public is perhaps obvious. If only for its value toward securing larger appropria- tions he should welcome data of the sort described. A reliable definition of the reading public in terms of schooling, occupa- tion, and other traits is, of course, particularly desired by publishers. The second group of studies concerns the status of reading. This covers a variety of basic studies. Until it is known to what extent a given population relies upon reading for recreation or for information (as compared with other types of recreation and
READING STUDIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES 295 other sources of information) it is of course impossible to esti- mate the significance of the social trends the reading may indi- cate. For example, suppose it were established that a population consisting of small shopkeepers and tradesmen, who are very active in local politics, reads extensively in newspapers and magazines upon political issues of the city, county, and state. Suppose further that an analysis of this literature showed it to be of a high order - non-partisan, authoritative, and construc- tive in purpose. Might the investigator then infer that those who read such literature are on the whole open-minded and in- terested in the truth about political issues? Hardly, until we have measures of the extent to which this reading successfully competes with other sources of information available to the group. It may well be found that campaign broadsides are also read and are considered more interesting than the non-partisan mate- rial; that most of the men get their political information from daily conversation, political meetings, and radio talks; and that, as a form of evening recreation, reading is generally a last resort. Thus it is a matter of fundamental importance to check the as- sumption that what people read on a given subject is a relatively important source of their information concerning it. Fugitive data, like the number of books found in rural homes, the sales figures for different types of reading matter, and the like, are too frequently used blindly in the description of group cultures. The status of reading, as compared with other sources of information and recreation, may readily be determined to any desired degree, for any given population, by check lists, interviews, time studies, and other familiar techniques. For the sociologist, such comparative studies to determine the status of reading within a given population, before data on the character of reading are used in the study of group cultures, should be an elementary precaution. For the librarian to know for each major population group in his community whether reading comes first or last as a source of information would seem to be a stern necessity. Since no reliable evidence on the
аф THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY status of reading within any given adult population has yet been produced, we have here a field of investigation in which the student of reading and the sociologist should co-operate to mutual advantage. The third group of studies - the nature and extent of reading upon particular social issues - is perhaps the most important. The common purpose of the projects is to identify the contem- porary social issues that are discussed in easily available papers, magazines, and books; also to determine the relative amount of reading upon, and the relative interest in, the various issues on the part of different group of readers. Evidence from such studies to date, for example, reveals a thoroughgoing indiffer- ence toward reading upon economic and political problems, whether discussed in newspapers, magazines, or books, on the part of college-trained women who are not themselves business executives. The social implications of this fact are the more important when it is considered that public-school teachers are largely recruited from this class of women, that all such women are voters, and that the large majority of housewives represent- ed are the moving spirits in the social propaganda directed by women's clubs. The sociologist has clearly a stake in evidence of this sort which serves to define group attitudes objectively and which can be checked for statistical reliability. In so far as public edu- cation has an influence upon social behavior, such facts as the indifference of public-school teachers toward the economic crises of modern civilization are directly pertinent to the problems of class consciousness and social evolution. The example illustrates with equal clearness the value of such evidence to the librarian. Before the librarian can purchase books to best advantage he should know the relative interest of different groups of readers in the various subjects discussed in contemporary books. The fourth group of studies - the effects of reading - bears a somewhat misleading description. The difficulty of isolating variables in comparisons of readers and non-readers has thus far prevented such studies from defining any noteworthy effects produced entirely by reading. Standard tests in some of the
READING STUDIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES 297 school subjects have been somewhat widely used to determine the effects of a single reading upon the readers' knowledge of the subject, and also to determine the rates at which such informa- tion is forgotten. A more interesting and equally practicable type of study would determine the degree to which attitudes for or against a given proposition - e.g., the social value of the church - are af- fected by reading a strong brief for either side - say Elmer Gantry. The Thurstone scales for the measurement of attitudes toward various current issues might be readily applied before and after the reading of a given book or article to secure such evidence. For its bearing upon the relative influence of different types of written propaganda upon populations representing dif- ferent levels of schooling and intelligence, such evidence should interest students of public opinion among sociologists. It is also clearly pertinent to the librarian's problems of censorship, adult education, and appeals for financial support. While no direct causal connections of the sort needed to establish "effects" can be expected, it is high time that students of reading concern themselves with the relationship between reading and various physical and mental disorders. Such studies may be addressed either to the individual or to the social group. If individuals are studied, the first source to be examined is the accumulation of case histories of juvenile delinquents, adult neurasthenics, and other types of mental patients. From such records it would be profitable to select all references to the type and amount of reading which serve to confirm the diagnosis. A classification of such references should indicate some of the more prevalent "bad effects" of reading. If studies to the same end were to be conducted in terms of different social groups, the results might be even more sig- nificant. Such an investigation might select two communities for comparison, one of which represents a high degree of social organization and the other a slum district. The attempt would then be made to contrast the per capita consumption in the two communities of "escape literature" - i.e., highly sensational writing upon situations that are altogether unreal or highly im-
298 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY probable - as in melodramatic fiction, accounts of sudden wealth, and the like. A study of this type is now being made of two groups of students in an American college, one of whom has been found by tests to have a poor emotional adjustment where- as the other group is entirely normal. The amount of "escape literature" read by each group is being determined for sake of comparison. Evidence resulting from this type of study should be useful to students of social disorganization. If a close relationship is found between the reading of "escape literature" and inability to meet life-situations successfully, one could not, of course, con- clude either that the reading caused the failure or that the fail- ure caused the reading. Of the two, the latter is perhaps more consistent with the principles of mental hygiene. Authorities are divided as to whether "escape literature" is helpful or harm- ful to neurotic individuals. But to determine the degree of re- lationship would give the sociologist an additional means of selecting a disorganized society, since he could identify such communities in part by the extensive sale or circulation of reading which has been found to appeal to maladjusted groups. In conclusion it should be pointed out that the four groups of studies are interdependent. No group is self-sufficient. It is first necessary to define the total reading population in order to evaluate the scope of reading as a social activity. It is then im- portant to determine the status of distinguishable types of read- ing within each typical subgroup or selected community, as a means of knowing the relative importance of reading as com- pared with other socializing influences. Next in logical order comes the investigation of group interest in particular social is- sues and the relative amount of reading upon each by typical groups. By comparing reading interest with actual reading we find means of extending the scope and influence of reading upon subjects of much interest upon which little reading is done. Finally, the study of the effects of reading should integrate the foregoing studies and increase our understanding of the social values of reading, whether for information or for entertainment. The following summary of the studies mentioned is too con*
READING STUDIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES 29$ cise to convey any clear notion of any particular investigation. The purpose is to afford some perspective of current work in the field of adult reading as a whole. Since studies of each type mentioned are actually in progress and in some cases well ad- vanced, persons interested in particular aspects of the work may obtain further information by correspondence. READING STUDIES CONTRIBUTORY TO SOCIAL SCIENCE A. The reading population: defined by studies of the reading of typical groups selected to represent wide ranges in respect to different conditions known to influence reading, for example: 1. Amount and character of reading in newspapers, magazines, and books, distributed among groups chosen to represent different amounts of schooling from the sixth grade to college graduation. 2. Same, for groups chosen to represent typical occupations on the various levels of schooling and intelligence. 3. Same, for groups representing racial differences known to affect read- ing - e.g., Jewish, Negro, Irish, Mexican, Japanese. 4. Summaries of the various distributions to indicate the traits and com- binations of traits associated with different amounts of reading in different types of material. 5. Distribution of popular reading on social subjects, obtained by sub- mitting lists of selected press items, magazine articles, and books to samplings of representative population groups. B. The status of reading: defined for each distinguishable type of reading by comparisons between the given type of reading and other sources of in- formation or forms of entertainment available to the particular population studied, for example: 1. Recreational reading compared with other types of recreation by means of preference ratings obtained from groups representing extreme differences in intelligence, economic status, and amount of schooling. 2. Reading compared with other sources of information, by selecting a few situations to represent different degrees of importance to the given population, then obtaining group judgments sufficient to show which of the following sources of information are preferred for each situation: {a) participation, (b) observation, (c) motion picture, (d) conversation, (<?) radio, (f) news item, (g) magazine fiction, (h) magazine non-fiction, (/) novel, (j) serious book of non-fiction. 3. Social distribution of preference for melodramatic fiction, secured by means of a series of fiction plots scaled to range from pure adventure to stories providing a somewhat philosophical interpretation of life. De-
Зоо THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY gree of simplicity in style and plot preferred by each social group to be determined by having representatives of typical groups indicate which plots are preferred. С Nature and extent of reading upon social subjects: determined by analyzing contemporary literature to obtain a complete list of such subjects, then in securing group ratings to indicate the relative interest of each subject to each group. Actual reading upon the various subjects may be obtained by collecting library call slips, by individual reading diaries, or by having representatives of each group check samplings of recent material on each subject to show which have been read less than half, more than half but not all, or entirely. Comparisons between relative interest and relative amounts of reading can then be made for each subject among all the popu- lation groups sampled. Such comparisons indicate, for example: 1. Discrepancies between group interest in reading upon particular sub- jects and actual reading done, thus suggesting conditions that prevent the reading desired - such as lack of sufficiently simple material, in- accessibility of such material, and the like. 2. Group characteristics associated with differences in interest in reading upon social questions. The differences in group interest are defined by correlations between the reading-interest scores of groups known to differ in respect to one or more of the following factors, the others being held constant: sex, age, schooling, occupation, environment, and other conditions. D. The social effects of reading: determined by tests or scale measures of the attitudes of selected groups toward a given social issue before and after the reading of a selected book, short-story, or article on the subject. Such tests are still more readily used to study the effects of selected readings upon the scope and permanence of factual information upon the topic. As contrasted with such studies of the desirable effects of reading, it is possible that studies to define the ««desirable effects will prove the more significant, in view of the scarcity of work in this field to date. Studies of the latter type, for example, involve: 1 . Compensatory aspects of recreational reading, defined by contrasting the amounts of romantic fiction ("escape literature") read by students rated D or E by the Thurstone personality scales with students rated A or B, the groups thus distinguished representing good and bad social adjustment, respectively. 2. Mental and physical disorders associated with excessive amounts of reading or with the character of material read. Evidence concerning such disorders is available in case histories of psycho-neurasthenic pa- tients, case records of juvenile delinquents, and like sources. Douglas Waples Graduate Library School University of Chicago