International Library Education JEAN E. LOWRIE, editor In addition to columns written by the column editor, readers are encouraged to submit articles of 1,000 to 1,500 words in length or to contact the editor, Jean E. Lowrie, School of Librarianship, Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo, 49008, noting appropriate items for possible inclusion in this column. We are fortunate to have a special feature for the column in this issue. Robert D. Stueart, Dean of the Graduate School of Library and In- formation Science, Simmons College, has shared his China experiences. The eagerness with which the People's Re- public is embracing the latest in library and information science is fascinating. Hopefully more possibilities for inter- national exchanges among library educators will develop among many countries over this next decade. A Personal Observation on Library and Information Science Education in the People's Republic of China Robert D. Stueart China, indeed, is embarking on a new long march in many areas to mod- ernize the country, but most particu- larly in the area of library and informa- tion services, and tentative indications are that the People's Republic, after a hiatus of more than 20 years, is now more than ever committed to bringing its information services up to a more desirable level. A great deal has been accomplished since normalization began in 1976. Before that time, during the Cultural Revolution (1965-1976), the closing of universities (meaning lib- rary and information science education programs as well as libraries) and the complete lack of materials acquisition (of Chinese language materials which were not being published and foreign materials which were not being bought) meant that the profession was im- mediately faced with a tremendous challenge of catching up with new technologies, developing pertinent col- lections, and educating and training individuals for all levels of work in li- braries and other information centers. Graduates of library science programs, which were in existence before the Cul- tural Revolution, plus a few who re- ceived their library education in the United States have been leaders in car- rying out the modernization of library services. The first major step was taken in 1978 when Chairman Hua stated to the People's Congress that "libraries of all types should be promoted so that a network serving the masses and scien- tific research can be established." More recently a separate Bureau of National Librarianship has been established 207
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP within the Ministry of Education to ad- dress and coordinate, among other things, standards, education, and per- sonnel needs in libraries. There is also a race to meet the 1985 deadline for hav- ing in place a preliminary automated library and information services net- work and the Ministry of Education has established nine "Center for the Book and other Media" locations in univer- sities across China to further aid in the modernization efforts. Since 1977 a number of training in- stitutes have been established across China, both in units within universities, departments, information centers and in public or academic libraries, to ac- commodate the basic needs for per- sonnel development. Before that time only two formal programs in library science existed for any length of time in the PRC. The first of those was origi- nally established as the Boone Library School (Boone College, Wuhan) in 1920. Ten years later the school be- came an independent entity and existed as such until after liberation (1949). In 1950 it became the Depart- ment of Library Science at the National Wuhan University and just recently (1981) received school status within the university as the School of Library and Information Science. It now offers two programs at two different levels in both library science and information sci- ence. Beida University (Beijing), which was established in the early 1950's is the other major program. Both of these schools now offer two programs: 1) an undergraduate degree program, four years in duration. Students in these programs would take their first two years of courses in disciplines such as history or language and literature (for library science majors) or physics, mathematics or computer science (for information science majors). In addi- tion, all of the approximate 1,000 stu- 208 dents in those programs in the two schools would take at least one foreign language and a political theory course; and 2) a postgraduate master's degree program which is three years long and requires a thesis in the third year. The small number of about 25 students in postgraduate programs are now mostly in their thirties and completed their undergraduate programs before the Cultural Revolution. They will be as- signed by the government either to teaching positions; to scientific re- search arms of governmental agencies; or to university or public libraries. Cur- rent efforts are toward improving the information science component in both levels. Simmons College's Graduate School of Library and Information Science has had a long and rewarding relationship with China and particularly with the program at Wuhan. The program there was started by an American, Mary Elizabeth Wood, who received her li- brary education at Simmons. The rela- tionship with that program and others in the PRC has continued and acceler- ated during the last few years when there has been an average of one lecturing/consulting visit per year by members of the Simmons faculty. In addition, there are currently five lib- rary educator/researchers who are studying/researching at Simmons: from Beida University; from Wuhan University; and from the Information Science and Technology Institute of China (ISTIC). Given the one billion person popula- tion of China, the needs for libraries and information services are obvious. Yet there are fewer than 100,000 "li- brarians" and only about five percent of them would actually qualify for that title. This figure does not include those individuals working in other informa- tion management categories in organi-
zations such as I STIC or the Academy of Science. This shortage has forced a variety of universities to offer exten- sion courses or short courses to en- hance the preparation of individuals for work as a professional in all types of libraries. These programs, whether part-time or short courses, offer certifi- cates of completion. Part-time course students either study at their own lib- rary or information center or attend nearby institutions which offer the lec- ture portions of the program. For short courses - primarily intended to pre- pare individuals for work as librarians in small public libraries, in factories or other such institutions, or for work on collective farms in the countryside - the individual leaves the work place and attends the course for a limited period of time. There is a great deal of activity at the undergraduate, graduate, and continu- ing education levels for personnel working in all types of libraries and in- formation centers. The problems of qualified staff in libraries and qualified faculty to extend educational programs are the primary challenges being faced today. The two schools and the Minis- try of Education are being looked to for the leadership role in expanding the horizons. My comments are based on observa- tions, discussions, and readings I did during my seven week stay in China where I lectured and consulted on col- lection development and management techniques at four universities in four different parts of China at the invita- tion of the Ministry of Education, is- sued through Wuhan University, in the central part of China. The other three locations were Sichuan University (Chengdu) in the southwestern pro- vince of Sichuan; Shanxi Teachers University (Xian) in the Shanxi pro- vince of northwestern China; and Beida University (Beijing) in north- International Library Education eastern China. My consulting at Sic- huan and Shanxi was done for the Un- ited Board of Christian Higher Educa- tion in Asia. One hears and reads about the crowds on the one hand and the tran- quil beauty on the other, but can never be quite prepared for the lasting im- pressions of both. For instance, when I walked into my first lecture, three hours in length, I was unprepared to see over one thousand eager librarians, some of whom had traveled over 500 miles to hear me. Always the sea of tape recorder antennas in the first few rows is a small but poignant indication of the eagerness to learn, to advance, to mod- ernize the oldest library system in the world. Every place I went, each group I talked with and almost to the person, Chinese librarians are eager to develop themselves as professionals and the services they offer their public. They are interested in our library and infor- mation science education programs, particularly the integrated approach we have taken (their separated prep- aration for librarians and information scientists is a holdover from the period of influence of Russians as foreign ex- perts). Librarians are interested in new technology, open stack systems, cataloging and classification practices, management methods, and collection development. They are anxious to teach new methods and are embarked on translation projects for several li- brary science textbooks. They are anxi- ous to establish exchange agreements and would gladly accept duplicate materials in library and information science for their professional collec- tions. All of this is a very positive sign for the renewal and strengthening of our professional relationship in order to promote the development of library and information services. * * * * 209
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP A special invitation to attend the 22nd biennial conference of the Lib- rary Association of Australia (August 22-26, 1982) to be held in Adelaide, South Australia, has been extended to American librarians and library educators. The theme is "Challenge and Response" with special emphasis on networking, libraries and the com- munity, and the social impact of the new technology. Air New Zealand is ar- ranging conference flights and in- teresting post and pre-tours. Brochures are available from this col- umn's editor or Muriel Ellis, Elli ser- vice, 81 Fullarton Rd., Kent Town 5067, S. Australia. • * * * Reminder: The International Fed- eration of Library Associations and In- stitutions (I FLA) will meet in Montreal, August 22-28, 1982. The Standing Committee on Library Schools will meet Sunday and Friday. The program session will be on Tuesday with visits to library schools on Wednesday. The over-all theme of the conference is networking. • * * * The First International Information Conference in Egypt, "Infrastructure of an Information Society," co-hosted by Egyptian Society for Information Technology (ESIT) and American Soc- iety for Information Science (ASIS), will be held in Cairo, December 13-15, 1982. Papers are invited. Contact Bahaa El-Hadidy, ESIT/ASIS, Confer- ence Co-chair, School of Library and Information Science, Catholic Univer- sity. • * * * An international conference on Mini and Micro-Computer applications in information, documentation, and li- braries (March 14-18, 1983) will take place in Tel-Aviv, Israel. This will be an 210 opportunity for all who work in these fields to describe their work and discuss future possibilities. Descriptions of existing systems, software require- ments, application software, and com- munication, systems design, problems in developing countries and mission oriented applications will be discussed. The International Federation of Documentation (FID), the Gesellschaft für Information und Dokumentation (GID), (Germany), the National Center of Scientific and Technological Infor- matien (COSTI), (Israel), and the Is- rael Society of Special Libraries and In- formation Centers (ISLIC) are co- sponsors. For further information con- tact: Secretariate, Mini and Micro- Computers Applications, P.O. Box 3054, Tel-Aviv 61030, Israel. Telex: 3-2332 CSTI IL. * * * * ELI PA is a directory of experienced library and information personnel in the developing countries of Asia and Oceania. It is established as an on-line data base at the Library of the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST) in Seoul, Korea. It is jointly sponsored by the Interna- tional Federation of Library Associa- tions (I FLA), the Commission for Asia and Oceania, International Federation for Documentation (FID/CAO), the In- ternational Development Research Centre, Canada (IDRC), and the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST). Each record in the data base gives details on the name, position, address, education, experience, special training, language ability, professional interest or specialty and the length of time that the person is available for a consultancy or staff exchange, etc. Based on specific search questions, the ELI PA Referral Service can pro-
vide profiles of qualified information specialists. If your name is not in the ELIPA data base, you are invited to write in to re- quest a questionnaire. To qualify for entry into the data base, you should hold a degree in library or information science: a doctor's degree, a master's degree with three year's experience or, a bachelor's degree with five year's ex- perience. Persons with degrees in other subjects will be included if they hold a second degree or special training in library/information work. You must International Library Education also have a working knowledge of a language of the region or at least one of the IFLA official languages i.e. English, French, German or Russian. All international organizations who have an interest in library and informa- tion work in the region are invited to make use of this ELIPA Referral Ser- vice. Please write or call: ELIPA, c/o Library, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, P.O. Box 131, Dong Dae Mun, Seoul, Korea. 211