GERMAN LIBRARIES AND SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL INFORMATION IN NAZI GERMANY' Pamela Spence Richards2 National Socialist policies drastically altered the roles of Germany's various scientific and technical library networks. The ability of the libraries in these systems to supply the results of current research to their users depended greatly on their access to foreign publications. Nazi ideological objections to foreign research were articulated in a series of laws and decrees that effectively pre- vented publicly accessible general state and university libraries from supplying foreign journals to their clientele. Technological university3 libraries, open to a smaller circle, grew in importance during the Reich both as collections and as agencies of dissemination to government and industry. Private industrial re- search libraries, using their own funds as well as the services of foreign sub- sidiaries, also flourished under the Nazis and profited from the additional dissemination services provided by the technological universities. The decline in general university libraries and the rise of industrial collections reflected the overall diversion of research under the Nazis from universities to the laborato- ries and proving grounds of industry. The Second World War has a special place in the history of the exchange of scientific and technical information. It severed the flow of informa- tion between Germany and the Allies much more radically than had the First World War. The traditional channels of exchange, such as confer- ences, visiting professorships, research internships, and-most impor- 1. Written with the support of grants from the American Philosophical Society and the Rutgers Research Council. 2. School of Communication, Information and Library Studies, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, New Jersey 08903. 3. I have translated the German Technische Hochschule as "technological university" throughout. Although "technological institute" (as in Massachusetts Institute of Tech- nology) is a more accurate rendering, in this article it would lead to the confusion of the Technische Hochschulen with the nonautonomous institutes within German universities. [Library Quarterly, vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 151-1731 C 1985 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-2519/85/5502-0002$01 .00 151
152 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY tant for this discussion-the scholarly book trade, were all closed off in September 1939. At the same time, the hostile governments knew not only that the new war was going to be the most technological conflict ever but also that the pure sciences, theoretical as well as experimental, offered prospects for victory that could not be ignored. Nor were phys- ics and chemistry the only sciences to be harnessed for the war effort; geography, biology, history, and psychology all were made to play their part. On both sides, consequently, a keen awareness grew that setting up alternative systems for information gathering was absolutely imperative. Not only must information gathering be organized; of equal importance for the mobilization of scientific knowledge was its documentation- indexing, abstracting, and dissemination. The institutions on each side that were involved in the war effort were pretty much the same: governmental and military agencies, scientific institutions in academe and industry, and, most important, the research libraries. The contributions of these individual agencies and their rela- tive importance in the common effort, however, seem to differ in very interesting ways when we compare their functioning in Germany and the Western alliance. Elsewhere I have tried to reconstruct the American organization set up to deal with these matters and to describe its impact on the U.S. library system after the war [1]. In this article I shall attempt to do the same for Germany. The differences to which I allude are not only the consequences of the war situation. In part they reflect national peculiarities in the patterns of organization of higher education, library systems, industry, culture, and political institutions that are rooted in the pre-World War I period. One powerful factor absent in the West was the totalitarian organization of the German state after March 1933 and its obsession with thought control. The National Socialist government had for ideological reasons begun well before the outbreak of war in 1939 to control the flow of scientific and technical information in Germany and had severely af- fected the functioning of the research library systems. My first task will be to sketch the German scientific and technical information network as it was organized around libraries before 1933. The library system was quite variegated: royal collections had grown into huge state libraries in Berlin and Munich; universities and their insti- tutes had accumulated both central libraries and specialized serninar libraries over generations; more recently, private industrial research libraries had been founded; and finally there were the libraries belong- ing to Germany's new technological universities. All these categories of scientific and technical information agencies were affected by National Socialist policy differently. A serious difficulty encountered immediately when trying to reconstruct the information system in the National
LIBRARIES AND INFORMATION IN NAZI GERMANY 153 Socialist era is the paucity of primary source material. The immense wartime destruction of Germany's libraries (resulting in the loss of 53 percent of the holdings of her state-supported scientific and technical libraries [2,. p. 600]), the understandable reluctance of many German librarians to dwell on the National Socialist years, and their distraction by the challenges of reconstructing the profession in a divided nation all play a role in the almost total lack of historical treatment of foreign scientific and technical information flow into the Third Reich. The evidence for this investigation is drawn from the German library litera- ture of the 1930s (mainly the prestigious Zentralblatt fur Bibliothekswesen) and from prewar proceedings of conferences of the International Fed- eration of Documentation. The most valuable sources, however, have been the memories of many of the German men and women who were personally involved in the scientific and technical information supply chain of the period. Of these, most important were the recollections of Gisela von Busse,4 from 1929 to 1945 chief of the Acquisitions Bureau for German Libraries established by the Emergency Association of Ger- man Science (Notgemeinschaft der deutschen Wissenschaft). For personal descriptions of the role of industrial research libraries in the information network, I rely chiefly on information supplied by Herbert Tamme, former head of the huge technical library of Krupp Steelworks at Essen. The following account, based as it is on memory fragments and the chance survival of single copies of reports and invoices, is necessarily incomplete and is offered as an initial framework for future scholarship. It is written with no small sense of urgency since the sources of oral history vital to its completion are diminishing in number with every passing year. Germany's Scientific and Technical Libraries before World War I Over the course of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, the various states (Lander) of which Germany was composed had developed a decentralized research library network in which the task of collecting current scientific and technical information was split between two broad 4. Her kind support led to the cooperation of the current directors and staffs of the university libraries at G6ttingen, Hanover, Tubingen, Freiburg im Breisgau, and the Technological University of Berlin, all of whom searched their archives and memories for clues to the system. Dr. Friedhilde Krause, general director of the German State Library in East Berlin, likewise mobilized her staff on my behalf. To Mr. Helmut Drubba, retired head of reader services at the University and Technical Information Library at Hanover, I am especially indebted for his willingness to share not only his knowledge of the history of the period but also his wide cirde of acquaintances in German technical information circles.
154 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY groups. On the one hand, making available research publications mainly in the pure sciences, were public institutions such as the two huge state libraries at Munich and Berlin and the libraries of the universities, both central and institute. All these facilities were funded by the states in which they were located and wee open to the general public as well as to the universities' students and faculty.5 The largest of these libraries reported their new acquisitions to the Royal Library in Berlin, which subsequently announced them in its Berliner Titeldrucke (1892-). The publications of the applied sciences, on the other hand, were collected mainly by Germany's burgeoning industrial research libraries, which received no government support. Some of these libraries were foupded and developed by trade or technical associations, such as the Coal Mining Association's huge Bergbau-Bibliothek (Mining Library) in Essen, founded in 1880, and the library of the Verein Deutscher Eisenhut- tenleute (German Steel Association) in Dusseldorf (founded 1905); others were maintained by single corporations, such as the immense libraries of the Bayer and Krupp organizations (founded 1897 and 1873, respec- tively). These proprietary libraries had highly selective acquisitions policies and served only their own constituencies [2, pp. 603-4]. Lying somewhere in between these two broad groups, but not yet so important, were the libraries of Germany's technological universities (Technische Hochschulen). Mostly founded in the course of the nineteenth century near the seats of industry,6 the technological universities ad- dressed themselves purely to training in the applied sciences; their libraries, unlike those of the general universities, were not autonomous units but lay under the jurisdiction of the institutions' senates [5, p. 5131. Partly as a result of their budgetary dependence, the collections tended to be closely bound to the courses of instruction and were available only for the use of the faculty and the student body [6, p. 19]. One indication of these libraries' status in late Wilhelmian Germany is the fact that the three largest technological universities, those at Berlin-Charlottenburg, Aachen, and Hanover, were not permitted to hire professional librari- ans until 1908 [6, p. 17], while at the general universities the employ- ment of full-time professional library directors was widespread by 1885 [7, p. 319]. Despite Germany's preeminence in pure and applied science during this period,7 no one, especially in the applied sciences, felt that the 5. Institute libraries were noncirculating after a decree to that effect in 1891, and they tended to be used mainly by individuals known to the director [3, p. 528]. 6. The technological universities did not gain equal status with the general universities until 1899, when William II gave them the right to grant doctorates [4, p. 24]. 7. Between the awarding of the first Nobel Prize in 1901 and the outbreak of the First World War, Germans received fourteen of the forty-eight science awards, just under one-third. Encyclpacdia Britannica, 15th ed., Micropaedia, s.v. "Nobel Prize Winners."
LIBRARIES AND INFORMATION IN NAZI GERMANY 155 system of information delivery in these areas was adequate. The lack of technical materials in the general state and university libraries was loudly lamented [5, p. 519], as was the narrowness of scope of the technological university libraries [5, p. 514]. The professional associations were dissatisfied with the textbook-oriented, restricted collections of the latter and called for a national central library of science and technology. Basic to many of the demands for reform was the sense that the establishment of technological universities in the seats of industry rather than as faculties of the general universities had driven a wedge between the applied sciences, pure sciences, and the liberal arts that could have unhealthy consequences [5, p. 513]. The Weimar period, following what English Prime Minister Lloyd George called an "engineer's war" [4, p. 32], would sae greater attention given the problem of scientific and technical information delivery and the role of the technological univer- sities in the process. The 1920s While the public and industrial research libraries of Germany escaped physical damage during the First World War, their isolation behind the 1915-18 British blockade created critical lacunae in their collections of foreign publications. Moreover, the huge war reparations imposed on Germany by the Treaty of Versailles produced an inflationary spiral that so devalued the mark that the purchase of foreign publications con- tinued to be extremely difficult right through 1923.8 (Of approximately 6,000 foreign journals held by publicly funded German libraries in 1914, for example, only 1,700 were still being kept current in 1921 [7, p. 333].) Some assistance was received from abroad during this crisis. The Nordic countries sent their entire scientific production and Switzerland its publications; the American Library Association forwarded duplicates from its members, and the Rockefeller Foundation paid for medical and social science books and journals [8, p. 372]. Various attempts to coordi- nate library acquisitions were made during this crisis. A government decree of 1920, for example, obligated all institute libraries to inform their central university libraries of their current subscriptions to foreign serials so that expensive duplication could be avoided [3, p. 530]. But the foreign aid and emergency decrees did little to fill the gaps in Germany's collections. German industrialists bestirred themselves on several fronts in efforts to remedy the breakdown in scientific and technical communication. In 8. A new mark introduced in the monetary reform of November 1923 was exchangeable for 1 trillion of the old marks.
156 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 1919, under the aegis of an umbrella group of technical societies (Deutscher Verband technisch-wissenschafticher Vereine), they sent a resolu- tion to the government, the general and technological universities, and the state libraries in which they demanded "as a necessary foundation for the reconstruction of the national economy" the creation of a central technical library based on the collections of the Patent Office in Berlin. Founded in 1877, this was the largest scientific and technical library in Germany, collecting the patent literature of the entire developed world; its use, however, had always been restricted to the office's research staff [6, p. 311. Financial constraints, however, ultimately forced the rejection of this proposal by the Weimar government in 1921 [6, p. 19]. Another initiative from the private sector had a more enduring effect on Germany's scientific and technical library development. In 1920 a group of prominent industrialists, publishers, scientists, and scholars founded the Emergency Association of German Science (Notgemeinschaft der deutschen Wissenschaft), whose Library Board was charged with coor- dinating cooperative acquisition of foreign materials for all of Ger- many's major research libraries. Domestic acquisitions continued to be funded by the states, but foreign acquisitions were paid for by the association with private-sector funds (after 1923 by the central Weimar government); books and journals were bought en masse through a special agency set up by the German Publishers Association (Borsenve- rein) in Leipzig and then shipped on to Germany's research libraries (9, p. 1661. By 1929, five years after the Dawes Plan had brought some economic stability to Germany,9 German library subscriptions had risen to number 14,000 foreign journal titles (more than twice as many as in 1914), of which the overwhelming number were acquired through the Emergency Association. By 1930, due to regional protests over central- ization, the funding of foreign materials was relegated back to the states, and the worldwide economic crisis subsequently led to a radical down- turn in foreign subscriptions between 1930 and 1933 [5, p. 3331. Despite the inflation at the beginning of the decade and the Depres- sion at the end, the 1920s should not be regarded as a time of stagnation or decline in Germany's scientific and technical information delivery system, for it was during this period that publicly funded technological university libraries, rather than industrial research libraries, began to play the foremost role in the process. Much of the dynamism of the technological universities must be attributed to the spectacular growth in their student enrollment, which more than doubled in Germany be- 9. Named after American banker Charles G. Dawes, the plan called for the French evacuation of the economically vital Ruhr, reduction in reparations, and foreign aid to Germany. See 110, p. 1561.
LIBRARIES AND INFORMATION IN NAZI GERMANY 157 tween 1914 and 1932; but growth in the technological universities' acquisitions budgets was even more spectacular, rising by 171 percent between 19 1 3 and 1929 [5, p. 5161. At the same time, their circle of users was considerably widened. From 1924, the technological universities' books could be borrowed through the national interlibrary loan system [5, p. 5211, and some technical associations, such as Germany's huge engineering society (Verein deutscher Ingenieure), obtained free use of all the technological university collections for their members in exchange for a direct payment to the libraries [6, p. 281. An important symbol of the integration of the technological universities' collections in the overall German information network was the inclusion of their new titles after January 1, 1928, in the Berliner Titeldrucke and in the union catalog at the Prussian state library in Berlin [5, p. 5221.10 Such was the enhanced status of the technological universities during the Weimar period that by 1933 the calls that were still being heard for a central technical library for Germany were now demanding that the facility be located at the technological university at Berlin-Charlottenburg [5, p. 5221. As we will see, such demands would jibe conveniently with the National Socialists' policy of centralization of the control of all national activities in a grandly reconstructed capital city. Immediate Effects of the National Socialist Rise to Power: The Race Laws Although the scholarly and scientific information policies formulated by the Nazis were full of contradictions and affected some intellectual areas more than others, one principle ran throughout, namely, the need to purge German cultural life-including science-of the influence of Jews and "Jewish thought." The Law for the Reconstruction of the Civil Service (Berufsbeamtengesetz) of April 7, 1933, mandated the dismissal of communists and leftists as well but was mainly aimed at Jews, who, although constituting less than 1 percent of the total German popula- tion, were said to have held 12 percent of the professorships [ 1 1, p. 163]. The law ultimately caused the loss to Germany of some 15 percent of its teachers and researchers, including twenty Nobel laureates forced from their university positions, of whom all but one ultimately left Germany 10. Called the Royal Library until 1918, the Prussian state library building on Unter den Linden now houses the state library of the German Democratic Republic. The union catalog maintained by the Prussian state library was the first national union catalog in Europe and consisted of an alphabetical author list of all books that were held by the major German research libraries. It was the basis for the massive Deutscher Gesami- katalog begun (but never finished) in 1931.
158 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY [12, p. 47]. It is difficult to determine the exact number of librarians affected by the law, but it is probable that several score lost their jobs as a result-there were eight academic librarians dismissed from the Prus- sian state library alone [13, p. 59; 14]. Industrial research libraries did not feel the results of Nazi racism directly since industry employees were not civil servants, but they shared some of the indirect consequences, namely, the decline in the quality of German science and technology in the course of the 1930s. The race laws brought to an end German advances in those fields of the pure sciences such as physics and mathematics where Germany had owed her preeminence to Jews [15, p. 109]. By the end of 1933, 26 percent of Germany's academic physicists, 20 percent of its mathema- ticians, and 13 percent of its chemists had left their posts [12, p. 44]; and within one year, the quality of research at the universities had deterio- rated so visibly that German industry was weighing the possibility of training doctoral candidates itself [12, p. 70]. Modern historians of German technology point to the dependence of technology on physics and the other pure sciences and cite the race laws as one of the causes of the radical downturn in the number of German patents granted after 1932-from 26,201 in 1932 to 16,525 in 1939 [4, pp. 211, 227]. Inevi- tably, the race laws led as well to a deterioration of Germany's scientific publications after 1933. In the fall of that year Arnold Berliner,"I editor of the internationally respected journal Die Naturwissenschaften, was warned by the authorities that he had too many non-Aryan contributors. The number and quality of contributions to Naturwissenschaften and other German scientific periodicals fell off swiftly after the implementa- tion of racist editorial policies, and after 1935 many foreign libraries, especially outside Europe, simply canceled their subscriptions to a num- ber of previously respected German journals [12, p. 76]. Restriction of Foreign Acquisitions Nazi ideology affected not just Germany's own output of scientific and technical information but its libraries' ability to obtain the results of foreign research as well. One of the basic Nazi tenets was the belief that all culture, including science, derived its validity from race and home- land (Blut und Boden) and that "truths" as determined by non-Germans were not necessarily "true" for Germans. Nobel Prize-winning physicist Johannes Stark, whose aversion to the "Jewish" relativity theories of 11. Berliner, himself aJew, was driven from the editorship in 1935 and committed suicide in 1942 [12, p. 65].
LIBRARIES AND INFORMATION IN NAZI GERMANY 159 Einstein is widely documented [12, p. 129], lent his name to the Nazi battle for a purely "German" science built on volkisch ideas and racial teachings [4, p. 210]. According to his racist logic, most foreign research would be of dubious value to Germany; most probably it would be quite worthless since foreign science-especially after the forced emigrations of 1933-was unquestionably influenced by Jews, and the Jews, as wan- derers without a homeland, were by Nazi definition incapable of any valid insights [16, p. 177]. Both the belief in German superiority and a denial of the validity of foreign scholarship for "the German spirit" were cited by Nazi cultural officials as justification for discouraging the acqui- sition of foreign materials by research libraries [17, p. 524]. In 1936 Propaganda Minister Josef Goebbels obtained the power to prohibit the import of foreign publications and to have the Gestapo seize them within the Reich (18, p. 160], and from 1937 on all orders for foreign publica- tions placed by publicly funded research libraries had to be approved by a special unit of the Gestapo, operating firt at headquarters in Berlin, then in Cologne [7, p. 471]; only if the Gestapo were convinced that the publications were vital to national defense would they grant the foreign credits necessary for their purchase. For Germany's general research libraries, Goebbels' decree marked the beginning of the end of their ability to serve their scholarly audi- ences with the records of current international research. It was obviously difficult for most acquisitions librarians to prove the strategic impor- tance of many of the specialized foreign publications to which they subscribed, many of which, moreover, contained expressions of liberal democratic ideals inimical to National Socialism. Gestapo approval was frequently withheld even for the purchase of foreign journals in the pure sciences, which, although rarely vehicles for propaganda, were deemed worthless for defense and potentially dangerous. Academic and state research libraries were open to the general public as well as to the academic community; thus virtually anyone might gain access to their foreign publications once they were cataloged and become tainted by "Jewish" or "pacifist" ideas or theories. (Various attempts were made by the Nazis to restrict circulation of "dangerous materials" by academic libraries [19], but their regulations were so complicated, and the collec- tions in question so huge, that the restrictions were only randomly effective [20, p. 179].) Acquisitions regulations were strictly applied at the highest levels: Gisela von Busse, who directed the Notgemeinschaft's much-reduced ac- quisitions operations, based from 1934 on in the Prussian state library, recalls having to accompany the library's director, Hugo Andres Kruss, to Gestapo headquarters on the Albrechtstrasse where Kruss would argue with police officials for the release of foreign credits for their
160 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY orders. Krtiss was, according to Busse, skillful, persuasive, and often successful in his negotiations [21]; nonetheless, the Emergency Associa- tion's already meager capabilities were further diminished by the restric- tions. Few academic libraries, moreover, had directors of Kruss's pres- tige and skill to plead for their own direct foreign acquisitions. While individual library directors were sometimes able to arrange for ad hoc methods of acquisition through exchange, personal foreign travel, or the good offices of friendly foreign librarians [7, p. 471], the libraries of the general universities and their institutes gradually ceased to be links with the wider world of research outside the Reich. Demands for Improved Scientific and Technical Documentation for Industry While general research libraries languished in Germany after 1937, a quite different scenario was unfolding for the Reich's scientific and technical libraries, both publicly and privately funded. Just as collection development and reader services at Germany's general research libraries were being most sharply restricted [19, pp. 460-61], the Reich's scientific and technical libraries were entering a period of unprece- dented productivity in the areas of gathering, processing, and dis- seminating information. To understand why the National Socialists, who were contemptuous of foreign science and technology on ideological grounds, could, in certain contexts, come to make it such a high priority, it is necessary first to examine the position of business in the Third Reich, for it was in this sector that the pressure for improvement in foreign information supply came. Modern historians of Nazism may disagree about the extent to which big business was responsible for Hitler's rise to power, but there is a consensus that once the Third Reich was founded, the influence of industry on the government was infinitely greater than it had been during the Weimar Republic [22, chap. 41. Evidence of the National Socialists' close ties to big business abound: a few illustrations are the routine forwarding of the minutes of Hitler's secret cabinet meeting (Geheimer Kabinettsrat) to Krupp headquarters in Essen [23, p. 406], government subsidizing of I. G. Farben's synthetics industry through the establishment of high tariffs on imported natural products [24, p. 11 1], and, most dramatically, the use of prisoners from the SS's concentration camps as slave labor in private industry [23, p. 492]. Party ideologues may have been slow to recognize the importance of foreign science, but Germany's industries, fearing that the global eco- nomic crisis of 1929 would usher in a new period of isolation, had
LIBRARIES AND INFORMATION IN NAZI GERMANY 161 already taken steps to ensure its flow into the country. Pioneering in this area was I. G. Farben,'2 whose general director, Carl Bosch, had been a co-winner of the Nobel Prize for chemistry in 1931. In that year 1. G. Farben had set up an organization named Chemnyco in New York City whose main purpose was to gather American scientific and technical publications and reports and dispatch them to Farben's Statistical De- partment in Berlin. The stated purpose of Chemnyco was the handling of patent arrangements for Farben with U.S. firms, but in reality it operated as an efficient scientific and technical intelligence-gathering unit, costing the mother company $84,000 per year. Chemnyco's sub- scription list to U.S. publications was sixteen single-spaced pages long; its journals alone cost $4,000 to obtain [18, p. 87]. In its ten years of existence, Chemnyco forwarded to Berlin information on subjects as diverse as synthetic rubber tires, Du Pont's nylon invention, and, later, progress in atomic fusion research [24, p. 277]. I. G. Farben's vast Statistical Department on Berlin's Unter den Linden, to which technical reports and publications were sent from Farben subsidiaries the world over, operated during the Third Reich as a sort of giant technical and economic reference library for many agencies of the government, in- cluding the German High Command and the Gestapo [26, p. 58]. Similarly, Krupp used its American subsidiary in Wilmington, Krupp- Nirosta, to expedite the flow of U.S. technological information to its huge library back in Essen [23, p. 406], where by 1937 Krupp main- tained a collection of 100,000 volumes, 13,500 reports, and 750 journal subscriptions [27, p. 194]. Herbert Tamme, wartime director of the Krupp technological library, is convinced that under the Reich his li- brary was infinitely richer in current foreign materials than any of Germany's public research facilities and that the quality of research emanating from Krupp's laboratories was, consequently, far superior to the academic research conducted at that time. Part of the abundance of foreign materials in the Krupp library during that period Tamme attrib- utes to the restricted nature of its readership, giving the Gestapo no cause to worry about the "liberalizing" or "defeatist" effect of chance remarks in the British or American journals [28]. The Technological University at Berlin-Charlottenburg Few German industries had the worldwide information-gathering net- works of I. G. Farben and Krupp at their disposal, and pressure was 12. I. G. Farben was formed in 1916 out of six of Germany's largest chemical concerns, including Bayer and Hoechst. See [25, p. vii].
162 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY increasingly put on the German government to improve the collection and dissemination of foreign materials by the libraries of the technologi- cal universities. When the National Socialists came to power in 1933, they responded more readily than the Weimar regime to demands of the industrial sector for improved access to the nation's network of techno- logical university libraries. The logical base for expanded dissemination activities was the technological university at Berlin-Charlottenburg, which had the largest library of any technological university in Germany. In 1931 the State Central Office for Scientific Reports (Reichszentralefiir w&ssenschaftliche Berichterstattung) had moved its photographic unit from Unter den Linden to Charlottenburg to be able to process more quickly the requests it received for copies of the technical reports routinely deposited with it by technological research institutions throughout Ger- many. In 1932 the technological university library, under the direction of Albert Predeek,13 had begun publishing a catalog of foreign technical journals currently held in German libraries (Verzeichnis der auslindischen Zeitschriften wekhe in deutschen und einigen nichtdeutschen Bibliotheken laufend gehalten werden) [5, p. 5221. With the encouragement of industry and the new National Socialist government, a new information center (Informationsstelle) at the library began in the fall of 1934 to issue and disseminate to industry reviews of the world's current periodical literature in certain areas that were not covered by existing means. Unlike other information centers (Auskunft- stellen), which announced the possession of titles, Predeek's unit dis- seminated their contents as well. By 1935, the information center on the Berliner Strasse in Charlottenburg was subscribing to 1,500 periodicals and was producing more than 100 reviews every two weeks (or about 2,400 per year) in the areas of electrical engineering, air compression, machine tools, and woodworking machinery. The summary-type re- views, prepared by bibliographer-engineers, appeared more quickly than those in journals, and readers could have photocopies of the origi- nals sent to them within twenty-four hours of their requests' receipt. From its inception, this service was international in scope: the originals could be translated into any one of seven languages [30, preface, pp. 3- 5]. The Berlin Information Center must have been extraordinarily efficient: a grateful British user stated at the International Documenta- tion Conference held at Oxford in 1938 that he had been able to get from Berlin copies of practically any technical paper of any date of 13. Predeek had been director of the library of the Technological University of Danzig from 1922 to 1929, but his training was in history, not technology, and much of his published work was in library history. See [29]. 1 am greatly indebted to Paul Kaeg- bein, professor of library science at the University of Cologne, and to his assistant, Rainer Schmitz, for their careful reading of this article.
LIBRARIES AND INFORMATION IN NAZI GERMANY 163 publication from any country in the world for fourpence a page plus postage [31, p. 31]. Although never formally designated as such, Predeek's unit came to operate as the de facto central technical information agency of the Reich, in part because of the role assigned by Nazi policy to the entire technological university at Berlin-Charlottenburg. After the party's ini- tial neglect of science had been changed by pressure from industry into a drive to harness research to defense production [4, p. 217], a Reich research council was set up in 1937 with the encouragement of Hitler, G6ring, and Army Chief of Staff Wilhelm Keitel to coordinate all re- search being done in Germany. (Some efforts along this line had already been made in 1934 by centralizing the control of all the universities, previously in the hands of the states, under a Reich minister of science and education, Bernhard Rust.) The research council's first president, General Karl Becker, the first active general ever to have been named to the Prussian Academy of Science, was, besides being chief of army ordnance (Heereswaffenamt), also a professor of ballistics and dean of the new faculty of defense science (Wehrtechnik) founded at Berlin- Charlottenburg in 1935 [4, p. 219]. Although his research council did not ultimately achieve its goals, Becker greatly increased the prestige of the Berlin technological university within the party: a new building complex for the new military science faculty was undertaken as part of Albert Speer's grandiose plans for the whole capital, with Hitler himself laying the cornerstone in November 1937. Although never completed (in 1942 the last construction workers were conscripted), the project made of the Berlin technological university the visible symbol of defense research in the Reich. Science Minister Rust even saw in Becker's new faculty the bridge that in the Nazi state would span the long-deplored gap between the applied sciences and the liberal arts, and he announced at the ground-breaking ceremonies that Berlin-Charlottenburg would be the Reich's "universal technological university" [4, p. 221]. In this context, with its strategic importance for the Reich part of party policy, the library flourished, and by 1943 its collection had grown to a quarter of a million volumes and 100,000 dissertations [2, p. 601]. Wartime Activities at Berlin-Charlottenburg The outbreak of war in September 1939 made the procurement of current British and American books and journals even more difficult than it had been, and in many university libraries foreign imprints attained the rarity of manuscripts [32, p. 13]. Private industrial libraries fared considerably better: the larger firms used subsidiaries in neutral
164 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY countries to subscribe with their own foreign credits to Allied publica- tions and to send the issues back to Germany (when America entered the war, for example, I. G. Farben simply transferred its subscription opera- tions from New York to its Bayer operations in neutral Portugal [18, p. 161]). Some technological university libraries, especially those furthest west, managed to keep up limited foreign book trade relations: Aachen, for example, was still spending 20 percent of its budget on foreign materials in 1944 [33]. But as the war progressed, the decline in foreign scientific and technical journals entering the Reich made their duplica- tion, and the dissemination of the duplicates, an increasingly high prior- ity. With the photographic units of the Central Office for Scientific Reports on the premises, as well as Predeek's staff of abstracters and indexers, it was logical that most of the wartime dissemination activities came to be based in the library at Berlin-Charlottenburg. Foreign publications were channeled to Predeek's unit from various sources: its own subscriptions, obtained through neutral countries such as Portugal; other technological institutions; private industrial research libraries; and Gisela von Busse's acquisitions unit of the Emergency Association of German Science-later renamed the German Research Association (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft)-in the Prussian state li- brary in Berlin. Once reproduced by photostat or microfilm, copies of articles or whole issues were then distributed to the major libraries and to the established reviewing media such as the Chemisches Zentralblatt, the Physikalische Berichte, and the medical reviews published by Springer. Copies were not automatically sent to industrial libraries, but orders for microfilm copies that came in from such libraries-in response to re- views seen in the professional journals-were duly processed [34]. In 1942, the long-standing indexing and abstracting activities of the German learned societies and book trade were augmented by a monthly review (Referatenblatt), published by Predeek's Information Center in collaboration with the Information Center of the Technical and Eco- nomic World Press of the Hamburg World Economics Institute (Auswer- tungsstelle der technischen und unrtschaftlichen Wel4fachpresse des Hamburger Weltivrtschaftsin.stituts), run by Leo Hausleiter. Founded in 1908 as the Hamburg Colonial Institute (Hamburgische Kolonialinstitut), the unit be- came under the Nazis an important collection and evaluation center for strategic foreign publications [35, pp. 191-94]. Hausleiter supervised thirty abstracters [36], whose partial duties were to supply the Referaten- blatt with reviews of economic articles, while Predeek's unit supplied reviews of technical material. The Referatenblatt was comparable in size to the monthly Chemical Abstracts and provided quicker and more current coverage than the established reviewing media. Each issue contained approximately 3,000 reviews of current technical articles published in
LIBRARIES AND INFORMATION IN NAZI GERMANY 165 Europe, Britain, and the United States (Russian, Asian, and Australian technical literature was not reviewed), with a detailed keyword index. Patent specifications were also covered. Photostats of the originals could be ordered through the review service, which was only made available to subscribers approved for "membership" by a board under the minister of economics [37]; in practice, those approved seem mainly-if not exclusively-to have been industrial and technological university librar- ies [281.14 Some of the material being published by the Allies and then dis- seminated within the Reich was of surprising strategic value. Before censorship was imposed on such matters, several articles appeared in British and American journals that were later cited as having benefited German defense research. In 1939, for example, the Reviews of Moden Physics published a description of a gas centrifuge that scientists at Hamburg later attempted to adapt to work with uranium hexafluoride gas. Some important American findings in the area of atomic fission were released: through notes put in the March and April 1940 issues of Physical Review, experimental proof was given that slow neutrons had a greater probability of fissioning U-235; and in the June 1940 number of the same journal, just before all such research became classified, the discovery of plutonium was announced. German scientists thus learned the results of physical investigations that they did not have the means to obtain themselves [16, pp. 70-721. Emergence of the Documentation Movement in Germany The same increasing emphasis on defense-related technology that led to the Nazis' buildup of the complex at Berlin-Charlottenburg provided an impetus to the budding German documentation movement. In fact, the Nazis' ultimate recognition of the importance of documentation to the winning of the war permitted the centralization and standardization of efforts that had hitherto come from several different organizational directions. Concerted efforts for improved coordination of technical information communication in Germany had originated in the German Standards Association (Deutscher Normenausschuss), the German member of the International Standards Organization. Active in German industry since its founding in 1917, the German Standards Association had set up a Committee on Professional Library Standards (Fachnormenausschussfuir 14. I have been unable to locate a "membership" list. The British occupational authorities confiscated most of the files of the Hamburg Institute after the war, and very little was ever returned [35, p. 194].
166 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Bibliothekswesen) in 1927, under the chairmanship of Hugo Andres Kruss [38, p. 21.15 The 1930s witnessed an intensification of organized documentation activities in Germany as elsewhere"6-and the end of the decade saw increased government involvement and support for these efforts. In 1935 the German Standards Association joined the International Insti- tute for Documentation (direct forerunner of the modern International Federation for Documentation)'7 so that Kruss's Committee on Profes- sional Library Standards could represent German interests in the inter- national organization [40, p. 515]. Some idea of the importance given to the committee's activities by the National Socialist government is con- veyed by the large (and high-level) delegation sent to the 1937 World Congress of Documentation in Paris, where Kruss gave the keynote address on the "Domination of Knowledge." Present at the Paris confer- ence also were representatives of Goebbels's Reich Chamber of Litera- ture (Reichsschnfttumskammer), the Reich Economic Chamber (R&hswirt- schaftskammer), the Reich Ministry of Education (Reichsministerium fur Wissenschaft, Erziehung und Volksbildung), the Reich Archives, and the German Chemical Society [38, p. 48]. Acting on behalf of the highest government cultural and economic authorities, the German delegation extended its country's invitation to the international organization to hold its 1940 meeting in Germany in connection with the 500-year Gutenberg Jubilee (the conference, canceled because of the war, was to be held in Frankfurt, Mainz, Berlin, and Leipzig during the first two weeks of August 1940 [41, p. 1]). Within Germany, the activities of the Committee on Professional Li- brary Standards were multiplying. In 1937 the German Standards Asso- ciation bulletin, DIN Mitteilungen, announced that "amongst the tasks imposed by the Reich government on German technology and industry, technical literature and documentation play a special role. The au- thorities make it very clear that everything must be done to achieve the greatest possible improvements through cooperative efforts" [42, p. 236]. In the same year the journal announced that because of the increased stress being laid by member industrial firms on the importance of documentation to their work, "the German Standards Association 15. In 1929, in order to specify more precisely its activities, this committee was renamed the Committee on Professional Standards for Libraries, Books and Journals (Fachnor- menausschuss flr Bibliotheks-, Buch- und Zeitschrftenwesen). 16. The American Documentation Institute (predecessor of the American Society for Information Science) was founded in 1937. See [39]. 17. Founded as the International Institute for Bibliography in Brussels in 1895, the IIB became the International Institute for Documentation in 1931 and was finally re- named the International Federation for Documentation in 1938 [38, pp. 44-451.
LIBRARIES AND INFORMATION IN NAZI GERMANY 167 feels obligated in the future to devote much more space in the DIN Mitteilungen to documentation matters" [42, p. 365]. As its respon- sibilities multiplied, the Committee on Professional Library Standards was broken down into task groups for classification, physical standards for journal production, cooperation between bibliographies and review journals, cooperation between information centers, and photoreprog- raphy (not established until 1940). Fritz Prinzhorn, library director of the technological university of Danzig and one of the key figures in documentation during the Reich,"8 served as chairman of additional task groups for journal administration and for the indexing of foreign and difficult-to-obtain technical jour- nals. The main goal of the latter task group was to be the creation of subject field union catalogs of technical periodicals [38, pp. 56-66]. By 1937 Prinzhorn was able to claim that the journals in certain fields- such as electrical engineering and aerodynamics-were already fully "opened up" (aufgeschlossen, here meaning indexed, abstracted, and the results disseminated), but he urged the establishment of more informa- tion centers like that at Berlin-Charlottenburg [43, p. 523]. In 1940, despite the outbreak of the war in the preceding September, Prinzhorn's indexing task force was able-in cooperation with the German Chemical Society (Deutsche chemische Gesellschaft)-to publish a union catalog of journals in chemistry and related fields [38, p. 66]. Founding of the German Society for Documentation (Deutsche Gesellschaft fur Dokumentation)'9 in 1941 Germany entered the war with a well-organized and highly defined apparatus for the evaluation of technical literature and its dissemination to the technological institutions and industry. However, the realities of a full-scale conflict, and in particular the British blockade of Germany after September 1939, soon made even the duplication work being done at Berlin-Charlottenburg inadequate, especially after the United States began to place restrictions on all American trade with Germany in early 1941. On May 5, 1941, the Committee on Professional Library Stan- dards called a meeting in Berlin to address the situation. Present were, besides library leaders, publishers, and representatives of industry and professional associations, also officials of the Ministry of Propaganda, 18. After the war, Prinzhorn was director of the West German Foreign Ministry Library from 1951 until his retirement in 1958. 19. An organization bearing the same name was founded in West Germany in 1946 with its headquarters in Frankfurt am Main.
168 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY the Ministry of Economics, the Foreign Office, and the Army High Command. The decision taken at this meeting to found a new organiza- tion, to be called the German Society for Documentation, marked the entrance of the Nazi government into a period of much more direct involvement with documentation matters. The society's governance placed it under firm Reich control: the chairman was to be appointed by the Minister of Education, who in turn appointed a board made up of representatives from science, technology, and industry, as well as agen- cies of the Reich; from this board the chairman named the society's vice- chairman, secretary, and treasurer [44, pp. 2-3]. At the same meeting Fritz Prinzhorn (by then director of the Leipzig University Library) was appointed chairman, and it was decided that the Documentation Society would assume the activities of the former Com- mittee on Professional Library Standards, including continued publica- tion of its bulletin Dokumentation und Arbeitstechnik; the task groups were taken over as a whole and three new ones formed, for terminology, journal clipping files, and-significantly-the acquisition of foreign scientific literature.20 The charge of this latter group was "to discuss, review and attempt all possible means of acquisition and to fill any gaps in the literature as they are discovered ... and to create an organization that establishes a central record of those information centers in Ger- many where each imported journal can be found" [38, pp. 70-72]. In December 1943 the new Documentation Society managed to pub- lish a classified 29-page union list (Zentralnachweise fur ausldndischer Literatur), which provided an inventory of all foreign publications re- ported to have been imported into Germany since September 1, 1939. Published in Potsdam under the direction of Maximilian Pflucke (long- time editor of Chemisches Zentralblatt), the Documentation Society's union list issued 3 volumes by August 1944. Essentially a guide to the location of recent journals from the United States and the British Common- wealth, the union list gave only titles, volumes available, and location. According to its introduction, it drew most heavily on the holdings of the Reich's five "official" acquisitions centers: the German Chemical Society, the Prussian state library, the Hamburg World Economics Institute, and two commercial publishers: Lange and Springer in Berlin, and Koehler and Volckmar in Leipzig.2' Fifteen locations were given, five of which were industrial libraries (four of these were I. G. Farben installations). 20. Even in nomenclature this task group's simnilarity to its American counterpart is striking: compare the OSS's Interdepartmental Committee for the Acquisition of Foreign Publications [1, p. 255]. 21. Curiously, Predeek's unit at the Berlin Technological University is not on the "official" list.
LIBRARIES AND INFORMATION IN NAZI GERMANY 169 Owners of the listed volumes were obligated to supply copies to querors [36]. But the Zentralnachweise can only be considered a fairly accurate reflection of holdings in the Reich's publicly funded libraries; despite an order from Deputy Reich Chancellor Martin Bormann (Rundschreiben no. 45) stipulating that all current foreign holdings had to be reported to the Society for Documentation [36], submission of titles by private firms, while extensive, was certainly not complete-competition for patents was still too intense to permit sharing everything with rivals. (The chief of the secret police [SD] complained to Goebbels's ministry in a letter of February 10, 1944, that he had proof that companies and research institutes were "selfishly" keeping their best new acquisitions to them- selves, despite orders from the highest level to inform the Documenta- tion Society of their receipt [45].) Destruction from the Air The technical information supply system of the Third Reich was brought to an end not by the lack of available foreign journals but rather by the destruction between 1943 and 1945 of the agencies of dissemina- tion. The import of foreign periodicals, which depended most heavily on Portugal after America's entry into the war, was threatened when the Allied invasions of France in the summer of 1944 cut off land routes to Germany; however, regular air traffic between Germany and the Iberian peninsula (a daily Lufthansa flight to Spain and weekly to Portugal) kept foreign journals coming in right into 1945 [36]. But inside the Reich itself, the information chain disintegrated under the hail of British and American bombs. In 1943, the entire technological university at Berlin- Charlottenburg, including its library of a quarter of a million volumes, was totally destroyed [5, p. 6011; hardly anything remained of Predeek's Information Center-neither its clipping files, its photographic equip- ment, nor its massive collection of foreign technical and scientific jour- nals. Predeek and the survivors on his staff took what was left of the materials with them to an evacuation site at Rossla in the Harz Moun- tains, where they kept working [46, p. 227].22 Incredibly, the monthly issues of the Referatenblatt published collaboratively by the Information Centers at Hamburg and the Berlin Technological University continued 22. After the war, Predeek was director of the library of the University of Jena from 1947 to 1951. In November 1951 he was made honorary professor of library science at the Free University of (West) Berlin. He died on February 10, 1956, at the age of seventy- three [46].
170 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY to appear until November 30, 1944. (Fortunately, the review itself was printed in Hamburg, where, despite terrible destruction, the World Economics Institute survived the entire war relatively unscathed.)23 The traditional technical and scientific reviews, some of them dating from the nineteenth century, were soon wiped out as well: Chemisches Zentralblatt, Biologisches Zentralblatt, and many other scientific and techni- cal reviews were published in Leipzig, where, on the night of December 3, 1943, the RAF dropped 1,500 tons of bombs on the center of the city, destroying the plants of 90 percent of the "book city's" publishers, paper manufacturers, and type founders. By October 1944 the German pub- lishing industry as a whole was reduced to littde more than 10 percent of its prewar production, as air raids and shortages of paper, lead, and electricity forced the merger or suspension of all journals not considered absolutely essential for Germany's daily information needs [47, exhibits F and G]. Busse's Acquisitions Bureau in the Prussian state library was bombed repeatedly from 1941 on, forcing it to turn much of its foreign acquisitions work back to the individual research libraries [34]. In the last months of the war, when the Prussian state library had been totally evacuated, the Bureau moved to Eberswalde, from which its workers finally fled before the advancing Russian army [48]. Conclusions and Implications Looking back over the twelve years of Nazi information policy, we may draw some conclusions about its effectiveness. We are struck first of all by its contradictory nature. This was perhaps most clearly visible in the example of the government's decrees forbidding the import of foreign literature;24 dismayed by the resulting scarcity of information, the Nazis subsequently had to establish the German Society for Documentation to expedite the flow of technical information-foreign included- throughout the Reich. Totalitarian fear of public access to information led the government to isolate most academic librarians from the process and create a new profession with a strictly limited clientele.25 23. Closed for three years after the war, the institute and its enormous library and information center are now public scholarly facilities (Informationszentrum in HWWA-Institute fir Wirtschaftsforschung-Hamburg) in new quarters on the out- skirts of the city [35]. 24. Most of these decrees were not published in official organs and can only be traced through surviving official correspondence. One such letter forbids public use of Nature because of the British journal's contemptuous remarks about German science [491. 25. Not unexpectedly, many academic librarians looked with deep suspicion at the devel- opment of the favored new "rival" profession of documentation. For some idea of the resentment felt by librarians toward documentalists, see [501.
LIBRARIES AND INFORMATION IN NAZI GERMANY 171 Reich policies also were inefficient. No mechanism was ever developed to exploit effectively the acquisitions of the privately owned industrial research libraries, which only shared their holdings with other libraries or with the government when such action posed no threat to corporate profits [26, p. 58; 44]. Some government agencies were particularly favored with information from industrial libraries (the Army High Command was well supplied by I. G. Farben [26, p. 99]); others, such as several intelligence units, had to fend for themselves.26 Thus, industrial libraries only profited from the system; they contributed little in return. The Nazis' overt favoring of industrial libraries at the expense of general university collections is all the more interesting when compared to the American wartime organization, in which university libraries occupied priority positions [1, p. 262]. This difference surely had to do with where the most important research was taking place in either country. Whether it was a fear of the liberal atmosphere of the great universities or the aggressiveness of the German cartels, the fact is that in Germany, the most advanced work was being done in the laboratories and proving grounds of industry. The U.S. government located the Manhattan Project on the campuses of Berkeley, Columbia, and Chicago, but the center of atomic research in Germany was in the plants of I. G. Farben, which had a monopoly on heavy water production in the Reich [16, p. 194]. America's university libraries emerged from the war with greatly enhanced status and resources as a result of their defense-related work. For Germany, the question arises as to how the diminished role of the academic librarian, in state and university libraries, and the enhanced status of the "documentalist" in technological collections affected the evolution of these branches of the information profession. A conclusive answer to this question awaits a thorough study of the reconstruction of research libraries and librarianship in both the public and private sector in postwar Germany and must include the perceptions, practical priorities, and ideological objectives of the four allied occupational au- thorities, whose directives were so vital in reshaping Germany's informa- tion infrastructure. A second, even more complex question that arises from the inquiry described in this article concerns the implications of permitting such a large proportion of a nation's publicly funded infor- mation resources to bypass publicly available libraries and be channeled 26. An extreme case of such independent scrounging was the November 1944 mission to Maine dispatched by the party's intelligence branch (Sicherheitsdieust). Two German agents were put ashore with orders to proceed to New York's bookstores and public libraries, reduce essential information in technical books and journals to microfilm, and insert them in letters to the agency's men in Madrid. The FBI managed to arrest both agents before any information was transmitted [18, pp. 13-26].
172 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY to private industry. The transformation of information from public resource to private property is a process with implications far beyond the ruins of the Third Reich and cannot be explored here; it can be hoped, however, that future scholars of the process in its more modern guises will not ignore the examples of the recent past. REFERENCES 1. Richards, Pamela Spence. "Gathering Enemy Scientific Information in Wartime: The OSS and the Periodical Republication Program." Journal of Library History 16 (Spring 1981): 253-64. 2. Fischer, Norbert. "Die Spezialbibliotheken." In Handbuch der Bibliothekswissenschaft. 2d ed. Edited by Georg Leyh. Vol. 2, pp. 555-632. Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz, 1961. 3. Naetebus, Gotthold. "Institutsbibliotheken." In Handbuch der Bibliothekswissenschaft, edited by Fritz Milkau. 1st ed. Vol. 2, pp. 523-54. Leipzig: Otto Harrassowitz, 1933. 4. Ludwig, Karl-Heinz. Technik und Ingenieure im Dritten Reich. Dusseldorf: Droste Verlag, 1974. 5. Trommsdorff, Paul. "Die Bibliotheken der technischen Hochschulen." In Milkau, ed. See [31. 6. Meyen, Fritz. Die technisch-wissenschaftlichen Bibliotheken. Braunschweig: Georg Wester- man, 1949. 7. Leyh, Georg. "Die deutschen Bibliotheken von der Aufldarung bis zur Gegenwart." In Handbuch der Bibliothekswissenschaft, 2d ed. Vol. 3, pt. 2, pp. 1-491. Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz, 1957. 8. Mehl, Ernst, and Hannemann, Kurt. Deutsche Bibliotheksgeschichte. Berlin: Erich Schmidt Verlag, 1951. 9. Gratzl, Emil. "Die Erwerbung." In Milkau, ed. See [3J. Vol. 2, pp. 116-96. 10. Gay, Peter. Weimar Culture. New York: Harper & Row, 1968. 11. Hartshorne, Edward Y. The German Universities and National Socialism. London: Allen & Unwin, 1937. 12. Beyerchen, Alan. Scientists under Hitler. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1977. 13. Dosa, Marta. Libraries in the Political Scene. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1974. 14. Marks, Erwin. "1945: Eine Wende in unserem Bibliothekswesen." Der Bibliothekar 5 (May 1975): 289-96. 15. Die deutsche Universitlt im Drittn Reich: Acht Beitrage. Munich: Piper Verlag, 1966. 16. Irving, David. The German Atomic Bomb. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1967. 17. Kirchner, Joachim. "Schrifttum und wissenschaftliche Bibliotheken im national- sozialistischen Deutschland." Zentralblattffir Bibliothekswesen (ZJB) 50 (1933): 514-25. 18. Kahn, David. Hitlr's Spies: German Military Intelligence in World War II. New York: Macmillan Publishing Co., 1978. 19. Des Coudres, Hans Peter. "Das verbotene Schrifttum und die wissenschaftlichen Bibliotheken." ZfB 52 (1935): 459-70. 20. Buzas, Ladislaus. Geschichte der Universitdtsbibliothek Munchen. Wiesbaden: Ludwig Reichert Verlag, 1972. 21. von Busse, Gisela. Bad Godesberg, Federal Republic of Germany. Interview, August 23, 1982. 22. Turner, Henry, ed. Nazism and the Third Reich. New York: Quadrangle, 1972. 23. Manchester, William. The Armn of Krupp, 1587-1968. Boston: Little, Brown & Co., 1964.
LIBRARIES AND INFORMATION IN NAZI GERMANY 173 24. Sasuly, Richard. I. G. Farben. New York: Boni & Gaer, 1947. 25. Ambruster, Howard. Treason's Peace. New York: Beechhurst, 1947. 26. Du Bois, Joseph. The Devil's Chemists. Boston: Beacon Press, 1952. 27. Gomoll, Heinz. "Die Werksbucherei der Fried. Krupp A.G. in Essen." ZfB 54 (1937): 191-95. 28. Tamme, Herbert. Interview. Fort Lauderdale, Florida. December 31, 1982. 29. Kaegbein, Paul. "Verzeichnis der Arbeiten von Albert Predeek." Zeitschrift fur Bib- liothekswesen und Bibliographie 3 (1956): 229-34. 30. Predeek, Albert. "Die Informationsstelle fur technisches Schrifttum in der Bibliothek der Technischen Hochschule Berlin." In Proceedings of the Fortieth Anniversary Congress, 1935. Copenhagen: International Institute of Documentation, 1935. 31. Holstrom, J. Edwin. "Bibliographical Tools from the Point of View of the User." Transactions of the Fourteenth Conference of the International Federation of Documtation, 1938. The Hague: International Federation of Documentation, 1938. 32. Leyh, Georg. Die deutschen wissenschaftlichen Bibliotheken nach dem Kriege. Tubingen: J. C. B. Mohr, 1947. 33. Lohse, Gerhart. Aachen, Federal Republic of Germany. Interview with Busse, August 20, 1982. (Lohse was director of the library of the Technological University at Aachen until 1979.) 34. von Busse, Gisela, to Richards, Pamela Spence, January 17, 1983. Personal files of Richards, New York City. 35. Scherwath, Wolfgang. "Die Bibliothek des HWWA-Institut fiir Wirtschafts- forschung-Hamburg." Auskunft: Mitteilungsblatt Hamburger Bibliotheken 3 (1983): 18 1-203. 36. Coblenz, Federal Republic of Germany. Bundesarchiv. File NS 6/440. Among other materials, this file contains the introductory issue of the Zentralnachweise. 37. Coblenz, Federal Republic of Germany. Bundesarchiv. File R 7/2029 contains a copy of the initial issue of the Referatenblatt (February 1942), in which there is a statement of the reviewing service's purpose and restricted availability, as well as a warning that it may not be reproduced in any fashion or even quoted. 38. Buder, Marianne. Das Verhtiltnis von Dokumentation und Normung von 1927 bis 1945 in nationaler und internationater Hinsicht. Berlin: Deutsches Institut fur Normung, 1976. 39. Schultz, Claire K., and Garwig, Paul L. "History of the American Documentation Institute-a Sketch." American Documentation 20 (1969): 152-60. 40. Predeek, Albert. "Noch einmal die Dokumentation." ZJB 53 (1936): 502-19. 41. Dokumentation und Arbeitstechnik (May 1939). 42. DIN Mitteilungen, vol. 20 (1937). 43. Prinzhorn, Fritz. "Der Stand der Normungs- und Dokumentationsarbeiten." ZfB 55 (1938): 510-24. 44. Dokumentation und Arbeitstechnik (July 1941). 45. Koblenz, Federal Republic of Germany. Bundesarchiv. File R 55/919. 46. Neubert, Hermann. "Dem Gedenken Albert Predeeks." Zeitschnft fur Bibliothekswesen und Bibliographie 3 (1956): 226-28. 47. U.S. Office of Alien Property Custodian. "Withdrawal of the Custodian from the Periodical Republication Program." May 25, 1945. (Typescript; copy in the library of the School of Library Science, Columbia University.) 48. von Busse to Richards, June 25, 1982. Personal files of Richards, New York City. 49. Ministry of Education, November 12, 1937. Staatsarchiv Hamburg, file "Hochschulwe- sen 11 Wd 36." 50. Ansteinsson, John. "Wissenschaft und Forschung-Bibliothek und Dokumentation." ZJB 56 (1939): 37-59.