COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENTS AND THEIR EFFECT ON LIBRARY PLANNING PHILIP M. HAUSER TIBRARY planning over the next sev- ~ eral decades will necessarily have ?s to take into account the great changes the nation is now experiencing in population growth, distribution, and composition and in the physical struc- tures of our metropolitan areas. Under the impact of two world wars and a great depression within the compass of a single human generation, the United States is experiencing basic population and phys- ical changes, some of which are reinforc- ing or accelerating long-time trends and some of which represent reversals of them. The public library, like other agencies and institutions on the contemporary scene, must necessarily adapt itself to these developments. "Library planning," which may be regarded as a short ex- pression for "rational decision-making in respect to the future of libraries," is a way to effect the accommodation of the library to the changing scene with a minimum of friction and with the great- est possible efficiency. To achieve these objectives, the library planner must be conversant with the basic changes under way and in prospect. Let us turn, first, to a consideration of the basic popula- tion changes under way and, second, to the structural changes in the metropoli- tan area which have important implica- tions for the library. POPULATION CHANGES TOTAL POPULATION GROWTH Until the beginning of World War II, the long-time trend of total population growth in the United States was defi- nitely downward. Between 1790 and 1950 the population of the country dou- bled five times. The first three times, be- tween 1790 and 1865, it took twenty- five years each time. The fourth time, between 1865 and 1900, it took thirty- five years. The fifth time the doubling of the population, between 1900 and 1950, took fifty years.1 The downward secular trend in rate of national popula- tion growth was augmented by the de- pression in the thirties, during which the American birth rate and the rate of pop- ulation growth reached new lows. Widely accepted population projections during the 1930's indicated that the United States would reach a maximum popula- tion of about 165 million by the end of the century and remain stationary or de- cline shortly thereafter.2 ' Data utilized unless otherwise specified are drawn largely from publications of the United States Bureau of the Census. To prevent a bulky number of footnotes, the main sources are indicated below: United States Bureau of the Census, Statisti- cal Abstract of the United States, 1956 (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1956); Historical Statistics of the United States, 1789-1945 (Washing- ton, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1949); Con- tinuation to 1952 of Historical Statistics of the United States, 1789-1945 (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1954); United States Census of Popu- lation: 1950, Vol. II: Characteristics of the Popula- tion, Part I: United States Summary (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1953); Revised Projections of the Population of the United States, by Age and Sex: 1960 to 1975 ("Current Population Re- ports-Population Estimates," Series P-25, No. 123 [Washington, D.C.J); Civilian Population of the United States, by Type of Residence: April 1955 and 1950 ("Current Population Reports-Population Characteristics," Series P-20, No. 63 [Washington, D.C.]). 2 P. K. Whelpton, Forecasts of the Population of the United States, 1945 to 1975 (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1947), p. 41. 255
256 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY The effects of World War II and post- war developments, however, have dras- tically altered the population prospects of the country. The economic boom which has accompanied these developments has produced an upsurge in marriage and fertility unanticipated either in magni- tude or in duration. In consequence, the population of the United States passed the 165 million mark in 1955 and ex- ceeded 171 million by June, 1957. Pro- jections of the United States Bureau of the Census indicate that the population of the United States will reach a total of about 228 million by 1975 if the birth rate remains at relatively high levels and a population of at least 207 million even if the birth rate should drop considerably. Thus, the library which accommo- dated itself to a national growth of 7 per cent, or 9 million persons between 1930 and 1940, must be prepared for an in- crease of up to 30 million persons per decade between 1950 and 1975. In the short span of twenty-five years the li- brary must be prepared for a population increase of from 55 to 75 million persons -an increase over the period of from 37 to 50 per cent. An increase of up to 50 per cent in li- brary facilities and services within the compass of twenty-five years may seem difficult if not impossible in the light of present library budgets and resources. But it must be borne in mind that the population increase in prospect will also generate at least comparable increases in national income. That we can afford to pay for the indicated expansion is sug- gested by the fact that the increase in the national income of the United States which may be anticipated between 1950 and 1975 even under conservative as- sumptions will exceed the national in- come of any nation on the earth today, except the United States itself.3 METROPOLITAN AREA CONCENTRATION For purposes of the 1950 Census and other statistical uses the federal govern- ment has delineated 168 Standard Met- ropolitan Areas in the United States.4 These consist, in general, of central cities of 50,000 or more inhabitants, together with one or more contiguous county pop- ulations which according to certain cri- teria are metropolitan in character and oriented toward the central city. In 1900 the Standard Metropolitan Areas in the United States contained less than one-third of the population. By 1950 the Standard Metropolitan Areas accounted for over half (57 per cent) of the population of the country. In the first half of this century, while the total population of the United States doubled, the population in the metropolitan areas increased three and one-half fold. The tendency for the population to become increasingly concentrated in metropoli- tan areas not only is continuing but is also accelerating. Between 1900 and 1950, metropolitan areas absorbed 73 per cent of the total population increase of the country. In the last decade of this period, between 1940 and 1950, metropolitan areas absorbed 81 per cent of the total population increase of the country. Be- tween 1940 and 1950, it is estimated by the Bureau of the Census, the metropol- itan areas absorbed about 97 per cent of the total national population increase. If the changes experienced between 1950 and 1955 were to continue, the Standard Metropolitan Areas would in- crease by some 60 million persons be- tween 1950 and 1975 and would contain more than two-thirds of the population of the UTnited States. 3 Based on calculations by the writer, assuming no increase in national income per head. 4 For definitions see United States Census of Popu- lation, Vol. II: Characteristics of the Population, p. 27.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENTS AND LIBRARY PLANNING 257 The library has, of course, from its inception been essentially an urban in- stitution identified with urbanism as a way of life. Library facilities continue to be concentrated primarily in urban areas and especially in the larger metropolitan areas. In the allocation of resources for libraries in the coming decades it is clear that the problem of expansion is, even more than in the past, a problem of keep- ing up with the tremendous increase in metropolitan-area inhabitants. The ex- tent to which individual metropolitan areas may be expected to increase may be determined through the same analyt- ical procedures utilized in analyzing the trends and making the projections for the country as a whole. Projections for a number of individual areas are already available.5 DECENTRALIZATION OF METROPOLI. TAN AREA POPULATION The large city identified with Western civilization is, in the main, the product of the industrial revolution and especially of nineteenth-century industrial technol- ogy. That is, the large cities of the United States, in common with the large cities in the Western world, tended in their nineteenth-century development to be organized in response to the centripetal forces of the steam engine and the belt and the pulley. At the present time metropolitan-area populations are apparently responding to centrifugal rather than centripetal forces, as is evidenced by increased at- tention to the problem of "decentrali- zatinn." The "decentralization" of population within our metropolitan areas is in part real and in part only apparent. It is real in the sense that the metropolitan phys- ical plant is now responding to twentieth- century technology-the automobile, elec- tric power, and the telephone-which permits wider dispersion of the popula- tion than did nineteenth-century tech- nology. A good example of this is afforded by perhaps the most fully twentieth- century metropolitan area in the United States, namely, Los Angeles. On the other hand, the fact that larger and larger proportions of the population of our metropolitan areas is resident in the suburban ring rather than the cen- tral city results more from natural growth processes than from centrifugal techno- logical forces. The "rings" of our met- ropolitan areas have been growing more rapidly than our central cities through- out the course of this century largely be- cause our central cities have become filled up. Cities have arbitrary boundaries set forth in their charters of incorpora- tion. In consequence, as the economic base and population of the metropolitan area continues to grow, the time comes when both industry and population can find locations only outside city limits in the metropolitan ring. Between 1900 and 1950 the rate of growth of the outlying rings in relation to the rate of growth of central cities was something like 1.33 to 1 (208 compared with 159 per cent). Be- tween 1940 and 1950 the ratio of growth of metropolitan rings to growth in the central cities was about 2.5 to 1 (35 com- pared with 14 per cent). In the first half of this decade, from 1950 to 1955, the ratio was 7 to 1 (28 compared with 4 per cent). Since our metropolitan areas will con- tinue to grow, the proportion of metro- politan-area population resident in sub- 5 E.g., Philip M. Hauser and Gerald S. Newman, "Projections of Population for the Chicago Stand- ard Metropolitan Area to 1980: Report by the Chi- cago Community Inventory, University of Chicago, to the Chicago Plan Commission and the Office of the Housing and Redevelopment Coordinator, Chi- ago, August, 1955." Such projections are often avail- able through city planning commissions.
258 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY urban rings will continue to increase. If we assume an increase of about 60 million persons in metropolitan United States between 1950 and 1975-a real possi- bility-continuation of recent changes would place about 50 million persons in the metropolitan ring and only 10 mil- lion in our central cities. Moreover, of the 50 million to be added to the metro- politan rings, it is possible that about half will be resident in parts of metropol- itan areas which are today unincorpo- rated "rural fnrnge." The implications of these changes should be clear to library planners. If library facilities are to be readily acces- sible to the population in 1975, it is ob- vious that the library, like the retail out- let, must continue to follow the new population distribution. Various ways of dealing with increasingly "decentralized" populations will undoubtedly continue to develop. Some effective way of deal- ing with this situation, however, must be found by all library administrative personnel charged with planning activi- ties during the years which lie ahead. AGE STRUCTURE Great decreases in the birth rates and death rates of the United States and changes in our immigration policy have greatly affected the age structure of the population. Undoubtedly, the outstand- ing single change is that referred to as the aging of the population. The long- run trend can briefly be summarized by referring to the fact that in 1800 the av- erage American was only sixteen years old; by 1950 he was over thirty. Changes in the average age of the population and the relative size of the various age group- ings undoubtedly affect reading habits and therefore merit the attention of the library planners. During the first half of this century the median age of the population of the United States rose from 22.9 to 30.1 years, an increase of over seven years. While the population of the United States as a whole doubled, between 1900 and 1950, persons roughly of elementary- school age-five to fourteen years-in- creased by only 43 per cent. In conse- quence, persons of elementary-school age decreased from 22 per cent of the total population in 1900 to 16 per cent of the total by 1950. Persons of high-school age, fifteen to nineteen years, increased by about 40 per cent between 1900 and 1950, to decline from 10 per cent of the population in 1900 to about 7 per cent of the population in 1950. While younger persons were decreasing as the propor- tion of the total, persons sixty-five years of age and over increased from 4 per cent in 1900 to over 8 per cent of the population in 1950. While the popula- tion doubled, the number of senior citi- zens, those sixty-five and over, quadru- pled. The postwar boom in marriages and babies in conjunction with previous age trends will produce further significant changes in age structure in the coming decades. Persons of elementary-school age, five to fourteen years, are likely to increase by from 6 to 17 million between 1950 and 1975, or from 24 to 71 per cent, depending on the course of the birth rate. Persons of high-school age, fifteen to nineteen years, are likely to increase from 7 to 10 million, or by from 62 to 90 per cent in the same period. While the num- ber and proportions of young persons are undergoing this rapid growth, the num- ber and proportion of senior citizens will also continue to expand rapidly. Between 1950 and 1975, persons sixty-five years of age and over will increase by about 64 million, or by 66 per cent. Thus, the library planner, while con-
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENTS AND LIBRARY PLANNING; 259 fronted with a total population increase of from 37 to 50 per cent between 1950 and 1975, must plan for up to a 71 per cent increase in elementary-school chil- dren, a 90 per cent increase in high- school children, and a 66 per cent in- crease in oldsters. Persons twenty to sixty-four years of age will, of course, remain relatively stable, while the upper and lower ends of the age structure rap- idly change. Persons in this intermediate age group will increase by about 30 per cent between 1950 and 1975. To the extent that library acquisitions are oriented to age, it is clear that the library planner has important growth differentials by age with which to con- tend in the period ahead. ETHNICITY AND RACE The reading habits of the American people and the characteristics of volumes on library shelves have undoubtedly been influenced by the diversity of the ethnic and racial composition of the American population. The rapid population growth of the country was in large part a result of foreign immigration. Between 1820 and 1950 the United States admitted 40 million immigrants, mostly from Europe. Moreover, the population contains con- siderable elements of non-white persons, mainly the Negro, who between 1790 and 1820 made up a fifth of the total population. Despite heavy immigration, the for- eign-born in the United States never ex- ceeded 15 per cent of the total popula- tion. Foreign white stock as defined by the Census (i.e., the foreign-born plus natives of foreign or mixed parentage) made up more than one-third of the pop- ulation (35 per cent) in 1910 but have decreased in proportion ever since. The characteristics of our immigrant popula- tions were undoubtedly reflected in some measure in the stocks of our libraries. As successive waves of immigrants came to our shores, waves of Germans, Irish, and Scandinavians during the nineteenth century and southern and eastern Eu- ropean stocks-Poles, Russians (partic- ularly Jewish), Italians, Slavs, Greeks, etc.--during the twentieth century, their needs for literature and their tastes in it must have been reflected in library ac- quisitions. In the coming decades the foreign- born will become increasingly unimpor- tant as consumers of library services. By reason of our immigration exclusion acts of the 1920's, the proportion of foreign- born, 6.7 per cent in 1950, will have shrunk to negligible proportions, 1 or 2 per cent, by 1975. As the foreign-born have declined, the American Negro has increased in impor- tance as a library consumer. Despite the fact that the American Negro has been a resident and a citizen of the United States for a longer period than the av- erage white person, he has, until rela- tively recently, been largely excluded from the American urban way of life. He has, therefore, been a relatively un- important consumer of library services. Trends of recent origin which are now accelerating will make the Negro a more avid consumer of literature and may af- fect library planning because of the spe- cial problems with which the Negro will be confronted in the transition from a rural to an urban and metropolitan way of life. Changes in the role of the Negro as a consumer of library services may be un- derstood in the light of the following facts. First, since 1820 the Negro has been a decreasing proportion of the total population, shrinking from about 20 per cent to about 10 per cent in 1930-a level at about which he has remained
260 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY ever since. Second, it may be observed that in 1860, the date of the last Census before the outbreak of the Civil War, 92 per cent of the Negroes were resident in the South. A half-century later, in 1910, the Census before the outbreak of World War I showed that this concen- tration of Negroes had declined by only 3 percentage points to 89 per cent. The first large migratory flows of Negroes from the South to the North began dur- ing World War I. Negro migration in response to the need for manpower to man our World War I industrial plant was a replacement for European immi- gration which came to almost a complete halt during the war. Third, after the passage of our immigration exclusion acts, Negro migration continued as a substitute for European immigration to meet the needs for manpower of an ex- panding industrial base. Negro migra- tion was greatly accelerated during World War II and will continue to be a major source of manpower for our expanding economy. Finally, the changed character of the Negro as a library consumer is high- lighted by the fact that the Negro is rap- idly becoming urbanized through inter- nal migration. In 1910, only 27 per cent of the Negroes lived in cities; by 1950 over 90 per cent of the Negroes in the North and in the West were urban resi- dents. Moreover, 48 per cent of the Ne- groes in the South also lived in cities. Thus, the Negro has been called upon in a little more than a single generation to make the transition from a rural to an urban way of life. The library is undoubt- edly contributing toward this transition and will undoubtedly play an increas- ingly important role in this respect in the decades which lie ahead. By 1975 it is possible that the North and the West will have as many Negroes as the South and that from a third to a half of the population of many of our great cities, and a fifth to a third of the population of a number of our Standard Metropolitan Areas, wil be Negro. THE FAMILY The family in the United States has undergone, and is still undergoing, sig- nificant changes in size and composition and in the nature of family living and interpersonal relations. Some of these changes undoubtedly affect reading hab- its in respect to both available time and subject matter. Moreover, the changing character of the family and the new type of problems which these changes pose for its members have become subjects for much written material, processed and circulated by libraries for the benefit of family consumers. Since the growth in the number of households and parents is not identical with the growth of total population, data relating to household and family growth point to the special consumer requirements, to the extent that they can be differentiated, of par- ents, children, and other related persons and non-related persons living in house- hold groups. The size of the family in the United States, as measured by the number of persons per household, decreased from 5.8 in 1790 to 3.5 in 1950. Even the post- war baby boom did not arrest the long- time downward trend of persons per household. Between 1940 and 1950, per- sons per household decreased from 3.8 to 3.5, and, although there has been a slight upturn during this decade, the probabilities are high that the average size of household in 1960 will be below that in 1950. The decline in the size of family reflects, of course, both the de- cline in fertility and the transition from the large-family to the small-family sys-
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENTS AND LIBRARY PLANNING 261 tem. The latter trend has continued even during periods of increases in fertility so as to maintain the downward trend in average size of family. The decrease in average size of family produces, of course, a larger proportion of household heads among the total pop- ulation and accounts for the greater rate of growth of households or families than of total population. Between 1900 and 1950, while the total population of the United States increased by about 2 per cent per year or doubled, the number of households increased by about 3' per cent per year or tripled. The formation of new households is affected both by the changing age struc- ture of the population and by the mar- riage rate. Marriages per 1,000 persons, that is, the crude marriage rate, reached an all-time high in 1946 at a level of 16.4, through the combined influence of unprecedented levels of economic activ- ity, demobilization, and a relatively fav- orable age structure, that is, a relatively large proportion of persons attaining mar- riageable age (reflecting the birth rate of the mid-twenties). The postwar mar- riage boom has created new records in the proportion of the American popula- tion married. In 1900 only 53 per cent of males fourteen and over were married; by 1950 this proportion had increased to 71 per cent. For females fourteen years of age and over the proportion married over the same time span increased from 55 to 66 per cent. Because of the unavailability of data, long-time trends cannot be established on the changing household status of the population. Between 1940 and 1950, for example, the proportion of men in the population who were heads of households increased from about 46 per cent to 51 per cent. The proportion of male children in the population living in households decreased from 42 per cent to 39 per cent; the proportion of male lodgers from 4 per cent to less than 3 per cent. Among females the proportion of wives increased from 41 per cent in 1940 to 45 per cent in 1950. Such shifts in household status, certainly over the long run, must point to changes in reading habits and the de- mand for various types of library serv- ices. Other types of family changes of un- doubted import to library planners are beginning to become available, among the most important of which are those related to changes in the "family cycle."6 Between 1890 and 1950, for example, av- erage age at first marriage decreased from 26.1 years to 22.8 years for the groom and from 22 years to 20.1 years for the bride. This decrease in average age at marriage was accompanied also by a decline in age of parents at the birth of the first child. The average wife, who was about 23 years old at the birth of the first child in 1890, was about 22.5 years old by 1950. Of perhaps greater significance for effect on reading habits is the decrease in average age of parents at the birth of the last child. In 1950, both parents were well under thirty at the birth of their last child, the wife with an average of 26 years and the husband with an average of 28.7 years. In 1890 the average wife was about 32 years old and the average husband 36 years old at the birth of their last child. The changing character of interpersonal relations in the family, indicating changes in time available for various types of pur- suits including reading, is indicated by the earlier departure of children from 6 Paul C. Glick, "The Life Cycle of the Family," Marriage and Family Living, XVII, No. 1 (Febru- ary, 1955), 3-9; "The Family Cycle," American So- ciological Review, XII, No. 2 (April 1947), 164-72; American Families (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1957).
262 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY the family fold and the increase in hus- band-wife years remaining after such de- parture. In 1950 the average age of the wife at the marriage of her last child was 47.5 yeays, 7.8 years below the av- erage age of 55.3 years in 1890. The av- erage age of the husband under similar circumstances in 1950 was 50.2 years, a decrease of 9.2 years from 1890. The earlier departure of children, com- bined with increased longevity, has re- sulted in a great increase in husband-wife years remaining after the departure of their last child. In 1890 the average wife still had an unmarried child at home at the death of her husband. By 1950 the average couple could look forward to fourteen years of life together after their last child had married. Other changes in the family which must affect reading habits include the following: the average age of the wife at the death of her husband increased by 8.1 years between 1890 and 1950 to reach a total of 61.4 years. The average age of the husband at the death of his wife in- creased by 6.7 years to 64.1 years. The average age of death of a surviving spouse increased from 67.7 to 77.2 years for the surviving wife; and from 66.4 to 71.6 years for the surviving husband. Between 1890 and 1950 the average duration of first marriage before dissolution by death increased by almost a third, from 31 to 41 years. Freedom from childbearing by the average wife, that is, the interval be- tween the birth of the last child and end of life, increased by over 40 per cent, from 36 to 51 years. In respect of the increases in the num- ber of households which may be antici- pated, projections indicate a possible in- crease of about 18 million households between 1950 and 1975, by which time the number of households in the United States will approximate 62 million. Many other changes in families might be cited, the full meaning of which, for various types of consumption including that of library services, is not yet fully comprehended. That these types of changes do affect library services, how- ever, can hardly be disputed. STRUCTURAL CHANGES THE HISTORICAL PATTERN The physical structure of the urban community in the United States reflects the combined influences of remarkably rapid growth of development during a period of great technological change and of the play of forces of competition in what has been, in the main, a free-market economy. The interplay of these factors has produced the modern industrial plant, which simultaneously is one of the great triumphs of man as an environment- and culture-building animal and one of the great matrices of man's acute physical and social problems. A helpful perspective in understanding the physical problems of the metropolis is afforded by the fact that, whereas man has been on the globe for perhaps a mil- lion years, the metropolis of a million or more inhabitants has been with us probably not more than a mere one hun- dred and fifty years, little more than five human generations. This time per- spective is particularly applicable to the United States. In our first Census in 1790 only twenty-four urban places were reported (that is, places having 2,500 or more persons), and only two of them had populations exceeding 25,000. Cities in the United States grew not structure by structure but subdivision, neighborhood, and community at a time. Chicago, for example, became a city of a million in a half-century. In the 1840 Census, the first in which Chicago ap-
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENTS AND LIBRARY PLANNING 263 peared, the population of the city was 4,470. By 1890 it had exceeded a million. Students of the city have documented patterns of growth which indicate that our urban areas grow outward from one or more centers of origin. Although ur- ban areas are characterized by both ver- tical and horizontal growth, the latter is the dominant form of development. In consequence of the simple geometry of growth, the newer areas are always those farthest from the center or centers of origin. Since our urban plant grew dur- ing a period of rapid technological changes newer and outlying structures tended to be more desirable places of residence not only because they were newer but also because they embodied the technologi* cal advances. In their first cycle of devel- opment, then, our metropolitan areas tended to have definite spatial patterns in respect to the character of residential structures. The older, the most outmoded, and the least desirable places to live have tended to be toward the center of our cities; the newer, the more advanced, and the more desirable places to live tended to be toward the periphery. The physical patterning of our metro- politan plant has produced a parallel, socioeconomic, spatial stratification of the urban population. Persons of lowest income, education, and occupational sta- tus, usually the newcomers to the urban environment, tended to occupy the less desirable residences toward the center of the city. Persons of higher income, edu- cation, and social status tended to be located toward the peripheries of the metropolis. In consequence, agencies and institutions of all sorts distributed in ac- cordance with the distribution of popu- lation tended to be attuned to, and to re- flect, the characteristics of the areas in which they were located. This must cer- tainly have been true for the branch li- brary whose stocks of reading material and general services reflected the inter- ests of the population among whom they were located. For one thing, the branch library closest to the center of the city tended, like residential housing, to be older and more outmoded than that to- ward the newer, peripheral areas of the city. As our urban plant has aged, the early patterns of remarkably rapid growth have been paralleled by equally remarkable obsolescence and decay. Just as our cities grew not structure by structure but com- munity by community, so have our cities decayed not by structure but by com- munity. Consequently, our cities have uniformly become characterized by areas of substandard housing and by slums which have become not only a national disgrace but also a major national polit- ical issue. The area of substandard hous- ing or the slum may be viewed as one of the by-products or frictions of rapid growth in a free-market economy which produced the highest mass level of living in human history. In our initial rush to- ward ever higher levels of economic ac- tivity and of living standards, we tended to overlook our obsolescent and decaying areas. At mid-twentieth century, how- ever, we are beginning to eradicate these ugly by-products of our rapid nine- teenth- and early-twentieth-century de- velopment under a host of programs- federal, state, and local-which are being increasingly lumped together under the designation of "urban renewal." Under the urban renewal program which has tended to consolidate efforts at slum clearance, rehabilitation, and conservation, we are now, in keeping with the heroic patterns of the past, be- ginning to destroy and rebuild decayed areas of our cities not structure by struc- ture but communities at a time. Popu-
264 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY lations of inner zones are, therefore, be- ing uprooted and dispersed to various sections of the metropolitan area. Inner zones are being rebuilt or rehabilitated so as to attract not only lower-income groupings of the population but also higher income and social groups. These developments together with new devel- opments in the suburban rings of the metropolitan areas presage basic changes in the physical structure of our metro- politan areas and of the manner in which they are used. These changes have im- portant implications for all agencies pro- viding goods or services to the popula- tion, including the library. THE PROSPECT It seems reasonable to expect that the trends in process will produce a much more heterogeneously composed metro- politan area in the decades which lie ahead. The spatial patterning of the phys- ical residential plant of our metropolitan areas with its correlative socioeconomic stratification of the population is likely to be drastically modified. It is the out- lying peripheral areas which are now ex- periencing the relatively rapid growth experienced by the central cities and in- ner zones during the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. It is possible that, while our decayed and obsolescent inner areas are replaced or renovated, decay and obsolescence will occur in our sub- urban rings. Moreover, with increased interventionism and with the increased utilization of the tools of urban renewal, it is likely that the physical and socio- economic character of a community in the future will depend less on the histori- cal accident of its origin and its location in respect to the center and older section of the city and more on the will of organ- ized population groupings as manifest in their planning and development activi- ties. Thus, there will be both "good" and "bad" communities at both the cen- ter of the metropolitan areas and at their peripheries. Finally, it is possible that an emergent pattern of residence within the metro- politan area may become the modal one in the decades to come. There is increas- ing evidence that the family is tending toward a cyclical use of the metropolitan area in correspondence with the family cycle. The newly married couples tend to live toward the center of the city near their places of work. As children come, they tend to move to the outlying sub- urban area to place their youngsters in the surrounding of green lawns and open spaces. As the last youngster departs for college or gets married to start his own family career, the parents show an in- creasing tendency to move back toward a rebuilt or renovated inner zone of the city, on the one hand, to escape the chore of mowing the lawn, and, on the other, to be closer to work, friends, recreation, and the many other services and ameni- ties of urban existence. The changes under way and those which may be anticipated may call for important adjustments in the present distribution of libraries and their branches and the makeup of the services which they provide. Specific analyses are de- sirable for the wide variety of situations both within and between metropolitan areas. But, in general, it may be stated that the library and its branches will be faced with the need to adjust to the changing physical structure of the met- ropolitan area and changes in the way in which the metropolitan area is used by its inhabitants as well as to changes in population composition and popula- tion type.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENTS AND LIBRARY PLANNING 265 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS The materials presented above by no means exhaust the changes in population and physical structure in the commum- ties of the United States which wl,l affect library planning. One obvious develop- ment, that it is scarcely necessary to mention in this paper, is the trend to- ward increasing enrolment in secondary and higher education which must inevi- tably affect reading habits. This is a trend which it may be assumed is fa- miliar to the library planner. Among the population changes which cannot be ignored are the increased tem- po of population growth occasioned by the war and postwar marriage and baby boom and the profound changes in the age structure which may be anticipated, reflecting previous developments in fer- tility, mortality, and immigration. In general, library services must be expanded to meet a population increase of from 37 to 50 per cent to accommodate an addi- tional 55-75 million persons between 1950 and 1975. Moreover, to the extent that age differences point to significant differences in reading habits, even greater accommodations must be made for in- dividual age groups. The library planner must allow for an increase between 1950 and 1975 of from 24 to 71 per cent in the population of elementary-school age and of from 62 to 90 per cent in the popula- tion of high-school age. Simultaneously, the planner must take into account an increase of 66 per cent in persons sixty- five years of age and over who are in- creasingly leaving the labor force and be- ing confronted with the need to find new ways of filling the life-space in their de- clining years. Finally, while dealing with these great changes for the younger and older groups, the library planner must also reckon with a 30 per cent increase in the population of intermediate age- that is, between twenty and sixty-four years. Of more subtle import, perhaps, are the changes which may be anticipated in ethnicity and race. Library services for the foreign-born and the foreign stock will decrease in importance as the for- eign-born shrink to the negligible pro- portion of 1 or 2 per cent of the popula- tion by 1975. As a special consumer group, however, the Negro who has be- come the major newcomer to metropoli- tan United States, may replace the for- eign-born as a consumer of library serv- ices. In many of our metropolitan areas the Negro, who is now in transition from a rural to an urban way of life, may make up from a fifth to a half of the population. The library may become a highly significant agency among the var- ious institutions which will assist the Negro in making this basic transition in his way of life. Also more subtle in its implications for the library planner are the changes which may be anticipated in family size, composition, and interpersonal relations. The astute library planner may do well to pursue the implications of the more rapid rates of growth of families than of population, of the increasing number of husband-wife years of life together oc- casioned by decreasing mortality, of the increasing number of years of life free from childbearing by the American wom- an who is marrying earlier and having the last of her children earlier, and by the increasing number of husband-wife years together after the children have left the family. These changes could con- ceivably afford libraries new opportuni- ties for highly significant services. National growth, it has been indicated,
266 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY will be disproportionately concentrated in our great metropolitan areas and in the suburban rings of those areas in- cluding what is now unincorporated rural territory. Libraries will be faced with the necessity of providing services to per- haps 50 million additional Americans who will be located in the suburban rings of metropolitan areas, half of whom may find residences in what is now unin- corporated open country. Finally, the library planner must face the fundamental changes in the physical structure and in the use of the physical plant of the metropolitan area. While confronted with the necessity for tre- mendous expansion of services within a relatively short period of time, he must also be prepared to make drastic accom- modations to greatly changing neighbor- hoods within the metropolitan complex. The tasks which lie ahead for the li- brary planner-and it may be added for anyone associated with the development or administration of library services- are not easy ones. The additional finan- cial and other burdens which they will impose upon the community will not be minor ones. But the size of the task and the size of the burden must be viewed against the perspective of the funda- mental importance of literacy and its role in the American way of life and of the tremendous productivity and pur- chasing power of the American people, which indicate that we can afford to as- sume the burdens and to complete the requisite tasks.