INFORMATION FOR THE ALLIES: OFFICE OF WAR INFORMATION LIBRARIES IN AUSTRALIA, NEW ZEALAND, AND SOUTH AFRICA Pamela Spence Richards' In 1942 the U.S. Of'fice of' War lnf'ormation (OWI) was created by the federal government to increase domestic understanding of' America's war eff'ort and to facilitate the flow of' American inf'ormation overseas. As part of this operation, f'ourteen inf'ormation libraries were established throughout allied and neutral territory. The OWI librarians sent to Australia, New Zealand, and South Af'rica arrived in those countries at critical periods in their library development, since all three nations were in the process of' reevaluating their library services in the light of' recent critical Carnegie Commission reports. By off'ering strong models of' modern information service and by energetically supporting emerging local movements f'or tax-supported public libraries, three OWl librarians in particular made contributions to library development in Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa that endure to this day. World War II, a time of general global disruption, was a critical period in the history of the international exchange of information. Not only did the war block long-established channels of print communication, but it greatly increased the importance of the United States as an information source. The decades preceding 1940 had already witnessed the emergence of America as a major exporter of expertise, especially in the areas of technical, business, and professional information. The prolifer- ation of technical colleges in the late nineteenth century,2 the country's enormous economic growth before 1929, and the slow European recov- ery from World War I all played a role in this phenomenon, and during 1. Rutgers University, Graduate School of Library Science, 4 Huntington Street, New Brunswick, New Jersey 08903. 2. The passage of the Morrill Land-Grant College Act in 1862, by which the U.S. government granted land to state colleges to aid engineering and agricultural educa- tion, was a great impetus to this development. [Library Quarterly, vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 325-347] ?1982 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-25 19/82/5204-0001$01 .00 325
326 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY the 1930s American books and publications of all kinds were being exported in sufficient numbers to cause consternation in the (British) Publishers Association [1, p. 375]. The havoc and destruction of a new war in Europe magnified the United States' importance in the interna- tional information grid, for alone among the world's highly developed nations it survived the Second World War with its industrial plant and research facilities intact. While the federal government was quick to perceive the importance of American science for the prosecution of the war and set up channels for the sharing of strategic information with England even before Pearl Harbor [2, 3], it was slower to recognize the need among the allied civilian populations for American technical, pro- fessional, and business information. The methods the government eventually used to ensure the flow of this information throughout the British Commonwealth had implications that stretch far beyond the distorted world picture of the war years. What is of interest to us here, however, is that one of the agencies assigned this task, the Office of War Information (OWI), through its establishment of American-staffed in- formation libraries abroad, offered models of librarianship that were to make permanent contributions to the development of the profession overseas. While OWI libraries were set up throughout allied territory,3 this study will focus primarily on Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa, those nations in which the influence of the OWI libraries is most clearly traceable. Predecessors of War Information Libraries The facilities upon which the allied populations came increasingly to rely for their supply of up-to-date American technical and professional in- formation were originally established for quite a different purpose: when the first U.S. Information Library was opened in London in May 1943, its operating mandate did not even mention technical information exchange but stressed instead its mission to counter Axis propaganda by presenting "what a free nation is thinking, doing and writing" [4, p. 102]. The "American Way," not "American know-how," was supposed to be the library's top-priority message. Its users would soon make it clear that America's scientific and technical information and its ability to manage and deliver it was at least as seductive as its democratic institutions. The perception that government-funded libraries could be an appro- 3. By the end of the war the OWI was running full-scale libraries in London, Sydney, Melbourne, Wellington, Johannesburg, Bombay, Cairo, and Capetown; smaller facili- ties operated in Lisbon, Madrid, Istanbul, Moscow, Chungking, Beirut, and Damascus.
INFORMATION FOR THE ALLIES 327 priate channel for the dissemination of propaganda had historical prec- edents in the United States in the World War I efforts of George Creel's Committee on Public Information. In fact, sustained negative public reaction to Creel committee activities was probably a factor in retarding the reestablishment of government libraries abroad in World War II. Creel, whose committee was in charge of creating public support, both at home and abroad, for America's participation in the First World War, established and maintained American reading rooms in seven Mexican cities from 1917 to early 1919, offering approved literature, newspapers, and periodicals. While the short-lived reading rooms in neutral Mexico were heavily used and their termination deplored by those involved, the Creel committee's heavy-handed propaganda activities were regarded by many Americans as unconstitutional. Identified in the public mind with the repressive Sedition Act of 1918, which made criticism of the gov- ernment punishable by twenty years' imprisonment, the committee was dismantled in June 1919, at which point Creel himself "was one of the most disliked and traduced members of the national government" [5, p. 12]. The public's distaste for propaganda campaigns, combined with the prevailing mood of isolationism, curtailed government spending abroad for information programs for two decades. The Soviet Union, Germany, Japan, and England all had international short-wave broadcasting pro- grams by the mid-1930s, and the British, French, Germans, and Japanese all established libraries in key foreign cities during that period [6, p. 433]; by contrast, the only American material being sent abroad by the U.S. government was a trickle of current information dispatched through State Department channels for distribution to the foreign press. While there were some agencies operating overseas in the 1920s and 1930s where American materials were available, they were neither gov- ernment funded nor part of a systematic program of information dis- tribution: the American Library in Paris, founded in 1920 with its basis the collection sent to France for the use of the American Expeditionary Forces in World War 1, was supported by Americans in Paris through regular subscription fees. Equally dependent on local support were the libraries of the "binational centers" of Latin America, which began in 1927 in Buenos Aires and by 1940 were situated as well in Port-au- Prince, Sao Paulo, Rio deJaneiro, Santiago, Lima, and Caracas. The first U.S. government funded library abroad was not established until April 1942, when the Biblioteca Benjamin Franklin was opened under a fed- eral contract by the American Library Association in Mexico, the country in which America felt most sensitive to the threat of foreign influence [4, p. 82]. The Biblioteca Benjamin Franklin, together with other U.S. libraries founded south of the border in following months, was funded
328 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY through the Office of the Coordinator of Inter-American Affairs (CIAA) under Nelson Rockefeller, an agency which had been set up in 1940 to promote western hemisphere solidarity in the face of the grow- ing Axis propaganda effort. The U.S. Information Library established in London in 1943 had its provenance not in the CIAA but in the younger Office of War Informa- tion. Created in June 1942 by Executive Order 9182 "in recognition of the right of the American people and of all other peoples opposing the Axis aggressors to be truthfully informed," the OWI was supposed to act as an umbrella agency to coordinate information about the war reaching the home front. Headed by news commentator Elmer Davis, the OWI was made up of inherited components which would preserve their dis- tinct characteristics throughout the war: its Domestic Branch consisted of, among other groups, personnel from Archibald MacLeish's old Office of Facts and Figures (established in the fall of 1941), which continued in its new guise to rally support for the national defense program through campaigns for bond buying, salvage, rationing, etc. Also transferred to the Domestic Branch was the United States Infor- mation Service (formerly of the Office of Government Reports), which continued to keep Congress and the public informed of federal-and now, war-issues. The Overseas Branch of OWI, on the other hand, originated in the Foreign Information Service of the Office of the Coordinator of Information, which had been established in July 1941 under William Donovan. When Donovan's office was reorganized in June 1942, and he and his intelligence-gathering units formed the Office of Strategic Services (OSS) under the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Foreign Information Service, directed by Robert E. Sherwood, was transferred to the new Office of War Information. As explained in the congressional hearing on the OWI's 1942-43 appropriation, the function of the Over- seas Branch was "psychological warfare, or. . . bringing the truth to the many millions of people who are completely dependent on us and our allies for any truthful account of what is going on" [7, p. 39]. It is not the task of this paper to trace the history of the Office of War Information or of the fourteen libraries its Overseas Branch had estab- lished abroad by the end of the war. There have been several long studies of the OWI-the latest being Allan Winkler's The Politics of Propaganda [8]-and personal accounts by OWI librarians appeared in the library literature both during and shortly after the war. But while the academic historians of the OWI have focused on the agency's impor- tance in the systematization of large-scale overt propaganda campaigns, the librarians involved, many of whom were graduates of America's oldest training schools, stress, both in their articles and in interviews with this writer, that their libraries were in no sense propaganda centers-
INFORMATION FOR THE ALLIES 329 that they, for example, answered questions on America's race problems as candidly and willingly as those on agricultural production. The anom- alous position of the librarians-the "truth squad," as one of them refers to her group [91-is implicit in Allan Winkler's failure to include any reference to them in his otherwise exhaustive study of the OWI. (In- terestingly, the records of OWI libraries are not even located in the same record group in the National Archives Annex as those of the OWI itself [RG 208] but are filed with the records of the consular posts [RG 84] to which they were-sometimes quite loosely-attached.) It is my intention not simply to rectify the lack of attention given the librarians by recent histories of the OWl but to demonstrate that their activities as prac- titioners of democratic American librarianship, incongruous as they were with the primary aims of a worldwide propaganda organization, made some of them pioneers of local library development and turned their libraries into important conduits of the flow of U.S.-produced technical and professional information which was so greatly to affect the postwar world. The London Library The London library, when first planned in August 1942, was conceived of as a purely emergency measure. Book and periodical shipments to England, America's only unoccupied ally, had been almost entirely cut off from the United States after the intensification of submarine warfare in the North Atlantic in 1940, while air raids on England had destroyed an estimated 2 million volumes by 1942. (So striking was the paucity of American material in England by this time-especially when compared with the large quantity of' German-produced materials available in British bookstalls-that the Books Across the Sea program had been organized in 1941 by Publishers Weekly publisher Frederic Melcher and May Lamberton Becker of the New York Herald Tribune; very small scale, the program succeeded, by mailing books individually to England, in getting a number of American titles through to the Outpost, its reading room in London. After the war, the program became part of the English-speaking Union [10, p. 128].) In planning its own facility, the OWI operated on the principle that the most efficient means of spread- ing the American viewpoint abroad was to keep the foreign media full of American-supplied material. To this end, the American library in Lon- don was initially designed to be a U.S. government-controlled channel of current information to the British communications industry, an objec- tive reflected in its collection of 8,000 books, 10,000 government docu- ments and pamphlets, and its subscription to some 500 American pe-
330 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY riodicals. Richard Heindel, a former University of Pennsylvania history professor who was the OWI officer in charge of the library, energetically pursued the most important London editorial writers, sometimes tearing out pages from reference books and periodicals and sending them directly to individual newsmen or members of the British government (happily for the collection, Heindel eventually got a photostat machine). As a peacetime member of the academic community, Heindel was sensitive to allegations that his library might be contributing to "disin- formation," or propaganda distortions. In articles about his work in London, he repeatedly stressed that he dealt "in facts and solidly documented information" [11, p. 93]; that although he practiced the selective dissemination of information, clipping and routing items to British journalists, "these trim centers are not propaganda centers" [12, p. 163]. Heindel's protests are better understood in the context of the considerable body of disinformation actually utilized by the OWI on both fronts: one of the lies it employed to demoralize the enemy, for example, was that while there existed a potato shortage in Germany, Hitler was using fuel distilled from potatoes to propel the V-Waffen [8, p. 128]. Though not a trained librarian, Heindel was very conscious of the professional implications of the evolving nature of the London library's clientele. While members of the press were constant visitors, other seg- ments of the British population not originally targeted as users began to make increasing use of the OWI facility: educators, doctors, research scientists, technicians, and members of the British armed forces came for news of American developments in their various fields. Heindel recog- nized that his library had become a pipeline to American expertise of all kinds, including the area of library development: "Here is the machinery which will be of help to many international projects-conferences, document exchanges, library reconstruction, [and] bibliographic im- provements" [12, p. 165]. Elsewhere he wrote, "I think the O.W.I. work in the field adds up to the most significant development in American library history in the 1940's and probably 1950's. These outpost libraries were born of the war ... but it seems clear that they are likely to be just as valuable in peace .... The O.W.I., by very practical and factual efforts, has carried the importance of libraries and books to the people and has raised them to a new and honorable position" [13]. The London library would remain the largest of the OWI libraries throughout the war; it also served as a staging area for the nineteen OWI libraries that were launched as mobile operations-and subsequently used as nuclei for permanent installations-on the Continent as it be- came liberated. But while the five OWI libraries opened in Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa in 1944 were smaller, the trends dis- cernible in the London library's operations-the surging demand of the
INFORMATION FOR THE ALLIES 331 general public for U.S. technical, professional, and business-related in- formation and the agency's influence on library development abroad- stand out in much more vivid relief in the OWI reports from these former British colonies.4 Partly because of these areas' damaged lines of communication with England, because of the embryonic state of their own library infrastructures, and also because of the similarity of many of their settlers' cultural experiences with those of Americans, Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa were particularly receptive to the influence of the U.S. libraries, and it is in their activities that one can most clearly recognize the growing importance of American materials to the man in the street as well as the impact on the local library profession of American information-management techniques. Planning OWI Libraries for the British Commonwealth Dependents of the British book trade, with pitifully small indigenous publishing industries, Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa were dramatically affected by the loss of book shipments from England. Australia's position was perhaps most critical because of its closeness to the front. When the first OWI officers arrived in Sydney to lay the foundations of an information operation in August 1942, the Japanese were within 100 miles of Port Moresby, New Guinea, the U.S. Marines had just established a tiny beachhead on Guadalcanal, and Japanese submarines had been sighted inside Sydney harbor. Certainly the warmth with which the American librarians were received in Australia when they finally arrived in November 1943 was due largely to their status as allies of the beleaguered British Empire. Planning for the Commonwealth libraries had begun some months after the opening of the London facility, with the same objective: filling the communications gap engendered by war-produced shipping difficulties. The Sydney library was dedicated on February 16, 1944, followed by those in Melbourne, Wellington, and Johannesburg. In all of these locations the libraries were just one component of local OWl information operations, comprising a news service, exhibits, filrns, and intelligence gathering. Probably because of increasing collaboration with American library leaders, the U.S. government, by the time of the opening of the Commonwealth libraries, had begun to stress the non- partisan nature of their mission, declaring that they were not to be "in any sense propaganda centers or distributors of pamphlets" [15, p. 228]. 4. An OWI library was opened in Bombay in 1944 [14]. The complexities of Indian library development and India's role in the history of information exchange are too great, however, to permit discussion here.
332 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY The basic incongruity of the librarians' situation within the agency re- mained, however, highlighted by the obligatory attendance of the ear- liest group of designated Commonwealth librarians at the OWI Tech- nical Training Center at Huntington, New York. Here, between April 1943 and December 1944, special courses were given in self-defense, psychological warfare, and irnfiltration techniques. Helen Wessells, one of the first women recruited by the OWI for service in an overseas library, remembers being told repeatedly during the two weeks she attended "Lloyd Neck Tech" in the fall of 1943 that "none of this applies to you librarians; your job is just to tell the truth" [9]. This disassociation of the librarians' work from the overall goals of the OWl would prove to be a major factor in the permanence of their influence in the countries to which they were posted. The group sent out to be directors of the U.S. Commonwealth librar- ies was preponderantly female; almost all its members were graduates of formal training programs (mainly Columbia),5 and many were vet- erans of New York Public Library work (the wartime service of Harry Miller Lydenberg, former director of New York Public Library, first as director of ALA's Washington-based International Relations Office and consultant to the OWI was a factor in many appointments.6 Several of the women already had impressive careers behind them: Harriet Root, posted to Sydney, had headed the United States Information Service and its public reading room of government documents in Washington, D.C.; Mary Parsons, bound for Wellington, had set up the ALA's Paris library school in 1923. Others in the group would emerge as leaders in the field after the war: Helen Wessells, posted to Melbourne, would rise to chief of the library branch of the U.S. Information Service in the Department of State and then become editor of Library Journal; and Winifred Linderman, at Cape Town, went home to teach and eventually to become a full professor at Columbia's School of Library Service. State of Libraries in South Africa, Australia, and New Zealand before 1940 The interest which the arrival of these professionals and their services aroused abroad was due largely to their novelty in their host countries: in Australia and South Africa tax-supported public libraries hardly existed at all before World War II, and while some state and university 5. Mary Parsons (Wellington) 1913; Flora Ludington (Bombay) 1925; Helen Wessells (Melbourne) 1926; Katherine Davis (Wellington) 1936; Lucile Dudgeon (Bombay) 1937; Florence Wilmer (Johannesburg) 1938; and Winifred Linderman (Capetown) 1941. 6. Parsons, Wessells, and Linderman had all served at the New York Public Library before they joined OWI.
INFORMATION FOR THE ALLIES 333 collections in Australia were sizable, "reference services, reader educa- tion and subject cataloging either did not exist or were very primitive" [16, p. 16]. Even the concept of a librarian as a professionally educated person had not appeared in Australia or New Zealand until the late 1930s, and only a few years earlier in South Africa [ 17, p. 76]. As a matter of fact, the American librarians arrived at a crucial time in the evolution of Australian, New Zealand, and South African librarianship: a series of reports issued by the Carnegie Corporation of New York on the library infrastructures of these nations had set local developments in motion in the 1930s; and few observers followed the work of the U.S. librarians with as much interest as members of the fledgling local library services, many of whom saw the American librarians as valuable links to the mainstream of the profession. The three Carnegie surveys had pointed out in vivid detail the deficiencies in the library services available first in South Africa, then in Australia and New Zealand. In 1928, S. A. Pitt, librarian at Glasgow Public Library, had been sent with Milton J. Ferguson, State Librarian of California, to do a survey of South African libraries. Their report [18] led directly to the establishment of the South African Library Associa- tion (SALA) in 1930. Seven years later, a survey for which the SALA had pressed urged that, since "library development in South Africa lagged so far behind the rest of the civilised world," the government should take the lead in improving conditions, in particular by abolishing the existing subscription library system, whereby "free" publicly sup- ported libraries were obliged to be free only in the sense that their reading rooms and reference services were available to all, while cir- culating privileges were reserved for subscribers. Another major rec- ommendation concerned the training of librarians, which was limited at that time to correspondence and vacation courses administered by the SALA [ 19]. As a result of the report, training programs were established in 1938 at the University of Pretoria and in 1939 at the University of Cape Town. Tax support for urban and rural library systems was slower to come: hampered by wartime manpower shortages, only two prov- inces, the Cape and the Transvaal, had published recommendations for such action by 1945 [17, chaps. 2, 5, and 16]. The South African survey had come to the attention of prominent Australian librarians, and in 1929, the Carnegie Corporation of New York was asked to undertake a like review of Australia's library re- sources. In 1934, after several years of negotiation, the corporation sent Ralph Munn, director of the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh, to Austra- lia, where for several months he examined libraries with Ernest Pitt, head of the Public Library of Victoria. Their 1935 report [20] was a condemnation of the dominant voluntary subscription library system; it found that, as a whole, Australia had been better provided with local
334 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY libraries in 1880 than it was in 1934. Among Munn's chief recom- mendations were the establishment of municipal tax-supported free libraries; the establishment of government-subsidized regional library services for rural areas; the establishment of a library association in Australia; and the development of uniform methods of training under apprenticeship systems based at the state libraries (there was at this time no library school or certification program in the country). While bitterly criticized by many Australians, the Munn-Pitt report was not without effect. With the aid of Carnegie implementation grants, the Australian Institute of Librarians (after 1949 the Library Association of Australia) was founded in 1937, and education for librarianship was stimulated. In 1938 the Public Library of New South Wales began conducting courses, and in 1941 offered an entire regular library training program (while the Commonwealth National Library at Canberra set up a training school in 1946, a full-time university-level school of librarianship would not be established in Australia until 1960 at the University of New South Wales). Despite the outbreak of the war, progress in Australia continued to be made, and by the time the OWI librarians arrived in late 1943, three states had begun to support the establishment of municipal library services, including free lending paid for by local taxes [21, pp. 29-33]. New Zealand's library infrastructure was much more highly developed than that of Australia upon the outbreak of World War II, at which time New Zealand boasted around 450 public municipal libraries. As in Aus- tralia, however, these "public" libraries were generally sustained by rev- enues raised by subscriptions. During the 1930s the Libraries Associa- tion of New Zealand (forerunner of the present New Zealand Library Association) began to agitate for truly free public library service. In 1934, mindful of Ralph Munn's activities in Australia, the New Zealand Association requested the Carnegie Corporation of New York to under- write a report on their own library situation. Munn was duly dispatched to New Zealand where, with the assistance of John Barr of the Auckland Public Library, he surveyed local resources and incorporated in his report [22] suggestions for improvements. The Munn and Barr report was highly critical of the subscription libraries and advocated the free circulation of collections. A deep-rooted prejudice on the part of New Zealanders against tax-subsidized recreation made this a controversial issue: there were only two fully free public libraries in New Zealand in 1934, and the third, Auckland, only became free in 1946 (later, the widening of free service in the 1950s and 1960s would go hand in hand with the establishment of rental collections of light fiction, the revenues from which would be used to maintain the rental and/or the free collec- tions). The Munn and Barr report's advocacy of government-supported free libraries for smaller municipalities was a key factor in the establish-
INFORMATION FOR THE ALLIES 335 ment in 1938 of' the Country Library Service to provide loans of books, via book vans, to small libraries where the localities would agree to subsidize free services (after 1945 this system became part of the much wider National Library Service). The inadequacy of educational facilities for librarianship in New Zealand was also singled out for criticism by Munn: in 1934 most librarians in that country had no training at all; the only possibility of formal instruction was a correspondence course of- fered by the (British) Library Association. Eight years after the Munn and Barr report, the New Zealand Library Association organized a general nongraduate correspondence course for library assistants lead- ing to a certificate, but a school offering full-time training for librarian- ship would not be established in New Zealand until 1945. Showcases for American Librarianship This dawning of library consciousness in Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa in the 1930s and early 1940s was the background for much of the enthusiasm elicited by the work of the OWI librarians, whose efficiency and energy frankly astonished Commonwealth journalists and the general public, especially in Australia. An article in the Sydney Sun marveled at how the local U.S. library staff "got this country flat on its back, sprayed it with facts, figures and information of every conceivable kind, from U.S. birth control to U.S. bulldozers, and jumped on the patient to ensure that the mix sank in-all with such pleasant efficiency that the treatment was painless, except in some quarters, for a slight sense of suffocation" [23]. Public attention was focused largely on the information work done by the librarians rather than on the collections themselves, which were not initially very impressive in size or scope. It had been correctly assumed by OWI leaders that highly technical Ameri- can materials were already held by local university or state libraries [9; 24], and when the Australian and New Zealand facilities first opened in early 1944, they were simply small reference rooms specializing in the United States: supplied with a basic collection of 1,000 books and 3,000 pamphlets and government documents, they received about 130 Ameri- can periodicals; 50-60 new books were acquired every month, as well as a small but steady flow of pamphlets and government documents. The unique feature of the libraries was not initially their content, but their service. Chester Williams, Chief of the OWI's British division, stressed that one of the main functions of the facilities was "sharing America's contribution to the various fields" ([25, p. 174] my italics); to this end each library was staffed with two Americans experienced in answering public inquiries-one of them usually with a background in reference and the
336 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY other a trained information specialist. The information delivery by the staff was, in the eyes of the press, the magic component: "U.S. Library Popular with Seekers of Fact," bannered the Melbourne Herald [26], listing, among the questions answered at the local U.S. library, queries on chinchilla farms, rural electrification, U.S. court decisions, and traffic control. Helen Wessells in Australia The Americans' energetic style of information work did not go un- noticed by local librarians either; the OWI workers were bombarded by Commonwealth colleagues with solicitations for professional advice. From Australia, Helen Wessells's monthly Melbourne reports recorded inquiries from libraries on outfitting bookmobiles (which had not yet been seen in Australia), on cataloging films, binding magazines, and organizing children's libraries, a type of facility barely known there at the time. Local librarians were invited to group discussions, provided with library films, and given hours of consultation on individual prob- lems. Besides being active in the Australian Institute of Librarians, Helen Wessells spoke on libraries in New South Wales, South Australia, Western Australia, Victoria, and Tasmania; with her vociferous support, the state of Victoria (in which Melbourne is located) passed its Library Services Act in 1946, permitting the municipal funding of library ser- vices, including free lending (as opposed to subscription lending) from local taxes. Somehow the American encouragement and support seems to have been given and received in a spirit of generosity, free of conde- scension or rancor: the librarian reporting to the Australian Institute of Librarians on developments in Victoria in 1944 wrote that Helen Wes- sells, who had frequently addressed the Victoria branch of the Institute, had been "not only most helpful in advice but mercifully sparing in her criticism of Victorian libraries. She and her compatriots have brought to our somewhat restricted circle a breath of the larger life of the library world overseas" [27, p. 78]. The advocacy role played by Helen Wessells and her American col- leagues in the Australian community was in 1944 held up as a model for local librarians by Leigh Scott, president of the Australian Institute. In his presidential address of that year, Scott pointed to the discrepancy between Australian and American professional styles, adding pointedly that "there shall be no need to tell a gathering of librarians that adver- tising is not thought to be beneath the dignity of the librarian in the United States: that the librarian does his library far more service by going out and talking about it than by sitting in his chair studying
INFORMATION FOR THE ALLIES 337 technical processes" [27, p. 33]. So enthusiastically, in fact, did the OWI librarians publicize the value of their facilities that a subsequent AIL president, J. D. A. Collier, actually announced in his presidential ad- dress one year later that America's libraries deserved most of the credit for the allied victory in World War II: "The almost magical war-time expansion of U.S. industry rests upon two foundations-material re- sources and understanding of the truth: 'Knowledge is power.' Knowl- edge means books, and books means libraries.... The United States leads in the race now largely because when the heat went on, its people had the world's best library system to rely on" [27, p. 36].7 When the U.S. librarians finally left Australia in 1947, the AIL ended its tenth annual report with a tribute to their assistance, expressing its "appreciation of the very happy relations that existed between it and the U.S. officers," and giving special mention to Helen Wessells, who, "at a critical stage in the postwar development of the free library movement, . . . was tireless in addressing public meetings and meetings of municipal councils .. always to good effect" [29, p. 21]. Mary Parsons in New Zealand In New Zealand, the OWI's impact on library development was also closely tied to the personality of one woman. Mary Prescott Parsons, the director at Wellington from 1943 to 1947, was, like Helen Wessells and Winifred Linderman, a graduate of what is now Columbia's School of Library Service (1913) and a veteran of the New York Public Library, where she served on the information desk from 1913 to 1917.8 Born in 1885, Mary Parsons was considerably older than the other OWI librar- ians, and her career had already been distinguished by teaching as well as practical experience. A graduate of Smith College (1908), Parsons had been appointed in 1923 to help establish the ALA's library school in Paris, of which she was resident director from 1924 to 1929. (The "first true library school" in France, this Ecole de Bibliothecaires finally closed during the Depression, by which time it had "trained a number of librarians inspired by the democratic ideology of American librarian- ship" [30, p. 70].) In 1933-34 Parsons had taught in the University of 7. In her recent discussion of the development of public libraries in New South Wales, Ida Vincent cites the Australian identification of libraries with the defense of democracy as a major factor in determining the goals set for public libraries of New South Wales (28, p. 3701. 8. From 1917 to 1923 Parsons had been director of the Morristown Library, Morristown, N.J., while Helen Wessells was employed there as a high school student in 1918-20 and general assistant in 1922-23.
338 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Michigan's Department of Library Science, to which she returned as associate professor in 1937 after having received a Ph.D. from the University of Vienna in 1937. Parsons was already known to New Zealanders through local Carnegie Corporation fellows who had studied under her at Michigan, and when she arrived in Wellington, librarians there considered it "an honour and a compliment to our country to have her" [31, p. 45]. A quiet, scholarly woman with a personal manner quite different from that of the outgoing Helen Wessells, Parsons nonetheless used many of the same basic methods for stimulating public interest in the OWI's information work as her colleagues in Australia. In a 1946 report from Wellington summarizing her library activities there, Parsons included several paragraphs under the heading "Public Relations," which she defined as "a two-way flow of information through which an institution knows what its community wants and a community knows what the institution has to offer." Under this rubric she listed her speeches before local organizations and national conferences, the arrangement of school exhibits, service on national committees for library training, technologi- cal and business information libraries and Children's Book Week; also mentioned is the inclusion of the U.S. Information Library's new books and periodicals in the union list of library holdings maintained by the New Zealand Library Association [32, pp. 10-11]. Of all the OWI personnel stationed aboard, Parsons probably left the most permanent mark on her host country's libraries: not only did she serve for several years as vice president of the New Zealand Library Association, but she was the founder and first director of the New Zealand Library School. Immediately after her arrival in Wellington in 1943, the New Zealand government asked that she be lent to them to organize, direct, and teach in the country's first school for training librarians on a full-time basis; largely because of her influence, library school education in New Zealand has from its inception been exclusively on a university graduate basis with a curriculum close to North Ameri- can models. In 1947, when American budget cutbacks forced the dis- missal of the U.S. Information librarians, New Zealand passed a special act to grant Parsons a financial award of merit so that she could continue to head the school, "whose undoubted success" according to the 1975 Australian survey done by Borchardt and Horacek, "was due to the leadership and scholarly standing provided by its first director" [16, p. 56]. All in all, the work of the OWI librarians in Australasia was widely acknowledged as both a diplomatic and educational success. When Par- sons finally returned to the United States in 1948, Foreign Minister Peter Fraser of New Zealand wrote the U.S. State Department that "No
INFORMATION FOR THE ALLIES 339 American has . . . done more in the cultural field to strengthen within New Zealand the excellent relations that exist between our two peoples" [33, p. 844]. Three years before, Henry Canby, editor of the Saturday Review, had visited New Zealand and Australia as a guest lecturer and had become an admirer of the OWI library work there, which he thought ranked "next to the rescue of the country from the Japs" in winning friends for America in Australia [34]. In a letter of August 13, 1945 to Under Secretary of State Archibald MacLeish, Canby singled out in particular OWI encouragement of local library development as being the contribution which, because of the historical context in which it occurred, would probably be the OWI's most enduring legacy; for the U.S. librarians had "taught our library ideas and practices, which are a quarter of a century ahead, to the Dominions, at the very moment when it is being realized, especially in Australia, that more education of their people is vital, and that better libraries are indispensable for this educa- tion" [35]. Winifred Linderman in South Africa In South Africa, Winifred Linderman, like her colleagues Wessells and Parsons, also managed to fit easily into the local scene. Serving in a period of rising South African national consciousness emphasizing the Afrikaners' pastoral traditions, Linderman found her own rural Min- nesota roots helpful: in choosing her "Woman of the Day" on September 19, 1945, the Afrikaans-language newspaper Suiderstem stressed her origins in an environment of "cows and contentment" and her gradua- tion from Carleton College (1919) in the heart of the nation's farmland. Although Linderman's Cape Town library was open less than two years (September 1945 to July 1947), it played a still-remembered role in the development of the local profession: at a time when South African libraries were still largely subscription supported and the debate over tax support was raging, her (U.S. tax-supported) collection, open to all, demonstrated daily the vital information services that could be provided by a library. "Miss Linderman Had All the Answers" was the headline of an article in the daily Cape Argus describing information supplied on physiotherapy, housing, and prison reform [36]. (She recalls in particu- lar how surprised Cape Town visitors were to be supplied with American materials frankly critical of racial discrimination in the southern United States [37]. The monthly reports Linderman sent to Washington record questions of a preponderantly technical and professional nature, in- cluding queries on fertilizer components, frequency modulation, the organization of Future Farmers of America, traffic control, sales tech-
340 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY niques, and public health. A South African who worked in the U.S. library recalls that the questions were almost never about American culture but focused instead on economic and trade affairs [38] (coinci- dentally, Linderman's knowledge of viticulture reference sources, picked up during her five years as a librarian in Fresno, California, was a special boon to Cape Province wine growers). In the judgment of her South African colleagues, they benefited most from Linderman's demonstration of the public service potential of the information that could be supplied by a tax-supported library: the presi- dent of the Cape Branch of the South African Library Association, R. F. M. Immelman, wrote her at the time of her departure that her li- brary's greatest service had been to act as a "model of its kind ... instru- mental in helping to further our struggle for better libraries in the Cape Province . . . and in stimulating better reference services in other librar- ies" [39]; and Douglas Varley, the association's president, thanked her for giving South Africans "the opportunity to watch the building-up of a first-class information service, and of learning from you and your col- leagues how effectively trained librarianship can be applied to work of this kind" [40]. Because library education was more advanced in South Africa than in Australia-perhaps because South Africa's Carnegie Corporation sur- vey predated those of Australia and New Zealand-Winifred Linder- man had a more established forum than did Wessells and Parsons from which to demonstrate new techniques and procedures (vertical files, for example, had never been seen in South Africa): in 1946-47 she taught at the University of Cape Town Library School, and her library was used in the school's internship program. One of the library assistants she hired from the Cape Library School, Stephanus I. Malan, is now professor of library science at the University of South Africa in Pretoria. Looking back after a long and distinguished career as a library educator, Malan thinks that his lifelong interest in library cooperation and his belief in the transfer of information as a basic function of library work most likely derive from his year and a half with Linderman; since that time he has "never been convinced that library and information work constitute two separate fields" [38]. Outside the library, Linderman's activities focused particularly on school librarianship, a specialty almost unknown in South Africa, where at that time not one school employed a full-time trained librarian [41, p. 137]. Calling upon her experiences in Fresno in 1924-29 as well as her work in Garden City High School (1936-44), she was an active member of the newly formed school and Children's Library Section of the Cape Branch of the South African Library Association. In this capacity she organized the exhibition for the first South African Children's Book
INFORMATION FOR THE ALLIES 341 Week, November 11-16, 1946, compiling for the occasion a 16-page booklist, Books Are Bridges/Boeke is skakels, subsequently used at the Cape Town Training College as a handbook for a new course on children's literature. Almost two decades later Immelman recalled that "the Chil- dren's Book Week exhibition (which was visited by 3,500 people), as well as the booklist, were the most ambitious and most successful ventures of the School and Children's Library Section of the Cape Branch during its period of existence" [42, p. 21]. OWI Libraries as an Entry for American Books and Periodicals Wessells's and Linderman's assistance to Commonwealth library work was widely enough acknowledged to win them a promotion from the rank of "Librarian" to that of "Cultural Officer" in the Foreign Service Reserve, when, in late 1945, the libraries were transferred to the State Depart- ment (the fact that Parsons was not so reclassified has been attributed partially to a lack of enthusiasm for the OWI and for library matters in general on the part of the American consular officials in New Zealand [9]). The promotion of the two women may also have indicated official recognition of the importance of their information work, which centered increasingly on the delivery of U.S.-produced technical expertise, for the development of postwar patterns of international communication, both commercial and public. The U.S. government was by 1945 well aware of America's unique and critical position in a world ravaged by war. It was widely believed in Washington that the postwar spread of democracy was directly dependent upon the diffusion abroad of American technology. The OWI's Chester Williams wrote in a 1944 article in Special Libraries that postwar peace was contingent on improved global living standards, which "require books, broadcasts, films and teaching until men everywhere will know what it is possible to have, and how to produce it" [25, p. 174]. But he also warned that the commercial channels vital to the delivery of U.S. information were not yet as efficient as America's new position demanded. Even before the wartime disruptions of the book- trade, for example, British Empire scholars had been inadequately supplied with U.S. publications, for "unlike the Germans, . . . American publishers never took pains to help the foreign libraries and booksellers develop the potential market for American material." It was precisely in this area that Williams saw the OWI libraries as playing a vital postwar role: "The war has vastly increased the interest in the United States and American printed matter. Libraries are eager to build up order lists that can be processed as soon as shipping and exchange permit. Many foreign libraries have postwar funds set aside for this purpose. The U.S.
342 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Information Library provides an exhibit collection of selected materials for inspection with trained American librarians to consult and advise" [25, p. 173]. Williams' vision that the OWI libraries could contribute to the "win- ning of the peace" by giving the Commonwealth public access to Ameri- can expertise in American books was fired by the monthly reports from the outposts in Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa. These coun- tries, with their small populations and traditional ties to England, had never represented particularly attractive targets for U.S. publishers; their English-language titles had always been almost exclusively British imprints. When American books were made available through the OWI libraries, the currency of the material and the attractiveness of their formats excited a demand for American publications which commercial sources could not satisfy. The reports from the Melbourne and Sydney OWI libraries record constant queries about where users might buy the books exhibited or how to subscribe to journals displayed; from South Africa came reports of booksellers seeking help in the difficult ordering of just-seen American materials, and librarians and educators who, having been exposed to new professional tools in the OWI libraries, sought help in acquiring them. Organized U.S. reaction to the clamor for American books came in several stages. In 1943, OWI headquarters in Washington began to send special collections to the outposts for loan or exhibit; typical of these was a Library of Congress selection of American scientific texts and journals forwarded to the OWI libraries for display at Commonwealth profes- sional conventions. American commercial publishers, many of whom "saw a positive duty to satisfy a hunger for books" [43, p. 189], were not far behind. Immediately after victory in the Pacific, the American Book Publishers Bureau dispatched Edward Hamilton and Whitney Darrow to make an on-the-scene survey of the book markets of Australia and New Zealand, areas which, although sparsely populated, were already known to have an extraordinarily high per capita consumption of books [44, p. 23]. In October 1945 Hamilton and Darrow reported that Ameri- can publishers could double their sales to Australasia overnight if there were stock available; not only were U.S. titles more up-to-date than the British, but even if the same title was available in both English and U.S. imprints, and shelved adjacently, the customer would buy the more attractive American book. (Stringent paper rationing in England during and after the war necessitated the closer setting of type and the use of thinner paper; it was not until 1950 that paper became reasonably plentiful in Europe.) The Darrow report concluded that the main obsta- cle to U.S. penetration of this huge market-Australasia represented 25 percent of British Empire sales-lay with traditional trade agreements
INFORMATION FOR THE ALLIES 343 whereby American publishers did not sell directly to the Commonwealth but sold the Commonwealth rights to English publishers as part of the entire British Empire package. Before any concerted attack could be made on these long-established distribution methods, British publishers, sensitive to the threat posed by American imprints in traditional British markets, formulated what came to be known as the British Marketing Agreement. The agreement, which was in effect until 1976, formalized the old book trade conventions and in effect legally closed the Commonwealth (except Canada) to most U.S.-produced books. Its effects were at least as frustrating to Com- monwealth bookmen and scholars as they were to thwarted American publishers: the only books of American origin available for sale in the Commonwealth were those to which English publishers had decided to buy the rights; the titles might be quite irrelevant for readers in, say, South Africa or New Zealand. Moreover, there were some titles which English publishers would buy and then decide not to publish, and others which they might publish at home but not export to the Commonwealth; these titles were effectively lost to the Commonwealth book trade, with which American publishers could not deal directly for fear of jeopar- dizing their position in the competition for lucrative British rights. Commonwealth booksellers, who read Publishers Weekly and the book supplements of the New York Times and Herald Tribune, were painfully aware of what they were missing. The obstruction of the free importing of American books into the Commonwealth was made even more effective by the postwar dollar shortage, which dimmed all hopes of sterling block countries buying American materials in any quantity. Restrictions imposed throughout the sterling area on dollar purchases cut book imports to the bone just as many scientists, scholars, and technicians in those areas were desperately trying to make up for all the time lost during the war; the Darrow report recorded sadly that in 1946 Australia was to be permitted only 50 percent of its 1939 dollar expenditures for U.S. printed materials [44, p. 16]. Postwar inflation, as well as America's importance as a producer of published research at that time, made such a quota pitiful indeed. Closing OWI Libraries in the British Commonwealth Given the difficulty of buying American books commercially, the dis- couragement of U.S. Information Library patrons was especially keen when, inJuly 1947, the closing was announced of the American libraries in the British Commonwealth. In an effort to cool an inflationary econ- omy by cutting back programs originally designed as wartime measures,
344 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Congress mandated an almost 50 percent budget cut ($12,400,000 vs. $20,000,000) for the Office of International Information and Cultural Affairs, within which the former OWI libraries operated in 1947. In the subsequent reorganization of the office by Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs William Benton, Cold War strategy was clear: un- touched, and sometimes augmented, were activities in "problem areas" such as Turkey, the Near East, and Africa but gone were information services to the "friendly" Commonwealth lands [45]. The local protests against the closures were strong and indicated no little sense of anger, even desperation. Some Commonwealth academics feared professional isolation; Luther Evans remembered an Australian economist who told him that his own personal studies would have been utterly impossible without the collection of the American library in Melbourne [46, p. 8]. Helen Wessells was told by several Melburnians that she "could not leave," that it was like "turning out a light"; her final report, dated July 31, 1947, contains excerpts from dozens of protest letters written by mayors, librarians, and businessmen, all expressing disbelief that the United States would terminate a service so mutually beneficial [35]. Similar reactions were recorded in Cape Town and sent on to Washington by Winifred Linderman. In view of the subsequent history of South Africa, one journalist's letter is particularly poignant: "Does 'Washington' fully realize what such a library means in a town like ours, where, strangely enough, much prejudice is still alive against everything American? The Americans themselves cannot be aware of this prejudice, since it is of course not shown to them personally.. . . I really hate to see the Library closed, not only because it was valuable to me in my profession as a trade journalist, but because I feel, that in South Africa with her growing isolationist tendency, institutions of this kind are much needed.. [47]. Despite the protests of readers as well as librarians, the books were packed up and the buildings closed. Through the exertions of influential local citizens and officials (not the State Department), homes were found for the collections in the Public Library of Victoria, the Public Library of New South Wales, and in the University of Cape Town Library. Helen Wessells and Winifred Linderman came home in 1947, and Mary Par- sons in 1948, after she had spent a year working for the government of New Zealand on the establishment of the Library School in Wellington. While the budget cuts of 1947 represented only a temporary reversal in the growth of the United States Information Service, they presaged significant changes in information policy resulting from the Cold War. After energetic lobbying by Benton and some congressmen who were concerned about distorted perceptions of America abroad, the Smith- Mundt Act was passed in 1948, permitting the reopening within the next few years of many overseas libraries with a mandate similar to that of the old OWI facilities, namely, to give full and fair information to "promote
INFORMATION FOR THE ALLIES 345 better understanding of the United States among the peoples of the world" [48, p. 4]. By the early years of the Eisenhower administration (which in 1953 made the service an independent agency), such straightforward delivery of information was no longer deemed sufficient. Russian accusations of American racism, for example, became more difficult to answer overseas if a "full and fair" picture of Southern segregation were to be presented exactly as it existed at that time. In 1951, therefore, claiming that "the aggressive policies of the Soviet Union have compelled the information program to develop a more dynamic content" [49, p. 3], the State Department adopted a new infor- mation policy; henceforth the "full and fair picture" was to be replaced by a purely favorable view of America described euphemistically as "more purposeful information and news designed to affect the attitude of a huge and diversified foreign audience" [50, p. 79]. With this rees- tablishment of public relations goals as its top priority, U.S. government information policy had in a sense come full circle: the mandate of the U.S. Information Agency in the McCarthy period was not far removed from that of the Creel committee in World War I. The State Department's Cold War deemphasis of the "full and fair picture," and of the type of information services upon which such a picture depended, marked the end of an era in U.S. overseas libraries.9 The legacy of the old OWI "truth squad" was more enduring, however, in Australian, New Zealand, and South African libraries, whose present highly developed models of information service owe much to early OWI examples, and whose initial public support was so actively stimulated by the advocacy of the OWI librarians. In a larger historical sense, the contributions of Wessells, Parsons, and Linderman constitute only a very small portion of a huge wartime exportation of American expertise; what gives their work a larger significance in the history of librarianship is its effective demonstration that the management and, above all, the delivery of information is as vital a component of a strong democracy as free access to the information itself. REFERENCES 1. Bryant, Mary Nell. "English Language Publication and the British Traditional Market Agreement." Library Quarterly 49 (October- 1979): 371-98. 2. Stevenson, William. A Man Called Intrepid. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1976. 9. For a scathing commentary on the type of' service rendered by U.S. Information Libraries abroad fourteen years after the implementation of the 1951 policy, see [51, p. 91].
346 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 3. Richards, Pamela Spence. "Gathering Enemy Scientific Information in Wartime: The OSS and the Periodical Republication Program."Journal of Library History 16 (Spring 1981): 257. 4. James, Henry. "The Role of the Information Library in the United States Interna- tional Information Program." Library Quarterly 23 (April 1953): 75-114. 5. Mock, James, and Larson, Cedric. Words That Won the War. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1939. 6. Larson, Cedric. "Books across the Sea: Libraries of the O.W.1." Wilson Library Bulletin 25 (February 1951): 433-36. 7. Cory, J. M. "Libraries and the O.W.I." A.LA. Bulletin 37 (February 1943): 38-41. 8. Winkler, Allan. The Politics of Propaganda. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1978. 9. Wessells, Helen. Interview. New York City, July 4, 1980. 10. Warde, Beatrice. "Books as Ammunition." Wilson Library Bulletin 18 (October 1943): 127-29. 11. Heindel, Richard. "The American Library Abroad." Library Quarterly 16 (April 1946): 93-107. 12. Heindel, Richard. "U.S. Libraries Overseas." Survey Graphic 35 (May 1946): 162-65. 13. Heindel, Richard. "London Library in Review." O.W.I. Outpost News (November 1945): 36. 14. Hartwell, Wayne. "An American Corner in Bombay." Library Journal 71 (June 15, 1946): 879-88. 15. "U.S. Information Libraries Abroad." U.S. Department of State Bulletin 9 (October 2, 1943): 223, 228-29. 16. Borchardt, D. H., and Horacek,J. I. Librarianship in Australia, New Zealand and Oceania. Rushcutters Bay, N.S.W.: Pergamon Press, 1975. 17. Taylor, Loree E. South African Libraries. Hamden, Conn.: Archon, 1967. 18. Pitt, S. A., and Ferguson, Milton J. Memorandum: Libraries in the Union of South Africa, Rhodesia and Kenya Colony. New York: Carnegie Corporation, 1929. 19. South Africa. Interdepartmental Committee on the Libraries of the Union of South Africa. Report. Cape Town: Cape Times, 1937. 20. Munn, R., and Pitt, E. R. Australian Libraries: A Survey of Conditions and Suggestions for Their Improvement. Melbourne: ACER, 1935. 21. Balnaves, John, and Biskup, Peter. Australian Libraries. London: Clive Bingley, 1966. 22. Munn, R., and Barr, J. New Zealand Libraries: A Survey of Conditions and Suggestions for Their Improvement. Christchurch: Libraries Association of New Zealand, 1934. 23. MacCullum, Mungo. "National Circus." Sydney Sun (July 8, 1946), p. 4. 24. Williams, Chester, to Wessells, Helen, July 29, 1943. Personal files of Helen Wessells, New York City. 25. Williams, Chester. "U.S. Information Libraries." Special Libraries 35 (May-June 1944): 170-75. 26. "U.S. Library Popular with Seekers of Fact." Melbourne Herald (June 30, 1947), p. 3. 27. Australian Institute of Librarians. Proceedings: Fifth Conference, Hobart, April 1946, and Other Papers. Melbourne: Australian Institute of Librarians, 1947. 28. Vincent, Ida. "Public Libraries in New South Wales, 1935-1980." Librazy Quarterly 51 (October 1981): 363-79. 29. Australian Institute of Librarians. Proceedings: Sixth Conference, Sydney, October 1947 and Other Papers. Sydney: Australian Institute of Librarians, 1949. 30. Encyclopedia of Library and Information Science. S.v. "France, Library and Information Science," by Eric de Grolier. 31. "'Mary Prescott Parsons." Newv Zealand Libraries 35 (February 1972): 45-46 (Obituary).
INFORMATION FOR THE ALLIES 347 32. American Legation, Wellington. Report No. 162. Mimeographed. July 5, 1946. Per- sonal files of Helen Wessells, New York City. 33. Sergeant, Howland. "The Role of the Library in the Overseas Information Program." U.S. Department of State Bulletin 18 (June 27, 1948): 842-44. 34. Canby, Henry, to Davis, Elmer, July 13, 1945. Personal files of Helen Wessells, New York City. 35. Suitland, Maryland. National Archives Annex. Consular Posts Records (Record Group 84). Correspondence of the American Consulate, Melbourne, 1945. 36. "Miss Linderman Had All the Answers." Cape Argus (July 22, 1947), p. 2. 37. Linderman, Winifred. Interview. New York City, January 28, 1981. 38. Malan, S. I., to Richards, Pamela Spence, March 25, 1981. 39. Immelman, R. F. M., to Linderman, Winifred,July 1, 1947. Personal files of Winifred Linderman, New York City. 40. Varley, Douglas, to Linderman, Winifred, July 1, 1947. Personal files of Winifred Linderman, New York City. 41. Taylor, L. E. "School and Children's Libraries in South Africa." Wilson Library Bulletin 22 (October 1947): 137-40, 43. 42. Immelman, R. F. M. The Cape Branch (S.A.L.A.): The First Twenty-Five Years. Cape Town: Cape Branch (S.A.L.A.), 1963. 43. Kingsford, R. J. L. The Publishers Association: 1896-1946. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1970. 44. Hamilton, Edward, and Darrow, Whitney. "A Report on Publishing and Bookselling in Australia and New Zealand submitted to the Book Publishers Bureau." Mimeo- graphed. October 1945. Personal files of Helen Wessells, New York City. 45. "Benton Revamping Information Body." New York Times (August 1, 1947), p. 3. 46. Evans, Luther. "United States Libraries Abroad." Department oj State Record 3 (May- June 1951): 6-1 1. 47. Alexander, F. L., to Linderman, Winifred, July 6, 1947. Personal files of Winifred Linderman, New York City. 48. U.S. Congress, House. U.S. Information and Educational Exchange Act. H.R. 3342, 80th Cong., 2d sess., 1948. 49. U.S. Department of State. The Campaign of Truth. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Of fice, 195 1. 50. James, Henry. "The Role of the Information Library in the United States Interna- tional Information Program." Library Quarterly 23 (April 1953): 75-114. 51. Asheim, Lester. Librarianship in Developing Countries. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1965.