The Educational Change Game MARY LEE BUNDY This approach is particularly recommended for faculty who are unsatisfied with their present programs, have reached stalemates in their efforts to make change and who are now willing to try almost anything.1 THIS "GAME" is designed to overcome the typical problems which confront educational change: - Curriculum decisions are made divorced from the goal of prepar- ing a professional worker and therefore amount to speculation, territorial fighting and seldom escape from the confines of tradition. - Responsibility is not real; i.e., no one is ultimately responsible for the quality of the student's preparation. - Significant issues are not raised - for instance, white middle class values and traditions are transmitted as though universal and equally applicable. - Content stands no real tests of relevancy or usefulness. - Planning is limited because the school does not have the range of faculty talents needed to make change. Miss Bundy is a Professor in the School of Library and Information Services at the University of Maryland. This article originally appeared in the Urban Information Specialist Program: First Year, presented by James Welbourne, Director, School of Library and Information Services, University of Maryland, June, 1971. 31
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP - Decisions regarding faculty appointments are not related to agreed-upon objectives and, therefore, tend to be made on an ad hoc basis. - Admission criteria are not reviewed; curriculum change, there- fore, presupposes work role performance requires only gradua- tion from college, any type of subject background and that race and community background are irrelevant. This model for change incorporates factors we have found to make for success in the Urban Information Specialist Program. The key factor is: Speciality development based upon an identification with a client group and a type of work role. Rules of the Game To begin, the following are "givens": (a.) The time to be allowed for this program is 36 hours, two academic semesters and a summer session, (b.) Only full time students will enter the program, (c.) Students may enter the program in the fall and spring semesters, (d.) There will be a general core of 12 hours; a specialty core of 12 hours; and 12 hours of advanced work in the specialty, (e.) The faculty-student ratio will be ten students for each full time faculty member. Optionah All resources of the school will be divided in proportion to the number of students being educated - library materials, secre- tarial assistance, etc. ALL DECISIONS INCLUDING THESE GIVENS ARE POTENTIALLY REVERSIBLE AS THE GAME PROCEEDS Players in the Game and the Stakes Each member of the faculty should agree to trying this approach. The group should reach an agreement to proceed with it at least up to some agreed upon point. Specialty group "stakes" are the number of students they are prepared to educate. This gives them their right to resources and to decide what the nature of the instruction will be. Directions for Playing The game can be played over varying periods of time; it is recom- mended that Stages One-Four be accomplished within a short period 32
The Educational Change Game of time so that effort can be put into the general core as other work proceeds. A coordinator should probably be assigned to keep the program in motion. Groups may elect their own chairman, representatives to larger groups meetings, etc. A method for reaching agreements must be decided upon. It is hoped that the group will move toward con- sensus rather than remaining dependent upon the vote. One objective of this approach is to help groups become "task oriented" as soon as possible. It is strongly recommended that records be kept of what transpires during the playing of the game, including using individual "diary" records of faculty members. These records could be invaluable to others undertaking the same task. Stage One: CHOICE OF WORK ROLE The game begins by each faculty member making two individual choices: The client community with which he most identifies and one of the following work roles: Information Interpreter, Information Processor, Information Manager. Client communities can be variously defined at this stage - chem- ists, high school students, etc. One of the tasks of the groups will be to develop these work roles in a specific context, but in general, they may be viewed as an expan- sion of the traditional reference, cataloging and management roles to include the handling of information rather than a primary book and bibliographic orientation. Stage Two: SPECIALTY GROUPING This is the most difficult and crucial step - the decision as to what will constitute the various specialties. It is done by examining the various faculty choices and arriving at what seems to be a realistic number and types of groupings. It involves formation of a group to include like interests. If a group is too large, it may mean splitting into parts. At this stage, the following kinds of questions should also enter: What will be the demands from the field of practice for particular types of specialists? Where does the need lie in terms of unserved client groups? In making these judgments, look to the future. Have a positive view of the role of library education in shaping the profes- 33
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP sion and of the role the library profession can play in society. Con- front the issue of social responsibility openly. One or another faculty competency may not translate into a spe- cialty. For instance, a school may have one specialist in a highly tech- nical area where expansion of his specialty would not be warranted in terms of the faculty additions necessary and the likely demand for professionals in this area. A faculty member could function independ- ently as a supporting service staff member, but it is highly desirable for each member to be a member of one or another specialty group. An example of the type of groupings which might emerge would be: A management information specialty concerned primarily with the management of large-scale information services for government and industry; an information interpreter work role in relation to high school clients largely middle class (an emphasis to be on media); an information interpreter role in relation to the urban poor. A critical question, of course, remains. Every school cannot provide specialization in all needed areas. And should not there still be simply a general librarian prepared? Our answer would be that we must move beyond the stage where students take a host of introductory courses, but never do develop any degree of specialization. If properly devised, there can still be considerable individual development, even after the student has elected his specialty choice. Stage Three: SPECIALTY ANALYSIS Once the groups are formed, they then go to work on making initial judgments in the following areas: 1. Nature of the tasks people in this specialty should be able to perform. 2. What people need to know to perform these tasks. 3. What characteristics, personal and educational and other ex- periences students should have upon entry. 4. What content and abilities should the program provide. 5. What particular teaching methods and approaches are desirable. (See the attached listing of the Urban Information Specialist Program as an example of what is involved.) Preferably during this stage, but no later than Stage Six, each group should form a field advisory committee composed of knowledgeable 34
The Educational Change Game and affected persons, librarians in the field working in the area, mem- bers of the client community or community leaders, students who have an interest in this area. This committee should work with the group through the remainder of the game. Resource consultants can also be employed by the groups as they consider one or another problem or issue. Stage Four: DEVELOPMENT OF THE COMMON CORE Each group now sends a representative to form a group to work on the general core. Theoretically, the core will consist of these ele- ments which are found to be common to all specialties. But readjust- ments may grow out of group dialogue on this issue. Development of the common core should proceed concurrently with specialty activities. Teachers for the core will be supplied by each specialty group on varying bases - to teach a course, lecture on a sub- ject, etc. The object here is for the specialties to gain the advantage of sharing. The core relieves the specialty group of having to offer ele- ments they either are not prepared to offer or which would deplete their faculty resources. Stage Five: BARTERING As planning continues, groups now look to sharing between spe- cialties, such as having a common course, lending a faculty member to a group in exchange for another. For instance, an information in- terpreter role specialty might want to have their students have more work related to the design of information services than is to be pro- vided in the common core. They would turn to that specialty group for faculty expertise. A course might be developed for the interpreter group, oriented toward their particular interests, or it might be de- cided that their students would take a course in the other specialty. We have used the term "course" throughout because it defines time dimensions. But do not be limited to this traditional set. Consider a range of possibilities - individual and group field experiences, major professional and research projects, imaginative use of consultants, varia- tions in the time allotted to the mastery of particular contents. If your specialty involves moving into uncharted territory, you may wish to adopt a "discovery" investigative mode throughout the educational experience. 35
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP Stage Six: REALIZATION This phase involves further study, bringing in experts, faculty field trips, etc. It should move toward fairly concrete plans. Student selec- tion criteria should be specified and plans for recruitment of students worked out. Needs for new faculty based upon the identification of competencies required should be defined. At this stage, some of the original game decisions may be changed in the light of group goals and feasibility. Evidence can be collected to support proposals if changes are going to involve review by a university group or require additional funding. Some general school decisions may also develop out of this plan- ning, such as a requirement for field experience. We recommend, however, that groups be given the maximum of flexibility in order to respond to their particular client and work role commitments. For instance, one specialty might call for a good deal of course work out- side the school, but another specialty may not. The essential task for each group is the planning of the educational preparation of x people in its particular specialty. Stage Seven: TESTING OUT A means should be devised for a "mock run." Students coming fresh to the endeavor can be asked to look at the total program which would evolve and asked to respond to how these various choices would seem to affect them. In these and other ways, the "kinks" can be ironed out of the plans and unanticipated consequences identified. Stage Eight: IMPLEMENTATION Finally, the faculty of the school must reach decisions about how to implement their revised curriculum. They may wish to develop a three-year plan, including the phasing out of the existing program. One or another specialty might run on an experimental basis before the others begin. We did not include a doctoral component in this scheme, but it could be incorporated by having each specialty consider itself to have a research arm. The various specialties could cooperate to form a com- mon doctoral experience as they did with the general core. Prospective game players are advised that this game has never been played before; it might be better to wait until someone else tries it first. 36
The Educational Change Game Urban Information Specialist Program A Specialty Analysis To Illustrate the Types of Decisions to be Made I. The Client Community The Inner City Poor II. Type of Work Role Information Interpreter III. Tasks to be Performed Gain access to information using a range of means and sources Analyze and interpret information from a client perspective Disseminate information to client communities using a range of media Design and operate non-conventional information services for client groups Prepare special information products Teach people about the information potential and give them information skills Be an active force in encouraging group use of information in goal setting and problem solving IV. Knowledge and Abilities Needed Community knowledge Client group understanding and rapport Behavioral understanding of the urban situation Specialized urban knowledge (housing, etc.) Information skills and abilities Related skills V. Type of Student Life experience in the inner city Working experience in the city in a leadership capacity Problem solving ability Social commitment Motivation to learn 37
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP VI. Instructional Content (Core) Information problem solving Dissemination skills Design of information services Investigative skills Future skills Legal understanding Organizing and teacher skills (Specialties still experimental) VII. Instructional Methods Problem solving approach Case approach Field experience VIII. Faculty Competencies Research methods Reference Information center design Law Media Futures approach Urban information The Critical Elements Do not remove these elements; Do not stray from this path START ELEMENTS Recognition of the need for change Willingness to try this approach PATH I. Specialize NAME A WORK ROLE CHOICE Re}ate to a client community Relate to work roles II* Get community, professional and GROUP BY SPECIALTIES student involvement Take a long term view Be socially responsive 38
The Educational Change Game III. Assume educational responsibilities DO SPECIALTY ANALYSIS Analyze tasks, requisite knowledge, relevant student characteristics, content, methods Build from the specific to the FIND A COMMON CORE general Negotiate, cooperate, struggle to BARTER fulfill educational commitments VI., VIL, VIH PLAN, TEST, ARRANGE TO Build a total program capable of IMPLEMENT realization FINISH A powerful, dynamic workable educational plan These cards are available to everyone. Individuals or groups may put these cards on the table when they feel the situation calls for it. If a card is played the faculty must then meet to discuss the issue. Faculty may wish to add other prospect cards before starting the game. PENALTIES - Your work role is too tied to existing practice in libraries; it proves to be irrelevant or of little value to the client group - You remain too book and bibliographic oriented; your work role is largely irrelevant - You fail to relate your work role to important needs of your client group ; your work role serves no important purpose - You do not get out of the traditional "set" of library education; you never leave start - You get bogged down in the mechanics and rituals of your plan; you lose the purpose - You do not bring your advisory committee in early and keep them in- volved; you fail to learn from them and may not have their support when you need it - You do not deal realistically with such related questions as financial re- sources; you might as well be back at start - Your expectancies are too low; you are not willing to fight; your students pay 39
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP - You do not learn to articulate your point of view; you are not understood - You do not tolerate the ideas of others; they will not tolerate yours - You are not willing to learn; you become obsolete // you incur any of the first five penalties and do not overcome them, you are out of the game! OBSTACLES * - Your advisory committee cannot work together - Your dean begins to feel he is losing control and starts to sabotage efforts - Your present students rebel because of the amount of time the faculty is spending on the game and away from their current instructional responsi- bilities - Your present students become alarmed that the new program will make them dinosaurs - Student "radicals" demand more of a say in the game - One or two individuals delay progress - Internal group dissension delays progress - Groups engage in continual fight over resources - You run into policies of the graduate school they are not willing to change for you - An external curriculum committee does not approve of your plan; cau- tions you to go slow - The university administration refuses a funding request CHANCE - A funding source looking for an innovative program in library education comes along and gives you money - A key member of a group leaves - A severe financial recession sets in, necessitating tremendous cuts in bud- gets REWARDS - Groups find they have gotten a new "set" on problems of library edu- cation - Groups prove capable of coming together to solve common problems * Warning: Game players are cautioned that if several of these factors are operative at once, that is, if there is a highly unfavorable external and in- ternal climate, prospects for success are dismal. Faculty may have to employ unusual strategies. 40
The Educational Change Game - The faculty finds new ways to cope with its poor teachers, and "goof offs" - Longstanding personality differences are minimized - Individual faculty members find new potentials in themselves; take on a new teaching lease - Students become proud to be in change oriented school - Client group contacts help find promising students - Advisory groups lend political support when needed - Exciting content is introduced into the curriculum - Standards are raised - Priorities are agreed upon, future decisions can be made in this frame- work - Specialities involving differing cultural value orientations, commitments, content and methods, learn to co-exist; mutual respect begins to develop - The school is now ready to move into educational preparation for viable, socially responsive work roles for the future HOLE CARDS Hole cards are only for those groups electing an urban poor speciality. These groups face particular problems because of lack of understanding on the part of members of the white dominant system; lack of real commitment to change social conditions; the problems of adjusting technical expertise into ghetto terms ; and racism. To give them a "fair chance" we have devised spe- cial help. Groups should contact the Urban Information Specialist Program directly for Ace Cards. To receive a card they must communicate that they are a genuine "people" oriented group. Critical Information We have tried to anticipate what lies before the game players. We have controlled ourselves; we have not made you recognize your social responsi- bilities in the beginning, by requiring you to have a poverty specialty and to give it all the support it needs even if other interests suffer. But our intentions are not to support the status quo even if everyone wants it. There is a danger that a faculty will take this game and use it to pro- tect the traditions of the field under the guise of innovation. In order to avoid the very real possibility that old wine will be put in new bottles, we have withheld critical information. We will distribute it to you only when you have communicated to us that you are honestly playing this game. A Special Group Incentive: The "Excellence in Game Playing Award" goes to the first group able to play any five of the reward cards. This is a financial reward to be decided by the faculty in advance of starting the game. 41
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP THE EVALUATOR Assuming you have successfully played this game and now have a dynamite program ready to begin, have attracted community and professional sup- port, have recruited the right type of student for each of your specialties, have convinced all the necessary outside groups, have found and secured all the outside talent you need and are now eager and ready to go, one more critical task confronts you. You must find an evaluator for all innovative programs must have an evaluator. (Unlike your former program which was never required to sub- mit itself to such tests.) The evaluator has secret knowledge which we can- not give you because only he holds it and that is the criteria and standards by which he proposes to evaluate you. If you have now become a group capable of accomplishing the tasks set in this game you may want to elect another alternative: Conduct your own self evaluation based on standards you derive. While this approach is very unusual, you being assumed not to be able to be objective about the results of your program, it has been tried with success by us in the urban program this year. We highly recommend it if you wish to learn and share with others as you proceed with your new program. Notes 1. Kuhn, Thomas: The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1970. Kuhn's definition of the conditions necessary for a scientific revolu- tion. 42