RESEARCH NOTES RESOURCES FOR SCHOLARS: FOUR QUAKER COLLECTIONS IN THE UNITED STATES PART 2: EARLHAM COLLEGE AND HAVERFORD COLLEGE Edited by Thomas D. Hamm' Few religious groups so relatively small in numbers have exercised the influence of the Religious Society of Friends, or Quakers. This series describes the pos- sibilities for research in the holdings of four Quaker colleges in the United States. Part 1, published in the January 1990 issue of the Library Quarterly, describes the collections at Guilford and Swarthmore colleges. In dealing with Quaker history and materials, some knowledge of Quaker terminology is vital. Among Friends, an individual congregation is known as a meeting. One or more such meetings also make up a monthly meeting, the basic business unit of the society, with the authority to receive and disown members, hold property, and solemnize marriages. Two or more monthly meetings form a quarterly meeting, a larger geographical unit, holding sessions four times a year. Several quarterly meetings, in turn, make up a yearly meeting, the final author- ity, at least before 1900, for business, doctrinal, and disciplinary affairs. At each of these levels, until the late nineteenth century, men and women held separate business meetings, each with its own officers and minutes. This segregation of the sexes was intended to remove women from a situation in which they might be intimidated by the men from participation. After 1900, most Quaker groups moved toward joint business meetings. THE FRIENDS COLLECTION AT EARLHAM COLLEGE Thomas D. Hamm The Friends Collection at Earlham College dates back to 1847, when, after almost fifteen years of planning, Indiana Yearly Meeting of 1. Archivist and assistant professor of history, Lilly Library, Earlham College, Richmond, Indiana 47374. [Library Quarterly, vol. 60, no. 2, pp. 139-1581 ? 1990 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-2519/90/6002-0003$01 .00 139
140 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Friends (Orthodox) opened a boarding school in Richmond, Indiana, for the "guarded religious education" of its youth and to provide conve- nient and suitable housing for visiting Quakers during the annual ses- sions of the yearly meeting. Originally a secondary school, the Friends Boarding School in 1859 made the transition to collegiate status and took the name of Earlham College, after the home of the eminent English Quaker minister and philanthropist Joseph John Gurney [ 1, pp. 32-33, 78-79]. From its beginning as a combination boarding school and dormitory for Quaker dignitaries, Earlham has housed a large collection of Quaker books and manuscripts. Most of these were part of the "Indiana Yearly Meeting Library of Reference Kept at the Boarding School near Rich- mond, Indiana," a group of over five hundred seventeenth- and eigh- teenth-century Quaker works donated in the 1840s by British Friends. The books purchased by the boarding school committee in 1847 for the use of the students also included a number of Friends works. All were housed with the rest of the college library in Earlham Hall, the campus's only building until the 1880s, and after that in Lindley Hall, the largest administration and classroom building on campus, until a library build- ing was erected with funding from Andrew Carnegie in 1907 [1, pp. 63, 245-461. At the time of the erection of the new library building, the college librarian was Harlow Lindley (1875-1959), who would later head both the Indiana Historical Commission and the Ohio State Archaeological and Historical Society. Lindley was also the college's American historian and apparently made the first systematic efforts on the part of anyone associated with the college to collect and preserve Quaker manuscripts and documents. It was also Lindley who apparently located the oldest records of the college, such as the minutes of the boarding school committee, and moved them into a special section of the library. Thus many of the college's most important nineteenth-century records es- caped destruction when Lindley Hall was devastated by fire in 1924 [1, pp. 240-41; 21. After Lindley left to head the Ohio Historical Society in 1928, the College Archives and the Friends Collection continued to grow, al- though with what the college's historian termed "benign neglect." In 1956 history professor Thomas D. S. Bassett was named the college's first archivist. When he left a year later, he was succeeded by Opal Thornburg (1899-1975) [3]. Thornburg was an Earlham graduate who had held a variety of administrative positions with the college. Simultaneously with assuming the position of archivist, she was given the task of writing the college's history. As a necessary prelude to her research, she located and brought
RESEARCH NOTES 141 into the library a variety of records from various offices on campus. She also undertook the first efforts to set up an organizational system for the College Archives, the Quaker manuscripts, and the Friends books and pamphlets. In addition, she supervised the installation of these holdings in the college's new Lilly Library in 1962. Today, the Friends Collection and the College Archives have five major components: the College Archives, the Friends Manuscripts Series, the Friends book and pam- phlet collection, the Indiana Yearly Meeting Archives, and the genealog- ical collection. The College Archives Most of the material in the Earlham College Archives is, by its nature, of interest primarily to those pursuing topics relating to the history of the college or to the history of higher education. Over the years, the archives have functioned as a sort of campus museum. Thus its holdings are strong on campus memorabilia-bits of charred wood from the Lindley Hall fire of 1924, china from the original dining hall, old debate team trophies, President Joseph Moore's (1868-83) inkwell. Minutes and records of various college organizations, from the board of trustees to the faculty meeting to student groups, are housed here, as are complete collections of virtually all campus publications. Some of the manuscript collections of faculty and administrators, however, do bear on larger topics, mainly because of Earlham's charac- ter as a Quaker college. The president's office files to 1924 were lost in the Lindley Hall fire, and most of those from 1925 to 1927 fell victim to the combined efforts of a janitor's canaries and a plague of rodents in the 1930s, but the files of presidents William C. Dennis (1929-46) and Thomas E. Jones (1946-58) are complete and open for research. Of particular interest in the Dennis Papers are files dealing with the enroll- ment of Japanese-Americans from the West Coast during World War II and the involvement of Dennis and other faculty and students in groups opposing American entry into the war. The Jones Papers reflect the tensions that the college experienced during the McCarthy Era. Jones built an outstanding faculty after World War II by hiring pacifist aca- demics, Quaker and non-Quaker, who, because of their position as conscientious objectors during the war, were not acceptable to most institutions. The involvement of these men and women in liberal and left-wing causes, especially antiwar and antisegregation ones, and the refusal of some students to register for the draft made for conflict with the local community and even with some Indiana Quakers. Also of significance for researchers are the personal papers of several
142 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Earlhamites housed in the Archives. Those of Joseph Moore (1832- 1905), long-time faculty member, president 1868-83, and one of the earliest Darwinian naturalists in the Midwest, are rich in material on the response of Friends to Darwinian evolution, the Civil War, and the work of northern Quakers in North Carolina during Reconstruction. Those of Barnabas Coffin Hobbs (1815-92), the college's first head and one of the most influential Quakers of his day, deal largely with his work for settlement of international disputes through mediation in the last quar- ter of the nineteenth century. A large and valuable collection is that of Allen Jay (1831-1910), one of the best-known Quaker ministers in the United States, who was associated with Earlham in a variety of adminis- trative positions. Jay's papers consist in large part of letters received when he was the first superintendent of Indiana Yearly Meeting in the 1890s, a time when Indiana Friends were moving away from traditional patterns of worship toward unprogrammed ministry. Of special interest is the large number of letters from women ministers concerning the problems they faced as pastors and in attempting to evangelize among non-Quakers. The archives also house a number of diaries and hun- dreds of individual letters of Earlham students and faculty that reflect Quaker spiritual concerns, pacifism, antislavery, efforts for women's and minority rights, work with refugees, and other social concerns. Friends Manuscripts This collection, whose line of division from the Earlham College Ar- chives is quite hazy, consists of a number of collections of papers of various Quakers and Quaker families, nearly all associated with Earlham in some way, and records of a variety of Quaker organizations, nearly all of the nineteenth or twentieth centuries. Among the largest collections is the Charles F. (1823-1916) and Rhoda M. Coffin (1826-1909) Collection. Charles was a Richmond, Indiana, banker and the clerk, or presiding officer, of Indiana Yearly Meeting from 1857 to 1884, while Rhoda was active in a host of reform causes. Their letters, scrapbooks, essays, speeches, pamphlets, and rem- iniscences are invaluable for local history, the history of Quakerism, temperance, antislavery, prison reform, and women's rights. Closely associated with the collection are smaller collections of the papers of Elijah Coffin (1798-1862) and William Hiatt Coffin (1825-1925), Charles's father and brother, respectively. A large collection of Coffin family papers complementing Earlham's holdings is in Friends Histor- ical Library at Swarthmore College. Nearly as large as the Coffin collection is the group of papers of Eli
RESEARCH NOTES 143 (1826-191 1) and Mahalah Jay (1827-1916), who were involved with Quaker education for nearly half a century. Eli Jay was one of the first historians of midwestern Quakerism, responsible for locating, inven- torying, and preserving many of the earliest records of Friends in Ohio and Indiana. Mahalah Jay was active in a number of reform causes, especially temperance and foreign missionary work. Their voluminous correspondence, essays, and speeches reflect their broad interests. Several other collections bear on nineteenth-century American Quakerism. The papers of Timothy Nicholson (1828-1924), although few, are rich in correspondence bearing on change and transformation in American Quakerism from 1870 to 1900. The diaries of David Hud- dleston (1801-90), spanning the years 1871-90, reflect the views of a plain Friend who looked askance at the changes the last quarter of the nineteenth century brought to American Quakerism and also constitute a wonderful portrait of life in rural Indiana. The journals of Elkanah Beard (1833-1905) and Lizzie Edwards (1835-1927) detail the experi- ences of their authors in work among former slaves in Mississippi and Arkansas in the 1860s. The Mordecai M. and Francis T. White Papers are valuable for information about the relocation in Indiana of slaves freed by North Carolina Quakers before the Civil War. Among other collections that bear on the involvement of Friends in the antislavery movement are a small collection of papers relating to the career of Levi Coffin (1798-1877), the so-called President of the Underground Rail- road; and a larger collection of reminiscent material of Daniel Huff (1816-99), also an active abolitionist in Coffin's village of Newport, now Fountain City, Indiana. And although Quakers are often associated with antipathy toward the arts, the papers of Marcus Mote (1817-98) reflect the career of a Quaker painter and photographer in Indiana and Ohio from the 1830s to the 1890s. Included are sketches, journals, account books, and a mass of notes accumulated by Opal Thornburg for a biography of Mote, never published, that is also housed with the collec- tion. The Friends Manuscript Series also includes several original works by Mote as well as photographs of those in other collections. Also in Friends Manuscripts are four major twentieth-century collec- tions. Esther Griffin White (1869-1954) was a Richmond journalist, politican, writer, artist, and social activist whose correspondence and clipping files reflect her varied interests. The collection is especially valuable for the light it sheds on Richmond as a center for women artists in the early twentieth century and on the women's suffrage movement in Indiana. White was one of the first women in the state to seek (albeit always without success) elected office. Another major collection is the Elbert Russell Papers. Russell (1871- 1951), an influential Old Testament scholar, was professor of Bible at
144 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Earlham (1895-1915) and later the first dean of the Duke Divinity School. Russell's career at Earlham was punctuated by an active role in local Progressive party politics, including a run for Congress in 1914, and controversy over his attempts to introduce modernist biblical study and the techniques of higher criticism into the college. His papers include several shelf feet of correspondence, the draft of Russell's auto- biography (published posthumously), and book and lecture notes. The correspondence bears on Russell's interests as an active and influen- tial Quaker, pacifist, educator, Prohibitionist, Christian Socialist, and scholar. The largest single collection at Earlham is that of Homer L. (1886- 1952) and Edna Morris (1884-1966). The Morrises were Indiana Quak- ers who were in most of the world's trouble spots from 1920 to 1945. In 1920-22 they coordinated famine relief in Germany and the Soviet Union for the American Friends Service Committee (AFSC). From 1931 to 1933 they headed the AFSC child-relief program in eastern Ken- tucky, and from 1933 to 1935 he was director of the New Deal's Subsist- ence Homestead Program. In the late 1930s, the Morrises were in Berlin, again working for the AFSC, and from 1942 to 1945 they directed the AFSC's programs in the Japanese-American internment camps. Included in the collections are correspondence, notebooks, re- ports, clippings, and photographs. The newest major collection, still arriving in the library, is the Willard Heiss Collection. Heiss (1921-88), the long-time archivist for the City of Indianapolis, also edited Abstracts of the Records of the Society of Friends in Indiana (1962-77) for the Indiana Historical Society. An indefatigable collector, he had by the time of his death built one of the best collections of Quaker historical materials in the world, emphasizing documents dealing with the migration of Southern Friends into the Old Northwest between 1800 and 1850. His papers also include extensive materials on Quaker genealogy and on the existence and location of meeting records as well as his own considerable work on behalf of peace, civil rights, and social justice in the 1950s and 1960s. Many other smaller collections are included in the Friends Manuscript Series. Unfortunately, while all are well organized, finding aids and indexes are still limited. Papers relating to a number of Quaker groups and organizations have also been deposited in the collection. Friends United Meeting (FUM), formerly known as the Five Years Meeting, the largest single interna- tional Quaker group, whose headquarters have long been in Richmond, has deposited many of its files and records. The largest of these is the Wider Ministries Papers, now microfilmed, consisting of reports and correspondence from Quaker missionaries and mission stations in Af-
RESEARCH NOTES 145 rica, Asia, and Central and South America. Also on deposit are many of the records and files of the United Society of Friends Women, formerly the Women Friends Foreign Missionary Union in America. Another very large collection is made up of files of the Associated Executive Committee for Indian Affairs from the time that it became a function of the Five Years Meeting in 1929. (Its previous records are in the Quaker Collection at Haverford College.) Another large collection in the Friends Manuscripts Series consists of the records of the Young Friends of North America, dating back to 1912. Embracing Friends of all per- suasions, its extensive files of correspondence and reports reflect the problems and concerns of Friends in the twentieth century. Spanning the line between personal and organizational papers is the Walter C. Woodward Collection. It consists of correspondence addressed to Woodward for the years 1917-20, while he edited the American Friend. Several other smaller collections are of potential research significance. The minutes of the Economy, Indiana Anti-Slavery Society are among the few surviving records of such an antislavery organization in Indiana. They span most of the 1840s. Recently acquired is a typescript of the minutes of the Henry County (Ind.) Female Anti-Slavery Society, the oldest known surviving records of any women's organization in the state. Also in the collection is a volume of the men's minutes of Indiana Yearly Meeting of Anti-Slavery Friends, which split from the main Indiana body in 1843 because of its reservations about the immediate abolition movement, and existed until 1857. In the last two decades, several important microfilm collections have been acquired. These include Early Quaker Writings, the Swarthmoor Manuscripts edited by Geoffrey Nuttall, and Quaker Women's Diaries of the Eighteenth and Nineteenth Centuries. A grant from the Newberry Library a few years ago funded the microfilming of manuscripts relating to Wayne County, Indiana, and Indiana Quakerism in the holdings of the Indiana Historical Society. Also in the collection are microfilms of records of monthly meetings of Friends in New England and New York, and all of the records of the Evangelical Friends Alliance-Eastern Re- gion, formerly Ohio Yearly Meeting, now housed at Malone College in Canton, Ohio. Microfilmed abstracts of vital statistics from English Qua- ker records before 1837 have just been acquired, while arrangements are underway to acquire microfilms of North Carolina Quaker records. Published Works The nucleus of the Friends Collection were the Early Quaker books donated by English Friends to Indiana Yearly Meeting as a reference
146 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY library in 1848. Most of these are still in the collection. The next significant addition came in 1906, when the large collection of Joseph S. Elkinton of Philadelphia was sold by his heirs to the college for $1,500 on the condition that it be kept intact. In 1930, after the Friends Library in Philadelphia was broken up, over seven hundred rare works were acquired. Still more books came in 1958, when many volumes were transferred from the old Western Yearly Meeting Reference Library in Plainfield, Indiana [4]. Today, the collection consists of about twelve thousand bound vol- umes, in addition to many thousand more pamphlets. Policy calls for the acquisition of all works by or about Quakers. Some gaps remain in the collection, mostly pre-1800 and minor Quaker works. For the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, the collection is virtually complete for the Orthodox and Gurneyite wings of American Quakerism, very strong for Hicksite and Evangelical Friends and for British Quakers, and spotty for non-English-speaking Quakers. All seventeenth-century works are housed in the vault, as are some rare items from later periods, such as Anthony Benezet's autographed copy of the first edition of John Woolman's Journal. The rest of the collection is housed in open stacks, accessible whenever the library is open. Included are bound photocopies of some manuscript items. Printed volumes in the collection include hundreds of biographical works-memoirs, diaries, journals. The collection of doctrinal works is extensive, including hundreds of yet-uncataloged pamphlets. There is also an extensive collection of published yearly meeting minutes and proceedings that is almost complete for Orthodox and Gurneyite Friends, with some gaps for the Hicksite and Wilburite-Conservative bodies. Earlham's collection of Quaker periodicals is also extensive. Again, it is strongest for Orthodox and Gurneyite Friends, with complete runs of the Fiends' Review, the Christian Worker, the American Friend, the Evangel- ical Friend, the London Friend, and the Friends Quarterly Examiner. Only a few issues are lacking to complete sets of the Friends' Intelligencer and the Philadelphia Friend. Also in the collection are complete sets of many short-lived periodicals significant for historians of Quakerism, such as the Miscellaneous Repository (1828-33) and Friends' Expositor (I1887-92) of Mount Pleasant, Ohio; the Western Friend (1848-49) of Cincinnati; the Southern Friend (1864-65) of Richmond, Virginia; the Freedmen's Record (1865-66) of Richmond, Indiana; and the Herald of Peace (1868-69) of Chicago. Also in the collection are microfilms of the two earliest Indiana antislavery periodicals, the Protectionist and the Free Labor Advocate and Anti-Slavery Chronicle, published in Newport, now Fountain City, in 1840
RESEARCH NOTES 147 and from 1841 to 1848, respectively. The complete runs were assembled by combining files at Earlham with those in the Indiana State Library. Indiana Yearly Meeting Archives Quakers have always been a record-keeping people. Since the first Quakers settled in Indiana in 1806, records have been kept at every level of organization: preparative, monthly, quarterly, and yearly meetings. Earlham is now the repository for the Archives of Indiana Yearly Meet- ing of Friends. The archives are especially significant because this meet- ing not only at one time included all Quakers west of central Ohio, but also because for much of the nineteenth century and part of the twen- tieth, it was the largest yearly meeting of Friends in the world. Today it includes Friends in parts of western Ohio, eastern Indiana, and Michi- gan. All existing meetings are encouraged to deposit past records regu- larly, and the archives become the home for records of meetings that have been "laid down," the Quaker term for dissolved. The earliest books in the collection, those of West Branch Monthly Meeting in Miami County, Ohio, date from 1807. Records in the yearly meeting archives are at four levels: 1. Preparative meetings.-Records at this level are limited. They con- cern almost entirely business and disciplinary matters reported for dis- position to the monthly meetings. 2. Monthly meetings.-Monthly meeting records include books of births and deaths; marriage records; records of transfers of membership; financial records; and minutes of the men's and women's business meet- ings, which were held separately in most parts of the yearly meeting until the 1880s. Minutes note marriages, membership transfers, committee and official appointments, and the reception and disownment of mem- bers. They are invaluable for students of demography, the history of the family, women's history, and, of course, nineteenth-century Quakerism. 3. Quarterly meetings.-Records at this level usually consist of minutes of business meetings relating to financial matters, the establishment and dissolution of monthly meetings, and matters generally that reached beyond the level of the local monthly meetings. Of special interest are the reports from the various quarterly meetings' Committees on the Concerns of the People of Color, which in some cases kept their own record books. These, beginning in some cases in the 1830s, are a valu- able resource for the experience of African-Americans in the Midwest. 4. Yearly meetings.-The records of the annual sessions of Indiana Yearly Meeting and its official bodies begin with its establishment in 1821 and run to the present day. They include a wide variety of records.
148 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Until 1903, men and women held separate yearly meetings for busi- ness. The men's minutes were always published, but the women's min- utes are usually accessible only in manuscript. The minutes reflect the varied concerns of Friends in Indiana: statistics on membership, educa- tion, and the use of alcohol and tobacco; committee on reports on temperance, peace, and antislavery concerns; and numerous doctrinal exhortations. Equally useful are the minutes of the Meeting for Suffer- ings or, as it was later known, the Representative Meeting. It functioned as the equivalent of a yearly meeting executive committee. Its records are valuable for information concerning petitions and statements on slavery, the rights of free blacks and American Indians and woman's suffrage, and the response of Indiana Orthodox Friends to doctrinal change and schism. The minutes of the Yearly Meeting of Ministers and Elders are informative for changing views and conceptions of the nature of Quaker ministry. The yearly meeting holdings also include the min- utes of various standing committees. Of greatest interest for scholarly research are the minutes of the Committee on the Concerns of the People of Color and the minutes of the Temperance Committee. Other miscellaneous books and manuscripts have also become part of the yearly meeting holdings. In certain Quaker communities, the local chapter of the Woman's Christian Temperance Union (WCTU) func- tioned effectively as an auxiliary of the local meeting, and some of their records have found their way into the archives. Records of local Quaker women's organizations, particularly missionary groups, are numerous. Also part of the collection are the papers of Francis W. Thomas (1823- 1909), a minister of Spiceland, Indiana. They consist of diaries, corre- spondence, manuscript sermons, and some essays on Quaker doctrinal subjects. Genealogical Collections Earlham has one of the largest collections of Quaker family histories in the world. Its core is a collection of about eleven hundred volumes donated in 1986 by Willard Heiss. About two-thirds of these are original publications, with the rest being bound photocopies. Perhaps a quarter of these are unpublished works, a few even handwritten. Some are multivolume compilations dealing with a number of families. Probably the most impressive of these is the Webster-Parry Edna Harvey Joseph Collection, which represents nearly a century of work on hundreds of American Quaker Families. Various manuscript genealogical materials are housed in the vault. Some collections fill several boxes. Others are individual items such as Quaker marriage certificates or family Bible records.
RESEARCH NOTES 149 The Future In the near future, the Friends Collection and the College Archives will be housed in a new wing of Lilly Library. It will quadruple the space available. Plans are also being made for a more aggressive collections and acquisition policy that will emphasize the history of Friends in the Midwest. Policies Access to most of the books and periodicals is in open stacks, available whenever the library is open to the public (Monday-Friday, 8 A.M. to midnight, Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sunday, 10 A.M. to midnight during the school year; Monday-Friday 8 A.M. to 4:30 P.M. when classes are not in session). The collections are in the charge of the college archivist, whose hours vary according to his teaching schedule. It is always advisable to call ahead when the use of manuscripts or rare books is anticipated. REFERENCES 1. Thornburg, Opal. Earlham: The Sto?y of the College, 1847-1962. Richmond, Ind.: Earl- ham College Press, 1963. 2. Lindley, Harlow. Curriculum Vitae. Personnel Files, College Archives, Earlham Col- lege, Richmond, Indiana. 3. "First Annual Report of the Archivist-Historian." June 2, 1959. Annual Report File, College Archives, Earlham College, Richmond, Indiana. 4. Thornburg, Opal. "Earlham's Quaker Collection." Quaker History 54 (Autumn 1965): 105-6.