THE SCHOMBURG CENTER FOR RESEARCH IN BLACK CULTURE, NEW YORK PUBLIC LIBRARY5 Howard Dodson6 History The flurry of activities by artists and scholars familiarly known as "The Harlem Renaissance" gave impetus to two significant cultural events in 1925. The New Negro: An Interpretation was published, with its editor, Alain Locke, stating in his foreword that "Whoever wishes to see the Negro in his essential traits, in the full perspective of his achievement and possibilities, must seek the enlightenment of that self-portraiture which the present developments of Negro culture are offering" [ 1, p. ix]. The other event was the opening of the Division of Negro Literature, History and Prints in the 135th Street Branch of the New York Public Library (NYPL); it was to serve as a repository for materials docu- menting Black achievements and to provide a fertile foundation for the propagation of future contributions to Black history. This special library was the forerunner of the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, which stands today as one of the world's foremost facilities dedicated to the preservation and interpretation of Black resource mate- rials. From its inception, the Schomburg Center has played a unique role in Black life because of its dual role as a repository and as a center for Black 5. I wish to acknowledge the assistance of Roberta J. Yancy in the preparation of this essay. 6. Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, 515 Lenox Avenue, New York, New York 10037.
RESOURCES FOR SCHOLARS 75 intellectual and artistic activities. Its location in Harlem gave added significance to this role, for by the early 1920s Harlem had become the "Black capital," home to an amalgam of Blacks from various parts of the United States, the Caribbean, and Africa. Economic opportunities, espe- cially during World War I, increased opportunities for home ownership; simultaneously, literacy and race consciousness were expanding within the Black community. The community's ranks of artists and scholars were also growing, and their creative output was touching on new themes and taking new directions. The influences on their work had progressed from the dialectical poetry and short stories of Paul Laurence Dunbar to the intense philosophical and social writings of W. E. B. Du Bois. Political consciousness and race pride were heightened by the activities of the NAACP, the Urban League, and the preachments of Marcus Garvey. More outlets for literary efforts were becoming available through Black newspapers and magazines, such as the NAACP's Crisis under the editorship of Du Bois; the Urban League's Opportunity, edited by Charles Johnson; and the Messenger, edited by A. Philip Randolph. Sterling Brown, writing about the concerns of Black poets from 1914 to 1936, perhaps captured those of other Black literary figures as well: "(1) a discovery of Africa as a source of race pride; (2) a use of Negro heroes and heroic episodes from American history; (3) propaganda of protest; (4) a treatment of the Negro masses with more understanding and less apology; and (5) franker and deeper self revelation" [2, p. 61]. Writing during that period sprang from social concerns as well as literary inter- ests, and early anthologies of Black writings covered a broad spectrum ranging from poetry to fiction to social and political criticism. Interest in literary affairs predated the activities that flourished in the 1920s and led to book collecting and the organization of intellectual societies. A Black literary society was organized in Philadelphia as early as 1828, and the New York Clarkson Society began in 1829. The Ameri- can Negro Academy, founded in 1897 in Washington, D.C., by theolo- gian and scholar Alexander Crummell, brought together some of the nation's leading Black intellectuals for "the promotion of literature, science and art, the fostering of higher education, the publication of scholarly work and the defense of the Negro against vicious assault" [3, p. 17]. John Edward Bruce and Arthur A. Schomburg were instrumen- tal in founding the Negro Society for Historical Research in New York City in 1911, marking the first time that African, West Indian, and Afro- American scholars joined forces in a single organization. Carter G. Woodson organized the Association for the Study of Negro Life and History in 1915 to continue the work of the Negro Society for Historical Research.
76 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY As Harlem became the focal point for Black artistic and intellectual activities, the 135th Street Branch Library took on a new dimension. The NYPL had opened the branch in 1905 in a neighborhood that was predominantly Jewish; within fifteen years, it was half Black. Ernestine Rose, who had developed services in other ethnic neighborhoods, was assigned to adapt the library's resources to meet the needs of the chang- ing community. In 1921 the branch began to sponsor annual art exhibi- tions planned by committees including cultural leaders such as Du Bois, James Weldon Johnson, and Schomburg. It also sponsored lectures and book discussions. By 1924, however, the library was facing a serious dilemma. The community's heightened interest in materials by and about Black people had begun to take a heavy toll on its limited resources. To meet this challenge, Rose called a community meeting in December, at which a citizen's committee was created and Schomburg, Johnson, Hubert H. Harrison, and John Nail were elected officers. The group recommended that the rarest books be set aside as a reference library. Gifts and loans for this special collection came from the private libraries of noted Black collectors, including Louise Latimer, George Young, Charles D. Martin, Harrison, Bruce, and Schomburg. At the formal opening of the Division of Negro Literature, History and Prints on May 8, 1925, Rose noted the existence of similar collec- tions in the Library of Congress, the libraries of institutions such as Tuskegee Institute and Howard University, certain large city reference libraries, and a few private libraries. She predicted, however, that the collection at the 135th Street Library would become one of the largest and most valuable in the world because of its location in Harlem, "the greatest negro city in the world," and because it would make materials "available equally to scholars, to the man in the street and to school children of all races" [4, p. 2]. As a result of the publicity surrounding the opening of the division and the efforts of Charles S. Johnson, L. Hollingsworth Wood, and Eugene Kinckle Jones of the National Urban League, the Carnegie Corporation provided a grant of $10,000 for the NYPL to purchase Schomburg's personal collection. This acquisition brought the division immediate international stature. Schomburg continued to augment the collection and also served as an unpaid consultant to the library, addressing staff meetings and assisting young scholars. A second Carnegie grant in 1932 made it possible for him to be hired as curator of the Negro Division, a position that he held until his death in 1938. In 1940, the library was renamed the Schomburg Collection of Negro Literature, History and Prints in his honor. Under the collection's first staff members, Catherine Allen Latimer and Schom- burg, holdings were expanded and organized. This work was continued
RESOURCES FOR SCHOLARS 77 by Lawrence D. Reddick, the noted historian and lecturer, who was appointed to succeed Schomburg in 1939. Reddick also initiated lecture series, organized exhibitions and programs to mark special occasions, and began the annual presentation of the respected Schomburg Collec- tion's Honor Roll in Race Relations awards. In 1942 the collection moved into the entire top floor of the new 135th Street Branch Library building. The American Negro Theater staged productions in the basement auditorium and served as a training ground for performers such as Frederick O'Neal, Hilda Simms, Hilda Haynes, Rosetta LeNoire, Earle Hyman, Sidney Poitier, and Harry Be- lafonte, and for writers such as Alice Childress and Abram Hill. Library- sponsored discussions drew the participation of African and Caribbean visitors to the United States who were involved in struggles for self- government; among them were Ja Ja Wachuku, former Ambassador from Nigeria, George Westermann, former Ambassador from Panama, and Kwame Nkrumah, who became the first president of Ghana. The collection itself was a primary resource for Richard Wright and Lang- ston Hughes and served as a center for Black scholars involved in WPA projects. Later, during the 1950s, it provided resources for the research underlying Kenneth Clark's report on the effects of segregated educa- tion on children, which was cited in the U.S. Supreme Court's historic Brown v. Board of Education decision in 1954. From 1948 through the 1970s, the collection continued to expand under the guidance of Jean Blackwell Hutson. By 1966, however, it was in serious jeopardy. Materials were deteriorating from overuse, air pol- lution, and climatic exposure. Although in 1954, it had been assigned the entire space in the 135th Street building, it was once again over- crowded. Hutson launched a successful campaign to rally support within the NYPL and the Black community, and by the 1970s, major changes were underway. In 1970, the Schomburg collection was designated part of the Re- search Libraries of the NYPL; its name was changed to the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, and Hutson became its chief. State and federal grants provided funds for preservation and conserva- tion; matching funds for National Endowment for the Humanities grants and monies for additional needs came from foundation, corpo- rate, and individual gifts; and city and federal grants paved the way for the construction of its current facility, which opened in 1980. The ef- forts of the Schomburg Center and the NYPL were augmented through- out the 1 970s and continue to be enhanced by the strong advocacy of the Schomburg Corporation, an umbrella organization formed in 1968 to coordinate the support efforts of individuals and groups. Today, the Schomburg Center is involved in another major expansion
78 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY project. In 1987, work got underway on the conversion of the old 135th Street building into a facility that will include study space and a storage area for the Art, Photographs and Prints, and Moving Image and Recorded Sound Collections. It will also include a 380-seat auditorium, a full exhibition gallery, and a gift shop. Along with the newly renovated Countee Cullen Branch Library, the expanded Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture will form a learning and activities complex equipped with technology and facilities geared to accommodate growth. Resources The collection acquired by the NYPL from Schomburg in 1926 was not only unique but also well-known to artists and scholars dealing with Black life. A Puerto Rican of African descent, Schomburg attributed his motivation to collect books to the stinging remark by one of his early teachers in Puerto Rico that the Negro had no history. The collection that he amassed, augmented by searches for rarities in the United States, Europe, and Latin America, established the "three outstanding conclu- sions" that, he said, resulted from the systematic and scientific study of the Black past: First, that the Negro has been throughout the centuries of controversy an active collaborator, and often a pioneer, in the struggle for his own freedom and advancement. Second, that by virtue of their being regarded as something "exceptional," even by friends and well-wishers, Negroes of attainment and genius have been unfairly disassociated from the group, and group credit lost accordingly. Third, that the remote racial origins of the Negro, far from being what the race and the world have been given to understand, offer a record of credible group achievement when scientifically viewed, and more important still, that they are of vital general interest because of their bearing upon the beginnings and early development of culture. [1, p. 232] Schomburg's collection included over 5,000 books, 3,000 manuscripts, 2,000 etchings and portraits, and several thousand pamphlets. Among its treasures were Latin poetry by Juan Latino, published in Spain in 1573. Latino, a full-blooded African,. was incumbent of the chair of poetry at the University of Granada during the reign of Philip V. Other rarities included various editions of Gustavus Vassa's autobiography, which provided evidence for Granville Sharpe's attack on slavery in the British colonies in 1796; the Latin and Dutch treatises of the West African-born Jacobus Eliza Capitein; and De la litterature des Negres (1808 French edition) by Abbe Henri Gregoire, the French abolitionist and intellectual. Early Black American finds included Jupiter Ham-
RESOURCES FOR SCHOLARS 79 mon's An Address to the Negroes in the State of New York (1787 edition); manuscript poems and early editions of works by Phillis Wheatley; sermons by the Black pastor Lemuel Haynes to the white congregation that he served in Rutland, Vermont, for thirty years following the Revolutionary War; copies of Benjamin Banneker's almanacs (1792 and 1793); and various editions of William Wells Brown's Clotel; or The President's Daughter; A Narrative of Slave Life in the United States. One of the most significant acquisitions during Schomburg's tenure as curator of the Negro Division was the Williamson Collection of Negro Freemasonry. He persuaded his fraternal brother, Harry Williamson, to contribute the materials in 1936, and Williamson continued to add to the collection until his death in 1965. The first detailed description of the division's holdings, the Calendar of the Manuscripts in the Schomburg Collec- tion of Negro Literature, was begun during that same period by the New York City Historical Records Survey, a WPA program. Completed in 1942, it included complete entries for 2,271 record items [5]. Among them were listings of the addresses and correspondence of such noted persons as Frederick Douglass, Alexander Crummell, and Booker T. Washington; army orders signed by Toussaint L'Ouverture; certificates of slave sales; and the Spanish manuscript of Soley Balsas (1757), re- counting in poetry the life of the African girl who became Saint Theresa of Salamanca. The center's holdings have grown to comprise more than five million items, including over 100,000 volumes and 75,000 microforms, more than 400 Black newspapers, and over 1,000 current periodicals, from around the world. Among its special reference resources are: a vertical file giving access to information contained in flyers, newspaper and magazine clippings, and pamphlets and ephemera, indexed under 7,000 subject headings; the Ernest D. Kaiser Index to Black Resources, a handwritten card catalog of articles in thousands of issues of magazines and newspapers; the U.S. Federal Population Census (1790 through 1900) and the Soundex Index, a name guide to the 1880 and 1900 Census records; and computer access to the Research Libraries Informa- tion Network. The center also maintains several special collections. Developed from Schomburg's original collection, the Rare Books, Manuscripts and Ar- chives section holds 3,800 rare books and pamphlets, 245 manuscript collections, and over 13,000 pieces of sheet music and other rare printed materials. The center's own archives are a major resource, especially when used in conjunction with related manuscript groups such as the papers of Crummell, Schomburg, and Bruce. Other early collections focus on slavery and abolition activities, Haiti, the West Indies, industrial education, and Black Freemasonry. Among the organization records are
80 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY those of the National Negro Congress, the Civil Rights Congress, the New York Urban League, the Black Academy of Arts and Letters, and the Central Division of Marcus Garvey's Universal Negro Improvement Association. There are also significant collections of personal papers; these are especially strong in the areas of history, politics, government, labor, and the arts. The literature holdings include manuscripts by Claude McKay, Zora Neale Hurston, Langston Hughes, Richard Wright, Piri Thomas, Larry Neal, Julian Mayfield, and Ben Carruthers; the music holdings, manuscripts by Lawrence Brown, Andy Razaf, Philippa Schuyler, Clarence Cameron White, and Sammy Heyward; and the theater holdings, manuscripts by Eusebia Cosme, John Marriott, and Fredi Washington. Schomburg was responsible for a number of significant acquisitions for the center's art collection, including bronze busts of an African man and woman by the nineteenth-century French sculptor Charles Cordier; Pietro Calvi's marble and bronze bust of Othello; and works by Black American artists such as Augusta Savage, William Ernest Braxton, Al- bert Alexander Smith, and Lois Mailou Jones, and by Caribbean artists, including the Cuban-born Pastor Argudin y Pedroso and Teodoro Ramos Blanco. Through the efforts of Alain Locke, Edith Isaacs, pub- lisher of Theatre Arts magazine, was persuaded to purchase the collection of Congolese art assembled by Raoul Blondiau, a Belgian diplomat. A portion of that collection was deposited at the center and designated the Blondiau-Theatre Arts Collection. Other African art holdings include the Eric de Kolb Collection of weaponry from the southern and western areas of Africa and the Oxmantown Collection of Yoruba Art from Nigeria. The art collection also includes important contemporary works by Norman Lewis, Jacob Lawrence, Romare Bearden, Vivian Browne, Ed Clark, Emma Amos, and Herbert Gentry. The center's photograph collection comprises over 200,000 photo- graphs dating from the 1 840s to the present, including portraits of Black artists, political figures, musicians, actors, athletes, and social activists. There are art as well as documentary photographs: for example, rare images documenting slave and free Black life in South America and the Caribbean during the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, photo- graphs by Doris Ulmann of the Gullah people of South Carolina; Walker Evans's photographs of African art; artists of the thirties captured by Marvin and Morgan Smith; works by James Van Der Zee; and Farm Security Administration photographs of the 1930s and forties. The Moving Image and Recorded Sound Collection encompasses musical documentation, oral history tapes, motion pictures, and video- tapes. Recordings of early radio broadcasts date from the late 1 920s, and there are also early recordings of statements by George Washington
RESOURCES FOR SCHOLARS 81 Carver, Booker T. Washington, and Garvey. Recorded music holdings include classics by artists such as Marian Anderson, Roland Hayes, Leontyne Price, Ulysses Kay, and William Grant Still, and blues by Mamie Smith, Alberta Hunter, and Bessie Smith. Jazz, gospel, reggae, and other forms are also represented. The collection also documents the music of Africa, the Caribbean, and other areas of the world where there are people of African descent. Among the film and video holdings are early film classics such as Scar of Shame and The EmperorJones, along with documentaries like The Streets of Greenwood, which portrays the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Com- mittee in 1962. There is early footage of Noble Sissle, Lena Horne, Kid Ory, Paul Robeson, Count Basie, Ethel Waters, Thelonious Monk, and Billie Holiday and more recent footage documenting a diverse group of artists, performers, and political figures. The center has also established an Oral History/Video Documentation Project, which videotapes in- house interviews. Special Programs From its inception, the center has sponsored exhibitions. Since 1980, however, a small gallery area and additional display spaces have made expansion of the exhibition program possible. With the completion of renovation and construction work on the old Schomburg building, the center will gain a full gallery for the first time. An impressive series of exhibitions has been mounted in recent years, with themes such as "Censorship and Black America," "Art against Apartheid," "The Black West," "Freedom's Journals: A History of the Black Press in New York State," and "Give Me Your Tired, Your Poor . .. ?: Voluntary Black Migration to the United States," which was the center's contribution to the Statue of Liberty centennial celebration. A traveling exhibition pro- gram makes shows that originate at the center available to sister institu- tions and other interested organizations and has scheduled presenta- tions in the United States, South America, and the Caribbean. Since 1983, the Schomburg Center has hosted two scholars who used fellowships to spend a year in residence. A grant from the Rockefeller Foundation made it possible for the center to launch its own Scholars in Residence Program by hosting two scholars for the 1986-87 academic year; three additional scholars spent short-term residencies, ranging from three to six months. Fellows work closely with the network of scholars affiliated with the Schomburg Assembly, an interdisciplin- ary regional association of scholars specializing in African and Afro- American history and culture. As a natural extension of its programs
82 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY and services, the center, in conjunction with the Phelps-Stokes Fund, administers the Clarence L. Holte Literary Prize, which is presented biennially to a contemporary writer who has contributed significantly, through publications in the humanities, to the cultural heritage of Africa and the African diaspora. The center's publications include exhibition catalogs and the Schom- burg CenterJournal, a quarterly publication for donors. A 1986 sixtieth- anniversary publication, The Schomburg Center for Research in Black Cul- ture, included historical data and rare photographs from the center's collection [6]. The Schomburg Clipping File has been published on microfiche [7]. Primarily a newspaper and periodical file, it also includes typescripts, broadsides, pamphlets, programs, book reviews, menus, and other ephemera; these are arranged chronologically under each of the 6,950 subject headings. Begun in 1925 and closed in 1974, the file also includes some earlier materials and some for 1975-81. As the Schomburg Center expands its collections, services, facilities, and technology to meet the needs of contemporary writers, scholars, and artists, it continues to participate actively in the evolution of Black culture. REFERENCES 1. Locke, Alain L., ed. The New Negro: An Interpretation. New York: Boni, 1925. 2. Brown, Sterling. Negro Poetry and Drama. Washington, D.C.: Associates in Negro Folk Education, 1937. 3. Miller, Mignon. "The American Negro Academy: An Intellectual Movement during the Era of Negro Disenfranchisement, 1897-1924." Master's thesis, Howard Univer- sity, 1966. 4. Biddle, Stanton. "A Partnership in Progress." Schomburg CenterJournal 1 (Spring 1978): 1-3, 12-15, 19-20. 5. Calendar of the Manuscripts in the Schomburg Collection of Negro Literature. New York: Works Progress Administration, Historical Records Survey, 1942. 6. The Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture: 60th Anniversary Tribute. New York: The Center, 1986. 7. The Schomburg Clipping File. Cambridge: Chadwick-Healey, 1986.