Recruiting and Retaining Students of Color in US Programs: Perspectives of Library and Information Professionals Kyung-Sun Kim and Sei-Ching Joanna Sin The study was conducted to identify effective strategies for recruiting and re- taining students of color in library and information science (LIS). Using a Web-based survey, the study collected data from librarians of color, enrolled in, or graduated from, ALA-accredited LIS programs. Study findings help reassess the efforts that LIS programs made in recruiting and retaining stu- dents of color, and shed light on some key areas of focus and improvement for such efforts. Suggestions are made to develop strategies for diverse LIS community and programs. Introduction According to the Association for Library and Information Science Educa- tion (ALISE) statistical reports, the student population in Library and In- formation Science (LIS) schools/programs has not been as ethnically diverse as the U.S. population. Among the students enrolled in American Library Association (ALA)-accredited LIS schools, only 1 1 .3% are ethnic minorities including the four main groups, African Americans, American Indians, Asian Americans, and Hispanic Americans.1 This proportion at LIS schools is significantly lower than the proportion of minorities en- rolled in graduate programs (26.4%)2 and those in the U.S. population (31.3%).3 The under-representation of ethnic minorities is also reflected in the li- brary community. Librarians of color constitute about 12-12.5% of aca- demic and public librarian populations.4 More recently, the ratio of librarians of color among credentialed librarians has actually dropped from 1 2% in 1 990 to 1 0% in 2000.5 As in the LIS student population, the propor- tion of ethnic minorities in the librarian population (10-12.5%) is signifi- cantly lower than the proportion in the U.S. population (31.3%) (See Figure 1 ). Recent projections of the U.S. population indicate that, by 2050, the four ethnic minority groups will represent almost half of the U.S. popu- lation.6 As Josey has pointed out, unless the LIS schools and other related organizations develop and support a more comprehensive and aggressive recruitment program, the gap between LIS and U.S. populations will widen even further.7 J. of Education for Library and Information Science, Vol. 47, No. 2- Spring 2006 ISSN: 0748-5786 ©2006 Association for Library and Information Science Education 8 1
82 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science About the Authors Kyung-Sun Kim is an assistant professor, School of Library and Information Studies, University of Wisconsin-Madison (kskim@slis.wisc.edu). Sei-Ching Joanna Sin is a doctoral student, School of Library and Information Studies, Uni- versity of Wisconsin-Madison (sjsin@wisc.edu). Ms. received 02/06; accepted 06/06; revised 06/06. Such a gap could be a serious issue, especially to public organizations like libraries. The mission of libraries is to serve the public, and the public is becoming more ethnically and culturally diverse. The increasing diver- sity in the user population requires changes in library services including reference, collection management, and outreach.9 Libraries whose staff is not as diverse as their users might not be able to serve the public effectively, as their employees9 lack of expertise in different cultures and languages could be a barrier in understanding and helping users. Another issue is re- lated to users. Research suggests that interpersonal similarity can increase the ease of communication, foster relationships of trust and reciprocity, and Figure 1 Ethnic Compositions of US and U.S. Population. Source: U.S. Census
Recruiting and Retaining Students of Color in US Programs 83 also create a sense of belonging and membership. l0 Ethnicity is a key factor for interpersonal similarity, as it is closely related to the cultural as well as physical connections between individuals. In libraries, as in other public organizations, it is important to have enough librarians of color so that all users, regardless of their ethnic and cultural background, can see authority figures (such as librarians and teachers) who look like them. This would make the users feel comfortable and affirmed that they are in the right place. Furthermore, ethnic diversity is important because it enriches a soci- ety by offering all citizens more opportunities to experience, learn, and un- derstand one another. Over the last few decades, LIS schools/programs have worked diligently to recruit people of color into the information profession, and other related organizations also have been stalwart in supporting recruitment programs. ALA, for example, created the Spectrum Initiative in 1997, to promote di- versity in the library community and recruit minority librarians by provid- ing scholarships, mentoring, and training programs. A number of LIS schools have supported the Spectrum Initiative scholarship program by agreeing to make additional financial commitments to the effort by either matching grants or supplementing them.1 ] Since its foundation in 1 996, the Institute of Museum and Library Services (IMLS) has also helped LIS schools increase the number of students of color through scholarships, re- cruitment programs such as Knowledge River and PRAXIS (Practice, Re- flection, Advocacy, Excellence, Inquiry, Solutions), and other initiatives.12 Despite such efforts, however, the progress in recruiting and retaining students of color has been rather slow, and the gap between the proportion of ethnic minorities in the U.S. population and in the LIS field remains sig- nificantly large. To minimize the gap, it is essential to develop and imple- ment effective programs to recruit and retain students of color in LIS programs. While there is no lack of suggested strategies for recruiting and retaining minorities, there is a dearth of empirical research on the issues. Compared to other professional fields, fewer empirical studies have been conducted in LIS to analyze and compare the preference for and effectiveness of such strategies.13 Of the few, most have focused on the recruitment of minority librarians, not minority students.14 Furthermore, research based on input from librarians and students of color - the target group of the recruit- ment/retention efforts - is scarce. A rare exception is a survey of librarians of color by Buttlar and Cay non, conducted more than a decade ago. 1 5 In the study, the authors surveyed librarians of color to identify why they chose to enter the library profession, and what they think LIS schools should do to attract ethnic minorities. As librarians and students of color are the targets and recipients of the LIS schools' recruitment and retention programs, their views and input are critical. More research is needed in order to collect, an- alyze, and give voice to the views of librarians and students of color regard- ing recruitment and retention in LIS education.
84 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science This study was conducted to find out how librarians of color view and evaluate the efforts that LIS schools/programs have made in recruiting and retaining students of color, and what they suggest for better recruitment and retention of such students. The study findings will help assess recruit- ment and retention efforts, and also provide insights on how to make exist- ing systems and strategies more successful. Study Research Questions Research questions of the study include: 1 . How satisfied/dissatisfied are librarians of color with the efforts made by LIS schools/programs in recruiting and retaining students of color? 2. What are the most effective strategies for the recruitment and retention of students of color? and 3. What should be done to better prepare all LIS students to work in a diverse, multicultural community? Participants Participants were librarians of color graduated from an ALA-accredited LIS program or those currently enrolled in such a program. A total of 1 82 li- brarians of color participated in the study. The age of the participants ranged from the twenties to the seventies with the majority in their fifties (32%) and thirties (30%). Most of them were fairly recent graduates of LIS programs: 33% graduated in 2000 or after and 26% in the 1990s. Some of the participants graduated as early as the 1960s (3%). Regarding ethnic background, 41% of the participants were African American. Hispanics, Asian Americans, and American Indians constituted 27%, 22%, and 10% of the participants, respectively. Most of the participants were working in academic (42%) or public (27%) libraries. Others were in government li- braries (4%), special libraries (4%), school libraries (2%), archives (1%), and other kinds of organizations. Concerning their academic background, most of the participants had an undergraduate degree in humanities (31%) or social sciences (32%). Data Collection A Web-based survey questionnaire was used to collect data from partici- pants. In fall 2004, a call for participation was distributed through different e-mail lists, including those of the American Indian Library Association, Asian/Pacific Librarians Association, Black Caucus of the American Li- brary Association, REFORMA (National Association to Promote Library and Information Services to Latinos and the Spanish-speaking) and others (e.g., Reference and User Services Association). Participation was volun- tary. Data collection was completed in March 2005.
Recruiting and Retaining Students of Color in LIS Programs 85 Table 1 Satisfaction with Recruitment by Types of Program. Completely Completely Partially Distance/Online Face-to-Face Distance/Online Average level of Satisfaction/Dissatisfaction* 0.75 0.02 -0.10 *Scale based on: Dissatisfied (-1); Neutral (0); Satisfied (1) Findings Satisfaction with Recruitment and Retention Efforts Made by US Schools Regarding both recruitment and retention efforts that LIS schools made, participants were neither satisfied nor dissatisfied. When the level of satis- faction was compared across different types of programs (e.g., completely face-to-face vs. online), a statistically significant difference was found in recruitment (F = 3.053, p < 0.05). That is, those who were enrolled in, or graduated from, a completely online/distance education program tended to be more satisfied with recruitment (See Table 1). Recruitment Strategies When the participants were asked to suggest the ten most effective recruit- ment strategies, they responded as follows (See Table 2). Besides financial support and work opportunities, findings suggest that students of color want a recruitment program that involves more proactive and tailored ad- vertisement, communication and personal contacts through people of color. Table 2 Effective Recruitment Strategies. Rank Strategy Frequency (%) 1 Assistantship/scholarship/financial aid 82% 2 Ethnic diversity of faculty in the LIS school/program 64% 3 Role models from ethnic groups 62% 4 Presence of faculty and staff of color in the recruitment process 57% 5 Opportunities for students of color to work in US-related fields 53% 6 Special programs (Opportunities to work with US faculty, grad- uate students, or librarians) 48% 7-8 Communication/Advertising in media, publications for people 46% of color Presence of alumni of color in the recruitment process 46% 9 Availability of career services/job placement in the US school/program 43% 10 Active solicitation and personal contacts from the US school/program 42%
86 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science i I O u *E ul 4> £- A 4> - e *= £ ^ ^ Si¿ i- * i ili li 111 P h iliil 1 fe! i 1 IH 11 1! If I III | 1 S«| §-5^ ¡l|5§-£-3 §" "O "SB «8 gg-§|§| 1 S«| » §" a-g Si o "O íRElg Í^^SE < Soí QÍ o2^iroa O)U^ D_ íoS^g LiJ aO)< ILI -S jü § .-re» Q. £ S < CUJ QÍ O)U^ D_ U (/) LiJ aO)< vi ILI jü w_ I Q. u g 1 §521 *_ gf i 1 i j H If3 it g| 1 9 E -fj « ^ o3cE^ oE oí2 o° E C Q.CI, w *5» a)^-2Dí^ O^ w.E 5u o) D ^^"o <d ^ "o^^oc >-cl 0c .y 5 o •= ^O-goO ^ 5_<D£<Dg ~-Q ^.2 "5§ CL .■?«•§■ e 8.-S s o S E |> 8 -e¿e|| o <Ct^O) jo"o2 í LU UmIÜ- ^12-5^ o UQ- * I <C> 8 f LU oPog Q. O)< CO 8. <Ct^O) LU UmIÜ- UQ- * <C> LU Q. O)< </> CO i Ì § 1 tei H & ^ íiü ? J lilt i! eli i I l Ui fill li ì .si Í | ÍlE% ^° ll^l El I s€ ss I {-Sí 2IH2Ü2Í ji -o 1§ |s J8Í <clu q_C£^o)Q-£q_u li-siJ^i-l a:ouco Sill <co j§ |1 P1^ <clu q_C£^o)Q-£q_u a:ouco <co P1^ 5 Pi Ì ¡ Ü lì ? ìli 1 I !¿ ílí í jl3|j ! ¿Is f § illfsrii! 1 Ü2 il | lit I i ij ni sili* n*\* y lis -: IS ill ¡1^ li i ¡lililí ili 1 < CU"D UQ. Uí¿ O)UJ Q. O)lQ¿ O UU<; Q_CJ)3 CO §-- <N coxruoo r^ co o 2 5 I Q. O "5 ! <D C O o e a> I s 8 TJ _C ]O o X) 'fi O) a> I e E "o o £ ^) "5 U c e Í2 a> n E Z Q) 1
Recruiting and Retaining Students of Color in LIS Programs 87 When the top ten strategy lists were compared across ethnic groups, some differences were found among the groups (See Table 3). For example, the African American group suggested that presenting LIS program/career opportunities in high schools (ranked 6th) and undergraduate classes (9th) is important. The American Indian group indicated that offering distance learning options in LIS programs is crucial (ranked 5th). Hispanics viewed that having a committee or system reinforcing diversity in LIS schools/pro- grams is one of the most effective strategies (9th). There were also some similarities in the suggested strategies. For example, both African Ameri- can and American Indian groups frequently suggested the use of recruit- ment materials developed especially for students of color (ranked 7th). Hispanic as well as Asian American groups viewed having an ethnically di- verse student population in LIS programs as being important (ranked 7th and 8th respectively). Retention Strategies When the participants were asked to suggest the ten most effective reten- tion strategies, they responded as follows (See Table 4). As with recruit- ment, assistantships and financial aid topped the list for retention. Offering opportunities to work in LIS-related fields was the second. In addition, stu- dents of color seem to want an atmosphere more supportive of diversity (e.g., understanding faculty/staff; mentoring; multicultural curriculum; support group) and also of working students (e.g., flexible class time, ca- reer services). When the top ten strategy lists were compared across ethnic groups, most of the suggested strategies were the same with a few exceptions (See Table 5). African American and Hispanic groups suggested that providing peer Table 4 Effective Retention Strategies. Rank Strategy Frequency (%) 1 Assistantship/scholarship/financial aid 77% 2 Opportunities for students of color to work part-time in LIS-re- lated fields 59% 3 Faculty and staff (sensitive to the needs/concerns of students of color) 56% 4 Mentoring program in the LIS school/program 54% 5 Effective academic/career advising (sensitive to the needs/con- cerns of students of color) 52% 6 Flexible class times (e.g., evening, weekend classes) 49% 7 Curriculum incorporating diversity/multiculturalism 48% 8 Partnerships between the LIS school/program and ethnic asso- ciations 47% 9-1 0 Support groups/systems in the LIS school/program for students 45% of color Career services/iob olacement in the LIS school/oroaram 45%
88 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science a 2 O u *E if s 1 I } I II 1 s| if - Is •i te-f^i is-! is* i .g| 2 o |fi £ iilHìfiili's? i -it is |-§ l§áÍ£§-85cÍ-§§JI I ¿? !■§ 13 iiií i fi ñm ii , < hi II ¿rH ìlìliislg ! lililí as-E-t 2sl"§{8?i|fl S A •8 ~Q1 fs-g . c % .e I lili Ill .i| ! I 1 1 i~f¿ fu i i m s i¿ 1-Slif 1§|- § Ills Is SI <Ou_cuo«o S3 yg £-§ q_O)uj.E ?Mi Q I (JíñO^: .^^ ^O) |S ,o| U <Ou_cuo«o q_O)uj.E Q (JíñO^: ^O) U w . t j j| „ h *_ ¡ I I l.l.ll III !lc ¡i lisi I illjllgifl ¡if 14 111 |? Js|!ss-S||J I|s |1 II J! § r- cn oo ^lo >or^oo o 2 c 0) Q. o o è <D c o o e <D I 8 c s c 0) 5) a> o /5 ^¿ c o o § a> o o T5 e e M a> I I àj o
Recruiting and Retaining Students of Color in US Programs 89 support would be important for retaining students of color (ranked 7th and 6th respectively). The American Indian group indicated that offering dis- tance education is effective (ranked 6th). Preparation for Diversity Diversity in LIS education and librarianship cannot be achieved by having a diverse student population in LIS programs alone. The importance of di- versity should be acknowledged, embraced and supported by the entire LIS community. All LIS students - the future LIS professionals - should value diversity and be prepared to serve the diverse public. In relation to this is- sue, an open-ended question was asked: "What suggestions would you give to LIS schools/programs to better prepare all LIS students to work in a di- verse, multicultural community?" Suggestions included: (1) to reform the curriculum to incorporate diversity issues and multiculturalism, (2) to pro- vide internship/fieldwork opportunities to work in diverse communities, (3) to make faculty and students aware of the importance of diversity, and (4) to have diverse faculty and students. Discussion and Conclusion Students' satisfaction is one of the key measures that can be used to evalu- ate the success of a program. The response from participants, who were the target "customers" of the recruitment/ retention efforts, seems to suggest that recruitment and retention efforts have not been particularly successful. Interestingly, however, those from a completely distance program were found to be quite satisfied with recruitment efforts. Their comments in open-ended questions indicated that their programs did a good job in re- cruitment by making all the useful information available through the Web site and other promotional materials and/or by using personal contacts. This seems to suggest that distance programs tend to incorporate more ag- gressive strategies to recruit students. Further research is needed to investi- gate if and why students in distance education programs are more satisfied with their school's efforts at recruiting minorities. Recruitment and Retention Strategies Regarding recruitment, three different groups of strategies have been sug- gested to be important. The first one is related to diversity in faculty/staff and students/alumni. The participants made it clear that having more fac- ulty of color in the LIS school/program and having faculty /staff/alumni of color involved in the recruitment process would attract more students of color. Such individuals could be good role models to the students as well. Previous research supports that using role models and/or authoritative fig- ures of color for recruitment is critically important.16 If students see role models from ethnic minority groups in their everyday life, and also during the recruitment process, they would be able to relate themselves more eas- ily to the model figures and the field where the role models work, and feel more confident about their success in the field.
90 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science The second group of recruitment strategies is related to support through scholarship/financial aid or work opportunities. As pursuing an LIS pro- gram requires a significant investment from students, it would be helpful if LIS programs assist the students to get some financial support through ei- ther scholarship/financial aid or job opportunities (in LIS-related areas). Finally, the third group of strategies is associated with active recruit- ment. Many participants responded that they had not seen any visible effort for recruitment made by their LIS programs. Better communication and ad- vertisement of LIS programs, particularly in media/publications targeted at people of color, and active solicitation of students of color including per- sonal contacts, are obviously key strategies, which is consistent with Buttlar and Caynon's findings.17 It will also be helpful if we can develop a more creative recruitment/promotional program such as a summer camp where prospective students get an opportunity to learn from and work with LIS faculty, students, and professionals. For the retention aspect, the top ten strategies can be divided again into three groups. As in recruitment, offering financial support and providing work/career opportunities through effective career/job placement services were suggested as crucial in retention. The importance of financial support in recruitment and retention is well documented.18 The need to pay for tui- tion and other expenses can be partially resolved through getting financial aid or holding a job. By offering more assistantships, scholarships, finan- cial aid and work opportunities, LIS schools can help students stay in the program without worrying about financial issues. To assist students in job searches, it will be necessary for LIS schools to provide effective career/job placement services. The second group of strategies is linked to support from faculty/staff, students, and ethnic associations. Support from faculty/staff, peer students and other groups would be critical to the success of any students in LIS pro- grams, including students of color. Faculty and staff members should be sensitive to students' needs and be able to provide effective academic and career advising. Mentoring systems would be particularly important for students of color,19 as they have to cope with "cultural loneliness."20 For this, it would be necessary that LIS programs train all the members in the program to be aware of the importance of diversity and to better understand and appreciate other cultures. In addition, having a system in place to sup- port and reinforce diversity might be helpful. Having ethnic associations and communities get involved in teaching and other activities might also be useful as this could help students learn more about diversity and become more connected to diverse communities. The third group is related to curriculum and class schedule, which is an- other important issue for the retention of students of color. It is crucial to have a curriculum incorporating diversity and multiculturalism because it will help all students to learn to appreciate other cultures and their values and also to become competent to work in an increasingly diverse society.21 Regarding the class schedule, a number of participants suggested that flexi-
Recruiting and Retaining Students of Color in US Programs 91 ble class time would be helpful in retaining students. This seems to have some connection with financial issues. As the amount of financial aid LIS schools/programs can offer is limited, this option would be helpful for those who need to work in order to support their studies or those who are al- ready working. This observation seems to be confirmed by previous re- search. McCook and Moen discovered that financial assistance was the second most important reason for selecting a particular LIS school among full-time students, while openness to the working adult (i.e., flexibility of scheduling and availability of advising) was the second most important reason among part-time students.22 Many LIS schools already offer courses in evening hours or during the weekend. In addition, an increasing number of schools have online courses to accommodate these needs. For those schools offering distance education courses, however, it should be ensured that all students be equipped with the necessary technologies and learning skills, as some individuals or ethnic groups are less likely to have access to such facilities.23 Strategies for Different Ethnic Groups When suggestions regarding recruitment and retention strategies were compared, some differences were found among ethnic groups. For exam- ple, American Indians ranked high the offering of distance education op- tions for both recruitment and retention. It seems that American Indians tend to prefer to stay where they are, more than other groups. This is consis- tent with the findings of the LISSADA survey: only 15% of American In- dian participants moved to a different state to attend LIS programs, which was the lowest rate among ethnic minority groups.24 For recruitment, African Americans suggested that presenting LIS pro- grams in undergraduate classes and high schools would be very effective. Both African Americans and American Indians regarded the use of recruit- ment materials developed for students of color as one of the most effective strategies. Hispanics and Asian Americans, on the other hand, felt that hav- ing a diverse student body in LIS programs would be one of the key strategies to attract students of color. Although different ethnic groups are often lumped together as a "minor- ity," it is apparent that they have different views and need different recruit- ment/retention strategies.25 In order to better understand each of the ethnic groups and to refine strategies that would work best for each group, more in-depth research is called for. Diversity for All Simply producing more librarians of color alone cannot help LIS programs succeed if their graduates, regardless of their background, are not prepared to work in an increasingly diverse society. To better prepare their students, the study suggests that LIS programs need to work on several areas. First, they need curriculum reform in order to incorporate diversity issues and multiculturalism.26 It is desirable that this includes not only offering
92 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science courses dedicated to diversity /multiculturalism issues, but also incorporat- ing such issues in required courses.27 As suggested by some researchers and several study participants, helping students gain work experience in di- verse communities through fieldwork or practica would also be crucial.28 In addition, helping all faculty and students become aware of the impor- tance of diversity and having a diverse faculty and student body would be of paramount importance. Some progress has been made, but LIS programs will need to continue their endeavors in improving these areas. LIS associations can help LIS programs with some of the areas. The asso- ciations can offer diversity workshops through which LIS faculty/staff can be trained. At the same time, they can work with LIS programs to reach out to different communities, which will help both recruitment and retention of students of color. In addition, the associations can collaborate with LIS programs and libraries to provide more internship opportunities as well as financial support/fellowship. Libraries are another important partner. They can help LIS programs in many different ways, such as in curriculum re- form and teaching, providing mentoring and role models, and offering in- ternship opportunities, among others. For more effective recruitment and retention of students, LIS programs will need to build a strong partnership with other organizations, and work closely with them. Future Research The study findings helped examine and assess the efforts in recruiting and retaining students of color in LIS programs and shed light on some key ar- eas of improvement for such endeavors. The study also suggested the im- portance of using different strategies depending on target groups. Finally, it offered a direction for making the LIS education relevant to a society that is becoming culturally and ethnically diverse. It should be noted, however, that this study had some limitations that need to be addressed in future research. Readers should be cautioned against over-generalizing the results of this study. The sampling frame does not include all librarians of color in the U.S., only those who were mem- bers of the ethnic caucuses and other associations affiliated with ALA. Al- though the study is not intended to be generalizable to all librarians of color in the U.S., the study is an exploratory first step to better understand the perspectives of the librarians of color - former LIS students of color - con- cerning LIS recruitment and retention. Larger-scale studies with a repre- sentative sample will help increase the external validity of the research findings. Future research, using a combination of survey and other qualitative re- search methods, is needed to develop and refine strategies for different eth- nic minority groups. Analyses of the current curriculum will also be useful towards curricular reform for multiculturalism, and for a better preparation of our students, faculty and staff for our diverse society. Studies on recruit- ment and retention strategies used in other disciplines (e.g., education, en-
Recruiting and Retaining Students of Color in LIS Programs 93 gineering, nursing, social work) will help us develop more efficient and competitive strategies. Acknowledgment This research was supported by an ALA Diversity Research Grant. The au- thors would like to thank advisory board members of the study, especially Dianne Hopkins, Loriene Roy, Clara Chu, Maurice Wheeler, Denice Adkins, Kathleen de la Peña McCook, Emma Perry, and also the anony- mous reviewers for their thoughtful comments and suggestions. References 1 . ALISE, "Library and Information Science Education Statistical Report 2003 - Students" (2003), http://ils.unc.edu/ALISE/2003/Students/Students01.htm (accessed Mar. 27, 2005). 2. U.S. Department of Education. National Center for Education Statistics, "The Condition of Education 2005," (U.S. Government Printing Office, 2005), http://nces.ed.gov/pubsearch/pubsinfo.asp?pubid=2005094 (accessed June 20, 2005). 3. U.S. Census Bureau, "Statistical Abstract of the United States 2003" (2003) http://www.census.gov/prod/2004pubs/03statab/pop.pdf (accessed Jun. 10, 2005). 4. American Library Association, Academic and Public Libraries: Data by Race, Ethnicity & Sex (Chicago: ALA, 1999). 5. PUMS, Decision Demographics. Census Public Use Microdata File (PUMS) (2004). 6. Minority Business Development Agency, "Dynamic Diversity: Projected Changes in U.S. Race and Ethnic Composition 1995 to 2050" (1999) http://www.mbda.gov/docu- ments/unpubtext.pdf (accessed Oct. 1 , 2005). 7. E. J. Josey, "Students in Library and Information Science," in Library and Information Studies Education in the United States, edited by Loriene Roy and Brooke E. Sheldon, 49-64 (Washington: Mansell, 1998). 8. U.S. Census Bureau, "Census 2000 Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) Data," (U. S. Census Bureau), http://www.census.gov/eeo2000/index.html (accessed Jan. 13, 2006); Campbell Gibson and Kay Jung, "Historical Census Statistics on Population Totals by Race, 1 790 to 1 990, and by Hispanic Origin, 1 970 to 1 990, for the United States, Regions, Divisions, and States" (U. S. Census Bureau, 2002). http://www.census.gov/popula- tion/documentation/twps0056/twps0056.pdf (accessed Feb. 1, 2006); U.S. Census Bu- reau, "Census '90 Detailed Occupation by Race, Hispanic Origin and Sex" (U. S. Census Bureau), http://www.census.gov/eeo2000/index.html (accessed Feb. 3, 2006); U.S. Cen- sus Bureau, "United States - Race and Hispanic Origin: 1790 to 1990," http://www.cen- sus.gov/population/documentation/twps0056/tab01.pdf (accessed Jan. 5, 2006). 9. Rosemary Ruhig Du Mont, Lois L. Buttlar, and William Caynon, Multiculturalism in Li- braries (Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1994). 10. Michalle E. Mor Barak, David A. Cherin, and Sherry Berkman, "Organizational and Per- sonal Dimensions in Diversity Climate," Journal of Applied Behavioral Science 34, no. 1 ( 1 998): 82- 1 04; Mary N. Hernandez, "Mentoring, Networking and Supervision: Parallelo- gram, Vortex, or Merging Point?" The Reference Librarian, no. 45-46 (1994): 15-22. 1 1 . Claudia J. Gollop, "Library and Information Science Education: Preparing Librarians for a Multicultural Society," College & Research Libraries 60, no. 4 (1999): 385-395. 1 2. Susan Jane Freiband, "Multicultural Issues and Concerns in Library Education," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 33 (1992): 28; Veronica E.
94 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Nance-Mitchell, "A Multicultural Library: Strategies for the Twenty-First Century," Col- lege & Research Libraries 57 (1996): 405-413; Lorna Peterson, teaching the Practitio- ners: One Professor's Attempt at Library Education and Sensitivity to Multicultural Diversity," The Reference Librarian, no. 45-46 (1994): 23-38. 1 3. N. Lopez, R Wadenya, and P Berthold, "Effective Recruitment and Retention Strategies for Underrepresented Minority Students: Perspectives from Dental Students," Journal of Den- tal Education 67, no. 10 (2003): 1 107-1 112; Howard P. Greenwald and R. A. Davis, "Mi- nority Recruitment and Retention in Dietetics: Issues and Interventions," Journal of the American Dietetic Association 1 00, no. 8 (2000): 96 1 -966; W. R. Hammond and B. Yung, "Minority Student Recruitment and Retention Practices among Schools of Professional Psychology - a National Survey and Analysis," Professional Psychology-Research and Practice 24, no. 1 (1993): 3-1 2. 1 4. Minority Recruitment and Retention in ARL Libraries (Washington, D.C. : Office of Man- agement Services, Association of Research Libraries, 1 990); Jen Stevens and Rosemary Streatfeild, Recruitment and Retention (Washington, D.C: Office of Management Ser- vices, Association of Research Libraries, 2003). 1 5. Lois L. Buttlar and William Caynon, "Recruitment of Librarians into the Profession: The Minority Perspective," Library & information Science Research 14 (1992): 259-280. 1 6. Camila A. Alire, "Recruitment and Retention of Librarians of Color," in Creating the Fu- ture: Essays on Librarianship in an Age of Great Change, edited by Sally Gardner Reed, 1 26-1 43 (North Carolina: McFarland, 1 996); Buttlar and Caynon, "Recruitment of Librar- ians into the Profession: The Minority Perspective." 1 7. Buttlar and Caynon, "Recruitment of Librarians into the Profession: The Minority Per- spective." 1 8. Ibid; Kathleen M . Heim, and William E. Moen, Occupational Entry: Library and Informa- tion Science Students ' Attitudes, Demographics and Aspirations Survey (Chicago: Ameri- can Library Association, Office for Library Personnel Resources, 1989); Kathleen de la Pena McCook and Kate Lippincott, "Planning for a Diverse Workforce in Library and In- formation Science Professions. Revised Edition" (Tampa, FL: University of South Florida, School of Library and Information Science, Research Group, 1997). 19. Alire, "Recruitment and Retention of Librarians of Color"; Roy, Loriene, "Creating Op- portunities and Opening Doors: Recruiting and Mentoring Students of Color," in Unfin- ished Business: Race, Equity, and Diversity in Library and Information Science Education, edited by Maurice B. Wheeler, 131-146 (Lanham, MD: Scarecrow, 2005). 20. Christine T. Lowery, "Hearing the Messages: Integrating Pueblo Philosophy into Aca- demic Life," Journal of American Indian Education 36 (1997): 1-8; Clara M. Chu, "Educa- tion for Multicultural Librarianship," in Multicultural ism in Libraries, edited by R.R. Du Mont, Lois J. Buttlar and William Caynon, 127-156 (Westport, CT: Greenwood press, 1994). 2 1 . Dennis East and R. Errol Lam, "In Search of Multiculturalism in the Library Science Cur- riculum," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 36 ( 1 995): 1 99-2 1 6. 22. Kathleen de la Pena McCook and William E. Moen, "Patterns of Program Selection: Ranked Factors in the Choice of a Master's Degree Program in Library and Information Studies," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 33, no. 3 (1992): 212-225. 23. Lotsee Patterson, "History and Status of Native Americans in Librarianship," Library Trends 49, no. 1 (2000): 1 82-1 93; A Nation Online: Entering the Broadband Age (U.S. De- partment of Commerce, 2004) http://www.ntia.doc.gov/reports/anol/ NadonOnlineBroadband04.htm (accessed Jan. 23, 2006); Susannah Fox, "Pew Internet & American Life Project. Digital Divisions," (Pew Internet & American Life Project, 2005). http://www.pewinternet.org/pdfs/PIP_Digital_Divisions_Oct_5_2005.pdf (accessed Jan. 23, 2006).
Recruiting and Retaining Students of Color in US Programs 95 24. McCook and Moen, "Patterns of Program Selection: Ranked Factors in the Choice of a Master's Degree Program in Library and Information Studies." 25. Gregory. L. Reese and Ernestine. L. Hawkins, Stop Talking, Start Doing! Attracting People of Color to the Library Profession (Chicago: ALA, 1999). 26. Lorna Peterson, "Curriculum Reform and Diversity," in Unfinished Business: Race, Eq- uity, and Diversity in Library and Information Science Education, edited by M.B. Wheeler, 163-169 (Lanham, MD: Scarecrow, 2005); M. B. Wheeler, "Faculty Development and Cultural Diversity in Teaching: LIS Education's Last Frontier," in Unfinished Business: Race, Equity, and Diversity in Library and Information Science Education, edited by M. B. Wheeler, 181-194 (Lanham, MD: Scarecrow, 2005). 27. Freiband, "Multicultural Issues and Concerns in Library Education." 28. Ibid; Ling-Hwey Jeng, "Facilitating Classroom Discussion on Diversity," Journal of Edu- cation for Library and Information Science 38 (1997): 334-338.