Expanding LIS Education in the US Department of State’s Diplomacy Lab Program: GIS and LGBTI Advocacy in Africa and Latin America Bharat Mehra, University of Tennessee bmehra@utk.edu Paul A. Lemieux III, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration National Centers for Environmental Information, Department of Commerce paul.lemieux@noaa.gov Christie Burwell, Williamsburg Regional Library christieburwell@gmail.com Taylor Hixson, New York University Abu Dhabi taylorhixson@gmail.com Robert P. Partee II, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Department of Commerce rpartee12@gmail.com Keri Stophel, Congressional Research Service keri.dofb@gmail.com Nicole E. Wood, Austin Peay State University woodn@apsu.edu This article focuses on two collaborative projects selected by the Howard H. Baker Jr. Center for Public Policy at the University of Tennessee to partner in the US Department of State’s Diplomacy Lab program that engages college students and faculty to study foreign policy challenges. The projects allowed information science graduate students to learn applied research in the process of developing geographic information systems for lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and intersex advocacy. The paper identifies opportunities, challenges, and best practices in content delivery, resource development, and extended relationship-building while drawing upon teaching-research-advocacy intersections in library and information science education. Keywords: advocacy; Africa; Diplomacy Lab; diversity; geographic information system (GIS); Latin America; lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and intersex (LGBTI); LIS education This article focuses on two collaborative information science projects that were selected by the Howard H. Baker Jr. Center for Public Policy at the University of Tennessee-Knoxville (UTK) as partners in the US © Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 2018 Vol. 59, No. 3 DOI: 10.3138/jelis.59.3.2018-0016.02 2018-0016 Mehra4.indd 4 5/18/2018 2:16:07 PM
Expanding LIS Education in the US Department of State’s Diplomacy Lab Program 5 Department of State’s Diplomacy Lab (Bureau of Public Affairs, n.d.), a pub- KEY POINTS lic–private collaboration to harness the “knowledge of students and faculty at • Two collaborative projects universities across the country to study i n t h e U S D e p a r t m e n t issues of worldwide importance” (Univer- of State’s Diplomacy Lab sity of Tennesee-Knoxville News, 2015). p ro g ra m d e ve l o p e d L I S The Diplomacy Lab program broadens teaching-research-advocacy the US Department of State’s research intersections to formulate base to more effectively respond to a va- foreign policy. riety of global challenges, while providing • Information sciences graduate a unique opportunity for students and students applied research faculty to contribute directly to foreign i n c r e a t i n g g e o g ra p h i c and national policy-making processes informat ion systems for (Lantsman, 2016). The projects reported international lesbian, gay, in this article include the following: bisexual, transgender, and • Project 1: International Correc- intersex advocacy. tion Reform and Human Rights Protections for Lesbian, Gay, Bi- • Opportunities, challenges, sexual, Transgender and Intersex and best practices shaped (LGBTI) Inmates in Africa and content delivery, resource Latin America [Global Survey of development, and extended Protections for LGBTI Inmates] relationship-building in library (fall 2015). Project Product: Devel- and information sc ience opment of the LGBTI Integrated education. Cartographic Information System 1 (LGBTI-ICIS1) [http://tiny.utk.edu/LGBTI-ICIS1-F2015]. • Project 2: Mapping “LGBTI” Cultural Representations of Differ- ence in Historical Sub-Saharan Africa [LGBTI Issues: Analysis of Historic Participation of LGBTI Persons in African Culture] (spring 2016). Project Product: Development of the LGBTI Integrated Car- tographic Information System 2 (LGBTI-ICIS2) [http://tiny.utk .edu/LGBTI-ICIS2-Sp2016]. The projects involved volunteer collaboration of a total of six graduate students working in two respective teams while they were registered in an independent study/graduate research participation course with a faculty member (lead author) to learn applied research in developing geographic information systems (GIS) for LGBTI advocacy. The projects expanded the role of library and information science (LIS) in integrating a partnership with federal agencies in pursuit of creative activity to shape foreign-policy formulation within a non-traditional “classroom” experience. The article identifies opportunities, challenges, and best practices in content delivery, resource development, and extended relationship-building while drawing upon teaching-research-advocacy intersections in LIS education. 2018-0016 Mehra4.indd 5 5/18/2018 2:16:07 PM
6 Mehra, Lemieux III, Burwell, Hixson, Partee II, Stophel, Wood Development of the LGBTI-ICIS1 The project identified baseline protections provided to LGBTI inmates in select countries of Africa and Latin America, expounding areas with crimes against LGBTI prisoners, areas needing correction reform, and level of best practices employed (from none to acceptable) (Mehra, 2016). It led to the development of the LGBTI-ICIS1, a prototype solution that includes a global, non-traditional collection of interactive maps, visual information analysis, and application of severity scales to select area study regions in terms of conditions of the law, condition in the prisons, and human rights protections for LGBTI inmates. Also included are details on critical events, highlighting individual stories and information on LGBTI organizations in each selected region. The work-in-progress resource is informing US international correction reform to further human rights protections for LGBTI inmates and others in select countries, especially those that have laws that criminalize an already marginalized population (Mehra, Burwell, et al., 2016). Figure 1 is a visual representative snapshot of the information, struc- ture, and analysis displayed in the LGBTI-ICIS1. The user can navigate through each of the three respective layers shown in the left frame related to the conditions of the law, condition in the prisons, and human rights protections in nine African countries (Ghana, Liberia, Mali, Morocco, Niger, Nigeria, Senegal, South Sudan, and Tunisia) and nine Latin American countries (Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Guyana, Mexico, Panama, Paraguay, Suriname, and Uruguay) by checking the select country and finding the relevant information. An alternative strategy is for users to explore and click on the map in the right frame to find detailed information about a particular country. They can click the “i” icon to see the severity scale legend and color code that is used to represent the conditions for LGB populations. The severity scale color codes for TI populations have not been applied to the map but are used in the details for select countries where available. Selecting the purple “heart-in-hand” icon provides a list of International Advocacy Organizations for the various countries. Figure 2 shows an example of an interactive online record that is accessed by selecting the name of each country for each one of the three layers (in this case conditions of the law in Ghana). The legal character- istics are highlighted in terms of their legislative, executive, and judicial developments associated with LGBTI populations in the particular country over time, with additional information in multimedia formats and author- itative sources where the referenced evidence was found. Figure 3 represents one form of visual information—namely an analysis of chronological development of the law related to LGBTI pop- ulations for each country (in this case Mexico)—that is integrated in the LGBTI-ICIS1. Several other forms of analysis were included, such as 2018-0016 Mehra4.indd 6 5/18/2018 2:16:08 PM
Expanding LIS Education in the US Department of State’s Diplomacy Lab Program 7 Figure 1: A visual representative snapshot of the information, structure, and analysis displayed in the LGBTI-ICIS1. Figure 2: An example of an interactive online record in the LGBTI-ICIS1 representing the conditions of the law in Ghana. development and visualization of legal data (e.g., male–male/female–female relationships, term and conditions of prison sentences, protection mea- sures from discrimination, relevant laws, etc.) that were compiled to gener- ate qualitative and quantitative severity scales, graphs, and space files that could be integrated into the GIS-based LGBTI-ICIS1. 2018-0016 Mehra4.indd 7 5/18/2018 2:16:16 PM
8 Mehra, Lemieux III, Burwell, Hixson, Partee II, Stophel, Wood Figure 3: An analysis of the chronological development of the law related to LGBTI populations in Mexico that is integrated in the LGBTI-ICIS1. Development of the LGBTI-ICIS2 This project mapped geospatial locations, events, places, people, and temporal data related to historical instances of non-conforming LGBTI representations of difference that have challenged contemporary per- spectives on LGBTI lifestyles in Sub-Saharan Africa (Mehra, Stophel, & Lemieux, 2016). The GIS resource visualized evidence that LGBTI people/constructs were a present and persistent part of African culture before colonialization. It led to the development of the LGBTI-ICIS2, a dynamic Web-based report (with literature review, metadata descriptions, online records, and interactive visualized database) delivered via the GIS-based tool Google Tour Builder and that includes (1) research-based evidence from popular press, scholarly literature, and select qualitative data collection; (2) narrative discourse/content analysis of folktales and myths; and (3) fiction and non-fiction, song and theater, and oral histories. This tool is being used by contemporary scholars, foreign-policy makers, and human rights activists who encounter the common argument against the support of LGBTI people in sub-Saharan Africa that homosexuality is a western construct that goes against that region’s historical and cultural tra- ditions (Hoad, 2007). Such arguments are often contrary to occurrences of LGBTI-related references, examples, symbolism, imagery, and people in the culture and history of the region. The LGBTI-ICIS2 resource show- cases evidence to identify these “non-conforming” examples of Africans who have challenged “traditional” cultural lifestyles to give the Department 2018-0016 Mehra4.indd 8 5/18/2018 2:16:20 PM
Expanding LIS Education in the US Department of State’s Diplomacy Lab Program 9 Figure 4: A visual representative snapshot of the information, structure, and analysis displayed in the LGBTI-ICIS2. of State leverage to further human rights advocacy on behalf of the LGBTI population. Figure 4 is a visual representative snapshot of the information, struc- ture, and analysis displayed in the LGBTI-ICIS2. The user can navigate through the list of tiles (like a “Table of Contents”) on the left-hand margin of the system. These tiles, serving as an interactive online record, were named in terms of Country-Tribe-Theme, with information regarding “non-conforming” LGBTI representations in sub-Saharan Africa during pre-modern times. Cultural themes included art, folklore, gender behavior, language, marriage, religion, and sexual activity. LGBTI-ICIS2 allows the user to navigate the system by either clicking on a select tile for relevant information or exploring on the map in the right frame to find detailed information about a particular Country-Tribe-Theme. The kind of visual analysis mapped in the LGBTI-ICIS2 includes the following: 1. Geo-Tribal Thematic Network: Figure 5 represents in one coun- try-tribe (i.e., the Angola- Ndongo tribe) a network of several docu- mented “non-conforming” LGBTI instances related to the cultural themes of religion, gender behaviors, and marriage dating back to the early 1600s. Navigating the corresponding tile associated with the specific country-tribe-theme in the LGBTI-ICIS2 provides addi- tional details, images, and references to the particular authoritative sources where the evidence was found. 2. Geo-Visual LGBTI Thematic Mapping: Figure 6 is a cultural the- matic mapping of documented sexual activity in the LGBTI-ICIS2, representing its occurrence throughout the heart of the sub-Saharan region stretching across the continent. The specific tile for each country-tribe related to the theme of sexual activity pro- vides the user further details, images, and authoritative references, for example, of homosexual activity under a variety of circumstances (e.g., during war), ranks, and roles contributing to the tribe. 2018-0016 Mehra4.indd 9 5/18/2018 2:16:24 PM
10 Mehra, Lemieux III, Burwell, Hixson, Partee II, Stophel, Wood Figure 5: A representation of a Geo-Tribal Thematic Network in the LGBTI-ICIS2 of several documented “non-conforming” LGBTI instances. Figure 6: A representation of Geo-Visual LGBTI Thematic Mapping in the LGBTI-ICIS2 related to the cultural theme of sexual activity throughout the continent. 2018-0016 Mehra4.indd 10 5/18/2018 2:16:30 PM
Expanding LIS Education in the US Department of State’s Diplomacy Lab Program 11 Figure 7: A representation of Geographic Hotspot Analysis in the LGBTI-ICIS2 related to an area that experienced a high documented spatial distribution of “non-conforming” gender behavior. 3. Geographic Hotspot Analysis: Figure 7 represents an area that expe- rienced a high documented spatial distribution related to the cul- tural theme of “non-conforming” gender behavior. A geographic hotspot is a blanket term used to describe an area that experienced such high observed spatial distribution of a particular variable. For this study, the team developed the following criteria to qualify as a geographic hotspot: there must be documented evidence of at least three occurrences of the same cultural theme within a radius no greater than 1,000 kilometers. Potential impact Leonid Lantsman, Department of State liaison in the Bureau of Inter- national Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs, identified Project 1 as an exemplar and invited the lead faculty author of this article as project representative to a panel entitled “Collaborative International Criminal Justice Research: Successful Projects from the U.S. State Department’s Diplomacy Lab” at the 2016 American Society of Criminology’s 72nd Annual Meeting in New Orleans in November 2016 (https://tiny.utk.edu/ dlp2016CrimConf). As Todd Haskell, deputy assistant secretary for public diplomacy, United States Department of State, Bureau of African Affairs, wrote in his letter of appreciation of Project 2, I thank you for encouraging your graduate students this semester to research historical examples of African acceptance of LGBTI individuals or individuals who could be contemporarily 2018-0016 Mehra4.indd 11 5/18/2018 2:16:33 PM
12 Mehra, Lemieux III, Burwell, Hixson, Partee II, Stophel, Wood characterized as LGBTI. This was the first time our Office of Public Diplomacy and Public Affairs undertook a Diplomacy Lab project, and your team’s final project sets a high bar for future Diplomacy Lab ventures. We plan to send the presentation and impressive website link to all 50 U.S. embassies and consulates in sub-Saharan Africa, as well as our colleagues in related bureaus, such as the Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor, and the Secretary’s Office of the Special Envoy for LGBTI Rights. The information provided can help our diplomats support tolerance and acceptance of Africa’s LGBTI communities by demonstrating the communities have strong historical roots in many instances. We also anticipate the presentation and website could be of wider interest to the aca- demic and activist community in the United States and encourage you to make it available to others for possible further research and refinement. (https://tiny.utk.edu/DLPLetter). Discussion A common strategy across the two Diplomacy Lab projects involved high- lighting materials that visually integrated print/digital and multi-media audio-visual collections into dynamic interactive user-friendly GIS-based resources, allowing for easier interpretation, analysis, and identification of policy actions emerging from the contained information (Bolstad, 2016; Pierkot, Zimanyi, Lin, & Libourel, 2011). The teams responded to an urgent responsibility of information agencies to connect “collections” to advocacy/human rights protections for marginalized populations like LGBTI people who are unfairly treated as criminals in many parts of the world owing to cultural taboos or political reasons (Mehra & Hernandez, 2016; Mehra & Rioux, 2016). The Diplomacy Lab projects provided opportunities for students to work directly with an external government agency and showcase their information management and technology skills while developing profes- sional networks and career growth possibilities in the process (Kazmer, 2005). Learning outcomes included the furtherance of GIS advocacy and associated technology knowledge (Duval-Diop, Curtis, & Clark, 2010), comprehension of the ways in which LIS education can be applied in the real world (Ball, 2008; Yontz & McCook, 2003), and experience in ana- lyzing complex data and communicating in a way that was succinct while still being comprehensively useful (Garvey, 2014). Student involvement in the two projects played an important role in their ability to graduate successfully and find job opportunities in prestigious firms and work set- tings of their choice. All project students are listed as co-authors of this article, and their current professional affiliations reflect the wide range of relevance and applicability of their learning experience in diverse career roles such as metadata specialist, data management specialist/team lead, 2018-0016 Mehra4.indd 12 5/18/2018 2:16:33 PM
Expanding LIS Education in the US Department of State’s Diplomacy Lab Program 13 technical services professional, GIS resident librarian, law librarian, and resource management librarian. Students gained hands-on experience in applying information-related research to foreign-policy development, a domain that has strong potential to expand the integration of library and information professionals’ contri- butions in future years (Lazar, 2014). The experiences went beyond what a traditional classroom usually offers because the learning was grounded in a real-time context of partnering with a government agency to have students develop a practical application of technology in the form of usable, tan- gible products (Lim & Bloomquist, 2015). Students were very passionate about the potential impact of their work toward affecting positive change for a marginalized population in a geographic region of the world where the need was most immediate and urgent. It made them excited to know that the Diplomacy Lab experience was preparing them as professionals to respond to challenges and opportunities provided in a changing and dynamic work environment that is resulting from a globally networked and interconnected information society (Castells, 2010). As Taylor Hixson, former GIS resident librarian at the University of Chicago (and article co-author) who started in January 2018 as the geospatial services librarian at the New York University, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, said about her Diplomacy Lab experience, “I had other experiences in my library school education that were worthwhile, like practicum, assistantships, and group projects, but this was the first project I worked on that really felt like it fell outside of library school’s structured safety net. Getting outside of my comfort zone as far as information seeking and collaboration—while still working under a professor’s guidance—prepared me more for the real world of librarianship than a cataloging class ever could.” Implications for LIS education LIS educators can implement similar efforts to partner external stakehold- ers (e.g., the US Department of State) with students in their classroom and develop information-related deliverables that make a direct difference in people’s lives. This section briefly highlights important considerations to inform the development of such experiential-learning practices within the LIS professions, based on insights learnt in the two Diplomacy Lab projects. Challenges. Building successful collaborations that are effective in serv- ing collaborating agencies’ expectations as well as enhancing students’ learning experience requires intense planning, time-task management, and a creative “out-of-the-box” mindset and approach. In the two Diplomacy Lab projects, the “course” strategy of the independent study/ graduate research participation allowed the faculty member to develop each student’s personalized learning objectives while collaborating with other students in the team in the context of the larger project’s goal and purpose. 2018-0016 Mehra4.indd 13 5/18/2018 2:16:33 PM
14 Mehra, Lemieux III, Burwell, Hixson, Partee II, Stophel, Wood Opportunities. To make such community-engaged learning a common phenomenon in LIS education requires faculty to critically analyze their course content and identify opportunities where stakeholder partnerships could enhance student experience and competence in the learning of varied information-related topics, subjects, and tasks. This calls, possibly at the programmatic levels, for identifying and listing different types of information agencies (e.g., government departments, multinational corporations, IT businesses, non-profits, etc.) that might be interested and willing to collaborate with students on the development of mutually identified products and outcomes requiring information-related skills and competences. Mapping to course content in the LIS curriculum would be an important step in the process. Conclusion This article has provided a glimpse of two innovative LIS projects that integrated collaborations with government stakeholders to apply student efforts toward foreign-policy formulation within the scope of an academic course structure (e.g., semester time frame, individualized student ob- jectives within bigger project goals, weekly meetings, work distribution, demarcation of professional obligations, grades, etc.). Challenges and best practice solutions in visualized content delivery and resource development are meaningful because of teaching-research-advocacy intersections in LIS education. The Diplomacy Lab project experiences reveal important pos- sible roles of information professionals in the enactment of government work. LIS educators and administrators must open their eyes to this po- tential as a strong career path for newly graduating students and provide opportunities and support for making this a reality. The need for strategies to expand LIS education in partnering with other organizations across various sectors (e.g., government, corporations, local activist groups, etc.) to involve students in teaching-research activities applied toward advocacy is also an important take-away message. Bharat Mehra is associate professor in the School of Information Sciences at the Univer- sity of Tennessee. His research examines diversity and intercultural communication, social justice in library and information science, critical and cross-cultural studies, and commu- nity informatics or the use of information and communication technologies to empower minority and underserved populations to make meaningful changes in their everyday lives. Mehra has collaborated with racial/ethnic groups, international communities, sexual minorities, rural librarians, and small businesses to represent their experiences and perspectives in shaping the design and development of community-based informa- tion systems and services. He primarily teaches courses on public library management, collection development, resources and services for adults, diversity services in libraries, and grant development for information professionals. Paul Lemieux III works for the NOAA National Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI) in Asheville, North Carolina, as a metadata specialist. His research interests include digital curation, environmental informatics, GIS technologies, and federal librarianship. Christie Burwell is currently a technical services librarian at the Williamsburg Regional Library in Williamsburg, Virginia. 2018-0016 Mehra4.indd 14 5/18/2018 2:16:33 PM
Expanding LIS Education in the US Department of State’s Diplomacy Lab Program 15 Taylor Hixson is currently the librarian for geospatial data services at New York University Abu Dhabi and was previously the resident librarian for GIS at the University of Chicago Library. Robert Partee II is a data specialist for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Keri Stophel has worked in research and reference for multiple academic legal libraries and federal court libraries, including Duncan School of Law, University of Tennessee Col- lege of Law, United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims, and the Supreme Court of the United States. She currently works at the Congressional Research Service, serving Congress in the American Law Division in Washington, D.C. Nicole Wood is currently employed as the resource management librarian at Austin Peay State University. Acknowledgments The authors wish to thank the Department of State liaisons, Leonid Lants- man and Justin Showalter, in the Bureau of International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs, and Samantha H. Smith, assistant cultural coor- dinator, Office of Public Diplomacy and Public Affairs, Bureau of African Affairs. We also appreciate the efforts of the university program coordi- nator, Nissa Dahlin-Brown, associate director of the Howard H. Baker Jr. Center for Public Policy at the University of Tennessee. An earlier version of the article was presented during the Association for Library and Infor- mation Science Education (ALISE) annual conference in Denver, Colo- rado, February 6–9, 2018, and published in the conference proceedings. References Ball, M.A. (2008). Practicums and service-learning in LIS education. Journal of Education for Library and Information Science, 49(1), 70–82. Bolstad, P. (2016). GIS fundamentals: A first text on geographic information systems (5th ed.). Ann Arbor, MI: XanEdu Publishing. Bureau of Public Affairs, US Department of State. (n.d.). Diplomacy in action: Diplomacy Lab. Washington, DC: US Department of State. Retrieved from https://www.state.gov/s/partnerships/ppp/diplab/ Castells, M. (2010). The rise of the network society. The information age: Economy, society, and culture (Vol. I). Chichester, England: John Wiley & Sons. Duval-Diop, D., Curtis, A., & Clark, A. (2010). Enhancing equity with public par- ticipatory GIS in hurricane rebuilding: Faith based organizations, community mapping, and policy advocacy. Community Development: Journal of the Community Development Society, 41(1), 32–49. https://doi.org/10.1080/15575330903288854 Garvey, W.D. (2014). Communication: The essence of science: Facilitating information exchange among librarians, scientists, engineers and students. Oxford, England: Per- gamon Press. Hoad, N.W. (2007). African intimacies: Race, homosexuality, and globalization. Minne- apolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press. Kazmer, M.M. (2005). Community-embedded learning. Library Quarterly: Informa- tion, Community, Policy, 75(2), 190–212. https://doi.org/10.1086/431333 Lantsman, L. (2016, November). Bureau of International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs’ academic outreach program: Leveraging Diplomacy Lab. Panel title: Collaborative international criminal justice research: Suc- cessful projects from the U.S. State Department’s Diplomacy Lab. 2016 American Society of Criminology’s 72nd Annual Meeting, New Orleans, LA. Retrieved from https://convention2.allacademic.com/one/asc/asc16/index. 2018-0016 Mehra4.indd 15 5/18/2018 2:16:33 PM
16 Mehra, Lemieux III, Burwell, Hixson, Partee II, Stophel, Wood php?cmd5Online1Program1View1Paper&selected_paper_id51149209&PH- PSESSID5e4rvuj6as3jb59fi1hv94or3l5 Lazar, J. (2014). Engaging in information science research that informs public policy. Library Quarterly: Information, Community, Policy, 84(4), 451–459. https:// doi.org/10.1086/677780 Lim, S., & Bloomquist, C. (2015). Distinguishing service learning from other types of experiential learning. Education for Information, 31(4), 195–207. https://doi .org/10.3233/EFI-150952 Mehra, B. (2016, November). International corrections reform and human rights protections for lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex inmates in Africa and Latin America: The LGBTI Integrated Cartographic Information System. Panel title: Collaborative international criminal justice research: Successful proj- ects from the U.S. State Department’s Diplomacy Lab. 2016 American Society of Criminology’s 72nd Annual Meeting, New Orleans, LA. Retrieved from https:// convention2.allacademic.com/one/asc/asc16/index.php?cmd5Online1Pro- gram1View1Paper&selected_paper_id51149211&PHPSESSID5t02a56c411rpc- 25mpvb7oqs8a3 Mehra, B., Burwell, C., Hixson, T., Lemieux, P.A., III, Partee, R.P., II, & Wood, N.E. (2016, August). Global collections of international correction reform and human rights protections for lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex inmates in Africa and Latin America: A prototype solution of the LGBTI Inte- grated Cartographic Information System. DocuQueer: Preserving community through collaborative collections (paper presentation), satellite meeting of the LGBTQ users SIG, World Library and Information Congress: International Federa- tion of Library Associations and Institutions (IFLA) General Conference and Council, Chicago, IL. Mehra, B., & Hernandez, L. (2016). Libraries as agents of human rights protection and social justice on behalf of sexual minorities in India: An action-based man- ifesto for progressive change. In U. Gorham, N.G. Taylor, & P.T. Jaeger (Eds.), Perspectives on libraries as institutions of human rights and social justice. (Advances in Librarianship Series) (pp. 147–182). Bingley, England: Emerald Group Publish- ing. https://doi.org/10.1108/S0065-283020160000041007 Mehra, B. & Rioux, K. (Eds.). (2016). Progressive community action: Critical theory and social justice in library and information science. Sacramento, CA: Library Juice Press. Mehra, B., Stophel, K., & Lemieux, P., III. (2016, May). LGBTI Integrated Carto- graphic Information System II, mapping “LGBTI” cultural representations of difference in historical sub-Saharan Africa [LGBTI issues: Analysis of historic participation of LGBTI persons in African culture] (invited presentation). US Department of State’s Diplomacy Lab Program. Washington, DC: US Department of State. Pierkot, C., Zimanyi, E., Lin, Y., & Libourel, T. (2011, May). Advocacy for external quality in GIS. Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on GeoSpatial Semantics, Brest, France. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-20630-6_10 University of Tennessee-Knoxville News. (2015, September 9). Law & poli- tics: Baker Center becomes Diplomacy Lab partner with US Department of State. Retrieved from https://news.utk.edu/2015/09/09/baker-center- diplomacy-lab-partner-department-state/ Yontz, E., & McCook, K.d.l.P. (2003). Service-learning and LIS education. Jour- nal of Education for Library and Information Science, 44(1), 58–68. https://doi .org/10.2307/40323942 2018-0016 Mehra4.indd 16 5/18/2018 2:16:33 PM