Diversified Research Methods Education in LIS: Thinking Outside the Box Lili Luo School of Information, San Jose State University. Email: lili.luo@sjsu.edu A small number of LIS degree programs have adopted a diversified approach to research methods education, including offering an array of specialized research methods courses in addition to a general introductory course. The current study conducted an in-depth investigation of the diversified research methods curriculum of the LIS program at San Jose State University. The curriculum featured ten different research methods courses, and permitted students to make a selection to fulfill the requirement. Students tended to base their selections on individual interests, and reported a high level of satisfaction with their learning experience. The current study examined different aspects of the di- versified curriculum from the student perspective, and reviewed the implications of this curricular model. Keywords: research methods, LIS education, LIS programs, LIS curriculum Introduction often inadequately prepared when con- ducting research at work. Librarians list In Library and Information Science unfamiliarity with the research process, (LIS), researchers and practitioners tra- lack of confidence, and insufficient knowl- ditionally acknowledge the importance of edge on research methods among the ob- research to practice. According to Jarvis stacles that hinder their engagement in (1999), research should seek “in a most research (Haddow & Klobas, 2004; Ken- rigorous manner, to understand and create nedy & Brancolini, 2012). This discrep- efficient working practice” (p. xi), should ancy demands reflection on the teaching create new knowledge and, therefore, and learning of research methods in LIS should contribute to the growth of LIS education. As educators, it is imperative as a profession (Powell, Baker, & Mika, that we constantly examine and properly 2002). Research methods education is in- adjust the research methods curriculum to dispensable in preparing LIS practitioners meet the needs of future LIS practitioners. for research, developing a culture that nur- Library and Information Science is an tures and offers opportunities for research, expansive field that covers a wide variety and facilitating the connection between of domains; thus, graduates of LIS degree research and practice (Haddow & Klobas, programs may gain employment in diverse 2004). In April 2016, of the 53 ALA-ac- settings where the culture and practice of credited LIS degree programs that offered research may vary greatly. Consequently, online information on degree require- the most appropriate research methods ments, 62.3% required research methods, education may depend on the specific pro- while 7.5% either offered the class among fessional domain pursued by individual a cluster of others from which students students. While traditional LIS degree could choose or strongly recommended the programs offer only one course that pro- course as an option. Even though the ma- vides an introductory overview of fre- jority of the programs mandated research quently used methods for data collection methods education, LIS practitioners are and analysis, a small number of programs J. of Education for Library and Information Science, Vol. 58, No. 2—(Spring) April 2017 ISSN: 0748-5786 © 2017 Association for Library and Information Science Education 49 doi:10.12783/issn.2328-2967/58/2/1
50 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE now consider students’ diverse needs and Literature Review offer an assortment of research methods courses with varying foci. These programs Research is “an inquiry process that has include: specific components” (Hernon, 2001, p. 81), including reflective inquiry (problem • The University of Oklahoma offers two statement, literature review, and theoretical courses, one of which provides a gen- framework, logical structure, objectives, eral introduction to research methods, and research questions, and hypotheses), while the other focuses on evaluative procedures (research design and methods research. of data collection), data gathering/process- • The University of Michigan features ing/analysis, issues of reliability and valid- eight courses, including Empirical ity of study, and presentation of findings. Methods for Health Informatics, Intro- Numerous studies (Bodi, 2002; Fister, duction to Statistics and Data Analysis, 1992, 1993; Lenox, 1985; Luo, 2011; Per- Microeconomics, Game Theory, Data kins & Helbig, 2008; Perkins & Slowik, Manipulation, Exploratory Data Analy- 2013) attest to the importance of research sis, Needs Assessment and Usability in the advancement of the LIS profession, Evaluation, and Research Methods for and offer abundant evidence that research Information Professionals. skills such as reference consultations, in- • San Jose State University delivers 10 formation literacy instruction, evaluation courses, including General Overview and management, and promotion and ten- of LIS Research Methods, Research in ure play an important role in LIS practice. Youth Services, Evaluating Programs Research can improve problem solving and Services, Action Research, Sur- and decision making in the workplace, vey Research, Historic Research and make LIS practitioners critical consum- Writing, Ethnography, Assessment of ers of the research literature, and equip Information Literacy Instruction, Grant them to provide optimal information ser- Writing and Records Management, and vices to researchers in other fields at the Archival Research. individual, organization, professional, and national levels (Neal, 2006; Powell et al., This diversified approach is an attempt 2002). The specific benefits of engaging in by LIS educators to think outside the box research are also well-documented. These by making research methods classes more benefits include job promotion, personal relevant. The approach provides students acknowledgement, enriched relationships with wider exposure to LIS research and with teaching faculty, increased ability to methodology, and prepares them for the change and identify/solve problems, and varying types of applied research they improve library services and programs may need in their future careers. Focusing (Luo, 2011; Perkins & Slowik, 2013). on the case of San Jose State University’s Despite disciplines within LIS recog- School of Information, the current study nizing the value of research, there is still involved a detailed examination and eval- a gap between LIS research and practice. uation of the new curricular model, which One study analyzed the contents of 1,880 produced a microscopic view of the way articles in LIS journals and found that only in which the diversified research curricu- 16% qualified as research (Turcios, Agar- lum fulfilled student needs. Hopefully, this wal, & Watkins, 2014). Some academics work will generate ideas for further dis- suggested the need for more research on cussion on enhancing LIS research meth- overcoming the barriers to conducting and ods education, and assist educators and re- applying research in LIS practice, which searchers in making informed decisions on might gradually bridge the research-prac- research methods curricular development. tice gap (Chu, 2015). The 2016 Annual
Diversified Research Methods Education in LIS: Thinking Outside the Box 51 Conference of the Association of Library ods courses were quantitative research and Information Science Education dedi- methods/data analysis, critical evaluation cated its prestigious President’s Panel to of the literature, and written research pa- this issue from both the researchers’ and pers/plans. Regarding research methods the practitioners’ perspectives (Stephens, pedagogy, Chang and Siao (2012) dis- Abbas, Garnar, Kennedy, Kenney, & Luo, cussed the development of e-learning ma- 2016). One theme that arose from the terials and the use of those methods in a panel discussion was the need to establish LIS research methods course, while On- a mutual understanding and definition of drusek, Thiele, and Yang (2014) analyzed research among researchers and practitio- abstracts written by LIS students for their ners to facilitate better communication. A research proposals. A one-way analysis of reasonable path leading to such mutual un- variance (ANOVA) detected significantly derstanding was research methods educa- higher scores in areas related to fluency of tion in the professional preparation of LIS description in the research design and the practitioners. Offering formal research required elements of a research proposal methods courses in LIS degree programs in groups with greater exposure to work- could enhance practitioners’ understand- ing examples. ing and appreciation of the practical value Another notable premise in the litera- of research and equip them with necessary ture was the efficacy of research methods knowledge/skills to interpret/conduct re- courses. To examine the students’ per- search to solve problems at work (Stoan, ceptions of research methods courses at 1984). Brigham Young University, Staples (1982) One prominent area in the literature on surveyed library school graduates and research methods education in LIS was found that half had a general understand- curriculum and pedagogy. Surveying in- ing of research and research methods, and structors in ALA-accredited LIS schools, most used research skills to derive data Stephenson (1990) and Smith and Adams for problem solving at least once. Student (1992) derived similar findings on the top- suggestions for improving the curriculum ical coverage in research methods courses. included having more time to complete re- Both found that most instructors required search projects, adding the requirement of evaluation of research articles and pro- a publishable article, and providing more vided basic research methodologies and comprehensive statistics instruction. In statistical skills, while about half made addition, Perkins and Helbig (2008) sur- practical research experience a mandatory veyed LIS journal authors regarding their component in the curriculum. In compar- perceptions of the usefulness of the 45 ing LIS programs in Korea and the US, topics identified from research course syl- Park (2004) examined the topics covered labi to their professional work and found in research methods education. Her find- that the three most useful topics were ings indicated that, while the range of top- the critical evaluation of literature, writ- ics covered in Korean research methods ten research paper/plan, and the scholarly courses needed expansion, those in the publication process. The same population United States required greater depth of cited the three least useful topics as quasi/ coverage. experimental design, global applications, Perkins and Helbig (2008) analyzed and multivariate analysis. research methods course syllabi from 25 In a 2002 study, Powell, Baker and ALA-accredited programs and provided a Mika (2002) investigated LIS practitio- detailed break-down of 45 methodologi- ners’ involvement in research with find- cal topics taught in those courses. Their ings revealing that almost 90% of LIS findings revealed that the three most fre- practitioners regularly read at least one re- quently covered topics in research meth- search journal, nearly 62% regularly read
52 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE research-based articles, approximately students taking a research methods course, 50% occasionally applied research results teaching methods and techniques, and to professional practices, and 42% occa- content and course goals. The lack of re- sionally or frequently conducted research search on assessment and student learning related to their job or to the LIS profession. created a gap in the literature on research The study also identified factors related to methods courses. practitioners’ research involvement. Ac- Building on the existing literature, the cording to participants, conducting and current study provides an in-depth view reading research positively associated of an emerging curricular model that em- with the number of educational activities ploys a diversified approach to research about research methods, but had no corre- methods education. It is anticipated that lation with whether their master’s program this new knowledge will enrich the un- offered adequate preparation. Luo (2011) derstanding of effective teaching in LIS conducted a nationwide survey among degree programs and, thus, make a unique librarians about the impact of research contribution to the literature on research methods education on their professional methods courses. practices, and concluded that the research methods course was a valuable component Description of Diversified Research of the MLIS program. Taking the research Methods Curriculum and Study methods course increased LIS practitio- Design ners’ research interests and assisted many aspects of their work, such as critically Research Methods is a required course evaluating published literature for applica- at LIS program at San Jose State Univer- tion at work, providing better assistance to sity with 10 different research methods library users, producing valid and reliable courses currently offered on a regular data to facilitate decision making, iden- basis. Four of the 10 courses offered ev- tifying problems at work and designing ery semester include General Overview, studies to solve them, and writing grants Evaluating Programs and Services, Action and for publication. Research, and Survey Research. The oth- In addition to studies on LIS prepara- er six are available only once each year, tion, some researchers investigated the either in the spring or in the fall, due to importance of research methods education limitations on instructor availability. Be- in other fields, such as psychology, sociol- cause the LIS program at San Jose State ogy, theological education, and business. University offers only online courses, all Wagner, Garner, and Kawulich (2011) Research Methods courses are entirely on- reviewed 195 articles published in 61 line. journals over a 10-year period to describe Students may take any of the 10 research the state of the state of the art of teaching methods courses to fulfill the requirement, research methods in the social sciences. based on their interests, backgrounds, and They identified three areas on which future professional pursuits. For example, if stu- efforts should focus: (a) the role and desir- dents intend to work with young people in able characteristics of a research methods public libraries, they may select the course teacher, (b) the challenges of teaching and that introduces the theory and methods of learning specific aspects of research meth- planning and evaluating youth services. On ods, and (c) commonalities and differenc- the other hand, if students majored in psy- es in research methods among disciplines. chology or sociology as an undergraduate In another review of literature on research and already have a strong knowledge base methods teaching and learning, Earley in quantitative methods, they might prefer (2014) examined 89 studies and found the a course focused on qualitative methods literature focused on the characteristics of like ethnography. Students may enroll in
Diversified Research Methods Education in LIS: Thinking Outside the Box 53 the research methods course twice for two Understand appropriate data collection/ specializations to expand their repertoire analysis tools, and ethical concerns of research knowledge and skills. related to research. Despite the different foci, each of the • The same program-level competency research methods courses shares four that students should master upon common components: graduating from the program includes demonstrating a grasp of quantitative • The same course-level learning objec- and qualitative research methods, the tives that students should acquire upon skill to design a research project, and completion of the course. The learn- the ability to evaluate and synthesize ing objectives include the ability to: research literature. (a) Understand the difference between • The same research ethics assignment primary and secondary research; (b) that accounts for 5% of the total grade, Demonstrate knowledge of fundamen- which includes completion of the tal principles and processes of conduct- Collaborative Institutional Training ing research; (c) Articulate the research Initiative (CITI) online workshop titled method(s) covered in the course, ap- Students conducting no more than propriately apply them, and understand minimal risk research. All San José their strengths and liabilities; and (d) State University faculty and students Table 1. Research Methods Courses Offered by the LIS Program at San Jose State University. Course Focus Course Description General Overview Introduces the research methods frequently used in conducting Library and Information Science research. Research in Youth Services Introduces research methods focusing on application in youth research, and critically examining the issues surrounding research involving youth. Evaluating Programs and Services Covers research methods most often used to evaluate and assess services in public, academic, and special libraries as well as information agencies. Action Research Introduces action research methods that further learning and improve situations within professional settings. Survey Research Focuses on the survey research method, one of the most frequent- ly used methods in library and information science research. Historic Research and Writing Explores the ways in which historians frame research questions, assess current literature on historical topics, locate and critically use primary and secondary sources, and formulate viable and worthwhile research projects. Ethnography Introduces ethnographic research, particularly through the use of technology. Assessment of Information Introduces research methods in evaluating and assessing the Literacy Instruction teaching and learning of information literacy. Needs Assessment and Grant Introduces widely used methodologies for needs assessment and Research writing grant applications. Records Management and Offers an overview of research methods in the social sciences Archival Research and their application to research about and within archives and records centers.
54 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE intending to do research with living In March 2016, with the approval of human subjects must complete this San Jose State University’s Institutional workshop. Review Board, previous research methods • For courses focusing on specialized students participated in an anonymous on- topics instead of a general overview, line survey to examine their perceptions a mandatory lecture briefly introduces of and experience with this diversified frequently used methods and designs in curricular approach. The main variables LIS research. investigated in the survey are in Table 2 below. For each variable, the table also Ultimately, these shared components, shows the survey question(s) measuring developed and finalized by all research that variable. methods instructors, ensured a broad level The survey served as the data collec- of curricular consistency. In addition, the tion method based on three determining university had a research methods cur- factors: (a) the study would quantitatively riculum coordinator, whose responsibili- measure variations in perceptions and ex- ties included facilitating communications perience; (b) the self-administered survey among instructors, providing support was appropriate to reach as many students throughout the semester, and conducting as possible; and (c) there was enough evi- curricular reviews every five years to en- dence in the literature and in the author’s sure the currency and relevance of the cur- informal observations to describe the vari- riculum. ation for each variable and develop ade- Table 2. Variables Measured in the Survey and the Corresponding Survey Questions. Variable Survey Questions Topical focus of the research methods Have you taken INFO (or MARA) 285 Research Methods in course the students selected Library and Information Science (LIS) yet? What is the topical focus of the 285 section you took (are taking)? Reasons for selecting the particular What was the main reason for you to choose the 285 section course identified above? Overall satisfaction with the course How satisfied are you with your overall learning experience in 285? Benefits of the course Have you had a chance to use what you learned in 285 to benefit your study or work? What are the benefits of 285 you have experienced? Impact of the course on their interest Has taken 285 increased your interest in research? in research Additional topics for the research Is there any topical focus that you think should be added to methods curriculum the offerings of 285? Suggestions for improving the Please provide any suggestions you may have to improve the curriculum curriculum of INFO 285. Demographics Which of the following the career pathways, as listed on the page of iSchool Career Pathways, are you most interested in pursuing? Which of the following statements best describes your current status in terms of professional practice in the field of LIS?
Diversified Research Methods Education in LIS: Thinking Outside the Box 55 Table 3. Frequency Distribution of Research Methods Course Selections. Course Focus % of Respondents Taking the Course General Overview 29.5 Evaluating Programs and Services 17.5 Historic Research and Writing 16.3 Survey Research 10.4 Action Research 10.0 Research in Youth Services 6.0 Records Management and Archival Research 5.2 Ethnography 3.2 Assessment of Information Literacy Instruction 1.2 Grant Writing 0.8 quate response categories for each survey those meeting the inclusion criteria to par- question. ticipate. The survey was available online The development of the survey ques- for three weeks. A week before the survey tionnaire underwent three stages. The first closed, students received a reminder to en- stage involved examination of relevant courage more participation. literature and curricular documents to fi- To analyze the survey data, the re- nalize the variables and draft the corre- searcher employed the Statistical Package sponding survey questions. Following the for Social Sciences (SPSS) to examine first draft, the researcher scrutinized the responses to closed questions. Frequency questionnaire based on the basic survey distribution and central tendency measures design rules discussed in Fink (2016). At aided univariate analysis with PRE mea- the second stage, the survey questionnaire sure Lambda used for bivariate analysis. went to all Research Methods instructors The researcher conducted applied themat- for feedback. After revision based on their ic analysis to examine responses to open- input, the instructors agreed that the sur- ended questions. vey questions represented proper measure- ment of the variables, which established Results face validity and content validity of the instrument. At the third and final stage, the The survey produced 266 valid sur- survey was pilot tested by two student as- vey responses of which 64.7% were from sistants and received minor revision based previous students and 35.3% from cur- on their suggestions. rent students. As shown in Table 3, the Purposeful sampling controlled defin- course that offered a general overview of ing and recruiting the survey respondents. research methods was the most popular Only current or previous students in the among students. The popularity of the research methods course by the time of courses likely related to the frequency the survey made up the sample. Students of offering—the top five most popular who had not taken the course or received a courses are available every semester with waiver could not participate. the remaining courses offered only once The online survey was administered every one or two years. via Qualtrics, a commercial online survey Table 4 indicates that interest in the service. An email including the survey subject matter and relevance to their ca- link went to the student listserv, inviting reer pursuits ranked first and second as
56 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE Table 4. Reasons for Selecting a Specific Research Methods Course. Reasons for Selecting a Specific Course Focus % of Respondents I was interested in the topic of the section. 34.0 The section was relevant to the career path I hope to pursue/current work. 26.1 It was the only section I could get in. 11.9 I liked the instructor/syllabus/assignments. 8.7 It was a rather random choice as I had no particular leaning toward any section. 6.7 The section was highly recommended by my peers. 5.9 I did not like any of the other sections offered concurrently. 2.8 I got into the section involuntarily because of registration mistakes or class cancel- 1.6 ations. I chose the section because it was offered in the intensive 8-week format instead 1.6 of the regular 16-week format, which was a better fit for my schedule. Other (a combination of reasons) 0.8 reasons for students’ choice of a particular 43.7% of the students responded affirma- Research Methods Course. tively. As indicated in Table 5, the most Overall, students expressed satisfaction recognized benefit was the ability to inter- with their learning experience in their se- pret research readings in their coursework. lected Research Methods course. They rat- While 59.5% of the students indicated ed their level of satisfaction on a five point that their interest in research improved af- Likert scale, wherein 5 represented Very ter taking the Research Methods course, Satisfied, and 1 represented Very Dissat- 40.5% reported no change, some of whom isfied. The average satisfaction rating was explained that they were already quite in- 3.9, and almost 70% of the students select- terested in research and the course itself ed 4 or 5 to indicate their satisfaction level, simply did not have much influence on as shown in Figure 1. their pre-existing interest level. Among When asked whether they had used those with an increased level of research what they learned in the Research Meth- interest, 57.1% felt they had greater inter- ods course to benefit their study or work, est in reading research articles to advance Figure 1. Students’ satisfaction with their learning experience in the research methods course.
Diversified Research Methods Education in LIS: Thinking Outside the Box 57 Table 5. Benefits of Taking the Research Methods Course. Benefits of the Research Methods Course % of Respondents I'm now able to interpret research articles that I'm assigned to read in other 63.0 classes. I used what I learned to design studies or projects required in other classes. 41.7 I used what I learned to evaluate published research findings more critically to 39.8 inform decisions at work. I used what I learned to conduct studies to gather original data to improve prac- 32.4 tice at work. I used what I learned to help write grant proposals or research proposals at work. 12.0 I had an opportunity to carry out the study described in the research proposal I 12.0 wrote for 285. My capability to write and publish improved as a result of the class. 3.7 I feel more prepared and confident to engage in research if opportunities arise in 2.8 the future. I gained a new perspective about conducting research. 0.9 their professional knowledge, 47.6% PRE measure Lambda served as analysis. shared that they acquired interest in us- As shown in Table 8, the resulting Lamb- ing published research findings to inform da values were small, indicating that the decision making at work, 51.0% revealed bivariate relationships examined in the interest in conducting research studies to study were weak. In other words, students’ generate evidence that could help improve overall satisfaction with their learning ex- practice, 2.0% reported a heightened inter- perience in the course, including whether est in research writing and publishing, and their research interest increased after tak- 1.4% noted more interest in helping others ing the course, whether they used what with their research work. they learned from the course to benefit Students that responded to the survey their study or work, their intended career had a variety of career pathways. To intro- pathway, and their status in terms of pro- duce students to various careers and help fessional practice in the field of LIS, had students with career planning and course little to do with the topic of the Research selection, the LIS program at San Jose Methods course. State University identified thirteen career To enrich the Research Methods curric- pathways to represent the diverse career ulum, the survey asked students to suggest directions students might follow with their new topics. Their suggestions included: MLIS degree. Table 6 provides an over- view of the student interest distribution • Quantitative research methods, such as across various career pathways. data analytics and statistics When asked about their work status, • Research related to technology, such more than 60% of the students responded as Web security, Web programming, that they worked full-time or part-time in algorithmic bias, virtual worlds, and the field of LIS, as shown in Table 7. digital literacy To understand student experiences with • Research in the area of information the Research Methods courses, a number organization (e.g. cataloging, metadata) of bivariate analyses determined whether • Research related to management, such the topics of the Research Methods cours- as strategic planning, trend watching, es correlated with five other variables. The evidence-based arguments, budget
58 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE Table 6. Career Pathways Students Intend to Pursue. Career Pathway % of Respondents Public Librarianship—A Community Hub for Learning and Literacy 18.0 Youth Services 13.4 Management, Digitization, and Preservation of Cultural Heritage and Records 11.3 (Archival Studies and Records Management) Academic Librarianship—The Information and Learning Commons 10.9 Teacher Librarianship 8.8 Special Librarianship 7.5 Information Organization, Description, Analysis, and Retrieval 6.7 Leadership and Management 5.4 Web Programming and Information Architecture 5.0 Digital Services 4.6 Emerging Technologies—Issues and Trends 3.3 Digital Curation 2.9 Information Intermediation and Instruction 2.1 analysis, and evidence gathering for indicated a desire to see two of the current- SWOT analysis ly available topics offered more frequent- • Research practices in schools, such as ly—Assessment of Information Literacy the school library, or other aspects of Instruction and Grant Writing. They also the educational community suggested more emphasis on topics, such • Research related to international stud- as: research ethics, citation styles, differ- ies, race, and diversity ences between qualitative and quantitative • Conducting interdisciplinary research research, dissemination of research find- • Postmodern research methods (This ings, and practical values of the methods topic was only offered twice and then in the current courses. discontinued because of instructor At the end of the survey, students re- unavailability. Students suggested a sponded to how to make the Research revival as a regular component of the Methods curriculum more effective in Research Methods curriculum). meeting their needs. Of the 266 respon- dents, 68 offered suggestions. Their input In addition to the new topics, students identified six main themes. Table 7. Students’ Work Status. Work Status % of Respondents I work full-time in the field of LIS. 39.5 I work part-time in the field of LIS. 21.8 I currently do not work, intern, or volunteer in the field of LIS. 21.8 I intern in the field of LIS. 8.2 I volunteer in the field of LIS. 6.6 I work full-time in a non-LIS field. 2.1
Diversified Research Methods Education in LIS: Thinking Outside the Box 59 Table 8. Bivariate Analysis Results. Relationship Lambda Value Is there a relationship The topic of the Research Methods course & students’ overall 0.06 between: satisfaction with their learning experience in the course The topic of the Research Methods course & whether stu- 0.019 dents’ research interest increased after taking the course The topic of the Research Methods course & whether stu- 0.035 dents used what they learned from the course to benefit their study or work The topic of the Research Methods course & the career path- 0.121 way students intended to pursue The topic of the Research Methods course & students’ status 0.019 in terms of professional practice in the field of LIS • The Research Methods course needs to lum is great, it’s just incredibly time be more practical, as indicated by com- consuming. I feel like that fact needs ments like “to make it as practical and to be addressed. The course workload hands-on as possible in order to allow expectations are written the same as students to really practice what they all the other courses, but with learning learn,” and “unfortunately, a lot of this and doing the major research for the course [General Overview] seems to be assignments in the course [Historical geared towards conducting research in Research and Writing] it is exceedingly the library field and hopefully getting overwhelming.” that research published, which I have • The waiver requirement for the Re- no interest in pursuing whatsoever. I search Methods course needs more wish the course would be more about flexibility. Currently, if students have a how to conduct research to support previous graduate degree with a com- changes in your library, or how read pleted a thesis, or passed a graduate and apply research to your library.” level-research methods course within • Students should take the Research the last five years, they can obtain a Methods course as early as possible, waiver. However, departments should as shown in this comment: “I would consider more flexibility, as indicated suggest that this class [Evaluating Pro- in this comment, “I appreciate you’re grams and Services] be required in one trying to be sure everyone gets a proper of the first semesters in the program. grounding in research, but not having The information I’m learning about to write a thesis for my first master’s research would have been very helpful doesn’t mean I’m not a proficient re- if I had learned it prior to some of my searcher or paper writer: I have written previous classes.” a 20 page research paper pretty much • Consider extending the Research Meth- every semester of my higher education ods course over two semesters because career and wrote two theses to get my “it [General Overview] is very difficult BAs. I have presented at conferences to understand; the material is too dense; on the work I have done and written and it is too hard to learn it all in one WASC reports on data I have gathered semester.” Even though students recog- and interpreted. I think taking into nize the benefits of the course, taking account the work we have done in our it in one semester can be daunting, as fields would be a better indication of revealed in this comment, “The curricu- our research and writing skills.”
60 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE • Although the different Research work. One likely reason was that students Methods courses share the same learn- tended to take this course toward the end ing objectives, their workload is not of the MLIS program. Even though they necessarily consistent. It is necessary recognized the value of the course, they to ensure more consistency across the had little chance to experience the actual curriculum. benefits in the remainder of the program. • Recommendations on how instructors Some students lamented this and sug- can improve the teaching of the course, gested that the Research Methods course such as offering more specific feedback be taken as early as possible. The univer- on assignments, being more thorough sity could address this area by adding a re- in explaining assignment requirements, quirement to the curriculum that mandated and providing more guidance on the taking the Research Methods course in the process of selecting research topics and first year or among the first 18 credits. identifying relevant literature. Another factor contributing to students’ less-than-ideal use of the knowledge Discussion learned from the Research Methods course was that the course was not practical When choosing from the 10 courses of- enough. Some students felt that the course fered in the diversified research methods lacked hands-on practice and placed more curriculum at San Jose State University, focus on the scholarly rather than the ap- most students based their decision on in- plied aspect of research. This is a critical dividual interest and relevance. More than issue in research methods education. In a third of the students revealed an inter- LIS practices, the aim of research is to est in the course topic, and more than a solve problems. Thus, in teaching the Re- quarter felt the course was relevant to their search Methods course, instructors could current or future career. This finding sug- position it as a class that teaches problem- gested that, for schools planning to em- solving skills, encourages students to talk ploy the diversified approach to Research to LIS professionals and to identify real- Methods education, it would be helpful to world problems that can be solved by re- conduct preliminary investigation about search. Courses could be designed around the types of research that interest students, these problems. Inviting practitioners, es- and the types of careers they intended to pecially published authors in practitioner- pursue after graduation. Such information oriented journals, as guest speakers could could inform the design of the curriculum also demonstrate the connection between and deliver an array of Research Methods research and practice. Through the prac- courses that reflect student needs. titioners’ depictions of their experiences The overall impact of the diversified engaging in research to solve problems Research Methods curriculum is positive. at work, students might develop a more Close to 70% of the students indicated a grounded understanding of the practical high level of satisfaction with their learn- value of research. Investigating ways in ing experience. After taking the Research which the course could be made mean- Methods course, almost 60% reported a ingfully practical should be one of the noticeable increase in their interest in read- top priorities for all research methods in- ing research articles to advance their pro- structors. A diversified Research Methods fessional knowledge, applying research to curriculum has the advantage of multiple decision making at work, or conducting faculty perspectives and may benefit from research to improve their practice. How- their collective wisdom and expertise in ever, only 43.7% of the students actually addressing this priority. used what they learned from the Research Regardless of which topic students Methods course to benefit their study or chose when taking the research methods
Diversified Research Methods Education in LIS: Thinking Outside the Box 61 course, it bore no relationship to their over- program might investigate whether other all satisfaction with their learning experi- departments on campus (e.g., psychology, ence in the course; whether their research sociology, or education) offered courses interest increased after taking the course, on quantitative research methods at the whether they used knowledge from the graduate level, and if so, allow students to course to benefit their study or work, the take those courses to fulfill the Research career pathway they intended to pursue, or Methods requirement. their status in terms of professional prac- In addition to new topics, students com- tice in the field of LIS. This means that mented on revising the waiver require- no particular course topic stood out. This ment, the emphasis in each course, and finding suggested that the diversified Re- means of creating a more pleasant learn- search Methods curriculum was consistent ing experience. These suggestions provide and balanced, which might be because all useful notions to improve the curriculum courses share three key components— and deserve consideration by all instruc- course-level learning objectives, program- tors. For instance, at San Jose State Uni- level learning objectives, and research eth- versity, the Research Methods course co- ics training requirements. ordinator could organize regular meetings Yet, as some students pointed out, among the instructors to discuss these sug- there were still inconsistences of work- gestions (and other ideas), reflect on the load in the different courses. Some courses curriculum and pedagogy, and develop seemed more time-consuming than oth- ideas to optimize the teaching and learning ers. It might be necessary to explore what of research methods that are both action- led to such perception. Students may take able and sustainable. two research methods courses, and their As previously mentioned, at the time of preparedness based on their prior knowl- this study, there were only three LIS de- edge may influence their learning experi- gree programs that employed a diversified ence. Or students may form the perception approach to research methods education. based on conversations with others taking These three programs might consider of- different research methods courses. Once fering some of their specialized research the LIS program identifies the cause of methods courses through the Web-based the perceived workload inconsistencies Information Science Education (WISE) among different courses, the department Consortium, and allow students in other can address the issue and ensure that all LIS programs to enroll. Such exposure instructors have a mutual understanding could broaden the impact of the diversi- regarding the expected workload for stu- fied curricular model and raise awareness dents and design their readings/assign- among LIS educators. This study serves as ments accordingly. a springboard to encourage more discus- Participants suggested a number of new sion about the model and its successful topics for inclusion in the Research Meth- implementation. Professional organiza- ods curriculum. A diversified Research tions, such as the Association of Library Methods curriculum should constantly and Information Science Education, might evolve in response to student needs. Still, it consider facilitating such discussions at is understandable that a single LIS degree their annual conferences in order for the program may not offer all the Research LIS research methods curriculum to grow Methods courses students desire due to and improve. a lack of faculty expertise. For instance, Meanwhile, findings of the current even though students indicated strong in- study help fill a void in the literature. As terests in courses focusing on quantitative discussed in the literature review, Park’s research, there might not be qualified in- (2004) study suggested that topics of the structors in the program. In that case, the research methods course in the United
62 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE States needed greater depth of coverage, at San Jose State University, which repre- and Earley (2014) concluded that the lit- sents an emerging model of research meth- erature lacked research on assessment ods education in LIS programs. Findings and student learning in research methods of the study may help LIS educators devel- courses. The diversified research methods op a solid understanding of the model and curriculum described in this study pro- encourage outside the box thinking in the vides a mechanism to offer more in-depth design of their own research methods cur- coverage of research methods topics (e.g., riculum. Future research may build upon ethnography, survey research, historical this study and further pedagogical innova- research, etc.), and the survey of students’ tions in research methods education. experience with and perceptions of the di- versified curriculum contributes to bridg- References ing the gap identified in Earley (2014). Bodi, S. (2002). How can we bridge the gap be- Limitations tween what we teach and what they do: Some thoughts on the place of questions in the process of research. Journal of Academic Librarianship, There were limitations in the study that 28, 109–114. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/ need acknowledgement. First, the study S0099-1333(01)00302-0 was about the diversified research meth- Chang, S., & Siao, Y. (2012). The development of ods curriculum in one LIS program. Be- digital learning objects for a “research methods” cause there are two other LIS schools that course in library and information science. Jour- also employ this diversified approach, it nal of Educational Media and Library Sciences, 49(3), 315–342. would be helpful to conduct similar cur- Chu, H., (2015). Research methods in library and ricular research at those schools, com- information science: A content analysis. Library paring the findings to generate enhanced & Information Science Research, 37(1), 36–41. understanding of the emerging model of doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.lisr.2014.09.003 research methods education. Secondly, Earley, A. (2014). A synthesis of the literature on the sample of survey respondents was a research methods education. Teaching in Higher purposeful sample, thus limiting the gen- Education, 19(3), 242–253. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13562517.2013.860105 eralizability of the study. Finally, since the Fink, A. (2016). How to conduct surveys: A step by focus of the study was to measure varia- step guide. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publica- tions of students’ perceptions of and expe- tions. riences with the diversified research meth- Fister, B. (1992). The research processes of under- ods curriculum, it was unlikely to capture graduate students. Journal of Academic Librari- a nuanced view. Qualitative methods like anship, 18, 42–43. focus group interviews might further ex- Fister, B. (1993). Teaching the rhetorical dimen- plorations of this issue. sions of research. Research Strategies, 11, 211–219. Conclusion Haddow, G., & Klobas, J. E. (2004). Communica-tion of research to practice in library and informa- tion science: Closing the gap. Library and Infor- The drive for offering a variety of re- mation Science Research, 26, 29–43. doi: http:// search methods courses stems from the dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.lisr.2003.11.010 fact that students enter the MLIS program Hernon, P. (2001). Components of the research pro- from diverse backgrounds and with dif- cess: Where do we need to focus attention. Jour- ferent interests; thus, the traditional one nal of Academic Librarianship, 27(2), 81–89. size fits all approach that offers a singular Jarvis, P. (1999). The practitioner-researcher: De- introduction course on Research Methods veloping theory from practice. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. can hardly meet their needs. This study Kennedy, M. R., & Brancolini, K. R. (2012). Aca- provides an in-depth examination of the demic librarian research: A survey of attitudes, diversified Research Methods curriculum involvement, and perceived capabilities. College
Diversified Research Methods Education in LIS: Thinking Outside the Box 63 & Research Libraries 73(5), 431–448. doi: http:// search, 24, 49–72. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/ dx.doi.org/10.5860/crl-276 S0740-8188(01)00104-9 Lenox, M. F. (1985). The importance of using re- Smith, N. M., & Adams, I. (1992). Characteristics search for decision making. Top of the News, of research courses in library schools. Journal of 301–302. Education for Library and Information Science, Luo, L. (2011). Fusing research into practice: The 33, 75–78. role of research methods education. Library and Staples, G. M. (1982). Perceptions of BYU library Information Science Research, 33(3), 191–201. school research courses and their applications. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.lisr.2010.12.001 Provo, UT: School of Library and Information Neal, J. (2006). The research and development im- Science, Brigham Young University. (ERIC Doc- perative in the academic library: Path to the Fu- ument Reproduction Service No. ED 254232) ture. portal: Libraries and the Academy, 6(1), Stephens, M., Abbas, J., Garnar, M., Kennedy, M., 1–3. Kenney, B., & Luo, L. (2016, January). Bridging Ondrusek, A., Thiele, H., & Yang, C. (2014). Writ- the divide: Exploring LIS research and practice. ing abstracts for MLIS research proposals using President’s Panel presented at the 2016 Annual worked examples: An innovative approach to Conference of the Association of Library and In- teaching the elements of research design. Col- formation Science Education. Boston, MA. lege & Research Libraries, 75(6), 822–841. doi: Stephenson, M. S. (1990). Teaching research meth- http://dx.doi.org/10.5860/crl.75.6.822 ods in library and information studies programs. Park, S. (2004). The study of research methods in Journal of Education for Library and Informa- LIS education: Issues in Korean and U.S. univer- tion Science, 31, 49–65. sities. Library and Information Science Research, Stoan, S. K. (1984). Research and library skills: 26, 501–510. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j. An analysis and interpretation. College & Re- lisr.2004.04.009 search Libraries, 45, 99–109. doi: http://dx.doi. Perkins, G. H., & Helbig, T. (2008). The value of org/10.5860/crl_45_02_99 LIS schools’ research topics to library authors’ Turcios, M. E., Agarwal, N.K., & Watkins, L. professional work. Journal of Academic Librari- (2014). How much of library and information sci- anship, 34(6), 513–519. ence literature qualifies as research. The Journal Perkins, G. H., & Slowik, A. (2013). The value of of Academic Librarianship, 40(5), 473–479. research in academic libraries. College & Re- Wagner, C., Garner, M., & Kawulich, B. (2011). The search Libraries, 74(2), 143–158. state of the art of teaching research methods in the Powell, R. R., Baker, L. M., & Mika, J. J. (2002). social sciences: Towards a pedagogical culture. Library and information science practitioners and Studies in Higher Education, 36(1), 75–88. doi: research. Library and Information Science Re- http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/03075070903452594