THE EXCHANGE OF IDEAS IN THE ADVANCEMENT OF KNOWLEDGE HOWARD W. WINGER I T HE problem of "Iron Curtains and Scholarship: The Exchange of Knowledge in a Divided World" is essentially a problem of cross-cultural communication. The political division which has separated two-thirds of the population and area of the world today into two nearly equal camps is but an important manifestation of conflicting cultures. To point out the obvious dif- ferences which provoke the conflict would be painfully commonplace. To attempt a deeper analysis would be too great a task for an introductory paper and would encroach upon the topics of other speakers. They will deal with the barriers to knowledge, discuss the life of the intellectual in the Communist countries-his books, his libraries, and his contributions-survey the present means for cross-cultural exchange of ideas, and project the possible develop- ment of more effective devices in the future. To introduce the subject, I shall discuss the role of the exchange of ideas in the advancement of knowl- edge with special application to the problem of comunication between con- flicting cultures. Confidence in the continous advance- ment of knowledge is an article of the modern creed. Although that faith is reflected in nearly every area of learn- ing, it is probably most characteristic of the attitudes people have toward the achievements of modern science. Peo- ple believe in the power of science to solve almost any problem nature can contrive. The optimism does not stop short of a belief in the possibility of controlling the weather. Should crops fail for lack of rain, it is expected that in the near future the agronomist will develop a grain as drouth-resistant as a cactus or that science will at last suc- ceed in pumping fresh water from the salt sea to wet the thirsty land. Such is the faith in advancing knowledge. Natural as it seems today, such pride in the power of human reason has not been typical of past ages. The ancients thought that too great a curiosity about nature and too much probing into its secrets would be sure to result in per- sonal and commun'al calamity. Familiar stories reveal the attitude. When Adam and Eve were driven from the Garden of Eden, it was because they stole apples from the Tree of Knowledge. According to a Greek story, in the golden age of innocence when there were no troubles to plague mankind, Pandora let her curiosity rule, raised the lid of a for- bidden box, and released the ills the flesh has since been heir to. Phaeton with his chariot and Daedalus with his wax- cemented wings paid the price of flying too high. Prometheus, more successful in his studies and experiments than ei- ther Phaeton or Daedalus, stole the se- cret of fire and gave it to mankind. As a result of his deed, however, the jealous gods chained him to a mountain peak and sent ravens to eat his liver. The be- liefs reflected in such stories survived into the Middle Ages. Faith in the ac- celerated conquest of nature for the good of mankind had little place in the ancient and medieval world. Sometimes today the nightmare of Promethean experience disturbs our 229
230 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY confidence. The achievements of sci- ence have indeed been miraculous. It may be assumed that the actual accom- plishments have outstripped the imagi- nation of the seventeenth-century in- novators who started us on the way. It is doubtful whether Sir Francis Bacon, who caught his death of cold trying to preserve a chicken in the snow, ever envisioned modern deep freezes, frozen orange juice, or air-conditioned auto- mobiles. The magnificent material de- vices of science, however, are imper- sonal. Sometimes they are used to pro- duce suffering and destruction rather than to benefit mankind. The tremen- dous technological strides made in the cataclysmic wars of our century have demonstrated that scientific advance- ment can be destructive in its very in- ception. So great, in fact, are the powers of destruction stored in the arsenals of the world today that it would be small wonder if we harked back to the an- cient distrust of proud and presump- tuous knowledge. Human loss through the accretion of knowledge is in modern terms a para- dox. Some of the most venerated and some of the most popular modern insti- tutions, ranging from the university down to the television quiz program, derive their social value from the good that the advancement of knowledge is supposed to bring about. Consequently, the modern answer to the paradox dif- fers from the ancient one. There is no general disposition to stifle scientific advancement or to renounce scientific gains because some discoveries have miscarried. We do not blame such diffi- culties on the speed of the advancement of knowledge in the natural sciences; instead, we criticize the social sciences and the humanities because they have not kept pace. In other words, our prob- lem is not that we have too much knowl- edge but that we have too little-for all knowledge is interrelated. A technologi- cal advance has an effect on the organi- zation of the society which produced it and a corresponding effect on the per- sonal motivations of the members of that society. One need look no farther than the perennial pride and headache of the American society, the automobile, to find evidence of the interrelationship. Originally a technological achievement, the automobile has disrupted some com- munities, created others, become a sym- bol of personal pride and power, and exercised a substantial force on the American economy. Obviously, ad- vancement in the field of the natural sci- ences brings with it a need for adapta- tions in our knowledge about men and how they behave-both in groups and in their personal situations. The ad- vancement of knowledge means differ- ent kinds of solutions in all areas of knowledge and involves the exchange of ideas in the social sciences and hu- manities as well as in the natural sci- ences. II The role of the exchange of ideas in the advancement of knowledge is sum- marized in the scholarly postulate that the advancement of knowledge depends on the free access to ideas. The theoreti- cal basis for the postulate rests partly on the constant need for checking con- clusions against conflicting opinions and partly on the role of outside sources of information in inspiring intellectual in- novations. John Stuart Mill, in his pro- test against the silencing of dissenting opinions, gave the classical expression of the need to test conclusions: The peculiar evil of silencing the expression of an opinion is, that it is robbing the human race; posterity as well as the existing genera- tion; those who dissent from the opinion, still
EXCHANGE OF IDEAS IN ADVANCEMENT OF KNOWLEDGE 231 more than those who hold it. If the opinion is right, they are deprived of the opportunity of exchanging error for truth: if wrong, they lose, what is almost as great a benefit, the clearer perception and livlier impression of truth, pro- duced by its collision with error.' Mill's argument is most frequently cited to pursuade traditionalists to give a hearing to different points of view. The question of whether an idea is new or old, however, is irrelevant to the testing process, and an innovation stands in as great a need of testing as do accepted beliefs. Beyond testing and refining the truth of beliefs and discoveries, a function of the exchange of ideas is to promote in- tellectual innovation. Since invention and discovery are essential ingredients of the advancement of knowledge, at- tention to the role of the exchange of ideas in creative thought is here perti- nent. As John Dewey has described the process of reflective thought, a man con- fronted with a problem must gather data relevant to it, sift the data and analyze it, and make a guess about the probable solution to the problem.2 External sources figure prominently in two as- pects of the steps toward discovery. They provide the investigator with in- formation bearing on his problem, and they may spark his guess about the cor- rect solution or, in older terminology, his inspiration. The function of both inspiration and information in inventions and discover- ies is illustrated in the story of penicillin. Sir Alexander Fleming's guess at the causal relation of the effects of penicillin mold to bacterial cultures was the in- piration. As Maurice B. Visscher said in a previous Graduate Library School Conference: I have no doubt that hundreds of bacteriolo- gists saw the same effect of culture contamina- tion by molds that led Sir Alexander Fleming to his discovery of penicillin and that their only reaction was one of exasperation over a spoiled plate. But out of the unique constellation of in- formation and logic in Fleming came the great- est boon to humanity through medical science our times have seen.3 The concept of a constellation of ideas as a sudden fortuitous combination of information and logic blazing in the in- tellectual zodiac is a figure expounded by Karl Mannheim to explain intellec- tual innovations. The inscrutability of the outer darkness from which those manifestations of the intellect come to cross suggest an almost unlimited value in the free access to ideas. Penicillin also illustrates the need for a variety of sources of information. Aside from Fleming's own laboratory and his training as a bacteriologist, which contributed to the discovery, the special information of men from other disciplines of knowledge and from other countries was a necessary factor in de- veloping the antibiotic for practical medical use. The lines of communication had to be both interdisciplinary and international. III The sources of information available to a specific innovator are many and various. Sometimes it seems that a man has come naturally under the influence of certain ideas merely because of the time and place in which he was b9rn. John Gutenberg, traditionally credited as inventor of printing with movable metal type, was such a man. Brilliant technological achievement though it was, the invention of printing has been described by some historians as inevita- ble. From a technological point of view, ' On Liberty (London: J. W. Parker & Son, 1859), p. 33. 'How We Think (Boston: D. C. Heath & Co., 1933). a "The Interdependence of Knowledge and In- formation in the World Today," Library Quarterly, XXIV (April, 1954), 90.
232 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY all the materials and all the skills and processes needed in the creation and exploitation of the invention had long been known and understood. Socially and intellectually, fifteenth-century so- ciety was ripe for it. A secular book trade had arisen; literacy was increas- ing; books were in demand. The inevita- bility of the invention is so apparent, after the fact, that John Gutenberg, al- though for a century after the invention of printing he was the only serious claim- ant for the honor of inventor, has trouble retaining his laurels. There is so much evidence that other men living in his time and place might also have done it. Despite any claim to inevitability, however, the invention of printing was not inevitable as from a law of nature. It was instead made possible by men's relatively easy access to the ideas neces- sary for the invention. Brought to their simultaneous attention were the paper and the wood blocks of China, the oils of the painter, the metals used in various crafts, the techniques and skills of cast- ing, dye-cutting, and carpentry, an un- derstanding of mechanics, and, perhaps most important of all, a knowledge of books and their uses. Many epochs in intellectual history, more brilliant in important respects than the fifteenth century in western Europe, had passed before such a constellation of ideas re- sulted in the invention of printing. In contrast to Gutenberg as a case where ideas crowded in on a man, Eras- mus serves as an example of a man who went to the ideas. A turning point in his intellectual development which di- rected him toward becoming an out- standing humanist of the sixteenth cen- tury was a journey he made from Paris to Oxford in 1498. At the time he was an impecunious student fresh from the Scotist college in Paris where he had been trained in the straitest of Scholastic sects, the antithesis of humanism. At Oxford he met John Colet, Richard Charnock, and Sir Thomas More-all humanists of greater or lesser light. Later he wrote about the strong impres- sion Colet made with his sincere and impassioned attacks against the Scho- lastic method of reasoning and study.4 Sir Thomas More inspired Erasmus to write The Praise of Folly, a book which is dedicated to Mfore and of which the original Latin title, Ecornium mnoriae, is a pun on the great English humanist's name. Thus foreign travel was an obvi- ous means through which Erasmus found access to the variety of ideas needed by the intellectual leader. His whole career, and the careers of many other scholars of his time, was shaped by the ease of establishing personal con- tacts with scholars of other nations. Library books, in many cases, of course, have inspired the intellectual and provided him with information to develop his thought. Carl Van Doren, for instance, has recorded how he wan- dered aimlessly about the campus at the beginning of his college career, spend- ing most of his free time in the gym- nasium. "Then," he wrote in his remi- niscences, "random in the library, I discovered Marlowe, and the glory of the great verse changed my world as if mountains had sprung up out of the prairie."' Having myself lived one year, though much later, next door to the Van Doren home in Urbana, I can testify that the prairies there are very flat, so Van Doren's reaction to Marlowe seems tremendous. In connection with our present topic of the exchange of knowl- ' F. Seebohm, The Oxford Reformers (3d ed.; London: Longmans, Green & Co., 1887), pp. 121- 33. f Three Worlds (New York: Harper & Bros., 1936), p. 76.
EXCHANGE OF IDEAS IN ADVANCEMENT OF KNOWLEDGE 233 edge in a divided world, it is pertinent to mention, in respect to Van Doren's source of inspiration, that Marlowe was an Englishman; and there had been much bad blood between England and America in the preceding century. There had been a war and numerous territorial squabbles, not to mention the Alabama Claims. Fortunately for Van Doren, and for scholarship generally, however, American librarians did not neglect the collecting of English books. About one hundred years ago Ameri- can librarians lamented the lack of a wide variety of books in the infant American libraries. Speculating how such a scarcity of the materials of learn- ing might affect a specific scholar, they often referred to Edward Gibbon and The Decline and Fall of the Roman Em- pire. They lamented the supposed fact that even in the middle of the nine- teenth century all the libraries in the United States did not possess in their combined collections copies of the sources Gibbon used to write his mas- terpiece. Naturally, to a historian like Gibbon, reconstructing a remote period of history, easy access to the pertinent written records is essential. He needs books to provide him with the facts of his story. However, even before he be- gins gathering specific items of informa- tion, he must first have the general idea which inspires him to undertake writing the history. It is clear from an incident in Gibbon's youth that books provided him with the inspiration for his work as well as with the information to develop it. According to his own report, at Lau- sanne in 1756, where his father had ex- iled him for religious deviation, he be- gan a review of all the Latin classics from Plautus down to "the decline of the language and empire of Rome."6 He completed the task in fourteen months, certainly too short a time for him to gather all the facts for his narrative. But the concentrated program of read- ing helped him formulate the ideas which he developed in later years of more extensive research. IV The cases which have been cited to show the importance of the wide access to ideas in promoting the advancement of knowledge have not involved serious problems of communication between peo- ple of different cultures. Flemingworked in what we are pleased to call the one world of science, and those investigators who expanded his contribution to knowl- edge were scientists. Gutenberg was at home in fifteenth-century Mainz and Strasbourg, a well-placed citizen natu- rally cognizant of the intellectual cur- rents which led to his invention. Eras- mus was grounded in the same tradi- tions as the English scholars. In spite of his foreign travel, not only in England but all over western Europe, he did not have to learn a new language. Scholars of his time and circle spoke, argued, wrote, and published in Latin, although Greek had also become important as a second scholarly language. The advan- tage of Latin as a scholarly language held good until the day of Gibbon. An educated Englishman of his time could review all the Latin classics in fourteen months, taking notes as was Gibbon's custom and reading important passages twice, which was also his custom. As for Van Doren, American literature be- longs to same stream as English litera- ture, and any American college student who wants to do so can read Marlowe. A college library without the text can hardly be imagined. 6 The Portable Gibbon: The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, edited with an introduction by Dero A. Saunders (New York: Viking Press, 1953), p. 5.
234 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Cross-cultural communication raises different problems. People of different cultural backgrounds may differ so much in their concepts of reality and in their visions of how reality should be transformed that their very bases of thought are different. If the bases of thought are different, then the symbols on which all communication depends may not have the same referents, and communication becomes very difficult. The questions arise: What are the pos- sibilities for the fruitful exchange of ideas in the face of different ideologies and different visions of utopia? What means must be taken to surmount the barriers which differences erect? I must leave the elaboration of these questions to other speakers, but I should like to discuss some of the general implications. The question which concerns me most is the possibility of intellectual co-oper- ation between people with greatly dif- fering cultural backgrounds. The value of free access to different meanings arising from different bases of thought would differ only in degree from the value asserted by John Stuart Mill as arising from the collision of truth with error. The possibility always exists of refining knowledge by exposing it to dif- ferent points of view and also of replac- ing an idea with a better one. Both East and West have shown vigor, initiative, and intellectual originality; both may gain through exchanging ideas in ad- vancing their own and in correcting them where necessary. One might hope, however, to gain even more from the exchange of ideas. He might hope to find ideas which are directly applicable even though they are the product of another culture, innovations which can stand one on another, regardless of their source. Such reciprocal use of ideas is what I mean by intellectual co-operation. Intellectual co-operation of the kind described is of course very difficult if there is such a conflict in ideologies as to make communication almost impos- sible. An example of such a conflict may be found in considering a paradox posed by the ancient philosopher, Zeno. He held that time and space are illusions and in support of his theory proposed a race between a man and tortoise in which the tortoise was given a head start. He reasoned that, even though Achilles was a faster runner than his slower rival, he could never overtake the tortoise, because, while Achilles was making up the original difference, the tortoise moved ahead some; while Achilles was making up the new differ- ence, the tortoise advanced still more; and so on ad infinitum. This proposition is so ridiculous that it cannot withstand the assault of any child who wants to race a tortoise. However, it takes a phi- losopher and a mathematician to refute Zeno's logic by showing that he was mixing concepts of finite with transfinite numbers. Most people do not trouble about his logic. His abstract notions of space and time so contradict their prag- matic realizations that they regard Zeno's paradox as a silly fable, unre- lated to any serious thought. Fortunately, differences in ideology are usually not so comprehensive as those revealed in the narrowly restricted paradoxes of Zeno. Cultural contacts prevail along such a broad front that there are sure to be openings in any curtain marking the division between peoples with different ways of life. Ide- ologies touch every aspect of public cognition, and people can always find some points of agreement, which pro- vide opportunities for cross-cultural communication. One way to promote the exchange of knowledge in a divided world is to look for areas of agreement that may serve as chinks in the iron
EXCHANGE OF IDEAS IN ADVANCEMENT OF KNOWLEDGE 235 curtain. Any branch of knowledge which uses uniform methods and applies them to a uniform field of observation provides a broad basis of agreement. Science has long claimed to be such a unified system of thought, and some examples illustrate the characteristic. Visscher recounted an example from the study of muscle chem- istry.7 A chain of brilliant discoveries was started when Englehardt, a Russian physiologist, identified an enzymatic function of myocin. Subsequently, new links in the chain were forged by Szent- Gyorgi, a Hungarian, Cori, an Ameri- can, and others in Belgium, Sweden, Britain, and elsewhere. Such linear con- tributions to the advancement of knowl- edge, drawing from investigators in so many different countries, imply a uni- fied system of thought which supports the claims of science to be one world of learning. In science characteristic na- tional interests may be important, but such specialized developments do not disrupt the field. The integrity of the sciences provides some of the best op- portunities for piercing holes in our iron curtains. Bases of agreement are also charac- teristic of the humanities. That branch of knowledge treats the responses of the individual to the great constants of life. Although techniques differ, and each artist derives merit from his unique treatment of universals, great art tran- scends cultural differences. Evidence of the universality of great literature is shown in the world-wide appreciation of Shakespeare, Cervantes, Goethe, Hu- go, Tolstoi, and many others from the same and other lands. On a somewhat less Olympian plane, the award of the Nobel Prize for literature to authors from eighteen different countries dis- plays some of the characteristic of uni- versality. Even a novel which critics say is not a great work may serve as a good device of cross-cultural communi- cation. Such a one might be the Russian novel by Vladimir Dudintsev, Not by Bread Alone. It has been popular in America, and I had to put my name on the waiting list at my local public library to borrow a copy. The story has interest and suspense. It deals with high motives, and it emphasizes courage, resolution, and loyalty to friends and ideas. The characters in the novel reveal many points of common information with American readers. They have read Kipling, an author popular in America, and they refer to Lopatkin, the hero who is an inventor, as a budding Edison. In these common points of reference liter- ature finds chinks in the iron curtains. Cross-cultural communication may pose a more difficult problem in the so- cial sciences than in other branches of learning, because so many cultural dif- ferences concern matters of social or- ganization. The institutional bias of a society resulting from its peculiar or- ganization is bound to affect the way people write and think about the very institutions which create the bias. In looking for holes in our iron curtains, we may have to consider the fact that discussion may revolve around either general principles or the particulars of a problem. As a colleague at the Uni- versity of Chicago, long a student of these affairs, remarked to me, "An American economist is not likely to reach agreement talking about eco- nomic principles with a scholar from the Communist countries. The opportu- nities for a fruitful exchange of ideas are more favorable, however, in respect to some particulars of the economic enter- prise, such as exchanges between Rus- sian and Iowa farmers." A review of Soviet educational re- T Op. cit., p. 87.
236 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY search illustrates the particular values which American scholars may gain from a study of Soviet work despite their disagreement with Russian edu- cators on the principles of education. The author of the review pointed out how Russian research on the use of visual aids in the teaching of mathe- matics is directly applicable to some American work. In fact, he expressed a high opinion of the importance of the whole Soviet research effort, although he pointed out that it was "the result, in part, of a commonly accepted prem- ise that many of us believe untenable."8 This acknowledged value of particular work done on an "untenable" premise is a striking confirmation of the impor- tance of looking for particulars of agreement in an area of general dis- agreement. It suggests possibilities for the fruitful exchange of ideas in areas that might seem wholly restricted. V The history of scholarship is a record of the importance of cross-cultural con- tacts. Considering the importance of such communication in the invention of the alphabet, one might call it the ABC of intellectual innovation, for the alpha- bet was the product of a meeting be- tween cultures. It was the invention of some people, probably the Phoenicians, who lived between the dominant Nile and Tigris-Euphrates cultural centers. The Egyptians and the Sumerians vie with one another for the honor of in- venting writing, and during the second millennium B.C. the Babylonians, who had succeeded the Sumerians in the Ti- gris-Euphrates center, and the Egyp- tians on the Nile were using systems of writing which even then were quite an- cient. Both the Babylonian cuneiform characters and the Egyptian hieroglyphs employed phonetic symbols, which were the key to the alphabet; but neither the Babylonians nor the Egyptians saw the advantage of using a small number of characters consistently to express the phonetic values. The alphabet was the invention of the people living be- tween. Through war, captivity, and trade they had become acquainted with the writing systems of their powerful neighbors. Applying what they learned in their own different cultural milieu, they hit on the idea of using a limited number of characters. Thus the Moabite stone of around 900 B.C. recorded an al- phabet of twenty-two characters. The best that came from the Tigris-Euphra- tes area was the Assyrian syllabary of around six hundred characters. The Egyptians continued to use several thou- sand characters for writing, down to the time of Cleopatra and the Rosetta Stone. It was cross-cultural contacts which produced the alphabet. The clash of disparate cultures was again reflected in the earliest important library development to which modern Western culture can look back with any feeling of kinship. The great libraries and schools at Alexandria resulted from the conscious attempts of the Ptolemaic kings and their wise men to create a cultural unity which combined Greek thought with Egyptian and other East- ern tradition. Their activities embraced all the world of knowledge. They were avid and even piratical book collectors. They sponsored the translation of Semitic writings into Greek, the most famous example being the Septuagint version of the Old Testament Scriptures. They were responsible for editing and establishing a canon of the Greek classi- cal writers. Science flourished, and philosophers from all over Greece and o George W. Boguslavsky, "Psychological Re- search in Soviet Education," Science, CCXXV (May 10, 1957), 918.
EXCHANGE OF IDEAS IN ADVANCEMENT OF KNOWLEDGE 237 Egypt, including Archimedes and Eu- clid, went to Alexandria to study and teach. In his observatory there, Eratos- thenes, the librarian who was also a geographer and mathematician, cal- culated the circumference of the earth, during the third century B.C. Today the achievements of the Alex- andrian scientific school sound anachro- nistic. Why was it seventeen hundred years after Eratosthenes calculated the circumference of the earth before Co- lumbus set out to circumnavigate the globe? Although the "why-nots" are for- bidden to the historian who has enough 'trouble investigating the "whys," we know that Eratosthenes was followed by a shift in attention which effectively hid the ideas of the Alexandrian sci- entists from the scholars of succeeding centuries. New schools of philosophy diverted attention from the material ob- jects of scientific studies. One of them, Neo-Platonism, was synthesized by the great Patristic scholars with emerging Christianity. When that mode of thought became dominant, it attracted all the bright and able men to its serv- ice. Lacking the stimulating force of ideas, the scientific advancement came to a halt. Not until science was revived and greatly enlarged by the Arabs did it find its way to western Europe again by means of an alien culture and a hos- tile people. The effect of Arabic books and ideas on the intellectual development of Latin Christendom in the eleventh and twelfth centuries is a classic instance of the value of cross-cultural communication. The event was appraised by Frederick B. Artz in the following words: The first important steps beyond an elemen- tary type of scientific writing had been taken by the Muslims. They had returned to the Greek sources of science, had added certain ideas from the Hindus, and then had gone on to push out the bounds of knowledge. In the eleventh century, Latin Christendom began to receive, from Spain, Sicily, and Constantinople, trans- lations of these works, as well as the philo- sophical writings of Aristotle. This recovery of Greek learning, usually accompanied by impor- tant Muslim works, marks a turning point in the history of Western thought.9 The twelfth-century example is no- table, among other things, for the long history of division and hostility between the peoples involved. At war for cen- turies, they were even at the time of the significant rapprochement contend- ing in the First Crusade. Trade between the East and Latin West had long been at a standstill, and the Moslem ships on the Mediterranean had disrupted the whole European economy. How- ever, despite the long record of enmity and isolation, there were some areas of basic agreement which made com- munication possible. According to Artz: Back of all medieval science and philosophy -Byzantine, Islamic, Jewish, and Latin Chris- tian-lay a common set of preconceptions that came down from the last centuries of antiquity. All agreed that the great truths were revealed by God and were contained in certain sacred books. All agreed, too, in accepting a common set of ideas about the nature of the universe and of man that were largely the creation of the ancient Greeks, and, finally, all accepted a mass of traditional folklore.10 That seems like a very considerable area of agreement, but apparently it was difficult for the principals in the ex- change to realize it. During the earliest period of the scholarly contacts, Euro- pean writers sometimes found it neces- sary to evade the old prejudices against alien sources by falsely attributing the ideas they were adopting to an accept- able domestic or traditional author. The spread of Arabic ideas was abetted by new channels of communi- cation. Among them the Crusades were 'Mind of the Middle Ages (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1953), p. 238. 10 Ibid., p. 232.
238 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY not the least important. The European knights had a chance to observe the fruits of Arabic learning at firsthand. Communication is always an incidental effect of warfare, and soldiers are dis- seminators of knowledge. (It takes a considerable amount of advancement of knowledge, however, to make up for the destruction armies wreak, and it is to be hoped that some means of acquir- ing and spreading learning can be found that do not have all the baneful side effects of war.) Less destructive was a second new channel introduced by com- merce. Even before the First Crusade was preached in 1095, the Italian port cities began their rise, based on trade with the East. Finally, as Artz pointed out, the Arabic books introduced new ideas into Western scholarship. The trade in Arabic books developed as a result of purposeful effort. It was pushed by an able group of men, eager for Arabic knowledge, willing to jour- ney to a strange and not altogether friendly land and to learn a new tongue in its pursuit. The names of the trans- lators who went to Spain in the twelfth century are indicative of the extensive- ness of the interest and study. They included Peter of Cremona, Alfred the Englishman, Michael Scot, and Her- mann the German-hailing obviously from widely separated points in Europe. The spread of Arabic ideas in Europe and the promotion of their effect on scholarship were much more than an incidental effect of the Crusades and the renewed trade with the Moslem lands. Scholars demonstrated that in- tellectuals who are convinced of the value of cross-cultural communication can do something themselves to bring it about. They can learn the languages and master the ideas, providing they are given the materials and the oppor- tunities. VI In summarizing these reflections on the role of cross-cultural communica- tion in the advancement of knowledge, I think perhaps the strongest point I have made in justification of our present conference is that librarians and schol- ars may by their own efforts promote the exchange of ideas. This conference is an effort to provide better understand- ing of the issues met in such attempts. Relevant to that conclusion are the fol- lowing points: 1. The concept of the advancement of knowledge through the exchange of ideas extends to all branches of knowl- edge, the social sciences and the hu- manities as well as the natural sciences. 2. The new points of view gained in cross-cultural exchanges provide a test- ing ground for conclusions already held, furnish inspiration for intellectual in- novations, and provide ideas for the de- velopment of scholarship. 3. Areas of agreement exist which surmount ideological differences, and they can be used to punch holes in our iron curtains. 4. Finally, where agreements cannot be reached on principles, the possibility still exists for the fruitful exchange of ideas on the particulars of a scholar- ship.