Volume 41 JANUARY 1970 Number x DE VINNE AND THE DE VINNE PRESS MICHAEL KOENIG ABSTRACT Theodore Low De Vinne (1828-1914), son of a Methodist circuit rider and antislavery pam- phleteer, was apprenticed to the printer of theNewburgh (New York) Gazette at the age of fourteen. In 1850 he joined the Francis Hart Company in New York City as journeyman com- positor and rose to partnership in 1858. UnderDe Vinne's management, Francis Hart & Com- pany won the contract to print St. Nicholas in 1872, followed by Scribner's Monthly in 1876 (to become the Century Illustrated Monthly in 1881). After the death of Hart, De Vinne pur- chased the company in 1883 and it became Theodore L. De Vinne and Company until his retire- ment from direct control in 1908. At this time the company took the corporate name of the De Vinne Press, surviving as such until 1923. De Vinne pioneered in developing typographic style, as a type designer, a historian of printing and printing types, an adapter of new technology to fine printing, and an educator of the printing trade. Making use of contemporary sources and De Vinne's writings and printing, this article examines De Vinne's achievements in vanrous areas, presenting him as the foremost artist and innovator in American printing in the nineteenth century and a major force in the revival of the printing art. A HISTORICAL SKETCH Theodore Low De Vinne was born in Stamford, Connecticut, on Christmas Day 1828. He was the second oldest of six sons in a family of eight children. His family, which was Dutch in an- cestry, the name originally being Van der Vinne, had emigrated to Ireland during the religious wars in Holland. Theodore's father, Daniel De Vinne, was a Methodist circuit rider, an ardent abolitionist, and a major factor in his church's gradual espousal of abolition- ism, though for a time he suffered vir- tual ostracism for his beliefs and was assigned to the most unattractive cir- cuits available [1, pp. 3-7]. He devoted considerable time in his later years to scholarship, and wrote The Methodist Episcopal Church and Slavery [2] and The Irish Primitive Church [3]. Theodore, who later dropped the ac- cent from De Vinne, was wont to ride with his father on circuit and seems to have been particularly close to him. Of the six sons, he was certainly most in- fluenced by his father's scholarliness. At the age of seven he accompanied his father to the Harper Brothers printing establishment on Cliff Street. The life- long friendship between Daniel De Vinne and John Harper may have ac- counted for the fact that of the six De Vinne sons, four became printers and two bookbinders; in fact, John, the eldest son, was apprenticed to the Har- 1
2 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY pers. Theodore learned Latin from his father and attended public school at Catskill, Amenia, and White Plains, New York. At the age of fourteen, he did some temporary work at a printing office in Fishkill, New York. Later that year (1843) he left school, ending his formal education, and became an ap- prentice to the printer of the New- burgh Gazette. After working in Newburgh for five years and fulfilling the obligations of his apprenticeship, De Vinne moved to New York to try his fortune there. In 1850, after various jobs with different printing offices and a stereotype found- ry, he began work as a journeyman compositor in the office of Francis Hart. In his new job De Vinne soon found himself in a very enviable position. Hart, born in New Bedford, Massa- chusetts, in 1815 and apprenticed there at the age of twelve, had moved to New York and set up business in 1843; he was, however, something of an invalid and desired to be relieved of the bur- den of operating a printing office. In 1849, he advertised his business for sale at the price of $7,000 and printed a very complete inventory of all his equipment [4, pp. 19-24], but found no takers at a satisfactory price. It was only a year later that De Vinne entered the scene and, immediately making himself invaluable, quickly rose to be foreman; he took responsibility as fast as Hart gladly relinquished it. In 1858, De Vinne considered seriously the pos- sibility of purchasing a printing estab- lishment in Ogdensburg, New York. Hart countered with the offer of a part- nership and one-third ownership in the company. De Vinne accepted, and the firm became Francis Hart & Company. The firm of Francis Hart had done job work principally, with a specialty of service to the legal profession; but as De Vinne took charge he widened its scope and began to achieve a reputation for quality. The Bruce Type Found- ry, for example, selected the firm to print its type-specimen books. In 1865 the management of the Alden Typeset- ting and Distributing Machine Com- pany, seeking new capital, hired Fran- cis Hart & Company to print an elabo- rate prospectus. The immaculate print- ing of scores of wood engravings may have helped the firm secure the print- ing of Scribner & Company's magazine for juveniles, St. Nicholas, in 1872. St. Nicholas magazine had an influ- ence that was substantial. Though not without rivals, it was the preeminent children's magazine of its time. Accord- ing to Lehmann-Haupt, it was "very much an exponent of the new publish- ing trends of those years" [5, p. 223]. Among its contributors was an impos- ing galaxy of eminent authors and authorities, including Mark Twain, Robert Louis Stevenson, Theodore Roosevelt, Walter Camp, and Brander Matthews. Rudyard Kipling's Jungle Book was written as a serial for St. Nicholas, as was Mrs. Burnett's Little Lord Fauntleroy. (St. Nicholas also featured more robust heroes such as Jack Hazard and The Young Survey- ors.) The editor was Mary Mapes Dodge, author of Hans Brinker and His Silver Skates. Frank Stockton, prolific novelist and writer of adventure tales, was the associate editor and a major contributor. The illustrations and art work were particularly distinguished; the Quarterly Illustrator remarked in 1843 that "nearly every illustrator of talent and note has got his handiwork between the covers of St. Nicholas" [6, p. 293]. Publishing St. Nicholas was a major event in the growth of Francis Hart &
DE VINNE AND THE DE VINNE PRESS 3 Company, for it gave to the firm a new financial stability, a new stature, and placed it in a manufacturing status. By this time, De Vinne was completely in charge of the press, for Hart was faring poorly, spending virtually all of his time vacationing, on doctor's orders, in search of his health. In 1876, Scribner & Company, dissatisfied with the at- tempts of several previous printers of Scribner's Monthly to print woodcut illustrations and impressed with the quality of work of the printer of St. Nicholas, approached De Vinne to un- dertake also the printing of Scribner's Monthly. Hart, vacationing in Europe, counseled against such a large under- taking. He received the reply, "Too late, it is done" [7, p. 8]. This was a decision of some signifi- cance, for Scribner's Monthly (to be- come in 1881 the Century Illustrated Monthly Magazine)1 was for more than a quarter of a century the foremost example of American magazine pub- lishing. It achieved a penetration (cir- culation relative to the population of the country) and an importance that ias probably never been equaled by my other "quality" American maga- zine. For example, in 1884 the circula- Lion of the Century magazine was over 227,000, in contrast to other quality magazines, none of which reached that level until seventy years later [8, pp. 291-92]. The Century was particularly noted for its illustrations, and featured such engravers as Timothy Coles, Wil- liam J. Linton, Francis C. Altwood, Frederick Juengling, and George Kruell. Artists and illustrators included Frederick Remington, Charles Dana Gibson, Maxfield Parrish, Howard Pyle, Andre Castaigne, E. W. Kemble, N. C. Wyeth, and Jules Guerin. The quality of printing which De Vinne did for the magazines was re- markable for its time. Henry Lewis Bullen asserted: "His [De Vinne's] first issue of Scribner's Monthly may now be rated as typographically good, when it appeared it was hailed as great. It was the first American magazine to use old style roman, a novelty which was admired. When the first issue of the Century appeared in 1881, De Vinne was setting the pace for the world in magazine making" [7, p. 8]. Mott's A History of American Magazines noted that "the Century gained the reputation of being the best-printed magazine in the world" [9, p. 467]. De Vinne was acknowledged to be the foremost print- er of wood engravings of his time. Alexander W. Drake, Art Editor of the Century (whose dissatisfaction with the Scribner's/ Century's previous printer had given De Vinne his chance), described the care De Vinne took with illustrations: Many a time have I seen Mr. De Vinne have a press "stripped" and kept it idle for a day or so while new overlays were being cut, all this to secure the best possible touch of excellence in the printing of illustrations. We would shake The magazine was founded by the collabora- tion of Dr. Josiah G. Holland, Roswell Smith, and Charles Scribner; the magazine publishing com- pany that resulted was called Scribner & Company. (This was distinct from Scribner, Armstrong & Company which in 1872 became Charles Scribner's Sons, a book publishing firm in which Charles Scribner was the major stockholder.) Although Scribner had only a financal, not an editorial interest, the magazine was named Scribner's Monthly, in the fashion of Harper's to capitalize upon a well-known name. In 1881, a dispute arose concerning the right of Scribner & Company to publish books in competition with Charles Scrib- ner's Sons. The result was that Roswell Smith bought out Holland and Scribner, Scribner & Com- pany became the Century Company, and Scribner's Monthly became the Century Illustrated Monthly Magazine. In return for Smith's giving up the name "Scribner's," Charles Scribner's Sons agreed not to establish a rival magazine for five years. Six years later they began Scribner's Magazine, quite a distinct publication from Scribner's Monthly.
4 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY our heads over some slightly unsatisfactory form, and then the conversation would usually end this way: "Well after all, we are here to get quality, aren't we?" And DeVinne would answer, "You're right; have that press stripped, Hamilton!" Sometimes the ink would be too "stiff," and De Vinne would try a half-dozen different inks before he was satisfied. It is easily imagined how costly this kind of con- scientiousness was. Not in the long run, how- ever, for it was just this minute care that built up the reputation of De Vinne and the maga. zines he printed. [10] He was particularly skillful in his use of overlays-pieces of paper in varying shapes which, when laid upon the im- pressing surface of the press, increased pressure upon those parts of the im- pression surface designed to print black, and, when absent, relieved pressure op- posite the highlights, thereby heighten- ing them. To achieve the results he wanted, De Vinne was quick to seize upon technological innovations such as improved printing presses and compos- ing machines, and introduced hard im- pression surfaces, coated paper, and other innovations of his own. As wood- cuts began to be replaced by the half- tone process in the early 1880s, De Vinne did not rest on his laurels but attempted to get the best possible re- sults from the new process. When Francis Hart died in 1877, his will made it possible for De Vinne to purchase the firm. This was accom- plished in six years, and in 1883 the firm changed its name to Theodore L. De Vinne & Company, De Vinne's only son, Theodore Brockbank De Vinne be- coming the partner. At about this time, the firm began using the imprint "The De Vinne Press" although it was not incorporated under that name until 1908, when De Vinne retired from di- rect control. The De Vinne Press increased rapidly in size until it employed well over 300 persons [ i1]. Though its mainstay con- tinued to be the St. Nicholas and Cen- tury magazines, the press turned in- creasingly to book publication, varying from the most commercial to limited editions done for bibliophiles. Among the latter were the Grolier Club publi- cations, of which the De Vinne Press printed forty-five of the fifty-five issued before De Vinne's death and several of those issued afterward. But the most significant aspect of De Vinne's work was the quality of the work done on everyday commercial publications. Carl Purington Rollins wrote: "No Ameri- can printer has equalled him in the mechanical perfection of book after book which issued from the De Vinne Press" [12, p. 16]. An impressive ex- ample of such commercial book work is the Century Dictionary, a multi- volume set that is a masterpiece of legibility and typographic functional- ity. As De Vinne grew older, he devoted more of his time to writing and other outside activities. By then the day-to- day direction of the press was carried on by his son, Theodore B., along with James Bothwell and R. W. Brown. In 1908, De Vinne formally relinquished direct control, and the firm was incor- porated as the De Vinne Press with De Vinne as president, R. W. Brown as vice-president, Theodore B. De Vinne as treasurer, and J. W. Bothwell as secretary. In his eighty-sixth year, on Monday, February 16, 1914, Theodore Low De Vinne died. The De Vinne Press con- tinued in operation for several years with J. W. Bothwell as president, but found the going increasingly difficult. Indeed, as early as 1913, De Vinne had written to the directors of the press ad- mitting that the press was in a "season of adversity," but advising the rejection
DE VINNE AND THE DE VINNE PRESS s of an offer of merger from a London firm [13, p. 26]. De Vinne had a great deal of business acumen, but he had a modest New England sense of what constituted a proper profit. The De Vinne Press was a commercial estab- lishment, charging commercial rates, but doing quality work, and quality work was, as always, costly. This was the De Vinne Press's glory, but it made for a very thin profit margin. Frank Hopkins remarked that much work was actually done at a loss [14, p. 12]. The war, of course, meant a decline in the sort of work which the De Vinne Press did, but the greatest blows to the press were labor troubles and the declining fortune of the Century magazine. The result was that in 1923, the De Vinne Press closed its doors. De Vinne's values and ambitions were summed up in a favorite quotation from Carlyle, "to do the duty that lies next to you, and do it as well as you can" [15]. His concept of his role as a printer was exemplified by a speech he gave to the Yale College Club of New York in which he said, "I have given the best part of my life to the making of books that have been sold and read, and are not rated as pieces of typo- graphic bric-a-brac" [16]. DE VINNE S TYPOGRAPHIC STYLE INFLUENCE AND BELIEFS De Vinne was an advocate of sim- plicity and good taste in typography. "Good taste," as he construed it, "should be understood as a synonym for propriety. It means order, symmetry, and the observance of seemly arrange- ments that have the sanctions of age and authority. In typesetting it means the putting of right types in right places. It does not mean departure from methods that have commanded general respect. Composition is but the archi- tecture of words, and it must be gov- erned by general rules of law and order that are observed not only in that art but in every kind of worthy construc- tion" [17, p. 100]. One element of ty- pographic style that particularly con- cerned De Vinne was the composition of title pages. Indeed his book, A Trea- tise on Title Pages [18], which is near- ly 500 pages in length, is still the most complete study of the history of the title page yet written, as well as a criti- cal study. De Vinne argued that a title page should be as simple as possible; "as a rule, the more words there are in a title, the more ineffective is the com- position" [19, p. 104]. This was an im- portant break from Victorian printing style. The statement was made by De Vinne in a lecture to the Grolier Club on January 15, 1885 and establishes his position as an early leader in the move- ment against the fussiness and over- ornateness of nineteenth-century print- ing. In decorations, De Vinne was again on the side of simplicity. He freely ad- mitted that in his youth he had been guilty of the same excesses as his con- temporaries [20], but his taste for simplicity matured ahead of his time and he was soon vigorously condemn- ing profuse ornamentation. He was fre- quently wont to quote the architects' maxim, "you may ornament construc- tion, but you may not construct orna- mentation" [21, p. 109]. In an article entitled "The Decoration of Books" De Vinne said simply, "Decoration is of questionable value for any book ex- pected to be permanent. Fashions change rapidly.... The books .. . in the best typographical style are of the severest simplicity" [22]. "The chief fault of modern typography," said De Vinne, "is over decoration" [23, p. 27231.
6 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY This deemphasis of decoration was a logical product of De Vinne's concep- tion of the purpose of a book. "A book should be so planned that every con- tributor to it keeps his place, and first place should always be given to the author.... The book so produced may have a Quaker-like simplicity, but its workmanship will be respected and pre- served when more pretentious printing has been forgotten" [24, p. 3091. His most endearing and quotable remark concerning style and decoration is the following: "The proper function of types is to convey instructions, and ... they are not improved by decoration any more than a trowel is by painting or a saw by gilding" [25, p. 309]. Spacing and a proper relief of white were major concerns of De Vinne. As usual, legibility was the primary reason behind his opinion, but stylistic con- siderations entered into it as well. He was fond of quoting Ruskin: "The eye is not saddened by quantity of white, but it should be saddened and greatly offended by quantity of black" [23, p. 2724]. De Vinne pointed out that in the early days of printing, because of the extremely large percentage of the print- er's cost which paper represented, plac- ing great emphasis upon its efficient use, compression had been something of an economic necessity. However, in the nineteenth century, this was no longer true. Paper was relatively very cheap; the need for the most efficient use of paper was no longer pressing; and hence there was no longer any reason, De Vinne felt, why type composition should not be governed by the desire to achieve maximum legibility and con- venience of use. De Vinne fought against fads in book typography and design; indeed Updike remarked that his only fad was his fear of them [26, p. 406]. He delighted im showing the inconsistencies in what patrons desired and in what they re- garded as artistic. In particular, he made fun of the Kelmscottian penchant for deckled edges which, he pointed out, resulted from an ignorance of printing history, for in the period of typography that Morris was emulating, the deckle edges were meant to be trimmed off when the purchaser had his book bound. He similarly ridiculed the penchant for rough stiff paper, the use of vellum, the substitution of V for U, and the infatuation with "printing by hand press" [16]. Although De Vinne was quick to adopt the Caslon revival of the 1850s and used the face widely, his favorite was modern roman, somewhat heavier than the Bodoni-influenced moderns of the early mnneteenth century. The Century roman exemplified his prefer- ence for a middle ground. He regarded the Bodoni typefaces and the scotch- romans derived from them as feminine; conversely he rejected black letter and much of Morris's work as too heavy and black. DE VINNE AND MORRIS Because of the strength of his own convictions, De Vinne was remarkably unswayed by the phenomenon of Wil- liam Morris. While on the whole he approved of Morris himself, De Vinne took some very definite exceptions to his ideas. "The Kelmscott books de- serve high praise for faithfulness to the best features of fifteenth century printing, but not every feature calls for praise" [16]. His objections to particu- lars of style concerned the overdense- ness of Morris's compositions, his lack of leading and spacing, and particularly the illegibility of his composition and his type. De Vinne admitted that the
DE VINNE AND THE DE VINNE PRESS 7 Morris style of extremely thin spaces and no leading was applicable to black letter: "A character plainly designed to show compression and huddling in every letter, but it is not at all applica- ble to roman letter, that is just as plain- ly designed to show roundness and openness" [23, p. 2724]. He called the Troy type "uncouth" [23, p. 2724]. He pointed out that three centuries pre- viously, the reading world outside of Germany had decided that it had had enough of characters such as Morris's "mongrel gothic" [16]. On the other hand, Morris drew praise for his "won- derful skill in presswork," and for his avoidance of certain affectations such as the long S [16]. De Vinne recognized that Morris was reacting to the meanness of nineteenth- century typography and to the over- proliferation of worthless typefaces, just as he himself had. This met with his approval, but he felt that Morris had overreacted. "It is possible that he has gone too far in the field of reform, but his steps have been in the right direction . . . [he] deserves high praise for his efforts to put typography back in its proper field" [27]. Unlike virtually everyone else at the time, De Vinne did not regard Morris as much of an innovator. First, the re- action to feminine types had been be- gun by printers like himself and Charles Jacobi well before Morris's en- try into the field of printing. Second, De Vinne did not regard Morris's form of reaction, or overreaction, as original. In the 1870s, Andrew Tuer of London began to reprint old English chap books that were noticeable for "rudeness, blackness, and uncouthness" [28, p. 15], and De Vinne regarded Tuer as the herald of the movement which was to find Morris its most effective spokes- man. De Vinne felt Andrew Tuer ex- hibited in an exaggerated form the mis- takes made by Morris and his follow- ers-that is, a slavish imitation of a previous period of typography, includ- ing its mistakes. On the whole, De Vinne regarded Morris's influence as unfortunate and mischievous [23, p. 2723], for printers and bibliophiles adopted the form of Morris's work without the spirit. "Un- fortunately the Morris types and the Morris methods have been copied by printers who pervert them from their proper use, which is the reprinting of medieval books on medieval subjects. They reproduce in books on modern subjects Morris mannerLsms that make them almost unreadable" [16]. "It is as absurd to use the Troy type for a modern novel or poem as it would be to use it for a dictionary, a directory, or a daily newspaper. Yet there are amateurs who do not see the impropri- ety of this perversion" [28, p. 19]. The result of this, De Vinne believed, was that typefounders following in their steps produced letters and decorations of such uncouthness that "at no point in the history of printing has there been more extravagance or eccentricity in the form of types, or more silly affecta- tion in the composition of types than there is now. There never was a time when orderly workmanship was more disparaged, and vulgarisms and un- couthness had more generous tolera- tion" [16]. De Vinne's criticism is therefore not so much directed at Mor- ris, whom he had met and admired, as at his unwitting results. An interesting example of De Vinne's basic under- standing of what Morris was trying to accomplish was his prescient remark after Morris's death that "it is a little remarkable that William Morris in his search for a characteristic letter for his Kelmscott books should have neglected
8 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY the first model of roman letter which appeared some years before the type of Jenson. The Lactantius type has the gothic peculiarities which Morris not so successfully tried to graft upon the Golden type he made in imitation of the Jenson roman" [29]. He praised the use of such a type, called "Subiaco" (the place where Sweyhnam & Pan- hartz printed the Lactantius) by the Ashendene Press of St. John and Cicely Hornsby.2 What he did not know was that this type, made by Walter & Cockerell for St. John Hornsby and cut by Edmund Prime, was in fact the com- pletion of a project that Morris him- self had started but had not managed to complete before his death, and did in fact represent what Morris desired, the "transitions between Gothic and Ro- man" [30, pp. 25, 35]. The great difference between De Vinne and Morris lay in the different bases from which they approached printing. Illuminating is this remark by De Vinne: "William Morris maintained that printing had gone steadily from bad to worse until he revised its best features. Many publishers maintain, with more reason, that books of real value for instruction or amusement, were never better filled than they are now for usefulness to all classes of readers" [28, p. 19]. For De Vinne the paramount aspect of the book was utility. Improved technology could pro- mote utility. De Vinne strove to put technology at the service of the best in tradition, and regarded Morris's re- treat from technology as missing the point of printing. DE VINNE AS A TYPE DESIGNER De Vinne was the force behind the cutting of two fonts of type, the Cen- tury family of types and the Renner. Though the type known as "De Vinne" is of course associated with him, there was no actual connection, the name being purely complimentary. In fact De Vinne disliked the face, objecting to some of the capitals as grotesque, and debated over whether he should allow his name to be used with it, but con- cluded it would be rude to refuse the honor [ 14, p. 40]. De Vinne's tastes ran to the simple, the strong, and above all to the legible. He disliked hyperrefined, overornamented, and overelaborate types, with the refinements of razor- edged hairlines and eye-irritating serifs. These he characterized as feminine. He preferred sturdy, legible, unorna- mented, strong-lined types, with intense black ink and appropriate spacing. These he characterized as masculine attributes. This unfortunate phrase- ology makes it appear that De Vinne saw the situation in a rather too crude light. However, he did not prefer strong-lined types and black inking for their own sake. His criticism of Mor- ris's heavy letters demonstrates that. He occupied a logical and defensible middle ground, holding that require- ments of legibility overruled other con- siderations. Though he was interested in style, legibility of type was always De Vinne's principal concern. He put his philosophy in the slogan, "Legibility first, decoration last" [31, p. 229]. The Century family of type, originally de- signed, as the name suggests, for the Century Magazine, illustrated his be- liefs. The basis of the family was De Vinne's Century Expanded, and from this were produced various adaptations, such as Century Broadface, much used by the Century Company for book work; Century Schoolbook; and Cen- tury Catalog. Century Expanded was essentially a modernized old style, char- 'For this De Vinne had high regard, consider- ing it the best of the private presses, while for the Vale and the Roycroft Presses he was rather dis- p ginr i reark.
DE VINNE AND THE DE VINNE PRESS 9 acterized by a slight upward expansion3 and by a thickening of the hairlines. The upward expansion was intended to produce a type more appropriate for cramped double-column magazine printing. The thickening of the hair- lines, intended to produce greater legi- bility, was the result of several factors. The first was De Vinne's realization that the use of dry paper and hard packing (which had replaced dampened paper and soft packing for most com- mercial uses in the early 1860s) had changed the relationship between the physical shape of the face of the type and the image it produced upon the paper. A thin line, for example, would produce a far thicker result when im- pressed upon damp paper backed by an elastic blanket than it would on dry and calendered paper against a hard impression. The effect would be propor- tionately greater and particularly no- ticeable upon the thinner lines. De Vinne seems to have been among the first printers to have been aware of this effect and write about it, and the first to attempt to counter it.4 There is an air of propriety in this, since De Vinne is credited with being the first printer to turn to the use of dry paper and was one of the earliest, if not the first, to use hard packing. De Vinne's second reason for thick- ening hairlines was his belief that even before the introduction of hard packing and dry paper, types had become too delicate. This he attributed to the in- direct influence of Thomas Bewick and his followers, who by demonstrating that "they could cre- ate the lightest grays and the most vigorous blacks on the same block" were paving the way for a typographic revolution. It was unwittingly done, but very effectual. He [Bewick] was cre- ating the belief that the merit of a book must be judged not so much by the thought of the author, by the readability of the type, or by the skill of the printer, as by the beauty of the illus- trations. The success of this revolution in meth- od was greatly aided by the timely invention of the hand press entirely of iron that gave in- creased strength and accuracy. Bewick's imi- tators, many of them men of great ability, undertook a foolish competition with line en- gravers, and produced blocks showing a strength and delicacy that had never been at- tained on wood. Type founders followed their example and made delicate types. The merit of printing was supposed to be in its delicacy and not in its strength. The strong and readable type made by French and Dutch printers of ability were put aside as coarse and old-fash- ioned, and types of light face with exceedingly sharp hair-lines almost invisible to the ordinary eye took their place. These radical changes were largely aided by the invention of the Fourdrinier paper-making machine which made paper in an endless web and of a uniform thick- ness. With paper of finer texture, with presses of greater strength, with types and engravings of greater delicacy, printers everywhere began to imitate the copper plate printer and the lith- ographer. [16] Finally, and most important, De Vinne thickened the hairlines in order to improve legibility. Many of the jus- tifications of De Vinne's arguments now seem naive, but in general De Vinne appears to have been attacking the matter of legibility from the cor- rect basis, and it can be argued that he appreciated surprisingly well the es- sence of Gestalt and pattern recogni- tion, though of course he did not and could not verbalize those then-unform- ulated concepts. To illustrate his argu- ments against ultrathin hairlines, De Vinne used the example of a continen- tal font of type in which the 3 and 5 'In the trade, expansion usually refers to an increase in the width-to-height ratio. De Vinne consciously reversed this usage to avoid calling his type "compressed." To avoid ambiguity, he used the phrase "upward expansion." 'As noted by De Vinne, on one occasion Wil- liam Blades remarked in passing that Fleischmann (a renowned punch cutter for the Ensched6 found- ry) would hardly recognize his own types printed by modern presswork on sized and calendered paper. But he made no more of it [25, p. 253].
10 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY have a basically identical pattern and are distinguishable only by the posi- tioning of minuscule hairlines [25, p. 238]. Similarly, he placed a great deal of emphasis upon ascenders and de- scenders, allocating to them a particu- larly large portion of the face of the type [ibid., p. 368], and these ascenders and descenders do play a very important part in pattern recognition. He also fre- quently made the distinction between the effect of letters viewed singly and the effect of a page of type composed of them [ibid., pp. 110, 31]. All of these emphases indicate an awareness of the importance of pattern recognition for type legibility. De Vinne's efforts at achieving legi- bility would seem to have been relative- ly successful. Frederick W. Goudy, in his Typologia [32, pp. 142-44], re- ported on a study of legibility under- taken at Clark University in 1911 com- paring twenty-six different typefaces, in which Century Expanded rated fifth in overall legibility, third among the book types tested. In a more elaborate series of experiments conducted by G. W. Ovink at the University of Utrecht in the late 1930s [33, pp. 96-97], twenty-four American and English typefaces for book use were tested. Cen- tury Catalog ranked fourth, Century Schoolbook, eighth, and Century Ex- panded, twentieth. Again the compari- son is on the whole favorable for the Century series, with the exception of Century Expanded which rated poorly. However, as De Vinne made plain, this type is a special purpose type and was' in a sense tested out of context. The result might very well have been differ- ent had the format of the test been the double-column magazine format for which the Century Expanded was de- signed. More recently (1959) Sir Cyril Burt reported in his A Psychological Study of Type Faces that Century seemed to be the most readable of the semimodern typefaces, though the face was not examined in depth [34, p. 7]. The Century types, though not now so widely used as they once were, are still in common use. Indeed, a new display series of the Century face was brought out as recently as 1964 [35, p. 87]. In addition, the Century types were important for two reasons. First, the Century typeface was the first to introduce the notion of a family of types; it was the first type on which a whole proportionate sequence of re- lated weights and sizes was built [36, p. 55]. That is, the larger sizes of types were made proportionate to the regular book composition sizes and were de- signed to be used with them. This al- lowed a unity of style, particularly ap- propriate for such use as advertising, where one would want to use several sizes together. This innovation was widely accepted and today is so taken for granted that there are few general purpose types designed which do not incorporate the feature of a family of sizes. Second, the Century type has been called the forerunner of Chelten- ham, the immensely popular and influ- ential product of the American Type Foundry. Indeed, in 1938 G. W. Ovink referred to Cheltenham as the "type which became and is partly still the most popular type in the world" [33, p. 192]. The critical acceptance of the type among typophiles, however, was extremely negative, primarily because of its simplicity, mechanical perfection, and lack of character. Nonetheless, as far as influencing the product of the workaday world is concerned, the Cen- tury face and its successor, Chelten- ham, were perhaps far more successful than the "Troys" and the "Goldens" which attracted critical favor.
DE VINNE AND THE DE VINNE PRESS 11 De Vinne also designed one other type, Renner. This design was in a large sense due to the influence of Wil- liam Morris; but unlike virtually every- one else who at that time was typo- graphically influenced by Morris, De Vinne's work was not done in imitation of him. Rather it was an attempt to do what Morris had done, and to do it better; to show Morris in effect what he should have done. The Renner type was intended to be "bold but not at all black" [37]-to be a rebuttal to the products of the Kelmscott Press. The best, though indirect illustration of the purpose of this typeface is a letter of November 28, 1902 from Mark H. Liddell, editor of The Elizabethan Shakspere, which the De Vinne Press printed in Renner type, 'to James Both- well, De Vinne's foreman, in which he says: "We have secured the prime beauty of early printing without having to resort to medieval man's revisions, and so far we have beaten William Morris at his best-no borders, no black illegible type, no crowding of matter, no sacrificing of sense to aes- thetic demands-all clear straight legi- ble printing-single, direct and force- ful" [13, pp. 76, 77]. De Vinne's re- action to the book and his concurrence is expressed by: "it promises to be ... one of the best, if not the best book we shall ever print" [ibid., p. 76]. De Vinne seems to have received less credit for the actual design of his types than he deserves. Linn Boyd Benton, for example, is frequently given credit as the designer of the Century typeface, though in fact he merely followed De Vinne's directions. (Coincidentally, it was Benton who invented the panto- graphic Benton Punch Cutting Ma- chine, which made the punch cutter in- termediating between designer and product so much less important.) Goudy, the dean of American type designers said this of De Vinne: If I were asked to say what I think has been the greatest single influence on my work as a type designer I would be hard put to find a satisfactory reply: but there is no doubt in my mind that the principles set forth in this article ["The Old & the New, a Friendly Dispute be- tween Juvenus & Senex"] and in his book No- table Printers of Italy during the 15th Century have certainly loomed large in crystallizing the character of my types. The consistency of thought he displayed, his sound knowledge of old types, his fairness in consideration of each moot point, the simple yet lucid presentation of his ideas and opinions interested me; they influenced my own thought, and in turn are re- flected in my work. [38] DE VINNE AS A PRINTING HISTORIAN In 1876, at the height of the Coster- Gutenberg controversy, appeared De Vinne's The Invention of Printing [39] -an exhaustive, methodical yet easy to read, and well-balanced, well-rea- soned account of the evidence concern- ing who invented what, where, and why. De Vinne brought to his work an unparalleled knowledge of the mechan- ics of the printing trade. He was one of the first practitioners of the new bibli- ography of the second half of the nine- teenth century. These bibliographers believed, as De Vinne put it, "that the internal evidences of old books are of higher authority than legends, and that these evidences are conclusive, not to be ignored or accommodated to the statements of early chroniclers" [39, p. 12]. Perhaps the most spectacular re- sult of this approach from the basis of the mechanics of printing was De Vinne's hypothesis that the four pieces mentioned in several places in the Stras- bourg documents of 14395 referred to 'These documents are reproduced by De Vmne in the original Alsatian, and in English, German, and French translations with extensive notes [40, pp. 157-59, 165].
12 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY a type mold. De Vinne concluded that the type mold was the essential part of what we call the "invention of print- ing" in the Western world; it was "the origin and symbol of the art. He was the inventor of typography and the founder of modern printing, who made the first adjustable type mold" [39, pp. 66, 67]. At greater length, he wrote: It is tribute enough to acknowledge that the inventor of the type-mold was the inventor of typography. It is not logical nor truthful to attribute to him the introduction or the redis- covery of the simple elements of relief print- ing. It is not derogatory to his honor to confess that his labors were materially lightened by the services of men who had gone before him and had prepared materials for his use. The inven- tor of the type-mold did not invent paper, for that had been known for two centuries before; he did not originate engraving on wood, nor impressions from relief surfaces, for both pro- cesses were known before paper was made; he was not the first to print upon paper, for print- ed matter, in the forms of playing cards and prints of pictures, was a merchantable com- modity before he was born. He was not the first to make printed books; it is not certain that he made the first printing press; it is not probable that he was the first to think of mov- able types. His merits rest on a securer basis. While others dreamed and thought, and, no doubt, made experiments, he was the first to do practical and useful work-the first to make types that could be used-the first to demon- strate the utility of typography. [Ibid., pp. 67, 68] With this statement, De Vinne elimi- nated from his consideration letters carved on bark, wood types, block books, and letters cast in sand (though they were attempts to the same end) as representing what we know as typogra- phy. Relying on the evidence of the Strasbourg trial and with this concept of the meaning of typography, he had little hesitation in crediting Gutenberg with the invention of printing. De Vinne exercised scholarly acumen and objectivity in his historical studies. Not inappropriately, both Yale and Columbia awarded the honorary degree of Master of Arts to the printer who had been apprenticed at the age of fourteen and who had taught himself German, French, and Italian so that he could personally read the documents involved in his research. In addition to The Invention of Printing [39], De Vinne was the author of several other books on the history of printing. His Plain Printing Types [25], one of a 4-volume set entitled The Practice of Typography [18, 25, 41,42], contains a great deal of information concerning the evolution of printing types. His Historic Printing Types [24], originally a lecture before the Grolier Club, covered much of the same ground. The two were seminal to Updike's later Printing Types: A Study of Survival [43]. Other works which contained much historical information were: Title-Pages as Seen by a Printer [44] and an elaboration of this A Treatise on Title-Pages [18], Christopher Plan- tin and the Plantin-Moretus Museum at Antwerp [45], and Notable Printers of Italy during the Fifteenth Century [46]. De Vinne was frequently a contributor of historical articles and prefaces to other books and compilations. For ex- ample, he contributed the prefaces to the Grolier Club's first publication, a reprint of A Decree of Star Chamber concerning Printing [47] and to the Typothetae's reprint of Joseph Moxon's Mechanick Exercises [48]. It was to periodical literature, how- ever, that his contributions were par- ticularly important, for he contributed historical articles to general as well as trade publications and brought a knowl- edge of some of the facets of the his- tory of printing before a wide audience. For Scribner's/Century, he wrote such articles as "John Gutenberg" [49],
DE VINNE AND THE DE VINNE PRESS 13 "The Growth of Woodcut Printing" [50], "The First Editor" [51] (Aldus Manutius), and "A Printer's Paradise: The Plantin-Moretus Museum at Ant- werp" [52]. He contributed to other general magazines, such as Outlook and the Eclectic. For trade publications, he contributed perhaps a dozen articles, for example, "William Caxton" [53], "Old Specimen Books" [54], "The Ma- zarine Bible" [55], "Giambatista Bo- doni" [56], "Medieval Printing" [57], that helped give printers a sense of their identity and of the continuity of their craft. De Vinne was an important figure in the new bibliography, the primary American exponent of the new school. He and Blades were, as Stanley Mori- son makes clear, the English-speaking world's two foremost printer-historians [58, p. 56]. DE VINNE AND TECHNOLOGY From the beginning of his career De Vinne was interested in the technology of his craft, in its possible improve- ment, and in utilizing and getting the best results from those improvements. For book printing, it was not until the 1860s that the centuries-old technique of printing with a dampened sheet upon an elastic packing gave way to the speedier and more precise method of printing on dry paper against a hard in- elastic backing. (Although this tech- nique allowed greater possible precision of results, it required greater precision on the part of the printer and his tools.) The firm of Francis Hart & Company has been credited with being the first to use dry paper for quality work [59]. This was a very important innovation, essential to many later typographic ad- vances such as the web press. Because of his position in the firm, De Vinne must certainly have been involved. Though De Vinne himself gave the credit to Hart [60, p. 318], Edmund C. Gress, a personal friend of De Vinne, maintained that De Vinne was the actual innovator [4, p. 11], and George French implies it [59]. Given De Vinne's technological bent, his modesty, and the relationship betwen Hart and De Vinne, the latter seems the more reasonable interpretation. De Vinne stated, in a typically indirect and mod- est fashion, that he was the first in modern times to use a metal impression surface. In a lecture before the Grolier Club, he mentioned that Christopher Plantin's account books showed that he had purchased copper platens for six of his presses, which indicated that Plantin knew the value of a hard im- pression surface "three centuries before the printer of the Century tried, as he thought, for the first time, the experi- ment of iron and brass impression sur- faces for inelastic impression" [45, p. 55]. In an article in the Century on woodcut printing, De Vinne elaborated that the first modern hard impression surfaces had been made of mill-glazed pressboard, a form of hard cardboard, and that later metal had been intro- duced. He made the claim that he was the first of the "magazine men" to utilize the new process [50, p. 39]. Both of these claims were made relatively soon after the fact by an acknowledged (if not impartial) authority, and they met with no disclaimer, though they were aired in public circumstances-a lecture before the Grolier Club, an or- ganization which contained many people knowledgeable about printing and its techniques-and in the pages of Scribner's /Century near the height of its circulation and importance. During this same period the firm of Francis Hart & Company began to print job work and books on a cylinder
14 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY press. This is credited with being the first successful use in America of a cylinder press, or any sort of nonplaten press, for quality work. George French said in 1914: "Fine printing on cylin- der presses was considered impossible until this firm [Francis Hart & Com- pany] persisted in experiments and finally discovered how to make a form ready and produce good job work on a cylinder press" [59]. The use of coated paper was perhaps De Vinne's single most important tech- nological contribution. Coated paper, that is, paper treated with some sort of material such as clay to fill in the pores and produce a smooth surface, had been invented in the early nine- teenth century and had been used in a limited way for wall paper and box cov- ering. In 1864, a patent had been issued to Richard Magee of Philadelphia for the manufacture of coated writing paper, but this was little used [61]. In 1875, De Vinne conceived of the idea of the use of coated paper as an aid to printing woodcuts. Charles M. Gage, a paper maker of Springfield, Massachu- setts, produced the first "coated-one- side" paper for De Vinne in that year [62, p. 50]. The innovation was suc- cessful, and in 1879, when Gage went to work for the S. D. Warren Paper Company, De Vinne transferred his business there. In 1881, the company succeeded in producing paper coated on both sides, and the first products of the new process were used by De Vinne in the printing of the Century. Indeed, that grade of paper was known for many years as "Century Enamel."6 De Vinne's experimentation with coated paper for book work was par- ticularly timely; for comparatively soon thereafter, beginning in 1882, wood engraving began to be supplanted by the newly developed process of photoengraving, which had the advan- tage of quicker and easier production. De Vinne and others immediately be- gan experimenting with the new sys- tem. Problems arose because the cop- per halftone plates were so shallow that strength was abandoned for delicacy in printing on even the best calendered paper. The plates had to be touched up, reengraved, and burnished by hand to insure proper printing of the deeper tones. Even then there was often a dis- tressing lack of uniformity from sheet to sheet, caused primarily by minute variations in the surface of the paper. Coated paper was the primary and most important element in the solution of these problems. Originally used by De Vinne as an aid to printing wood- cuts, coated paper became, with the advent of halftone processes, extraor- dinarily important. The coat of whit- ing laid on after calendering produced a surface of fastidious smoothness upon which De Vinne printed "with a bril- liance never before achieved" [63, 5: 263]. De Vinne's insistence upon quality, in conjunction with the quantity de- manded by magazine production, pro- duced a keen interest in the design and possible improvement of the printing press itself. This interest and a shared hobby of book collecting led to a long and firm friendship with Robert Hoe of Hoe Brothers, Inc., manufacturers of printing presses. The result was the collaboration between De Vinne and the Hoe firm in the production of a new design of rotary web perfecting press made to De Vinne's specifications for 6Interestingly, this coating had a very positive effect in improving the permanence of the poor paper of the time, although neither DeVinne nor the paper makers were aware of this happy conse- quence (personal conversation with Joseph G. Thomas, director of research for the S. D. Warren Paper Company).
DE VINNE AND THE DE VINNE PRESS 15 the production of the Century Maga- zine. The press was completed in 1886 and was capable of printing on both sides of the paper; each cylinder held thirty-two plates, each plate represent- ing one page. The press was used for the plain and advertising pages, with the graphic sections of the magazine being done separately. But, it was as Robert Hoe points out, "the first, and for three years the only, web press being used in this country for good book work" [64, p. 72; 65, p. 93]. Com- pared with the web perfecting presses used for newspapers, this press was slower, but more accurate and more flexible, and capable of much more complex cutting and folding operations. The success of this experiment led to the design of the "rotary art" press for the printing of illustrations, with which De Vinne became the first American printer to do quality work on a rotary press. Previously, illustrations such as characterized the Century, had had to be done on a platen press or on a stop- cylinder press. The stop-cylinder press, invented in France in 1852 by Dutarte and brought into this country in 1853 by the Hoe firm, was a flat-bed cylinder press. Although it produced high qual- ity work it was relatively slow. The rotary art press was set up in the De Vinne Press in 1890. It printed only on one side because De Vinne felt that even with the best inks then available, in order to insure that the fine lines of the illustrations not be smudged one side must be allowed to dry before the paper could be printed on the other side. The cylinder, however, was larger than in the previous press and con- tained sixty-four plates, so that the amount of printing per cycle was equiv- alent or, more important, the number of pages involved in each setting up of the machine was equivalent. The press printed from single sheets; it was not a web press. Two principal improvements made in the rotary art press allowed the print- ing of illustrations. The machine was made remarkably sturdy to permit great rigidity and precision so that it would not give or spring under the strongest impression. The shafts of the plate and the impression cylinders, for example, were each four and one-half inches in diameter, made of hardened steel. The inking provisions were par- ticularly generous; it had sixteen ink- ing rollers, as compared with seven, for example, on the web perfecting press described above. This was probably the direct result of De Vinne's influence, for in an account of printing in the nine- teenth century, he remarked on the in- adequate provision for inking of most presses and of the need to correct this [66]. He said of the new press: "It can be made responsive to the slightest overlay ... [and] does the work of four stop-cylinders in superior style. The gain in performance is not as great as the gain in quality of presswork, but quality was considered more than speed" [64, p. 73]. De Vinne was a very vocal advocate of the rotary press and argued against the misconceptions and traditions that prevented its being adopted more quickly and more com- pletely. In particular he argued that the belief that quality work demanded a hand or stop-cylinder press was not only out-of-date but incorrect; that in general the rotary press was capable of better work. The De Vinne press was one of the first, perhaps the first, to use the "lino- type" type composing machine, or any composing machine, for quality work. The linotype, which was patented by Ottman Mergenthaler in 1884, was first used in the printing of the New York
16 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Tribune in 1886; it went into produc- tion in a redesigned form and was of- fered commercially in 1890. On May 28, 1891 De Vinne reported in a letter to J. W. Phinney [67] of Boston that the press had started using its typeset- ting machine, that not a great deal of work had been accomplished, but that he thought the outlook was good.7 De Vinne, in short, took up the new inven- tion with remarkable speed, an out- come rather to be predicted in the light of his views concerning the promise and importance of type-composing ma- chines. As early as 1869, in an article he wrote commemorating the death of Gutenberg, he predicted that in roughly another four hundred years the world would in similar fashion be celebrating the four hundredth anmnversary of "the man who first invented the art of set- ting type by machinery" [68, p. 1141, an event that De Vinne believed would be, and of course was, of great impor- tance. De Vinne was concerned with virtu- ally every aspect of the technology of printing. For example, he wrote to a friend in 1894 concerning electro- plating: The only practical improvement in electro- plating that I think of decided importance is that of pressing the plate flat while it is still in a plastic or semi-fluid state. We have done this successfully for some time. A much better way would be to fasten the electrotype shell in a steel mold, to exhaust the air from the mold and to cast the plate to the exact size, including head margins, with the bevels, so that the plate would be as finished as a type when that comes from the mold. I do not see my way clearly to do it, but I be- lieve it will be done before the century is out. [69] It was, as a matter of fact, a member of De Vinne's firm, Patrick J. Furlong, previously of the Government Printing Office, who was the first to succeed in producing stereotype plates to the stan- dard of accuracy needed for high-qual- ity work on rotary presses [11]. No detail was too small or too trivial to escape his eye. For the printing of the Century Dictionary, whose degree of complexity at that time (1889-1906) demanded that it be set by hand, De Vinne devised a new form of compos- ing stand to hold the twelve different cases used within easy reach of one compositor [42, pp. 23-30, 466]. De Vinne was modest about his innova- tions; the above, for example, is men- tioned as his own innovation only in the index of Modern Methods of Book Composition [ibid.]. The technological preeminence of the De Vinne press continued into the twen- tieth century. The press was one of the first to experiment with and use the new methods of color reproduction, and was awarded the gold "special medal of award" of the American Institute of Graphic Arts for the results it obtained with four-color process printing. In summary, De Vinne was an eager exponent of technological innovations, adapting them with great patience and skill to do quality printing. He was not content to rest on his laurels when he had achieved mastery of a piece of equipment, but was always searching for new devices to improve both the speed and quality of printing. His own writings and those of others who knew him make it appear that he was per- sonally responsible for the introduction of many innovations himself. To verify all of these, one would have to do more extensive research, for the assignment of firsts is a hazardous act. However, one feels that De Vinne would hardly 'Apparently this was a linotype. Although type- distributing machines were still sometimes loosely referred to as "typesetting" machines, De Vinne had used type-distributing machines for many years and would not have referred to them as new.
DE VINNE AND THE DE VINNE PRESS 17 have cared about the credit. He was more concerned with gaining mastery of the tools that were produced and with doing printing of consistently high qual- ity. BOOK COLLECTOR As a book collector, De Vinne spe- cialized in books on printing. The collec- tions of David Wolfe Bruce (to whom De Vinne dedicated The Invention of Printing) and James Lenox had been the starting places for De Vinne's his- torical research, but he found them in- adequate. As a result, he built what Carl L. Canon describes in his Ameri- can Book Collectors as the first signifi- cant book collection concerning typog- raphy and the mechanics of printing in this country [70, p. 191]. After his death, the more than 6,000 items from his collection were sold at auction. Among them were eighty-six incunab- ula, a not insignificant number for a collector who was neither overwhelm- ingly wealthy nor free to devote more than a fraction of his time to the ac- quisition of books. In addition to his collection at home, De Vinne main- tained a sizable typographical library at the press, which when he died was acquired in toto by Henry Lewis Bul- len's Typographic and Graphic Arts Li- brary in Jersey City, New Jersey. The reputation of De Vinne's collec- tions in his lifetime is illustrated by the fact that Horace Hart of the Oxford University Press wrote requesting in- formation concerning an English man- ual of typography, John Smith's The Printer's Grammer, Containing a Con- cise History of the Origin of Printing, Also an Explanation of the Superficies, Gradation & Properties of the Differ- ent Sorts and Sizes of Metal Types . . . (London, 1787) which the Bodleian did not possess, but of which De Vinne had two copies plus the original edition (without the history) of 1775 [71]. When the collection was offered at auc- tion in 1920, Henrietta Bartlett, rare- book librarian at Yale University, con- tributed an introduction to the sale catalog in which she described it as "the finest library on the history of printing which has ever been offered for sale in this country" [72]. A FOUNDER OF THE GROLIER CLUB De Vinne's work with the Century Magazine, with which many eminent literary and artistic people were con- nected, his growing reputation as a scholar of the history of printing, and the growing reputation of his press as one that did quality work, combined to place him in the midst of New York's circle of bibliophiles and scholars of the book. He was one of the nine people, all collectors of books of one degree or another, who on February 5, 1884 met at the home of Robert Hoe, press manufacturer, bibliophile, and close friend of De Vinne, to organize the Grolier Club, the oldest existing Ameri- can club devoted exclusively to the art of the book. Their purpose was "the literary study and promotion of the arts entering into the production of books." Although Robert Hoe was elected the first president, De Vinne had a great influence upon the club. He was its sixth president, and a member of its committee on publications from 1884 until his death. The first publication of the Grolier Club was a suggestion of De Vinne's, a reprint of The Decree of Star Chamber of 1637. Four of the publications of the Grolier Club [19, 44 46] were written by De Vinne, and forty-five of the fifty-five volumes printed by the Grolier Club prior to De Vinne's death were printed at the De
18 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Vinne Press and seen through the press by De Vinne himself [14, p. 21]. The influence of the Grolier Club upon American printing has been wide- ly recognized as being very significant. Bruce Rogers remarked that: "Among the first of the recent efforts to infuse into printing something of the quality that made the earlier books so interest- ing were the publications of the Grolier Club of New York. Their books printed at the De Vinne Press were the most ambitious that America had produced before the influence of Morris was felt" [73, p. 20]. In addition to the books, the club was important because of its exhibitions and its proselytizing. More than any other such organization, the Grolier Club worked to make the public aware of good printing-the "promotion of the arts." ORGANIZER AND EDUCATOR OF IS TRADE The welfare and the state of the printing industry as a whole were mat- ters of great concern to De Vinne. Shortly after becoming a partner in Francis Hart & Company in 1858, he began to take an active role in the leadership of his trade. In 1859, Fran- cis Hart & Company published a short. lived trade periodical entitled the Print- er's Miscellany,8 of which De Vinne was the editor and to which he contrib- uted articles. During this same period, for the betterment of trade conditions within the industry, De Vinne and others, principally Peter C. Baker and C. A. Alvord, began to work toward some sort of organization of New York's master printers. This began modestly enough in 1859 with the prac- tice of assembling at lunch to discuss business matters. Gradually a rather loose organization evolved, known vari- ously as "The Printers of New York," "The Employing Printers Association," and the "Associated Employing Print- ers"-the latter name being the most used. De Vinne was the secretary of this organization. On March 21, 1865 the group was formally organized- the first such in the country. The name "Typothetae of the City of New York" was chosen at the suggestion of Peter C. Baker, who had seen the name used for German master-printers' societies. ("Typothetae" was derived from the Greek typos [type] and thetos [set- ting].) C. A. Alvord was chosen as president, and De Vinne, the youngest member of the group at the age of thirty-six, was named secretary. De- spite the fact that the organization of the employing printers followed hard upon the unionization of their employ- ees, it does not seem that their purpose was to combat the unions. Rather, the intent seems to have been to foster the adoption of uniform trade prices and to alleviate the problems of cutthroat competition between scores of small competing printing houses. In 1871, De Vinne published his in- fluential Printer's Price List: A Manual for the Use of Clerks and Bookkeepers in Job Printing Offices [74], designed to combat this problem.9 It was so suc- cessful in alleviating the situation that the Typothetae had been formed to remedy, -that the organization accord- ingly became somewhat superfluous and moribund until it was revivified in the early 1880s. The intent of the Printer's Price List was not, however, to set an exact price for every contingency, but as De Vinne stated in the preface: "Its best use will be found, not so much as a final author- I So short-lived that it is not mentioned in the Union List of Serials. (Columbia University Li- brary has some copies.) This was the culmination of much effort by De Vinne. For earlier works, see [87-90].
DE VINNE AND THE DE VINNE PRESS 19 ity on prices, but as a guide to the making of prices in a systematic man- ner" [74, p. 13]. Opposite every im- portant table there was a blank table in which users could adjust and supply their own figures. It was De Vinne's thesis that, while most printers knew the mechanics of their trade, too few of them had a sufficient knowledge of business to accurately set fair and rea- sonable prices upon their work. In par- ticular, he was concerned with the ten- dency of many printers to charge prices that covered immediate expenses, such as labor, but did not take into account overhead and long-term expenses, such as equipment depreciation. In short, he deplored the tendency to charge on the basis of variable and incremental costs while ignoring or underestimating fixed costs and thereby setting a standard that was, in the long run, unprofitable to the printing profession. The Print- er's Price List was part, a major part, of his campaign to educate printers in proper cost analysis. The influence of the book was im- mediate and widespread. Though it was designed with the problems of the print- ers of New York in mind, it was im- mediately adopted as the standard, with near unanimity, in Philadelphia and Boston as well as New York. Indeed it became the standard nationwide (of course, differing wage scales made in- terpolation necessary elsewhere). The book contained such a wealth of infor- mation that it was of major importance as a handbook and would have been es- sential to printers on that point alone. The burgeoning power of trade unionism precipitated the revivification of the Typothetae of New York in 1883. Although De Vinne played a rel- atively minor role, he was elected first vice-president and succeeded to the presidency in 1891. Employing-printers associations were being formed in other cities for the same reasons, and in Sep- tember of 1887 the Chicago Typothetae called for a convention "for the pur- pose of discussing plans for united ac- tion" against these demands [75, p. 335]. Representatives of seventeen local typothetae met in Chicago on Oc- tober 18-20 and formed the United Typothetae of America. The structure of the United Typothetae was particu- larly loose. As De Vinne, who was the first full-term president (1887-88) ," remarked at the second convention, "it is not in our plan to coerce unwilling or half-willing members in obedience to a policy they do not approve. We are here for counsel and for that cheerful and voluntary concert of action which comes only from a conviction of the justice of the counsellings" [75, p. 336]. In general, in view of the purpose of its founding, the United Typothetae was surprisingly modest and inactive in op- position to union demands. How much of this was the influence of De Vinne, who drafted its Code of Ethics, is im- possible to determine, but it did repre- sent his view of its proper role. Although not so important in the or- ganization of the United Typothetae, one of De Vinne's ideas eventually de- termined the Typothetae's major im- portance. This was to provide the print- er with information he needed and to assist him in his continuing education. De Vinne took a particular interest in this aspect. Carl P. Rollins, in speaking of De Vinne's advocacy and promotion of the United Typothetae of America says: "This national organization through its education of the employers in learning their actual costs of opera- tion and in charging fair prices for their '0R. Harver Smith was president pro tem for a period in 1887, but De Vinne is usually referred to as the first president.
20 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY product, has done for the employing printers what in its own field the In- ternational Typographical Union has done for the employees in stabilizing the printing industry in America. De Vinne's efforts in connection with the typothetae . . . were a notable contri- bution" [12, p. 13]. INGELIST OF PRTIG De Vinne was an evangelist of print- ing. During his lifetime he contributed nearly seventy articles to periodicals; many of these were brief, but some were quite extensive. One for example, "Speed in Composition" [76], was actually twelve separate articles trac- ing the history of attempts to increase speed of composition. De Vinne's arti- cles were almost equally divided be- tween those in trade publications and those for the general public. The for- mer primarily concerned technical mat- ters: "The Adaptability of Paper" [77]; trade conditions: "The Tariff on Types" [78], "Low Prices and Ruinous Competition" [79]; questions of taste and style: "Head Bands and Tail Pieces" [80], "Fads in Typography" [81]; and some historical articles: "William Caxton" [53]. The latter pri- marily concerned stylistic matters: "Some Comments on the Imitator of William Morris" [82], "Attractiveness in Books" [83]; and historical matters: "John Gutenberg" [49], "The First Editor" [51], etc.; but there were also occasional articles on technical and labor matters: "The Printing of the Century" [65], "Cooperation." [84] There was a great deal that De Vinne wished to write, but had not accom- plished before he died. Unfinished tasks included a more complete history of typefaces and at least one more volume, as a supplement to his Practice of Ty- pography, on the planning of books and on the typographic treatment of par- ticular topics. In his last years, he urged Henry L. Bullen to undertake the latter because he knew he himself could not [85]. De Vinne did more than any other person to make the public and the scholar aware of the problems of the printer. He imposed upon himself the job of being a public-relations man for the printing trade. He availed himself of every opportunity to explain his trade to the public by writing and by lecturing. He continually tried to uplift the public's taste in typographical mat- ters, making more effort for this cause than any American before or since. Perhaps even more important, how- ever, was the influence of his writings and his example upon the typographic taste of the trade. A JUDGMENT It can be argued that De Vinne was the greatest American printer and that he exerted probably the greatest influ- ence of any one man upon American printing. No one else has had such a great effect upon both the technology and typography of his time; no one else has been so successful in convey- ing his ideas to his fellow printers; no one else was so highly regarded by his contemporaries in the trade. De Vinne's work stands in sharp con- trast to the English work of William Morris, not so much because it aroused public interest, but because it pointed in the direction which the course of printing would follow. Marshall Lee makes the distinction between Morris and De Vinne nicely: Rapid expansion had an unfortunate effect upon typographic development. Where the hand printer was confined to a few basic type- faces (and therefore simple typography), the machine age printer had type of every descrip-
DE VINNE AND THE DE VINNE PRESS 21 tion-and many that defied description. The result, beginning at mid-century, was typo- graphic chaos. About 1890, a reaction set in against machine-made monstrosities. In En- gland, William Morris revived the handicrafts of medieval bookmaking. In Amenca, a few scholar printers, notably De Vinne, Updike and Rogers restored the typography of the seven- teenth and eighteenth centuries. Although no more inventive than Morris's this movement introduced the mature traditions of printing to machine technology-and had a far greater effect. [86, p. 4] Chronology comes to De Vinne's de- fense as an innovator. His actions against the confusing mixture of type- faces began well before 1890 and Wil- liam Morris. The constructive contri- butions of Updike and Rogers, original- ly much influenced by Morris, did not come until the twentieth century. In addition to the importance of his many particular contributions, De Vinne is significant because of his uniquely successful spanning of what to other printers have been dichotomies. No other printer, certainly no other printer of modern times, who has had such an interest in fine printing and typographic style and in the historical and antiquarian aspects of his craft, ever possessed such technological knowledge and seized upon technologi- cal innovation so wholeheartedly as did De Vinne. He demonstrated as has no other, and at a crucial time, that one could embrace and even contribute to the new technology without abandoning either typographic traditions or con- cern for style and the values of aesthet- ics. Nor has any other printer of mod- ern times combined such stylistic val- ues and historical interests with such an awareness of the proper role of print as communication; with such a realiza- tion and exploitation of the potentiali- ties of printing as mass communication. De Vinne, through the form of the mag- azine, led quality printing into the realm of mass circulation, which it had never penetrated before. Finally, no other printer of modern times has com- bined such stylistic values and histori- cal interests with such commercial suc- cess. De Vinne demonstrated that fine printing need not be limited to the domain of the private press or the small press of deliberately limited scope. Dedication to typographic and aesthet- ic values could be demanded of the most commerical establishment. These are significant and major con- tributions, for they demonstrate that these dichotomies are not so unbridg- able as one might otherwise suppose, and these contributions are all, in one way or another, unique to De Vinne. REFERENCES 1. De Vinn6, Daniel. Recollections of Fifty Years in the Ministry. New York: N. Tib- bals & Co., 1869. 2. DeVinne, Daniel. The Methodist Episco- pal Church and Slavery. New York: Fran- cis Hart & Co., 1857. 3. De VinnC, Daniel. The Irish Primitive Church. New York: Francis Hart & Co., 1870. 4. The Business Printer. Salt Lake City, Utah: Porte Publishing Co., May 1931. 5. Lehmann-Haupt, Hellmut. The Book in America. 2d ed. New York: R. R. Bowker Co., 1951. 6. Quarterly Illustrator, vol. 1 (December 1893). 7. Bullen, Henry Lewis. "Biographical Sketch." In Theodore Low De Vinne: Printer. New York: Privately printed, 1915. 8. Weeks, Edward. "The Schooling of an Ed- itor." In Bowker Lectures on Book Pub- lishing. New York: R. R. Bowker Co., 1957. 9. Mott, Frank Luther. A History of Ameri- can Magazines. Vol. 3, 1865-1885. Cam- bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1958.
22 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 10. Drake, Alexander W. "Letter to the Edi- tor." New York Times, February 22, 1914. Reprinted in Theodore Low De Vinne: Printer. 11. De Vinne, Theodore Low. Speech before a testimonial banquet of De Vinne employ- ees, April 30, 1892. Reported in undated newspaper clipping in the De Vinne Col- lection, Columbia University Library. 12. Rollins, Carl Purington. "Theodore Low De Vinne." Signature, n.s. 10 (1950): 3-2 1. 13. Catalogue of Work of the De Vinne Press. Exhibited at the Grolier Club. New York: Grolier Club, 1929. 14. Hopkins, Frank. The De Vinne and Marion Presses. Meriden, Conn.: Columbia Club, 1936. 15. Letter: T. L. De Vinne to Henry Lewis Bullen, November 6, 1913. De Vinne Col- lection, Columbia University Library. 16. De Vinne, T. L. Lecture to the Yale Col- lege Club of New York. Typescript. De Vinne Collection, Columbia University Li- brary. 17. DeVinne, T. L. "Good Taste in Typog- raphy." Printing Art 8 (October 1906): 100. 18. DeVinne, T. L. The Practice of Typog- raphy. Vol. 3, A Treatise on Title-Pages: With Numerous Illustrations in Facsimile, and Some Observations on the Early and Recent Printing of Books. New York: Century Co., 1902. 19. DeVinne, T. L. Historic Printing Types. A lecture read before the Grolier Club of New York, January 15, 1885, with addi- tions and new illustrations. New York: Grolier Club, 1886. 20. De Vinne, T. L. "The Mechanical Depart- ment." In The National Journalist for Edi- tors. Undated fragment in the DeVinne Collection, Columbia University Library. 21. De Vinne, T. L. Modern Book Composi- tion. New York: Oswald Publishing Co., 1914. 22. DeVinne, T. L. "The Decoration of Books." Undated clipping in the De Vinne Collection, Columbia University Library. 23. De Vinne, T. L. "Typographic Effect." In- dependent 4 (November 1903): 2723-25. 24. De Vinne, T. L. "The Printing of Books." Outlook 57 (December 1897): 805-9. 25. De Vinne, T. L. The Practice of Typog- raphy. Vol. 1, A Treatise on the Processes of Type-Making: The Point System, the Names, Sizes, Styles and Prices of Plain Printing Types. New York: Century Co., 1900; 2d ed., 1902. 26. Updike, Daniel B. "Letter to the Editor." Literary Review (January 1923), pp. 405, 406. 27. De Vinne, T. L. "The Printing of William Morris." Bookbuyer 13 (January 1897): 920-73. 28. De Vinne, T. L. Printing in the Nineteenth Century. New York: Lead Mould Electro- type Foundry, 1924. Appeared originally in the New York Evening Post, January 12, 1901. 29. De Vinne, T. L. Untitled undated clipping. De Vinne Collection, Columbia University Library. 30. William Morris Society. The Typographi- cal Adventure of William Morris. London: William Morris Society, 1956. 31. De Vinne, T. L. Types of the De Vinne Press. New York: De Vinne Press, 1907. 32. Goudy, Frederic W. Typologia: Studies in Type Design and Type Making. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1940. 33. Ovink, G. W. Legibility, Atmosphere- Value, and Forms of Printing Types. Leiden: A. W. Sijthoff, 1938. 34. Burt, Cyril. A Psychological Study of Typography. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni- versity Press, 1959. 35. Sutton, James, and Bartram, Alan. An Atlas of Typeforms. New York: Hastings House, 1968. 36. Morison, Stanley. The Typographic Book, 1450-1935. London: Ernest Bern, 1963. 37. Letter: T. L. De Vinne to A. W. Phinney, June 16, 1898. De Vinne Collection, Co- lumbia University Library. 38. Goudy, Frederic W. "'A Note'" concern- ing T. L. De Vinne's The Old & The New: A Friendly Dispute between Juvenus & Senex. In Books and Printing: A Treasury for Typophiles, edited by Paul A. Bennett. Cleveland: World Publishing Co., 1963. 39. De Vinne, T. L. The Invention of Print- ing. 2d ed. New York: Francis Hart & Co., 1876. 40. Fuhrmann, Otto W. Gutenberg and the Strasbourg Documents of 1439. New York: Press of the Wooly Whale, 1940. 41. De Vinne, T. L. The Practice of Typog- raphy. Vol. 2, Correct Composition: A Treatise on Spelling, Abbreviations, the Compounding and Division of Words, the Proper Use of Figures and Numerals; Italic and Capital Letters, Notes, etc.,
DE VINNE AND THE DE VINNE PRESS 23 with Observations on Punctuation and Proof-Reading. New York: Century Co., 1901. 42. De Vinne, T. L. The Practice of Typog- raphy. Vol. 4, Modern Methods of Book Composition: A Treatise on Type-Setting by Hand and by Machine, and on the Prop- er Arrangement and Imposition of Pages. New York: Century Co., 1904. 43. Updike, Daniel B. Printing Types, Their History, Forms and Use: A Study in Sur- vivals. 2 vols. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1922. 44. De Vinne, T. L. Title-Pages as Seen by a Printer, with Numerous Illustrations in Facsimile, and Some Observations on the Early and Recent Printing of Books. New York: Grolier Club, 1901. 45. De Vinne, T. L. Christopher Plantin and the Plantin-Moretus Museum at Antwerp. With illustrations by Joseph Pennell and others. New York: Grolier Club, 1888. 46. De Vinne, T. L. Notable Printers of Italy during the Fifteenth Century. Illustrated with facsimiles from early editions and with remarks on early and recent printing. New York: Grolier Club, 1910. 47. A Decree of Star Chamber concerning Printing. Made July 11, 1637. Reprinted by the Grolier Club from the 1st ed. by Robert Barker, 1637. New York: Grolier Club, 1884. 48. Moxon, Joseph. Moxon's Mechanick Exercises. Or, The Doctrine of Handy- Works Applied to the Art of Printing: A Literal Reprint . . . of the First Edition published in . . . 1683, with a Preface and Notes by Theo. L. De Vinne. 2 vols. New York: Typothetae of the City of New York, 1896. 49. De Vinne, T. L. "John Gutenberg." Scribner's Monthly 12 (May 1876): 73- 85. 50. De Vinne, T. L. "The Growth of Woodcut Printing." Scribner's Monthly 19 (April 1880): 860-74; 20 (May 1880): 34-45. 51. De Vinne, T. L. "The First Editor." Scribner's Monthly 22 (October 1881): 889-98. 52. De Vinne, T. L. "A Printer's Paradise: The Plantin-Moretus Museum at Ant- werp." Century Magazine 14 (June 1888): 225-45. 53. De Vinne, T. L. "William Caxton." Printers' Circular 7 (1872): 241-43; 281- 83; 321-23; 353-57. 54. De Vinne, T. L. "Old Specimen Books." Printers' Circular 9 (1874): 45-47. 55. De Vinne, T. L. "The Mazarine Bible." Printers' Circular 8 (1873): 233-35. 56. De Vinne, T. L. "Giambatista Bodoni." Printing Art 17 (June 1911): 277-87. 57. De Vinne, T. L. "Medieval Printing." Printer's Journal, June 18 and July 2, 1866. 58. Morison, Stanley. "Recollections and Per- spectives." In Updike, American Printer and His Merrymount Press. New York: American Institute of Graphic Arts, 1947. 59. French, George. "Letter to the Editor" dated 7 March, Dial, March 16, 1914, p. 236. 60. De Vinne, T. L. "American Printing." In One Hundred Years of American Cor- merce, edited by Chauncey M. Depew. New York: D. 0. Haynes & Co., 1895. 61. Munsell, Joel. A Chronology of Paper and Paper Making. 4th ed. Albany, N.Y.: J. Munsell, 1870. 62. A History of the S. D. Warren Paper Company. Portland, Me.: Anthoensen Press, 1954. 63. Rollins, Carl Purington. "De Vinne, Theo- dore Low." In Dictionary of American Biography. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1930. 64. Hoe, Robert. A Short History of the Print- ing Press. New York: R. Hoe, 1902. 65. De Vinne, T. L. "The Printing of the Cen- tury." Century Illustrated Monthly Maga- zine 19, no. 1 (November 1890): 87-99. 66. De Vinne, T. L. Fragment, untitled and undated. De Vinne Collection, Columbia University Library. 67. Letter: T. L. De Vinne to J. W. Phinney, May 23, 1891. De Vinne Collection, Ameri- can Antiquarian Society. 68. De Vinne, T. L. "Gutenberg, 1400-1468." Eclectic Magazine, n.s. 10 (July 1869): 14. 69. Letter: T. L. De Vinne to J. W. Phinney, December 31, 1894. De Vinne Collection, American Antiquarian Society. 70. Cannon, Carl L. American Book Collectors and Collecting from Colonial Times to the Present. New York: H. W. Wilson Co., 1941. 71. Letter: T. L. De Vinne to H. L. Bullen, November 19, 1910. De Vinne Collection, Columbia University Library. 72. Bartlett, Henrietta. Introduction to The Library of the Late Theodore Low De Vinne, Sale No. 1455, Sale Catalogue. New York: Anderson Galleries, 1920.
24 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 73. Rogers, Bruce. Pi. Cleveland: World Pub- lishing Co., 1953. 74. De Vinne, T. L. A Printer's Price List: A Manual for the Use of Clerks and Book- keepers in Job Printing Offices. 2d ed. New York: Francis Hart & Co., 1871. 75. Barnett, George E. The Printers: A Study in American Trade Unionism. Publications of the American Economic Association. Third series, vol. 10, no. 3. Cambnrdge, Mass.: American Economic Association, 1909. 76. De Vinne, T. L. "Speed in Composition." Printing Gazette, vol. 6 (January-Decem- ber 1871). 77. De Vinne, T. L. "The Adaptability of Pa- per." Bookman (May 1897), pp. 222-24. 78. De Vinne, T. L. "The Tariff on Types." Printing Gazette 7, no. 3 (March 1872): 1-2; also Proofsheet 5 (March 1872): 67- 68. 79. De Vinne, T. L. "Low Prices and Ruinous Competition." Typo. Syracuse, 1871. Re- printed in Printing Gazette 7, no. 3 (March 1872). 80. De Vine, T. L. "Head Bands and Tall Pieces." Printing Art 3 (July 1904): 149- 53. 81. De Vinne, T. L. "Fads in Typography." Inland Printer 26 (February 1901): 601- 4. 82. De Vinne, T. L. "Some Comments on the Imitators of William Morris." New York Times Saturday Review, October 27, 1900. 83. De Vinne, T. L. "Attractiveness in Books." Independent 57 (December 1904): 1374- 77. 84. De Vinne, T. L. "Cooperation." Century Magazine 10 (June 1888): 403-4. 85. Letters: T. L. De Vinne to H. L. Bullen, October 24, 1913 and November 6, 1913. De Vinne Collection, Columbia Univer- sity Library. 86. Lee, Marshall. Bookmaking: The Illus- trated Guide to Design and Production. New York: R. R. Bowker Co., 1965. 87. De Vinne, Theodore L. "The Profits of Book Composition." Printer 5 (January 1864): 38-40. 88. De Vinne, Theodore L. The Profits of Book Composition. New York: Associated Employing Printers, 1864. 89. De Vinne, Theodore L. Prices for Print- ing Adopted by the Employing Printers of the City of New York. New York: Asso- ciated Employing Printers, 1864. 90. De Vinne, Theodore L. A Printer's Price List: A Manual for the Use of Clerks and Bookkeepers in Job Printing Offices. New York: Pnrvately printed, Francis Hart & Co., 1869.