POVERTY, PREJUDICE, AND THE PUBLIC LIBRARY EWALD B. NYQUIST ET me begin by emphasizing four current trends that affect us all id and have a high degree of rele- vance for the work of public libraries. First, there is the factor of interlock- ing complexity. Just as we live in a cul- ture that is polarized around the scien- tific revolution, so do we live in one that puts a premium on organization, on system, on co-operation between units having mutual or overlapping interests. It is a day of calculated interdepend- ence, of involvement, of planned to- getherness, whether we like it or not. Not enough librarians realize that they can no longer preside over institutions or agencies in splendid isolation. Li- brarianship has too often been, and still is, a many-splintered thing. We do not have enough librarians who are pre- pared by education, experience, or by inclination to cope with the often be- wildering interlocking complexity of their environment. Traditional forms of institutional au- tonomy are being displaced by emerg- ing patterns that emphasize interde- pendence rather than independence in the expansion and improvement of edu- cation and library work. But it is not only a problem of co- operation or sharing of responsibility between like institutions. In formal ed- ucation, for instance, state education departments and local school officials must learn to establish constructive re- lationships with the federal government, with private and parochial institutions, with private and public agencies in such fields as health, welfare, housing, recre- ation, and comimuniity planniiag, with business and industry, labor, and with the other educational resources that have hitherto stood on the periphery of the formal teaching and learning proc- ess, such as museums, libraries, educa- tional television, zoos, the performing arts, and so on. And, finally, in this day of interlock- ing complexity, when we seem to find only half-solutions to the problems of our own human aggregation, let us be firmly cormmitted to providing a lateral outreach to the poor and to the disad- vantaged, to involving them in a shared responsibility for planning and imple- menting community action programs. Too long we have either ignored the poor or else have provided welfare serv- ices to the poor and the disadvantaged on the basis of superior-inferior au- thority relationships, divorced from the goal of developing human resources and the independence and autonomy of the individual human being. Means and ends have been confused. Let us listen for a moment to Pro- fessor Dan WV. Dodson of New York IUniversity, when he spoke at a confer- ence we called on the role of public li- braries in developing services for the disadvantaged: Are our services simply the squirting on of more welfare? Does our interest stem simply from the concern that we must keep the ten- sion controlled with a little more and so on, or is it to release the human potential? If it is to release the human potential, we must run some calculated risk. If people are going to take power and move from self-direction, out of this will come the need for the library to serv- 78
POVERTY, PREJUDICE, AND THE PUBLIC LIBRARY 79 ice some movements that are going to be au- tonomous in themselves and not simply pro- granms of service of welfare agencies, that get together and coordinate and wrap up their services in a cartel kind of arrangement. In other words, the biggest issue we are dealing with is not the issue of more service, as impor- tant as this is, but of some undergirding ideol- ogy that gives life structure and meaning and purpose. One that moves people towards some autonomous goals which cause them to fight back and not be willing quite so rapidly to sur- render their potency. In this, where do we stand as an institution of service to the com- munity? Are we committed to helping all peo- ple to pursue these autonomous kinds of goals or are we there as representatives also of the power order to serve sufficiently well that we keep people tranquilized? These days, then, educators and li- brarians, and I use those terms synony- mously, must learn that it takes at least two to tangle. The new era is one of "going steady." Librarians no longer walk alone. There is, as someone has predicted, a bright future for complex- ity; and, he might have added, ambi- guity, for assisting in filling out the edu- cational mosaic of the Great Society is not without both. Next, let me speak of the national in- terest in education and library work and of the concept of creative federal- ism. Why has the federal government assumed a much larger role in educa- tion and library affairs, displacing the importance of individual states and lo- calities? As one writer has put it: There is no mystery about why the powers of the Federal government have been constant- ly growing and the powers of the states con- stantly declining. One reason is that in our increasingly complex and interlocking society, problems that once could be dealt with on a state basis flowed over state lines and had to be handled on a national basis. Secondly, most states abandoned their powers by failing to ex- ercise them and thus forced their people to turn to Washington for help and services their states refused to provide. It is in the national interest to de- velop to the fullest the capacity of our libraries to preserve, enlarge, and dis- seminate man's knowledge. States and localities, and private and single insti- tutions, no longer can, by themselves, support libraries to the extent necessary for enhancing private individual benefit and the common good. The most sig- nificant development in American edu- cation is the increased awareness of ed- ucation's importance to the achievement of our national goals and of a national commitment to raising the quality of our educational enterprise. Thus, the federal government in re- cent years has generously increased its funding for a variety of library activi- ties, in elementary and secondary schools, in colleges and universities, in the public libraries, and at the state level. The availability of massive categori- cal federal aid to correct areas of criti- cal weakness forces new relationships. Indicative these days of the concern with the meaning of the federal govern- ment's growing participation in educa- tion is the preoccupation with the term "creative federalism." It conceives of a partnership, a family of governments, a federal-state-local sharing of responsi- bility, joint effort, and mutual develop- ment of new activities, rather than a strict separation of powers and direct federal action. It acknowledges the im- portance of state and local levels of governance with their accompanying powers and responsibilities, but affirms the primacy of the federal government. The concept presumes to be more sensi- tive to the "rapidly changing pressures and powers in an increasingly plural- istic society." Power and control in ed- ucation are not a fixed absolute pool, a static commodity, a defined quantum of
80 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY power. The entrance of the federal gov- ernment into education and library af- fairs does not diminish the power of the states, localities, or local institutions; it enlarges it. The new notion of federalism, then, calls for a sharing of responsibility for carrying out an important public pur- pose that all have in common and that none could achieve as well without the co-operation of the others. It is mutu- ally enriching and has a multiplier ef- fect on its participants. It depends up- on co-operation, creative tension, con- flict, and constructive criticism for its continued viability. Third, I shall discuss, briefly, urban- ization. In the early part of the twen- tieth century, a marked movement of people from rural to urban areas took place. Then at mid-century three inter- related population movements affected cities: Many moved to suburban living in metropolitan areas; disadvantaged persons flowed from other states to the core areas of central cities; and Puerto Rican citizens moved to the larger cities, particularly New York City. Today, nearly 70 per cent of Ameri- cans live in 212 metropolitan centers. By 1980, it is estimated that 80 per cent of the nation's population will live in urban areas. These areas are expanding into vast urban complexities spreading from a central core, containing the fi- nancial, commercial, and legal head- quarters of the area, through nearby exclusive, prosperous neighborhoods, out into a gray area of deteriorating residential and decaying industrial and commercial neighborhoods, with all of this encircled by miles and miles of res- idential suburbia. The population growth within this complex has been uneven. In the dec- ade between the 1950 and the 1960 cen- sus, the population of some major cities, including Chicago, New York, Philadelphia, and St. Louis, decreased, while their total metropolitan popula- tions were expanding. The suburbs have had to absorb the enormous growth in metropolitan populations. The growing urbanization of our so- ciety is one of the outstanding charac- teristics of our age. For many years our American cities have been undergoing a social and economic revolution. The most obvious sign has been the decline of the central city. The decline, con- trary to popular belief, has not been brought about by the influx of the new migrants-the Negro, the Puerto Rican, the Mexican, those groups primarily with a high percentage of unskilled and culturally handicapped-but by the abandonment of responsibility by the white majority and the flight of indus- try and the white-middle-class families to more affluent suburbs, thus leaving the cities shorn not only of needed tax revenues but of part of its leadership. As John Gardner has said recently, "We are going to have to do more than build bridges between the inner city and its opulent periphery. We need a totally new concept of metropolitan organiza- tion." The urban schools (and libraries) have been left with the task of serving undue proportions of those hardest to educate-the children of the poor, the migrant, and the ghetto-and have also had to attempt this task in an atmos- phere of rejection and apathy by the most influential segment of society. Thus, the recent history of urban edu- cation has been one of a vicious circle of diminishing support and deteriora- tion in quality. It is estimated that by 1970 Negroes and Puerto Ricans will make up 28 per
POVERTY, PREJUDICE, AND THE PUBLIC LIBRARY 81 cent of New York City's population and comprise 50 per cent of the borough of Manhattan, that Chicago will be 25 per cent Negro, and St. Louis 50 per cent. And we need to remind ourselves that about 93 per cent of the children in the public schools of Washington, D.C., are Negro. I'd like to quote again from Profes- sor Dan Dodson: The cities have always been the great civiliz- ing force in cultures. They brought the poor and the humble, the despised and the outcast, the uneducated, the uncouth to the great en- counters and in one or two generations pro- duced out of them urbane, humane people. This has been the function, the role, of the city in history. This process is unfolding be- fore our eyes here. The big problem, it seems to me, is the extent of the problem in so short a period of time. There are a million more peo- ple living in the slums of our large cities than live on all farms, and a million more to come. The history of civilization also is that they have attracted the marginal, but choked them down because they found it easier to keep these people amused than to integrate them purposefully into the life of the community. Ultimately, bread and circuses produced such attrition of resource that civilization fell of its own weight. What he seems to be saying is that there is an inverse correlation between increasing urbanization and urbanity. Everybody, or nearly everybody, has gone to town, so to speak, and the new frontier in education is elsewhere. It is not in the developing rural lands, nor in the clean, comfortable antiseptic sub- urbs. The excitement, the cutting edge of things in education today, is in the dusty streets of urban areas, the large cities, and in the slums. There is where the action is. There is where we need the boldest, the most creative, and the best of our educators and librarians, if we are to fill out the mosaic of a still distant Great Society. It is in these areas where the disadvantaged are and where one can most truly become an innovator. Fourth, and finally, let me speak of racial isolation and racial integration as issues in and of themselves aside from urbanization. I shall speak to the need for the greatest innovation of all, essen- tial for correcting the most glaring hy- pocrisy today in American education. The hypocrisy-a stench in the nos- trils of the national community-is the gaping distance between our professed, historical belief in equality of access to educational opportunity for all our chil- dren and youth, on the one hand, and our actual provisions for what is usual- ly called, in a transport of euphemism, the disadvantaged, on the other. And let us not delude ourselves as to who the disadvantaged are: They are pri- marily the American Negro. We need to develop, as someone has said, a special capacity for outrage at the injustice done to the American Negro. The corrective innovation-about which the public is still consumed by apathy-is integration in its fullest, al- most spiritual, sense. Let me speak briefly, then, about this flaw in our educational ointment and its remedy. And again, we educators have had to be prodded by others to recog- nize that change was required. We have been caught with our plans down. I define the "disadvantaged" as those equal and fellow citizens for whom we must be concerned because they have reduced opportunities for social and economic success. They comprise the "social dynamite" so dramatically por- trayed by former Harvard President James B. Conant. The foremost challenge facing Ameri- can education today, in the North, not just in the South, is to equalize educa-
82 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY tional opportunity for the disadvan- taged segments of our population. It is primarily an urban, large-city problem, and those schools, those communities, those administrators, those social and business agencies not yet moving in new directions in response to the central thrust of integration, are running a col- lision course with destiny. Are there too many administrative arenas over their heads in problems of integration and up to their knees in midgets? We are confronted with the number one problem today in building a better nation: improving the quality and op- portunity of education for the disad- vantaged; and, I like to think, as Pro- fessor Cremin of Columbia's Teachers College has said, that any system of universal education is ultimately tested at its margins. We have no better guidance than what John Dewey gave us in 1899: "What the best and wisest parent wants for his own child that must the com- munity want for all its children. Any other ideal for our schools is narrow and unlovely; acted upon, it will de- stroy democracy." There are two aspects to the Civil Rights movement as it affects educa- tion: desegregation, which is basically an administrative problem, and integra- tion, which is an educational one. Desegregation is a process of elimi- nating the high concentration of colored children in a few schools. Despite the emotion and tension aroused in doing so, once a determination has been made to end segregation, it is merely adminis- trative and mechanical to carry it out. But integration is something differ- ent, by far. It involves the attitudes and behavior of people of all kinds and age levels. It affects everybody and takes time. Integration is a positive advani tage for all children, and, without it, all children, white or black, are disad- vantaged. It is an opportunity to im- prove the education for everyone. It involves both the head and the heart. Racial prejudice is something we learn; we are not born with it, and our children need not learn it. Local cus- toms are not decreed in heaven. Im- proved educational quality and the achievement of integration are synony- mous terms. Each fosters the other. An integrated education is not the mere mixing together of children from different backgrounds. For mixing to have educational value it must be rein- forced by the attitudes and behavior of school teachers and administrators and librarians, by the content of the cur- riculum and of textbooks, by the ex- perience of the children outside the classroom, by better illustrative mate- rials supplied by business and industry, and it must be accompanied by the opportunity for every child to develop his potential aided by the best possible li'brary and educational system we can provide. XVhat is integrated education? It is an education in which the child learns that he lives in a multi-racial society, in a multi-racial world, a world that is largely non-white, non-demo- cratic, and non-Christian, a world in which no race can choose to live apart. It is one that teaches him to judge in- dividuals for what they are rather than by what group they belong to. From this viewpoint, he learns that differ- ences among peoples are not as great as similarities and that difference is a source of richness and value rather than a thing to be feared and denied. And these things can be taught every- where, even where all the children are
POVERTY, PREJUDICE, AND THE PUBLIC LIBRARY 83 of the same color, class, and creed. In- tegration can thus occur anywhere and, of course, in libraries. Libraries of all kinds have an essen- tial role to play in putting those dis- advantaged by poverty and prejudice on an equal footing with those who are more familiar with abundance and so- cial success. In a real sense, libraries are probably the least segregated institutions, but they can do more than they are now do- ing to achieve the kind of integration I am talking about. An essential element in state and local planning for improved library service is the inclusion of innovative provisions for helping the disadvan- taged to overcome their handicaps. The improvement of reading ability and the instilment of the love of learning (needs that represent ghastly failures in the functioning of the public schools) are basic remedies for which libraries and their staffs are, or ought to be, well equipped. In short, I have often thought that public libraries should become more like schools and the elementary and secondary schools need to become more like libraries. I know that in our own state, with state and federal assistance, we are try- ing to give the previous statement prac- tical effect. From the funds for opera- tional grants in the Library Services and Construction Act (LSCA), our state plan calls for almost 42 per cent of the total to be assigned to library systems for programs for the disad- vantaged. Thus, this project objective has the highest priority of seven ob- jectives we have set for ourselves. And the federal funds in Title II of the Elementary and Secondary Edu- cation Act, along with state funds, are making it possible to develop in the secondary, and especially in the ele- mentary, schools not only decent library resources but also imaginative schemes for providing library services of all kinds, including co-operative programs with other institutions. There is in the library liturgy what I shall call a myth in order to provoke you. The myth is that a public library is a "poor man's university." I have often heard the cliche and, until a few years ago, believed it. Like all myths, it has some basis. But myths, once be- lieved in, become a basis for action and attitude and lead to an arteriosclerosis of belief, thus limiting change and inno- vation. If my claim seems to be outrageous, let us look at New York for a moment. We have just concluded an exhaustive, and exhausting, three-year evaluation of our public library system. We have 726 public libraries, almost all of which are organized into 22 public library systems covering just about the whole state. Here are some excerpts from the re- port, taken verbatim from two different summaries of it: 1. The greatest intensity of library use was among college graduates. 2. The low intensity of use among those persons over twenty-five years of age with less than a high school educa- tion suggests the possibility that the library programs are not well designed to attract persons with a limited educa- tion. 3. Intensity of use dropped off rap- idly as distance increased and very few libraries (other than strong central libraries) drew more than 10 per cent of their users from more than 10 miles. 4. The study notes the need for vastly more study and experimentation
84 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY in reaching a broader segment of the population in New York City, particu- larly the great numbers of disadvan- taged persons who live there. 5. The study points up the over- whelming volume of student use of public libraries and the growing realiza- tion that the public library is the only library agency which is charged with the responsibility for service to all members of the community. 6. The middle and upper classes are the users of the libraries. This was sus- pected in some quarters, but the study brought the fact sharply into focus. Further study will be needed to ascer- tain why, because it is not sufficient to accept the notion that those who can't read won't read. The libraries may have to retool their offerings so that the edu- cationally deprived will find something of interest. 7. Improved facilities on accessible sites represent a primary goal. Libraries are undergoing renovation and moderni- zation. The truth of the matter is that many of them were built before the turn of the century. Many exist in de- caying parts of large cities surrounded by industrial projects. They have lived their life of usefulness. The new facili- ties should be located on sites which are readily accessible by transportation and should be designed to operate in a so- ciety which is rapidly moving toward the turn of another century. 8. Library service of systems, col- leges, and schools should be maximally intermeshed. Historically the develop- ment of these various institutions has brought different modes of operation. I have thrown in this last finding simply because I do not believe the solution can be found to our library problems, including services to the dis- advantaged, unless there is increased communication and co-operation be- tween all kinds of library agencies. I know in our own state that the attitude between the different specialized seg- ments of the library community has been something like the one of the pompous Church of England cleric who said to his non-conformist colleague one day: "We are both doing God's work. You in your way and I in His." So far I have reviewed with you four trends: interlocking complexity; ur- banization; the mounting national in- terest in library affairs; and racial in- tegration. I have also put research evi- dence behind the claim that public li- braries serve only a relatively small fraction of the population and hardly any of those who are disadvantaged. Now I should like to turn at last to some special service programs being operated in New York. I shall mention only three or four examples of the several being operated throughout the state in order to bring out the new con- cepts involved relating to personnel, methods, materials, facilities, programs, and co-operative action. I am well aware, of course, of the many distinguished programs started in other urban areas of the country. I am familiar with them only because I have read about them. Administrators of public libraries in the major cities of New York State knew that their services were being used very little by the poor, the illiter- ate, and those disadvantaged by preju- dice. There were language barriers, edu- cational deficiencies, and limited mo- bility, to name a few deterrents. Most of these libraries have now set up special programs in an attempt to reach the disadvantaged. The Brooklyn Pub- lic Library established a position in 1961 called Community Coordinator to
POVERTY, PREJUDICE, AND THE PUBLIC LIBRARY 85 work with individuals and organizations to help them become more aware of the very existence of the library and the many services it has to offer. VWhen in 1964 federal funds under the reconstituted LSCA became avail- able for urban areas-and, incidentally, this is another recognizable admission of the financial plight of the cities-the Brooklyn Public Library added three more community co-ordinators and some supporting staff to the program. Approaches are tailored to the com- munities served so that an honest at- tempt is made first to determine and then to meet needs. If the section com- prises many Spanish-speaking people, the community co-ordinator learns enough Spanish to converse with the residents and the local civic, educa- tional, and political leadership. Books are brought to meetings or social hours at which these people are in attendance and a description of the pertinent serv- ices offered is made. The goal of the project is to widen awareness of the library as an information center and a source of continuing education in low- income, low-education communities, to find new ways of reaching those un- reached who have most to gain from a library's services. The co-ordinators work out in the community rather than within the library building. They oper- ate as "salesmen," working with in- dividuals, institutions, and organiza- tions in disadvantaged areas to inter- pret the library's resources and to pro- mote greater use of its services. The co-ordinators have taken differ- ent approaches to reaching people. They even ring doorbells in housing projects to acquaint residents with the library's services. One co-ordinator established a Career and College Club to raise the aspirations of promising teen-agers, to encourage them to go on with their edu- cation. They have established commu- nity dialogues to attack the problems of crime and juvenile delinquency, an activity that involves many official and community agencies. They have taken basic informational paperbacks into bars, beauty and barber shops in an experimental project to encourage peo- ple to turn to books for answers to their daily problems. The newest project is the operation of a Sidewalk Service-an "autovan" (a type of bookmobile) that will per- mit the co-ordinators actually to take books, book displays, records, and films to the street corners, parks, and gather- ing places of the various neighbor- hoods, actually going to the people not just with words but with materials to show these "disadvantaged" citizens what the library can do to aid them in improving their lives-to help each in- dividual to "read your way up." The children's department directs a program, also supported by federal funds,1 that has earned wide acclaim in Brooklyn and in the library profession. It acquaints youngsters with the pleas- ures and personal enrichment found in books and reading through story-telling and other book-related activities. The library hires and trains a staff of college graduates who go to day-care centers and other non-library centers serving youngsters to present programs. The program is designed to assist preschool children in disadvantaged areas in be- coming emotionally and socially pre- pared for formal learning experience in school by orienting and acquainting them with books and reading. In March of 1965, for example, there were 283 ' Most puiblic library programs for the disad- vantaged seem to have gained their inception and/ or support from LSCA funds.
86 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY programs attended by 3,954 children. The Queens Borough Public Library has earned a national reputation from its "Operation Head Start" which en- courages and helps preschool children in reading readiness. The program en- lists the assistance and interest of par- ents who bring their youngsters to the central or one of several large branch libraries in which the programs are con- ducted. This kind of special service is reaching large numbers of children whose parents are interested in their getting ahead and having advantages they themselves were not offered. The New York Public Library's Countee Cullen Branch, located in central Harlem, has been substantially strengthened through additional staff, book, and audio-visual materials, and programs oriented toward reaching the non-library user. The creation of a new image of the library in the eyes of the community is the goal. A study of this branch reveals that of 1,500 adult registered borrowers, 5 per cent were unemployed, 10 per cent skilled workers, 10 per cent house- wives, 16 per cent professional person- nel, 10 per cent unskilled workers, 14 per cent clerical workers, and 10 per cent service workers. The remaining small percentage were either retired or unclassified. No one asks at the door of a library what your last library use was or what grade in school you at- tained or where you were born or what church you attend. A library's doors are open to all. The New York Public Library, not content to serve only those who now use it, is seeking to make the Countee Cullen Branch as inviting and useful an information cen- ter for the people of the community as possible. In Rochester a pro3ect director was employed who, not incidentally, was chosen for his background in sociology and research techniques, since it is his responsibility to conduct the prelimi- nary research on community needs, to plan, direct, and evaluate the pilot projects, and to co-ordinate the inserv- ice training phases of the program in- volving the librarians of the Rochester Public Library, appropriate librarians of member libraries of the Pioneer Sys- tem, and personnel of other community agencies. In Rochester, the program was initi- ated using LSCA funds as well as com- munity action money to provide a popu- lar library in the central halls of the main library that included the most wanted items from each division and other books and pamphlets that are relatively simple, brief, and direct, and deal with personal problems and events currently in the news. In addition, young people from slum areas were hired by the library and trained as library aides using regular library budget funds and federal anti-poverty funds to promote better community liaison with the library. Easy reading materials of high interest are in great demand in inner-city libraries. Again in Rochester a discovery was made that a number of non-users, including many who are school dropouts, can read at the eighth-grade level if they are moti- vated to do so by an interest in the sub- ject matter. The inclusion of high school review books, a great variety of audio- visual materials, as well as biographies of outstanding Negro sports figures and persons prominent in the Civil Rights movement have increased the interest of former non-library users from the inner city. The provision of meeting places for non-library related activities has proved a drawing card in many in-
POVERTY, PREJUDICE, AND THE PUBLIC LIBRARY 87 ner-city branches. Easily accessible materials for adult literacy classes have increased library use as well. The Rochester Public Library has now established a position of "Out- reach Librarian" whose sole responsi- bility is to plan for programs to reach out into the community, bring the com- munity to the library and the library to the community. The image of the library needs refur- bishing if not downright demolition and reconstruction in many of our urban slums. Locked shelves, reference col- lections kept under lock and key, the collection of library cards for the use of reference materials, all increase the feeling of the slum dweller that the li- brary does not trust him, that he is regarded with suspicion the moment he enters the door, and that he is not particularly welcome. The minority group member meets this feeling of distrust and suspicion in too many places. Let us not be guilty of perpetu- ating an image of discrimination in our libraries, however unintended. A recent patron of the Countee Cullen Branch was heard to remark, "Boy, has this place changed," when he found that, with additional person- nel, the shelves were now bright with new book jackets, a new fiction collec- tion geared to his reading ability and his tastes had been purchased, the formerly locked shelves were no longer locked, the reference collections and encyclopedias were available to any who wished to use them, he could keep his card in his pocket until he wished to borrow a book, no policeman met him or was sent after him to collect the fines for overdue books. In short, the staff worked very hard to change the "tradi- tional" library image. As I view the experiments going on in our own state and reflect on what is going on in other areas, I am con- strained to make the following observa- tions and recommendations on what constitutes a felicitous mix of ingredi- ents in any library program for the disadvantaged to assist in overcoming poverty, illiteracy, racial isolation, and educational deficiencies, or to plan for urban renewal, which I have hardly touched upon. 1. If you have not undertaken a pro- gram of special services for the disad- vantaged, don't try to go through all of your planning from scratch. There are enough good programs going on now to give you some valuable clues as to what your own might be, granted there is a continuing need and vast room for di- versity. Visit some of these programs or hire knowledgeable consultants from them. 2. Involve, from the beginning, other community agencies and, above all, the disadvantaged themselves in your plan- ning. 3. Seek out co-operative relation- ships with other types of libraries and community groups and agencies in or- der to mount a comprehensive opera- tional program. 4. In doing the necessary survey work to find out what kinds of needs there are among the disadvantaged, em- ploy someone with a sociological back- ground. It helps. 5. In operating a program, be sure to provide for inservice training in race or intercultural relations, group work, and community organization. Without it, some of your staff are going to ex- perience a cultural shock, which has been defined as an "experience individ- uals have upon being immersed in an alien culture and is characterized by a state of disturbance following upon the
88 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY loss of the familiar that sustains the in- dividual in everyday life." 6. Make liberal use of paraprofes- sional personnel; aides from the indig- enous community and from other anti- poverty programs; non-library special- ists; and be sure to involve the parents. 7. Identify all the barriers you can to the use of existing library facilities and remove as many as possible. Throw the rule book away, especially on such things as hours of service, penalties for non-return of materials, and anything else which alienates potential users, re- inforces their self-image of powerless- ness, and which conveys the notion that those who staff libraries are middle- class authority figures. 8. Books alone are not enough. There are many other media, materials, and services that can be provided. Do not look for riskless choices. Be willing to experiment with boldness. Some things are going to fail. 9. Provide programs that meet peo- ple where they are, intellectually, emo- tionally, and educationally, not where you think they ought to be. A lot of the disadvantaged can't even read. 10. Take the services to where the people are physically. Neighborhood centers and mobile services provide di- rect visible evidence that there are li- braries around for the disadvantaged and that somebody is interested in them. 11. Establish advisory groups for at least some of your projects using indig- enous personnel. 12. If your state planning agency has not established a high priority for the disadvantaged in the use of federal funds from the LSCA, do something about it. 13. Treat each disadvantaged user with the dignity he deserves as an indi- vidual human being worthy of study and celebration in his own right. Re- member that the goal is not the provi- sion of services but to make each user eventually independent through the re- lease of his own potential. 14. Provide for evaluation of your project from the very beginning. HIow will you know you are accomplishing anything? Simply a Good Samaritan feeling of helping the poor and those who are damaged by prejudice is not enough. 15. Looking toward the future, be aggressive in associating yourself or in- fluential members of your governing boards with urban renewal planning groups. From my limited experience so far, such civil and voluntary planning groups hardly know that schools and libraries exist. Certainly they don't think of libraries as instruments and agents of change. If your city is en- gaged in planning for the Demonstra- tion Cities and Metropolitan Act of 1966, are you literally in on the act? 16. For a final point: Are you, as public institutions, fully satisfied that your administrative and operational professional staffs, as well as your board of trustees, are racially integrat- ed? Have you been aggressive in seek- ing out and training Negroes to man what I know are vacant positions, or are Negroes to be found only in your stacks as pages? Before I close, let me define for you what I consider to be a foremost cri- terion of excellence in a public library (or in any institution, for that matter): It is the extent to which the institution is willing to extend generous hospitality to experimentation and to spark and accommodate innovation; in short, to engage in self-criticism. We have been reminded by every prophet of the commonplace th'at this is a time of rapid change. Our universal faith in flux has led a University of
POVERTY, PREJUDICE, AND THE PUBLIC LIBRARY 89 California professor to define tradition as something you did last year and would like to do again. An appetite for a new look is now a professional re- quirement. The agent of change is the new peer group to which we must all aspire or be counted as second-rate. To lIft a sad corner of the truth, li- brarians, like educators, tend to be gyroscopic; they do not easily change direction. Some are like inverted Mi- cawbers-those who wait around for something to turn down. They never lift a finger toward originality. Some executives know that their greatest ad- ministrative art is the ability to "insin- uate" new ideas into their institutions without getting detected at it. Every- body is for progress of course; it is only change they do not like. Maybe you read the report of the British analyst of academic politics. His conclusion was that nothing should ever be done for the first time. Ortho- doxy comes natural with many educa- tors; heresy does not. And as Sir Eric Ashby has said: "Orthodoxy is celi- bate; it breeds no fresh ideas." We are reminded by Toynbee that rigid societies are the dead or dying so- cieties, and Alfred North Whitehead gave us ample warning that a race makes progress only when it combines reverence for its symbols with courage in their revision. And so with libraries. As never be- fore, any public library worth its salt has a deep appreciation that its corpo- rate life is a constant conflict between the need for stability and the need for change. A good organization is neither scared by novelty nor bored with it, as Mark Van Doren has said. Educators and librarians have two opposite tendencies. The first is to re- sist change with the noble intransigence of mules. The second is at the opposite extreme, an exuberant boundlessness for full and immediate accommodation of any novel fad that comes along. NaYve over-enthusiasm and unrea- sonable pessimism are the two extremes. The person at one extreme rusts in peace, and the other often becomes un- hinged in his frenetic haste to try some- thing new. The one wears his eyebrows permanently lifted and keeps his fore- head in a state of perpetual surprise. The other is so open-minded that his brains fall out. Neither extreme is helpful. Cardinal Newman said that to change is to pro- gress; to change often is to be perfect. But we need to remind ourselves as well, as a former chancellor of the Uni- versity of Chicago has said, that we must resist change when we wish to bear witness to the true virtues of what we already have. I have intended these remarks about innovation to sensitize you to become innovators and agents of change on be- half of the disadvantaged, if only be- cause the usual ground rules do not ap- ply. They desperately need your help. And you need to give public visibility for the benefit of many other civil and private groups to the claim that your profession and the public libraries can be instruments of reform. Just as I had almost completed the preparation of these remarks, our state librarian, formerly director of the Brooklyn Public Library, handed me a document entitled Neighborhood Li- brary Centers and Services, a study conducted by the National Book Com- mittee for the Office of Economic Op- portunity. I commend this study to you. We are flattered that of the ten pro- grams described in it, four are in New York.