CHILDHOOD SOCIALIZATION: ITS EFFECT ON ADULT LIBRARY USE AND ADULT READING Ronald R. Powell,' Margaret T. Taylor, and David L. McMillen This study was undertaken to investigate the relationship between certain child- hood experiences and adult use of the public library and adult reading. Data were gathered via a nationally representative interview conducted by the Survey Research Center of the University of Michigan. The interview contained 25 questions relating to current reading habits, library use during the previous year, and childhood experiences related to reading and library use for the respondent and the respondent's parents. In addition, demographic data were obtained for the respondents. On the basis of usable responses obtained from 342 persons (95 percent of the persons interviewed), it was determined that heavy library users and readers were not unlike those characterized by earlier studies. A substantial number of childhood variables did prove to have statistical relationships with reading and library use. The results clearly indicated the importance of social learning and parents as primary agents in the development of reading and library habits. Introduction Research to determine those factors that predict adult reading and library use has focused, to date, primarily on demographic variables and, to a lesser extent, on some sociological and psychological behaviors that exist in the user or nonuser as an adult. However, the area of social learning theory has produced a vast amount of research regarding the general importance of childhood socialization in determining adult at- titudes, values, and behaviors as well as personality characteristics. Therefore, a study was undertaken to examine the relative importance of childhood experiences in determining adult reading and library use. A telephone survey, conducted by the Survey Research Center of the 1. School of Library Science, 580 Union Drive, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109. [Library Quarterly, vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 245-264] ? 1984 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-25 19/84/5403-0005$0 1.00 245
246 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY University of Michigan and based on a national sample of adults, was used to collect data on present reading and library use behaviors, pres- ent demographic variables, and certain childhood experiences that might be related to reading and library use. Background Research studies that have attempted to determine the factors that influence library use, or specifically to determine the characteristics of library users as opposed to nonusers, have provided information on the basic demographic characteristics of age, sex, education, and-varying somewhat from study to study-income, occupation, race, residence, marital status, and family size. Some have focused additionally on such sociological characteristics as reading behavior, use of other media, social and community participation or involvement, political opinions and behavior, and participation in or attitudes toward adult education activities, and some on such library-related characteristics as use of other (than public) libraries, knowledge of and satisfaction with specific public library services, and attitudes toward public library services. Rarely have these studies investigated psychological or personality characteristics that might relate to library use, nor have they examined experiences, attitudes, or behavior from the user/nonuser's past that might relate to present library use. The data from these studies have provided us with a reasonably consistent picture over the years of public library users and nonusers. A few of these studies have been based on national samples or statewide samples, but most have been based on individual city, commu- nity, or library systems. Four major studies of public library use, based on national samples, stand out from the past forty years: Campbell and Metzger in 1948 [1], Mendelsohn and Wingerd in 1967 [2], and the Gallup Organization in 1976 [3] and again in 1978 [4]. In 1978 a major study on reading and book purchasing was done by Yankelovich, Skelly, and White [5]. Three other recent studies, while not based on national samples, focused on a broader range of characteristics, attitudes, and behaviors (what their authors chose to refer to as "life-styles"): Carpenter in 1971 [6], Madden in 1973 [7], and Bolton in 1979 [8]. Finally, from the many use/user studies that have been done, a few select studies should be noted because they made use of multivariate analysis techniques for looking at the effects of the variables: Rees and Paisley's study of information seeking and media use in Fresno, Califor- nia, in 1965 [9]; Kronus's study of patterns of adult library use in Illinois,
CHILDHOOD SOCIALIZATION EFFECT 247 in 1968 [10]; Zweizig's dissertation on factors predicting library use in Syracuse, New York, in 1972 [11]; and D'Elia's study of public library user behavior in Syracuse in the late 1970s [12]. In addition to the studies themselves, there have been reviews of the studies. One of the more recent of these analyses, built on Berelson's classic The Library's Public [13], is that of Zweizig and Dervin in 1977 [14], which includes-among others-data from the Berelson review [13] and from the Mendelsohn and Wingerd [2] and the 1976 Gallup [3] studies as well as from the Rees and Paisley [9], Kronus [10], and Zweizig [11] multivariate analysis studies. A third review to be noted, that by Harris and Sodt in 1981 [15], adds the 1978 Gallup study [4] and the Yankelovich, Skelly, and White study [5] to the work done by Zweizig and Dervin [14]. Since these thorough reviews do exist for reference, it seems reasonable to comment only briefly on the generalizations that can be and have been made on the basis of the findings. However, one comment should be made at this point regarding the methodological approaches of these studies. Two approaches have been identified by Zweizig and Dervin [14, pp. 234-35]: the variable-by-variable approach, which looks at characteristics independently of each other, and the composite-characteristics approach, which-using multivariate data analysis techniques-looks at all the characteristics or variables as they interrelate and allows the predictor variables to be ordered in relative importance and an additive model to be built. The study to be reported on here also makes use of such multivariate techniques. In general, the results of these studies have shown that education is positively related to library use-the more education, the more use. Age is also clearly related to library use, with younger people most likely to be users (although this could be primarily an effect of education). The effect of sex is less clear; the 1978 Gallup study [4] showed heavier users more likely to be male, but earlier studies have given females the edge. Higher socioeconomic status (as determined by income and occupation) is generally shown to be positively related to library use, but since socioeconomic status is also strongly related to education, its exact effect is not clear. Residence may cover such factors as how close one lives to a library (distance from library has a negative effect on use), the size of the city in which one lives (the larger the city, the greater the use), urban versus rural environments (the more urban, the greater the use, al- though the greater use in cities and urban environments may come about simply because these areas have more libraries), or region of the country (the 1978 Gallup study [4] showed residents of the East to be more likely to be heavy users). Marital status or family size does not seem to be related to library use, although the 1978 Gallup study [4] showed
248 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY that the presence of young children in the home had a positive effect on library use.2 Reading behavior and use of other media also correlate with library use. Library users are likely to be book readers, although readers are not necessarily also library users, and both book readers and library users are likely to be users of other media such as magazines, newspapers, television, radio, recordings, et cetera. Both library users and book readers have also been shown to be active people, involved in community and/or social activities and often in community, social, or political leader- ship roles.3 Also correlating with library use, as might be expected, is the general role that print media and the awareness of and satisfaction with adult educational institutions (of which the public library is one) play in one's life. Two psychological or personality factors that appear to be related to greater library use are achievement motivation and open- mindedness.4 The relative importance of these factors in predicting library use is measured against library use itself, but studies have measured and interpreted "use" in varying ways. Zweizig and Dervin stated that "a public library administrator could be quite confident in concluding that, on the average, 20 percent of the adults use the public library once a month" [14, p. 236]. They also cited figures showing that prior to 1977 about 40-60 percent (depending on the study) of general population adults used the public library at least once a year [14, pp. 235-56]. The 1978 Gallup study reported that 50 percent of all respondents visited the public library at least once in the past year and 18 percent of all respon- dents visited the public library "about once a month" (that is, eleven or more times during the year) [4, p. 22]. Although studies have shown that public library use tends to drop off with age, and particularly at the school-leaving age, no studies were found that attempted to relate past or childhood experiences in reading or library use to adult library use. The Campbell and Metzger study in 1948 did ask respondents if there was ever a time when they used the library more than at present and why it was or how it happened that they did not now use the library as much [1, pp. 22-23], but the answers to these questions were not discussed in relation to present library use or to any of the other factors predicting use. Studies have been done on the use of libraries by children and on the place of the library in the child's life. As an example, a recent publication on a major "study of children's lives outside school" [16] (interviews with eleven- and twelve-year-old 2. See the 1978 Gallup study [4] and Zweizig and Dervin [14]. 3. See Yankelovich, Skelly, and White [5], Zweizig and Dervin [141, and Berelson (131. 4. See Rees and Paisley [9], Kronus [10], and Zweizig [111.
CHILDHOOD SOCIALIZATION EFFECT 249 children and their parents, in Oakland, California) reports children's responses when asked about going places in the community. Of the activities specifically surveyed-going to a restaurant, the movies, the park, church, and the library-all were done by a majority of children, but going to the library was the least frequently done. Only 6 percent of the children surveyed reported that they usually went to the library with their parents. This study also examined what children did "on their own," including reading, and found that "parents helping children with schoolwork was directly associated with informal reading" [16, pp. 91- 92]. Landy reported in 1977 [17] on research done on readers and non- readers among seventh-grade students in Regina, Canada; question- naires, psychological tests, and in-depth interviews were used to gather data, and multivariate techniques were used in analyzing the data. Schools with the most readers and schools with the most nonreaders were visited, and Landy reported that, "surprisingly, the school library did not make the difference; rather, it seemed to be the encouragement and enthusiasm that certain teachers had communicated to their stu- dents" [17, p. 383]. Both of these studies reported only on the child's behavior, however; no studies on library use could be found that looked at the relative importance of childhood experiences in determining later adult reading and library use. Research from the area of social learning, while not dealing specifically with library use and reading, is concerned with the general importance of childhood socialization in determining adult at- titudes, values, and behaviors [18]. Social learning theory predicts that many of our attitudes and behaviors will be shaped and influenced by the models we are exposed to and the actions we commit that are rewarded. Sometimes the rewards are explicitly stated in terms of con- tingencies, for example, If you do , I will let you . More often, however, the rewards come in the form of approval, attention, and affection. Parents are particularly important sources of reward to the young child because of the control they have and the child's desire to be liked and to please the parents. Areas such as aggression, prosocial behavior, achievement, and con- formity have been studied extensively. The general findings are quite clear. Persons who, as adults, are aggressive, altruistic, achieving, or conforming usually develop these attitudes and behaviors as a result of learning experiences during childhood. There are several reasons for this; the major ones being (1) the relative ease of learning attitudes and behaviors when there are no preexisting attitudes or behaviors to com- pete and (2) the substantial control that parents have during this period regarding what the child is exposed to and rewarded for. In addition,
250 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY there appears to exist in most children a general curiosity and eagerness to experience and learn. Unfortunately this curiositiy and eagerness is sometimes suppressed by parents and teachers so that as an adult the individual is less interested in learning. According to Albert Bandura [19] and numerous others, observa- tional learning and instrumental learning are particularly important in the socialization of the child. Observational learning refers to situations where the child acquires an attitude, value, or behavior by seeing it exhibited in a model. Usually, for the young child the parent is the model, although television characters and teachers frequently serve as models. Early theorists (for example, Miller and Dollard [201) believed that, for the child to learn from the model, he must observe the model being rewarded for his behavior. For example, for a child to learn an aggressive behavior such as taking a toy from another child, he must see the model being rewarded for such an action. However, Bandura [21] has demonstrated that observation of reward is not essential for the child to learn. Instrumental learning does, of course, rely on reward. Parents and others shape the child's attitudes and behaviors by rewarding the child with attention and affection for acting the way they desire the child to act. Both instrumental and observational learning are potentially appli- cable to developing reading and library habits in children. A reasonable hypothesis is that children who are taken to the library by their parents and who observe their parents reading and using the library are likely to become adults who spend a substantial amount of time reading and using the library. In addition, children who receive attention, affection, and other kinds of rewards from parents, teachers, and others for reading and going to the library should be avid readers and library users as adults. At least such a prediction follows from social learning theory. The time at which such influences occur is likely to be of great importance. Preschool and grade school years should be of most impor- tance. As previously indicated, this is the period when humans are most open to acquiring values and attitudes. We are influenced by the rewards supplied by our parents and others; also, we tend to identify with significant adult models. This identification causes us to want to be like and behave like those with whom we identify. Identification is particu- larly important because it means the child will try to emulate those he identifies with even if the person identified with is not present to observe or reward the child. Rather, the child finds it rewarding to be like and act like the model. As we become older we tend to identify with several different persons and groups; however, in early childhood the tendency is to identify predominantly with our parents. Therefore what we see in our parents determines a great deal of our behavior as children and later
CHILDHOOD SOCIALIZATION EFFECT 251 as adults. How they behave is, in a very real sense, more important than how they tell us to behave. Applying this social learning model to reading and library use leads to a prediction that the adult who reads frequently and uses the library frequently probably began using the library regularly when in kinder- garten or grades one through six, probably was taken to the library regularly by one or both parents or some other adult, and probably had parents who read frequently at home. Development of the Study In order to collect adequate data regarding relationships between child- hood experiences and public library use and reading, it seemed neces- sary to conduct a survey. Toward that end, a grant was applied for and received from the Office of the Vice President for Research of the University of Michigan. This grant was provided for the purpose of financing data collection and analysis costs associated with the proposed survey. The Survey Research Center (SRC) of the University of Michigan was contracted with for the collection of data via its monthly telephone interview. This strategy offered several benefits: it allowed the research- ers to take advantage of shared field expenses; it reduced the amount of time that was needed for developing new survey materials, sampling, and data collection procedures; and it eliminated time required for questionnaire and code development for standard demographic items. In addition, SRC surveys are usually characterized by prompt turn- around-within forty-eight hours of the close of data collection a fully documented computer data file is available for analytic use. An interview schedule was developed to collect data relevant to the question of the relationship between childhood experiences and subse- quent adult use of the public library and reading habits, keeping in mind the desirability of being able to make some comparisons between the findings of this study and those of previous studies on library use and reading patterns. Prior to the actual survey, conducted in the summer of 1980, the interview schedule was pretested twice by the staff of the SRC. Debriefings involving the research team, the interviewers, and an SRC supervisor were held following each pretest. The pretests facilitated redesigning problem questions and determining the amount of time necessary for asking the questions, which was the basis for the cost of the survey. The final version of the schedule contained 25 questions requiring approximately three minutes of interview time per respondent. As was
252 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY indicated earlier, it was incorporated with a larger survey conducted by the SRC. This survey, which was its monthly "Survey of Consumer Attitudes," contained questions about personal finances, employment, price changes, the national business situation, et cetera. In addition, demographic data were obtained on income, age, sex, race, education, and occupation, among other things. The library use researchers, as is true for all researchers utilizing the "Survey of Consumer Attitudes," had access to all of the data collected in the survey. The SRC conducts an ongoing, nationally representative survey based on approximately seven hundred telephone interviews per month with adult men and women living in households in the coterminous United States (forty-eight states and the District of Columbia). For each monthly sample an independent drawing of telephone numbers is made, utilizing electronic, random generation of numbers. The respondents chosen in the drawing are reinterviewed six months later. A rotating panel design results, and the total sample for any one survey is normally made up of 55 percent new respondents and 45 percent of the respondents being interviewed for the second time. The library use study, however, was limited to the new respondents (a random sample of 361 persons) in order to minimize costs and yet maximize the number of questions that could be asked. Usable responses were obtained from 342 persons or 95 percent of the total sample. Findings of the Study Profiles of the Respondents The study respondents, all of whom were eighteen years or older, were distributed on most demographic variables about as expected. They did not vary significantly from those reported in earlier studies. As was indicated earlier, the SRC made available to the researchers a variety of demographic type data not routinely gathered in library related surveys. The demographic variables considered to be the most likely to relate to reading habits and library use, and therefore included in the statistical analysis, were: income, marital status, political orientation, employment status, occupation, years of schooling, age, race, sex, living environment, number of children in household, respondent's perception of his or her financial status in comparison to the preceding year, political party affiliation, whether the respondent's income had kept up with price increases, size of the town where the respondent was residing, labor union affiliation, and geographical region in which the respondent was living. As indicated, data on reading habits were collected as well. They too
CHILDHOOD SOCIALIZATION EFFECT 253 were not significantly different from comparable data reported in re- lated studies. About 47 percent of the respondents reported that they often read books; 45 percent reported that they often read magazines. Libraries ranked third, behind stores and family and friends, as the major source of books. Regarding library use, slightly over 48 percent of the respondents indicated that they had visited a public library during the preceding twelve months. Of those, over 43 percent reported that they had used public libraries more than ten times during that period. Library users indicated that borrowing books represented their most common type of use by far. Of those who had not used a public library during the past year, over 16 percent did report that they had used some other type of library during that time. (For more complete information on use vari- ables, see [22].) In order to be able to analyze relationships between the library use and reading variables and childhood factors, 10 questions designed to gather data about certain childhood experiences were included in the interview. The questions and summaries of the responses are presented in table 1. As an examination of these data reveals, most of the respondents, as children, had easy access to a library, were frequent library users, and were encouraged by their parents to read. On the other hand, less than half of the respondents actually read frequently as children (or adults) or had parents who had read frequently. More than half of the respon- dents who had used a public library during the past twelve months reported having started to use libraries while in grade school. The greatest percentage of them also reported that they had begun using libraries on their own. If they were escorted to the library, it was usually by a person they perceived to be a frequent library user. Analysis of Relationships In order to investigate relationships between childhood experiences and reading habits and library use, the data were statistically analyzed utiliz- ing OSIRIS, a Statistical Analysis and Data Management Software Sys- tem. In addition to the generation of univariate and bivariate frequen- cies, OSIRIS programs for x2 and multiple classification analysis (MCA) were employed. Since it has been used extensively in library related research, x2 probably needs no explanation here. As is typically the case, x was used because many of the variables measured in this study represented nominal level data. In that x2 merely indicates whether a relationship exists between two variables, a test known as Cramer's V was employed in order to measure the strength or degree of any relation- ships.
TABLE I QUESTIONS RELATED ro CHILDHOOD ExPEnuNcES iN READING AND LiBwRY USE Question Respondents (%) 1. Were there public or school libraries in the community where you grew up? Yes 88.0 No 12.0 2. When you were in grade school, was it easy or difficult for you to get to a library? Easy 72.6 Difficult 24.7 Somewhere in between 2.7 3. Other than for schoolwork, how often did you read while you were a child? Often 48.5 Sometimes 22.1 Not very often 29.4 4. Did your parents encourage you to read when you were a child; did they discourage you from reading? Encouraged 68.6 Discouraged 4.7 Neither 26.7 5. How often did your father read at home while you were growing up? Often 37.9 Sometimes 21.0 Not very often 41.1 6. How often did your mother read at home while you were growing up? Often 42.8 Sometimes 25.6 Not very often 31.6 7. When you were growing up, was there a period when you used a public or school library about 10 or more times a year? Yes 75.8 No 24.2 8. When you first began visiting a public or school library, was it as a preschooler, while you were a grade school student, a junior high or high school student, or after high school? Preschool 10.5 Grade school 59.1 Junior high or high school 28.8 Since high school 1.6 9. When you first began visiting a public or school library, did you go with a parent, a brother or sister, a teacher, a friend, by yourself, or whom? Self 34.9 Parent 13.6 Brother or sister 7.5 Teacher 16.9 Friend 21.1 Other 6.0 10. Did that person use a library frequently? Yes 77.4 No 22.6
CHILDHOOD SOCIALIZATION EFFECT 255 MCA, "a technique for examining the interrelationships between sev- eral predictor variables and a dependent variable within the context of an additive model" [23, p. 1], was used in this study instead of multiple regression analysis because the MCA technique can handle predictors with no better than nominal measurement and a dependent variable that is either interval scaled or dichotomous. Using MCA permitted the determination of the combined effect of several predictor or independent variables on a dependent variable as well as the relative importance of the predictor variables. MCA also showed how each predictor related to the independent variable both before and after adjusting for the effects of other predictors. Reading as a Dependent Variable While data were collected on several reading variables, the statistical analysis focused on two-book reading frequency and magazine reading frequency. Looking first at the frequency of book reading, it was found that five demographic variables had statistically significant relationships with the dependent variable (that is, x2 values significant at the .05 probability level or better). The significant demographic predictors, ranked in order of the size of their Cramer's V, are as follows: (1) sex (X2 = 19.33, p < .001, V = .24); (2) political orientation (X2 = 28.78, p < .001, V = .21); (3) education (x = 30.13, p < .001, V = .21); (4) occupation (X2 = 15.01, p < .02, V = .16); and (5) marital status (X2 = 13.29, p < .04, V = .14). Based on broad occupational categories, those persons most likely to read books frequently were professional and technical workers. They were followed, in decreasing order, by clerical and sales workers, man- agers, and operatives. With regard to the other factors, the most fre- quent book readers tended to be female, to be somewhat to very liberal politically, to hold a bachelor's degree, and to be a widow or single person. It should be noted that, while the preceding demographic variables were all significantly related to frequency of book reading, when ranked with the childhood and library use variables, they tended to be relatively low in importance. In addition, they had rather weak Cramer's V's, ranging from a low of .14 to a high (out of a possible 1.00) of .24. However, most of the Cramer's V values in this study tended to be fairly low, as is often the case in social science research. As for the frequency of reading magazines, it was found that eight demographic variables were significantly related. These variables were: (1) education (X2 = 38.49, p < .001, V = .24); (2) age (X2 = 31.74, p < .001, V = .22); (3) income (X2 = 27.16, p < .00 1, V = .2 1); (4) political orientation (x2 = 30.89, p < .00 1, V = .2 1); (5) occupation (X2 = 21.03,
256 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY p < .001, V = .19); (6) employment status (X2 = 9.33,p <.01, V = .17); (7) whether there are persons under eighteen years of age in household (X2 = 8.60, p < .01, V = .16); and (8) respondent's perception of his or her financial status compared to preceding year (X2 = 9.50, p < .05, V = .12). Characterizing the occupations of frequent magazine readers, they too were most likely to be professional and technical workers, followed by clerical and sales workers, managers, and operatives. In addition, they were likely to be employed (as opposed to unemployed), to have a bachelor's degree, to have a family income of twenty-five thousand dollars or more, to be eighteen to twenty-five years of age, to be politi- cally moderate or liberal, not to have persons under eighteen in their household, and to consider themselves to be better off financially than they were a year ago. The bivariate relationships between these variables and magazine reading frequency produced Cramer's V's ranging from .12 to .24. In this case, the demographic variables seemed to be more important, when ranked with the childhood and library use variables, than they did with regard to book reading; that is, they tended to be ranked higher within the listing of all predictor variables associated with the frequency of reading magazines. Several variables representing relevant childhood experiences also were found to have significant relationships with reading level as indicated by x2 values. Again, considering book reading frequency first, seven childhood variables were statistically related; they were: (1) amount of reading respondent did as a child, exclusive of schoolwork (X2 = 54.89, p < .001, V = .28); (2) person with whom respondent began visiting libraries (X2 = 32.15, p < .001, V = .22); (3) age at which respondent began using public or school libraries (x2 = 31.10, p < .001, V = .21); (4) whether respondent was a frequent (ten or more times in one year) library user as a child (X2 = 13.18, p < .001, V = .20); (5) frequency of mother's reading (X2 1 17.28, p < .001, V = .16); (6) frequency of father's reading (X2 = 10.17, p < .04, V = .13); and (7) availability of public or school libraries in respondent's childhood town (X2 = 6.09, p < .05, V = .13). Characterizing frequent book readers by these childhood variables, it appears that they also read books often as children, they most likely began using a public or school library during their preschool years, they were most often accompanied to the library by a parent, they were likely ever to have used a library more than ten times per year as a child, they tended to have a mother who read often (and/or a father who read often, to a slightly lesser degree), and, not surprisingly, they were more likely than not to have had public or school libraries in their home towns. The Cramer's V's for these childhood experience/book reading level
CHILDHOOD SOCIALIZATION EFFECT 257 relationships were comparable to those involving the preceding demo- graphic variables. They ranged from .13 to .28. As for magazine reading frequency, the statistically significant child- hood variables were the same, except that the availability of libraries in the home town was not related. However, the variable most strongly associated with adult magazine reading was whether the respondent was a frequent library user as a child, while the frequency of childhood reading was most strongly related to adult book reading. The measures of the strength of the associations were again rather low, more so even than for the relationships between book reading and childhood factors. The highest Cramer's V was .24 and the lowest was .12. As was indicated earlier, MCA was employed in order to determine the combined effects of more than one independent variable. It enabled analysis of the effect of several demographic variables acting together, several childhood variables acting together, and combinations of the two types. In evaluating the results of the MCA, particular attention was paid to the values obtained for -q2 (eta squared), which was essentially the correlation between each independent and each dependent variable; for beta, which indicated the relative importance of each predictor variable in terms of variance explained after adjusting for the effects of other predictors; and for multiple r2, or the multiple correlation coefficient, which indicated the proportion of variance in the dependent variable explained by several independent variables acting together. Few 2 and beta values were found to be statistically significant. Only four variables produced values equal to or greater than .10, but the beta results did provide some interesting data regarding the relative import- ance of various predictors. In addition, the multiple r2 analysis produced some useful information about the effects resulting from combining certain variables and categories of variables. For example, returning to the respondents' frequency of reading books, it was found that, among nineteen demographic and childhood variables, the four variables having the most influence were the respon- dents' childhood reading frequency, their sex, the person who accom- panied them to the library as a child, and whether their mothers or fathers frequently read. (The directions that these relationships took were indicated earlier in the discussion of the bivariate relationships or x2 results.) In terms of combined effect, thirteen demographic variables5 were able to explain 7.1 percent of the variation in book reading frequency, 5. They were, in descending beta weight order, education, sex, income, residential setting, party affiliation, occupation, political orientation, town size, marital status, geographical region, age, race, and children.
258 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY and six childhood variables, acting together, were able to explain 17.8 percent.6 So in this case, at least, childhood factors were more powerful predictors of adult book reading frequency than were demographic characteristics. Less than half as many childhood predictors accounted for more than twice as much of the variation in the dependent variable as did the demographic predictors. And in fact, when these demo- graphic and childhood variables were combined, they were able to ex- plain less of the total variation (16.9 percent) than were the childhood variables alone. In other words, the demographic variables reduced the predictive ability of the childhood variables, or the childhood variables were more influential when the demographic variables were controlled. Interestingly, the results of the MCA for magazine reading frequency were quite different. According to the beta coefficients, the four vari- ables having the most relative influence on magazine reading were age, political orientation, political party affiliation, and when the respondents first began using libraries. A x2 analysis of these relationships was pro- vided earlier, but party affiliation was not included. (The two party preferences most frequently checked by frequent magazine readers were moderate Republican and moderate Democrat.) None of these four variables are among the four having the most influence on book reading. The same groupings of demographic and childhood variables as were used with book reading frequency were regressed on frequency of reading magazines. It was found that the thirteen demographic variables were able to explain 11.7 percent of the variation in magazine reading frequency. The six childhood variables, acting together, were able to explain only 6.2 percent. But in this case, the combined explanatory power, which was 13.7 percent, was greater than the explanatory power of either the demographic or childhood variables alone. In other words, the predictive ability of either group was enhanced by the addition of the other, but the combined or total predictive power was less here than it was for the same variables in relation to book reading frequency. An- other interesting difference was that the relative importance of the demographic and childhood variables was reversed. Public Library Use as a Dependent Variable With regard to the statistical analysis reported here, two variables will be considered indicative of public library use. The first indicates whether the respondent used a public library during the preceding twelve 6. They were, in descending beta weight order, amount of reading as a child, escort to library, when library use began, parent's reading frequency, library 'availability, and parent's encouragement to read.
CHILDHOOD SOCIALIZATION EFFECT 259 months, and the second represents how often, if at all, the respondent used a public library during that same period. As was the case with reading frequency, demographic characteristics as predictor variables will be considered first. Ten different characteris- tics were found to produce significant x2's when related to whether the respondent had used a public library during the previous year (a yes/no response). They were, in order of importance: (1) education (X2 = 41.51, p < .001, V = .35); (2) occupation (X2 = 19.67, p < .001, V = .27); (3) political orientation (X2 = 22.94, p < .00 1, V = .26); (4) age (X2 = 16.15, p < .01, V = .22); (5) whether respondent lives in an urban, suburban, or rural setting (X2 = 12.35, p < .00 1, V = .19); (6) whether respondent's income has kept up with price increases (X2 = 11.53, p < .001, V = .18); (7) whether there are persons under 18 years of age in household (X2 = 11.62, p < .001, V = .18); (8) population size of town where respondent is residing (X2 = 7.86, p < .05, V = .16); (9) respon- dent's perception of his or her financial status compared to preceding year (X2 = 7.74, p < .02, V = .15); and (10) sex (X2 = 4.04, p < .04, V = .11). Based on these findings, the public library user was most likely to be, in order, a professional or technical worker, a clerical or sales worker, a manager, or an operative. In addition, he or she was likely to have earned a bachelor's degree, to be somewhat liberal politically, and to be between the ages of eighteen and twenty-four or thirty-five and forty- four. The public library users were more likely to live in a suburban than an urban or rural setting, likely believed that their incomes had gone up more than prices during the past year, and were likely to have persons under eighteen living in their households. The respondents who had used a public library most likely lived in cities with more than 100,000 persons, were slightly more likely to believe that their families were better off financially than a year ago, and were more likely to be females than males. The Cramer's V's for these relationships were relatively high, and once again education headed the list. The values ranged from a high of .35 to a low of .11. On the other hand, only seven demographic characteristics related statistically to the frequency of public library use. And while six of the seven were among those relating to any public library use, the ranking was considerably different. Also, the Cramer's V values were somewhat lower, ranging from a low of .16 to a high of .25. The seven variables that did produce significant x2's when associated with the frequency of public library use, again ranked in order of high to low, were: (1) employment status (X2 = 61.92, p < .03, V = .25); (2)
260 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY education (X2 = 45.80, p < .001, V = .21); (3) whether there are persons under eighteen years of age in household (X2 = 13.13, p < .001, V = .20); (4) political orientation (X2 = 35.27, p < .01, V = .19); (5) whether respondent's income has kept up with price increases (X2 = 21.82, p < .001, V = .18); (6) occupation (X2 = 25.69, p < .001, V = .18); and (7) whether respondent lives in an urban, suburban, or rural setting (X2 = 16.95, p < .01, V = .16). In looking at these variables, it could be said that the respondent who was a heavy public library user, that is, one who had used a library more than ten times during the past year, was most likely to be someone working twenty hours or more per week and holding a bachelor's de- gree. Rounding out the picture, the heavy public library users were likely to be somewhat liberal politically, to have persons under eighteen in their household (as was the case for any public library user), to believe that their income had kept up with inflation, to be professional or technical workers, and to live in an urban setting. Several childhood variables also were found to be significantly related to the use of public libraries. Five childhood-related variables were, based on x 2's, statistically related to any use of public libraries during the preceding year, and they were: (1) person with whom respondent began visiting libraries (x2 = 26.26, p < .001, V = .28); (2) age at which respondent began using public or school libraries (X2 = 25.50, p < .001, V = .27); (3) whether respondent was a frequent library user as a child (X2 19.57, p < .001, V = .24); (4) amount of reading respondent did as a child, exclusive of schoolwork (X2 = 8.51, p < .01, V = .16); and (5) availability of public or school libraries in respondent's childhood town (X2 = 5.01, p < .03, V = .12). More specifically, it appeared that the respondents who had used a public library at least once during the preceding twelve months were most likely to have been accompanied by a parent when children. In addition, they probably started using libraries while elementary school students. It was probable that if persons had used a public library during the past year, they had at one time used a library at least ten times per year when children. It also was quite probable that the respondents who had used a public library had read often as children and had had access as children to a library in their home towns. The Cramer's V's for these five variables ranged from .12 to .28. Four of the same five variables also were significantly related to the respondent's frequency of public library use during the preceding year. The excluded variable represented the availability of public or school libraries in the respondent's childhood home town. The average of the Cramer's V values was about the same for both groups, but the highest
CHILDHOOD SOCIALIZATION EFFECT 261 value for the latter group was only .25 (the low was .19). Ranked in order of importance, the four variables were: (1) whether respondent was a frequent library user as a child (X2 = 20.29, p < .00 1, V = .25); (2) amount of reading respondent did as a child, exclusive of schoolwork (X2 = 26.99, p < .00 1, V = .20); (3) person with whom respondent be- gan visiting libraries (X2 = 36.50, p < .001, V = .19); and (4) age at which respondent began using public or school libraries (X2 = 37.13, p < .001, V = .19). The respondents who had used public libraries more than ten times during the preceding year could be characterized as ones who had used public or school libraries ten or more times during at least one year as children and ones who were likely to have begun using libraries with a parent. They probably read often when children and began using librar- ies while preschoolers. With regard to this set of variables, it is interesting to note that frequent childhood use of libraries is more important to the frequency of adult use than it is to the mere existence or absence of use. In other words, people who were frequent users of libraries as children were likely to continue to be heavy library users. As was the case with reading, the effects of groups of demographic and childhood variables on public library use also were analyzed. Look- ing first at any level of public library use, we found that the same demographic variables7 could explain 18.2 percent of the variation in the dependent variable and the same childhood variables8 could account for 12.6 percent. Their combined predictive ability was a relatively high 24.6 percent of variation. According to the beta coefficients, the variables of the greatest rela- tive importance were: (1) with whom respondent began using public or school libraries, (2) whether there were persons under eighteen years of age in the household, and (3) the respondent's education. Again, the nature of these relationships was indicated in the preceding discussion of X2 results. As was just noted, the two groups of variables, especially when com- bined, were able to account for a relatively large percentage of the variation in any library use. Their ability to predict variation in the frequency of public library use was somewhat weaker but also fairly 7. They were, in descending beta weight order, education, children, political orientation, residential setting, age, marital status, party affiliation, town size, geographical region, occupation, income, sex, and race. 8. They were, in descending beta weight order, escort to library, when library use began, parent's encouragement to read, library availability, parent's reading frequency, and amount of reading as a child.
262 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY good. The thirteen demographic variables were able to explain 13.5 percent,9 the six childhood variables accounted for 14.4 percent,'0 and together they could explain 21.0 percent of the variation in the depen- dent variable. Again the most influential variables were: (1) with whom the respondent began using libraries, (2) whether there were persons under eighteen living in the respondent's household, and (3) education. While the possible effect of childhood reading on public library use was included in the analysis presented above, it might be of some value to consider the possible effect of adult reading habits on public library use. In that there were essentially only two variables representing fre- quency of adult reading, they were not treated using MCA. However, x29s were calculated for the relationships between frequency of book and magazine reading and public library use. It was found that both the frequency of book reading and the fre- quency of magazine reading were significantly related to any use of a public library during the preceding twelve months. (The Cramer's V's were .29 and .16, respectively.) As would be expected, respondents who had read books and magazines often were likely to have used a public library at least once in the past year. Both reading variables also were significantly related to the frequency of public library use, and they produced comparable Cramer's V's-.26 and .14, respectively. But the frequency of magazine reading was less strongly related to library use than was the frequency of book reading. Summary and Conclusions In looking at the results of this exploratory study, one can see that a substantial number of demographic and childhood variables proved to have statistical relationships with reading and library use. Not all of the predictor variables available to the researchers were included in the data analysis, but of those that were, only five were not associated to some degree with the major dependent variables. Those five variables were: (1) race, (2) respondent's ease of library use as a child, (3) frequency of library use of the person who first took the respondent to a library, (4) the respondent's labor union affiliation status, and (5) the geographical region in which the respondent was presently residing. Those demo- 9. They were, in descending beta weight order, education, children, political orientation, residential setting, age, geographical region, town size, party affiliation, sex, occupa- tion, income, marital status, and race. 10. They were, in descending beta weight order, escort to library, when library use began, parent's encouragement to read, amount of reading as a child, library availability, and parent's reading frequency.
CHILDHOOD SOCIALIZATION EFFECT 263 graphic variables that were found to be statistically related to reading and/or library use (as indicated by x2 values significant at the .05 level or better) were: education, occupation, age, sex, political orientation, marital status, children, residential setting, and town size. With the same criteria, statistically significant childhood variables were: amount of reading as a child, escort to library, whether the respondent was a frequent library user as a child, when library use began, frequency of mother's reading, frequency of father's reading, and library availability as a child. The analysis also clearly indicated the importance of social learning and the parents as primary agents in the development of reading and library habits. Childhood factors were in general more powerful predic- tors of both reading and library use than were demographic factors. The two together account for approximately 25 percent of the variance in adult library use. Of particular importance are (1) whether the respon- dent read frequently as a child, (2) at what age the respondent began using the library, (3) degree to which the parents read, and (4) with whom the respondent started using the library. As a means of understanding the role of childhood factors, it is instructive to take a closer look at the role the parents play in shaping the reading habits of their children. Of the total sample, 48 percent of the respondents said they had been to a public library in the last twelve months. However, of the respondents who began visiting the library with their parents, 80 percent had been to the public library in the last year. This difference of over 30 percentage points between the total sample and that portion who began visiting the library with their parents is a clear indicator of the important role parents can play in influencing their children's library use. They provide a model by taking the child to the library and by reading and using the library themselves. In addition, they may reward the child with affection and approval. As time goes by, the child begins to enjoy reading and using the library even when the parent is not present to reward or serve as a model. The behaviors and attitudes toward reading are internalized, and the child, and later the adult, obtains satisfaction from reading. Reading and library use become independent of the conditions that originally produced them. They are ends in and of themselves. Therefore the individual will likely continue throughout life to read and to use the library. REFERENCES 1. Campbell, Angus, and Metzger, Charles A. Public Use of the Library and Other Sources of Information. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan, Institute for Social Research, 1950.
264 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 2. Mendelsohn, H., and Wingerd, K. The Use of Libraries and the Conditions That Promote Their Use: A Report to the Natinal Advisory Commission on Libranes. ED 022 489. New York: Academy for Educational Development, 1967. 3. Gallup Organization. The Role of Libraries in America. Study conducted for the Chief Officers of State Library Agencies and the American Library Association. Frankfort: Kentucky Department of Library and Archives, 1976. 4. Gallup Organization. Book Reading and Library Usage: A Study of Habits and Perceptions. Study conducted for the American Library Association. Princeton, NJ.: Gallup Or- ganization, 1978. 5. Yankelovich, Skelly, & White, Inc. Reading and Book Purchasing. New York: Book Industry Study Group, 1978. 6. Carpenter, Ray L. "The Public Library Patron." LibraryJournal 104 (February 1, 1979): 347-51. 7. Madden, Michael. "Library User/Nonuser Lifestyles." American Libraries 10 (February 1979): 78-81. 8. Bolton, W. Theodore. "Life Style Research: An Aid to Promoting Public Libraries." LibraryJournal 107 (May 15, 1982): 963-68. 9. Rees, Matilda B., and Paisley, William J. "Social and Psychological Predictors of Adult Information Seeking and Media Use." Adult Education 19 (Fall 1968): 11-29. 10. Kronus, Carol L. "Patterns of Adult Library Use: A Regression and Path Analysis." Adult Education 23 (Winter 1973): 115-31. 11. Zweizig, Douglas. "Predicting Amount of Library Use: An Empirical Study of the Role of the Public Library in the Life of the Adult Public." Ph.D. diss., Syracuse University, 1973. 12. D'Elia, George. "The Development and Testing of a Conceptual Model of Public Library User Behavior." Library Quarterly 50 (October 1980): 410-30. 13. Berelson, Bernard. The Library's Public. New York: Columbia University Press, 1949. 14. Zweizig, Douglas, and Dervin, Brenda. "Public Library Use, Users, Uses: Advances in Knowledge of the Characteristics and Needs of the Adult Clientele of American Public Libraries." In Advances in Librarianship, vol. 7, edited by Melvin Voigt and Michael Harris. New York: Academic Press, 1977. 15. Harris, Michael H., and Sodt, James. "Libraries, Users, and Librarians: Continuing Efforts to Define the Nature and Extent of Public Library Use." In Advances in Librarianship, vol. 11, edited by Michael Harris. New York: Academic Press, 1981. 16. Medrich, Elliott A.; Roizen, Judith; Rubin, Victor; and Buckley, Stuart. The Seious Business of Growing Up: A Study of Children's Lives Outside School. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1982. 17. Landy, Sarah. "Why Johnny Can Read, But Doesn't." Canadian Libraty Journal 34 (October 1977): 379-87. 18. Berkowitz, Leonard. A Survey of Social Psychology. 2d ed. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1980. 19. Bandura, Albert. Theories of Modelings. New York: Atherton Press, 1970. 20. Miller, N., and Dollard, J. Social Learning and Imitation. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1941. 21. Bandura, Albert. "Vicarious Processes: A Case of No-Trial Learning." In Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, vol. 2, edited by Leonard Berkowitz. New York: Aca- demic Press, 1965. 22. Smalley, Topsy N. Bibliographic Instructionfor Undergraduates: An Example of a One-Unit Required Library Research Skills Course. ED 232 654. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Education, National Institute of Education, 1983. 23. Andrews, Frank. Multiple Classification Analysis. 2d ed, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan, 1973.