The Challenges of Cultural Diversity in the Recruitment of Faculty and Students from Diverse Backgrounds EJ.JOSEY IT has BEEN MY PROFESSIONAL GOAL to promote cultural diversity, not only in the profession of librarianship and in libraries, but in Ameri- can society as well. My association with civil rights organizations has helped me to work toward this goal. Acceptance of cultural diversity is very important, for we live in a multicultural environment. The multicul- tural environment is global: within nations, within regional sections of countries, and, certainly, in various communities around the world. In a multicultural community, the library and/or the information provider can act as a catalyst for bringing ethnic groups together by fostering acculturation through the provision of information and research re- sources about the various ethnic communities. Cultural diversity should be a concern of the library schools of our country because the minority ethnic groups are rapidly becoming the majority in many states. By the year 2000, it is projected that four cultural minority groups - African Americans; Hispanic Americans; Asian and Pacific Islander Amer- icans; and Native Americans, or American Indians - will compose almost one-third of the U.S. population. Projections for the year 2025 indicate that the combined total population of the four protected classes as defined by the Civil Rights Act of 1964 will be 104,862,000. This popula- E. J. Josey is Professor, School of Library and Information Science, University of Pittsburgh. 302 Volume 34, Number 4
The Challenges of Cultural Diversity tion group will represent 35 percent of the total American population of 30 1,022, 000. 1 Described in another way, by the year 2025 this phenomenal growth will result in these four ethnic groups' composing more than one-third of the U.S. population. From the foregoing projections, it is clear that minorities are growing at a faster rate than the population as a whole, and during the next three decades, the proportion of the Ameri- can population of white, European ancestry will decline at a rapid rate. The nation must recognize that by the year 2000, more than 30 percent of the American population will be age sixty-five or older. Since our society is rapidly aging and the youth of America are emerging largely from minority groups, the future workforce of the nation will shift heavily to minorities. Analyzing the demographics further, we find the following: Today's young adults, born in the 1950s, will be retiring from the workforce and depending more and more on state and federal budgets for benefits. These facts have serious implications for America's economic planning, the educational system and library and information services. This means that, in the future, the working population will be smaller than that of the retired and the unemployed, and it will consist of a larger proportion of minorities. Since minorities will constitute a major segment of the workforce and will contribute substantially to the economic well-being of the nation, the United States government must be certain that its minority population receives a quality education and is guaranteed access to library and information resources. Further, the minorities of this country must have the knowledge and skills to use the new technologies in the workplace as well as in every aspect of their lives. The nation cannot afford to ignore the education, training and library needs of its minorities.2 Cultural diversity, in particular, is concerned with the significance of ethnicity, race, and race relations in the workplace, topics that have been largely ignored in many of our library schools and organizations. At this point we should describe "diversity." What is diversity? Diversity, in this context, refers to the equal participation of men and women in all of our library organizations, including library and information science schools, regardless of their race, ethnicity, or gender. Statistics related to minority faculty and minority students suggest that library schools are not cultur- ally diverse. Why is this? One possible hypothesis is that there are some people in our library organizations and library schools who are members of the majority white population and who believe that racism or discrimi- nation has been eradicated in the workplace; therefore further effort at achieving diversity is unnecessary. If you carefully examine the ALISE annual statistics, you will find that blacks, Hispanics, Asians, and American Indians have not increased as a percentage of the entire population in library and information science education programs since the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. While it is true that today we rarely observe overt discrimination in this country, covert discrimination has arisen nevertheless and is just as mean-spirited and destructive as the overt form. One ray of hope is the inauguration of President Bill Clinton, who has installed a cabinet and Fall 1993 303
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science subcabinet with members whose faces "look like America." It is my hope that library and information science schools will recruit minority faculty and minority students whose faces will look more like America than the preponderance of lily-white faces that fill many of our library schools. Racism Racism is a continuing problem in our country. I don't have to cite just the Rodney King case in Los Angeles. In another recent example, a black police officer in a major city was working on an undercover assignment. He was not recognized by his fellow white officers, and they handcuffed him and beat him unmercifully. The white officers were fired. This example shows that even when you are working as a law enforcement officer within the system, and you happen to be a person of color, you are a victim not only of racist attitudes, but also of the violence that racism begets. How can one think that library schools are superior to other institutions in American society? The race issue is still very pervasive and systemic in almost every walk of life: in housing, employment, education, voting rights, and the administration of criminal justice. In addition to our moral obligation to oppose racism, for the sake of our future minori- ties must be treated fairly. The world is diversified, and racial and ethnic tolerance must be promoted. We cannot promote racial and ethnic tolerance in our field when one race dominates in library and informa- tion science programs. One problem during the last twelve years was in our country's not having a leader at the highest level of government who believed in fairness and who attempted to right the wrongs that have been per- petrated on people of color. Last December, the Education Department released its revised policy position, declaring that most of the grants in higher education should be eliminated because they are discriminatory. This came on the heels of a surprise ruling one year earlier by Michael Williams, the department's assistant secretary for civil rights, which de- clared that scholarships given on the basis of race were illegal. The department released this revised policy statement despite the fact that executive directors of nineteen higher-education associations, a host of college presidents, and many professional library associations, including the American Library Association, had condemned the Education De- partment's "policy guidance" and called it legally flawed, factually insup- portable, and not in the public interest. In addition, the United States Commission on Civil Rights also had urged reconsideration of this policy. In a letter to Williams, the commission's chairman, Arthur A. Fletcher, said the policy "sends a message . . . that the federal government is re- treating from the vigorous and aggressive [support] of equal educational opportunities for minorities."3 More important, Robert Atwell, president of the American Council on Education, declared that "the change in policy is unjustified. It displays a total lack of understanding . . . and has the potential for doing signifi- 304 Volume 34, Number 4
The Challenges of Cultural Diversity cant harm to the success of underrepresented minori ties."4 These kinds of activities at the federal level have sent a signal to the nation and to educational institutions that we no longer believe in equal opportunity. You can forget the 1964 Civil Rights Act, and you can forget affirmative action. This sent a chilling message to minorities in this country, that *you don't count, and we are not concerned about you." In my visits to campuses to recruit, I have met many minority individuals who expressed frustration about this particular situation. Minority Faculty Is Key to Success How many minorities teach in the library schools of our country? Let us examine the makeup of the total faculty of library schools in 1991-92 as reported in ALISE statistics. As of January 1, 1992, there was a total of 544 faculty members teaching in all of the ALA-accredited schools. Of this number, 482, or 88.6 percent, were white. There were 2 American Indians (.04 percent), 16 Asians/Pacific Islanders (3 percent), 33 blacks (6 percent), and 12 Hispanics (2.2 percent).5 The statistics for all four groups are simply depressing. African Americans, Asian/Pacific Islander Americans, American Indians, and Hispanic Americans constitute almost 25 percent of the nation's population, but are not proportionately repre- sented in schools of library and information science. Only 11.24 percent of our total library and information science faculty are from the four groups combined. The schools have very few minority faculty members. I believe that this is the most significant piece of evidence that indicates that not much has changed and that something needs to be done in terms of recruitment of minority faculty - if we truly believe in having a culturally diverse faculty^ Marilyn Mobley, who is an African American professor of literature at George Mason University, reveals that students of color look for minority faculty members on campuses. She says: Black students on white campuses say, "Hallelujah, I finally found a black professor." That is because they feel safe in our presence. We are the ones to whom they can tell their stories of racism. They feel like they can tell us what is happening and how the institution is affecting them personally.6 Response to people of color goes well beyond supporting and minis- tering to the needs of African American students. Mobley says that "White students also seek out black professors to fill in the gaps."7 White students now seek out black professors to help them understand things like Afrocentrism and other subjects related to minorities. Mobley argues that the key reason that institutions recruit minority professors is that they recognize their worth in attracting and educating students of color, as well as in educating white students, whose underex- posure to nonwhite scholars leaves them at an intellectual disadvantage. Mobley reminds us that it is occasionally "difficult to reject the constant, sometimes annoying, call to serve as the do-alls for minority students, Fall 1993 305
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science even though that usually means that their white counterparts have the edge in writing, conducting research and working towards tenure."8 Charles Moody, vice-provost for minority affairs at the University of Michigan, believes that minority faculty cannot separate themselves from the responsibility to serve minority students, but he urges all faculty of color to take every opportunity to remind white faculty and administra- tors of their responsibility also: "We have a role to play, but we have to make sure whites carry their share of the responsibility as well. . . . The name of the game is sponsored mobility. It is critical that minority students have sponsors and mentors if they are going to succeed, and the research is clear about that. It is also critical that we can't dump the load of mentoring on the few black faculty on campus."9 Students of color expect to see their counterparts on the faculty. An Asian student at Occidental College in California put it this way: "We lack Asian American faculty. In fact, we are having a difficult time finding a sponsor for the Korean Club. No matter how learned or open a white professor or faculty member may be, there are things that they can't understand. And we need to be understood."10 In order to have a program of cultural diversity in our library and information science programs, it is important that faculty of color be recruited and urged to participate fully in the school's program of research, service, and teaching. It is not enough for faculty search com- mittees to lower their qualifications for candidates who are persons of color. At the same time, they cannot come back to the faculty and say that "We have tried, but we have not found any" - they must have the evidence of what they have done and where they have looked for faculty. Whenjuanita Kreps was appointed secretary of commerce by President Jimmy Carter, the president, in his remarks to the press, indicated that he had great difficulty in finding women for positions in government. When the president invited Kreps to address the press, she was asked why it was so difficult for President Carter to find qualified women. Krepps responded as follows: "In the case of the search for women, it was men who did the searching. And I do think that we simply have to do a better job of searching for both women and minorities."1 1 Schools of library and information science must be held accountable in terms of where they look for minority faculty. Recruitment of Minority Students: An Imperative Access to information by disadvantaged minority communities in the United States will improve only with an increase in the number of minority librarians and information professionals. Minorities compose roughly 20 percent of the total U.S. population but represent fewer than 13 percent of the personnel of American academic and public libraries. A survey conducted by the ALA Office for Library Personnel Resources in 1991 reported that only 12.3 percent of 306 Volume 34, Number 4
The Challenges of Cultural Diversity the staff of academic and public libraries were American Indians, Asian, African Americans, or Hispanic Americans. Further, only 8 percent of library administrative positions were held by members of these four ethnic groups.12 These statistics represent irrefutable evidence that there is critical need for a major recruitment program by library and informa- tion science schools. Additional evidence was given in June Lester's summary of 1992 ALISE statistics: Degree recipients in 1990-91 continued to be overwhelmingly white: 84.1 percent at the master's level, 64.5 percent at the doctoral level, for schools reporting this data. Only 7 doctorates were awarded to American minority students (11.3 percent) , fewer than were awarded to international students (9 or 14.5 percent) (ethnicity was not available for 9.7 percent) . Enrollment follows the same pattern, although at the doctorate level, the black enroll- ment percentage (4.2) is strikingly lower than the percentage of degrees received (9.7) And Asian/Pacific Islander enrollment (6.1 percent) is high compared to the percentage of degrees (0). The total percentage of minor- ity enrollment in doctoral programs reporting such data is 13.0 percent, compared to 17.9 percent international enrollment (ethnicity data for 4.38 percent not available ).,s These appalling statistics are a real indication that in order to have true cultural diversity, there must be a commitment to the recruitment of minority students by library and information science education pro- grams. A study that I conducted of North American library schools revealed that 52.2 percent of the schools claimed to have a mission statement that espoused a concern for library multicultural issues and diversity.14 But schools must go beyond merely setting and meeting recruitment goals to ensure that there will be no revolving doors - that is to say, once minority students are recruited to a school, there must be follow-up and aggressive intervention to ascertain what support the students need, rather than leaving them to fail, unaided. Not only must library schools be concerned about retaining students of color, but I believe that we should in a very aggressive manner triple the percentage of minority student enrollment in all programs. Increas- ing cultural diversity in our schools is essential in an information society in which minorities are becoming the majority. Frequently, minorities must work while they are in library school, which has an impact on their academic performance. Another problem for minority students is funding for school. The American Council on Education recently released a report entitled Student Financial Aid: The Growth of Academic Credit's Other Meaning that says that minorities are the most likely to rely on guaranteed student loans to pay for school. The report indicates that "the greater reliance on borrowing for student aid may limit the participation of minorities and students from low-income families who are reluctant to take out loans."15 Fall 1993 307
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science When a recommendation is made for more funding support for minorities, this should not be construed to be at the expense of other population groups. Such a perception reflects institutional racism. There is a great need for financial assistance if we expect to recruit minorities to our graduate programs. The issue for library and information science schools is that they must agree that the recruitment and support of minorities is a national imperative, if the situation of students of color in graduate LIS programs is to improve. Meeting the Challenge of Diversity Recruiting students and faculty of color is not enough if the library and information science education programs are truly to embrace cul- tural diversity. There must be a support system that makes students of color feel that they are wanted and they are at home within the university environment. In addition to minority faculty's mentoring of minority students, white faculty also have a very important role to play in mentor- ing and in establishing a support system to strengthen cultural diversity. Most of the schools have student chapters of ALA, ASIS, SLA, MLA, and other library and information science organizations. Minority students should not only be encouraged to participate in these organizations, but they should be made to feel that it is essential for their professional growth to become involved. In addition to the regular student pro- fessional associations, there might be a need for the students to organize a minority organization similar to the Black Caucus, APALA, REFORMER, or other ethnic librarian groups. At the University of Pittsburgh, we have a Minority Concerns Council (MCC) that is open to all minorities that are enrolled at the school. It is a vibrant organization, and last year the group presented Congressman Major Owens (D-N.Y.) as its Black History Week speaker. The MCC also invites minority library professionals within the region to participate as speakers for group meetings. This gives students the opportunity to get to know other minority professionals, for many of them come from communities in which there is no minority professional librarian. The challenge of diversity is met when schools establish a regular recruiting program with a recruitment committee and a person or persons assigned to this task. At the University of Pittsburgh I am the chair of the Recruitment Committee. How does one recruit? Time is of essence so I will not belabor the point. I would recommend that you should look at a suggested recruitment strategy that I published in the fall 1 989 issue of The Bookmark . 16 Highlights of this strategy include developing public awareness programs; develop- ing a funding program; cooperating with large urban public libraries and major academic and research libraries; creating a program for the reten- tion of minority students; and ensuring that a positive program is fos- tered.17 In many instances you will find that there are a number of minorities who have never considered the library and information science profession; therefore, recruitment is essential. 308 Volume 34, Number 4
The Challenges of Cultural Diversity The Future Is Now How can we redefine our strategies and responsibilities for creating and fostering cultural diversity in schools of LIS in preparation for the twenty-first century? The twenty-first century is only seven years away! We don't have much time. What current and future scenarios must we develop for the recruitment of minority faculty and students to our schools? It is not enough just to add or alter one or two courses, for we must make the total environment one in which there is an appreciation of persons from the various cultures and their contribution to the infor- mation profession and to the information society. Most minority students come from financially poor backgrounds, and therefore schools will need money to recruit them as well as support them. If you are going to recruit minority faculty, there is a need for more funding for this purpose as well. There are many universities in this country that have fund-raising campaigns, but when we consider these universities, we never hear of any of the funds being targeted for the recruitment of students of color or for the recruitment of faculty of color. Library and information science schools can take the lead and urge their administrations and their development offices to designate some of the money that is coming into universities for the recruitment and retention of students and faculty of color. You may wish to propose this at your next faculty meeting. I serve as a representative of the University of Pittsburgh Senate on the University of Pittsburgh Board of Trustees Faculty Committee on Affir- mative Action. At its December 1992 meeting, the chancellor of the university revealed a new program that the university put in place during the spring of 1993. Advertisements have been placed in the Chronicle of Higher Education and the other usual advertising media to recruit five African American Junior Scholars (that is, those who have recently re- ceived their Ph.D. degrees) to bring them to the university to teach for a couple of years. They are assigned to coteach only one course during the term and spend the rest of their time in research and publishing activities. This effort was enthusiastically applauded by members of the committee because of the serious need in this particular area. Another solution that one may wish to consider: you may have to begin to "grow your own." This is very easy for institutions that have Ph.D. programs, but schools that do not have doctoral programs also have the opportunity to develop links with doctoral-granting institutions. They could provide funding for one of their graduates to attend graduate school, or identify and cultivate someone at the degree-granting institution who would make a good faculty member. These are examples of ways to do more than we have done in the past. Finally, I am optimistic about the future. In November 1992 1 traveled to Washington to attend the fall retreat of the American Library Associa- tion's Committee on Legislation. There was something different about Fall 1993 309
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Washington; there was optimism in the air. People began to speak very positively about the future. There were smiles on people's faces, and people were walking more briskly and looking more positive. One of the Washington education leaders, Congressman Major Owens, shares my optimism. He writes: The United States will soon make a great leap forward as the Clinton administration begins to chart the American course toward the 21st Century. Among the priorities for action will be education. Citizens across the nation rank education as one of the top four issues requiring immediate action. As we begin the 103rd Congress, America is fortunate to have elected a President who is a Rhodes Scholar, a former college professor and a politi- cian not afraid to allow high visibility for his exceptional intellect. President Clinton ranks education high on his priority list. New members entering Congress all have included education as a priority. . . . The work of improving our public education system must receive the same kind of systematic, intense, well-funded support as has our national defense program.18 Congressman Owens indicated that in the last Congress, the Edu- cational Research, Development, and Dissemination Excellence Act (H.R. 401) passed the House of Representatives but did not pass the Senate. There is indication that this act will be reintroduced. One of the most attractive points in this legislation is that "a new minority fellowship program to support graduate study in education research by talented African American, Latino, Native American and Asian and Pacific Amer- ican scholars would be initiated." This bodes very well for us in library and information science education. With Congressman Owens playing a key role in the House of Representatives, I am certain that there will be support for library programs of all kinds, including library education. The future is now. References 1. E. J. Josey, "Library and Information Services for Cultural Minorities: A Commentary and Analysis of a Report to the National Commission on Libraries and Information Science," Libri 35 (1985): 320-21. 2. Ibid. 3. James Michael Brodie, "Administrators, Students Blast Minority Scholarship Policy," Black Issues in Higher Education 9 (Mar. 26, 1992): 17. 4. Ibid. 5. Timothy W. Sineath, "Faculty," in Association for Library and Information Science Statistical Report 1992, ed. Timothy W. Sineath (Raleigh, N.C.: AUSE, 1992), 31. 6. Edward Wiley, "Ability to Manage Students and Collegial Expectations in Black Faculty Success," Black Issues in Higher Education 9 (Dec. 17, 1992): 10-11. 7. Ibid. 8. Ibid. 9. Ibid., 11. 10. Emerelda Barnese, "Ethos of the Environment," Black Issues in Higher Education 9 (Dec. 31, 1992): 20. 11. James T. Wooten, "Carter Names Friend as Attorney General and Selects Woman - Mrs. Kreps Gets Commerce Job . . .," New York Times , Dec. 21, 1976, 1, 24. 12. American Library Association, Office for Library Personnel Resources, Academic and 310 Volume 34, Number 4
The Challenges of Cultural Diversity Public Librarians: Data by Race , Ethnicity , and Sex 1991 (Chicago: American Library Assn., 1991), 1. 13. June Lester, "Summary and Comparative Analysis," in Association for Library and Information Science Education Statistical Report 1992 , ed. Timothy W. Sineath (Raleigh, N.C.: AUSE, 1992), 369. 14. E. J. Josey, "Education for Library Services to Cultural Minorities in North America," fournal of Multicultural Librarianship 5 (July 1991): 104-11. 15. Charles J. Anderson, "Student Financial Aid: The Growth of Academic Credit's Other Meaning," Research Briefs % no. 5 (1992): 1. 16. E.J. Josey, "Minority Representation in Library and Information Science Programs," The Bookmark 48 (Fall 1989): 55-57. 17. Josey, "Education for Library Services." 18. Major R. Owens, "Setting the Education Agenda for Clinton's First 100 Days," Black Issues in Higher Education 9 (Dec. 13, 1992): 34-35. Fall 1993 311