Anti-Communism, Racism, and Censorship in the McCarthy Era The Case of Ruth W. Brown and the Bartlesville Public Library Louise S. Robbins To report on my research in progress, I will first give a brief account of the case and its significance to the library and information profession. Then I will re- count for you where the research has taken me thus far, some discoveries I have made, some questions that keep arising, and where I go from here. The Case My research examines the case of Ruth W. Brown, long-time librarian of the Bartlesville, Oklahoma, Public Library, who was fired from her job in 1950 fol- lowing charges by a citizens' committee that she had "subversive" periodicals in the library, charges that masked actual concerns about Brown's personal views and professional actions concerning equal treatment of African-Americans. The library board (which had also been ousted), friends of Brown, and friends of the library unsuccessfully challenged the legality of the action.1 The Okla- homa Library Association quickly put together an Intellectual Freedom Com- mittee to investigate the case and to give Brown what support it could.2 The in- ability of the American Library Associa- tion's Intellectual Freedom Committee to take prompt and effective action pro- vided an impetus to increase the com- mittee's powers.3 One of the most widely publicized library censorship cases of the 1950s,4 its major elements - anti-communism, racism, and suppression or censor- ship - were prominent themes of the McCarthy era,5 a time in which books or films that dealt with race issues were often attacked as Communist propa- ganda.6 A book-length exploration of the in- tersection of these themes that played out in Bartlesville will shed light on the motives of the censors of the 1950s and perhaps illuminate what lies behind similarly ambiguous acts of censorship today. It will also reveal how the library profession attempted to deal with a bla- tant attack on its credo of free access to information for all at a time when the profession was just learning to assert itself against challenges to intellectual freedom. It will thus add both to the library history literature, and to the lit- erature concerning the ways in which professions define themselves by choosing their battles.7 Fall 1994 331
332 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science About the Author Louise Robbins is Assistant Professor of Library and Information Studies at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. This is an informal report on research in progress, presented to ALISE, February 3, 1994. Progress I began my research in the American Library Association Archives at the University of Illinois with the papers of David K. Berninghausen, ALA's Intel- lectual Freedom Committee chairman in 1950, at the University of Minnesota. A telephone call to Jan Sanders, the Bartlesville librarian, gave me a connec- tion to Russell Davis, who was chair- man of the ousted library board. Sand- ers also kindly copied the library's file on Ruth Brown. The contact with Davis led to a wonderful discovery. A few years ear- lier he had donated his file on Ruth Brown to the Pittsburg State University Library, Pittsburg, Kansas, and Ruth Brown's own papers were also located there. A call to Special Collections Li- brarian Gene deGruson gave me access to both sets of papers and put me in touch with Ruth Brown's close friend, Margaret Varvel. Varvel in turn con- firmed the surprising information that Ruth Brown had two adopted daugh- ters, and gave me information that en- abled me to locate them. The file of materials from the Bar- tlesville Public Library included one slightly inaccurate statement that sug- gested Ruth Brown had some connec- tion to the Congress on Racial Equality (CORE).8 This information sent me to the microfilm of the CORE papers at the State Historical Society of Wisconsin Library. I had hoped to find Ruth Brown's name on a membership list. Instead, to my amazement, I found a significant number of letters Brown ex- changed with CORE'S executive direc- tor, George Hauser, from 1946 until 1951, the year after her firing. The let- ters reveal that Ruth Brown's dedication to equal rights was far greater than a reader of any of the published materials could have guessed. In fact, she at- tended CORE conferences and devel- oped a commitment to non-violent di- rect action that finally led her to go to a local drugstore with two African- American women teachers from Bartles- ville's segregated Douglass School and ask to be served,9 well aware of the possible consequences. She wrote Hauser as early as 1948 of her commit- ment to take action to help end segrega- tion: "It might mean that I would no longer be Bartlesville Librarian but I've had that fun for thirty years anyway."10 I have also discovered that when Ruth lost her court fight to regain her Bartlesville position, she left Bartles- ville and went to be librarian at the all-Black Piney Woods Country Life School, just south of Jackson, Missis- sippl.11 She left that position over dif- ferences with the authoritarian admini- stration of the School.12 Her last professional years were spent at Ster- ling, Colorado, from which she wrote Library Journal in 1961 to congratulate ALA on finally taking a stand against segregation.13 I have learned that the Oklahoma Library Association formed an intellectual freedom committee spe- cifically to investigate this case, but that no public librarians in Oklahoma were willing to serve on the committee.14 Anecdotal and circumstantial evi- dence suggest that Ruth Brown was the Volume 35, Number 4
Censorship in the McCarthy Era 333 subject for the 1956 film, Storm Cen- ter,15 for which the ALA Intellectual Freedom Committee served as consult- ant.16 Her friends certainly have that impression. One quotes Brown as say- ing, "It's strange to be fat and sixty-ish and see yourself played by Bette Davis."17 Certainly a New York Times article by writer and director Daniel Taradash indicates that he got the idea for the film from newspapers in 1950. 18 And Ruth was prominent in the news- papers.19 Unanswered Questions What motivated Ruth Brown, a white woman in her late fifties who had lived in Oklahoma, a Jim Crow state, almost all of her life; and who had no visible means of support other than her library position, to take what was at the time such radi- cal action? We know that, at least in part, it was her reading.20 What did she read? Neither ALA nor the Oklahoma Li- brary Association confronted the race aspect of this case in their re- porting. Is this because of the way the case was presented to them? Were they ignorant of the facts? Or were they simply unready or unwill- ing to deal with a case that was dou- bly controversial? Was the unwillingness of public li- brarians to be embroiled in the in- vestigation of cases like Ruth Brown's a reason for the slow devel- opment of permanent intellectual freedom committees in the states?21 Next Steps I have not yet begun to look at Ruth Brown's opponents, who were members of such groups as the Daughters of the American Revolution, the United Daughters of the Confederacy, the American Legion, and Pro-America.22 I have not yet looked at the involvement, on both sides of the issue, of Phillips Petroleum, the major employer in Bar- tlesville, a "company town." I have also not yet looked at the library itself, and how it compared its collection or serv- ices with comparable libraries in Okla- homa, or how the structure and respon- sibilities of the library board factored into the confrontation.23 Nor have I yet examined the impact of the censorship case and its attendant publicity on the library and the city, especially on the African-American community. Ruth Brown is becoming more and more fascinating as I learn more about her. It is entirely appropriate that re- search into her case should receive the research award bearing the name of Jane Anne Hannigan, because it is clear that Ruth Brown needs to be viewed from a feminist standpoint. Stay tuned for more. References and Notes 1. "Censorship in Bartlesville: A Report of the Oklahoma Library Association's Committee on Intellectual Freedom," American Library Association Bulletin 45 (March 1951): 87-90. 2. F. Kennedy and others, to President and Executive Board, Oklahoma Library As- sociation, January 8, 1951, "Letter of Transmittal Accompanying Report of the Intellectual Freedom Committee of the Oklahoma Library Association on the Bartles ville Public Library," Item No. 41. Ruth W. Brown Archive, Kansas Collec- tion, Pittsburg State University Library, Pittsburg, Kansas. 3. L. Robbins, "Toward Ideology and Auton- omy: The American Library Association's Response to Threats to Intellectual Free- dom, 1939-1969" (Ph.D. diss., Texas Woman's University, 1991), 134-35. Fall 1994
334 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 4. The episode was covered nationally by at least The Nation, The New Republic, The Saturday Review of Literature, and the Christian Science Monitor, as well as by library journals. It was even covered in "Afsked pa Grat Papir" ("Instant Dismiss- al"), Bogens Verden 33 (July 1951): 237- 38. 5. D. Caute, The Great Fear: The Anti-Com- munist Purge under Truman and Eisen- hower (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1978); As an example see J. Salmond, "The Great Southern Commie Hunt': Aubrey Williams, the Southern Confer- ence Educational Fund, and the Internal Security Subcommittee," in The South Atlantic Quarterly 77 (4): 433-52. 6. ALA's footnote on film was precipitated by just such an attack, the attack on the Peoria, Illinois, Public Library, which was accused of circulating films contain- ing Communist propaganda, among them the United Nations film, The Brother- hood of Man. See D. Berninghausen, The Flight from Reason: Essays on Intellec- tual Freedom in the Academy, the Press, and the Library (Chicago: American Li- brary Assn., 1975): 37-45. 7. A. Abbott, The System of Professions: An Essay on the Division of Expert Labor (Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Pr., 1988). 8. P. Hood, "Collision of Ideas Fans Violent Fuss," Daily Oklahoman, Nov. 5, 1950, 1. 9. R. Brown to G. Hauser, February 2, 1950, Frame 602, Reel 9, Series III: Executive Secretary's File, 1941-1962, Record Group 22, "The Papers of the Congress of Racial Equality, 1941-1967," State His- torical Society of Wisconsin, Madison, Wise. 10. R. Brown to G. Hauser, July 25, 1948, Frames 580-81, Reel 9, Series III: Execu- tive Secretary's File, 1941-1962, Record Group 22, "CORE Papers," State Histori- cal Society of Wisconsin, Madison, Wise. 11. R. Brown, "New Library at Piney Woods," Library Journal 77 (June 15, 1952): 1052. 12. R. Brown, "Three Years in a Negro School in Mississippi," undated typescript, item no. 70, Ruth W. Brown Archive. 13. R. Brown, "Remember Bartlesville," Li- brary Journal 86 (Feb. 15, 1961): 730. 14. J. Robinson, "Loyalty Investigations and Legislation in Oklahoma" (master's the- sis, University of Oklahoma, 1955), 19. 15. M. Creasy, telephone interview with the author, January 26, 1994. 16. D. Clift, "Memo to Members," American Library Association Bulletin 50 (June 1956): 334-35. 17. G. DeGruson, telephone interview with the author, January 12, 1994. 18. D. Taradash, " 'Storm Center' Course," New York Times, October 14, 1956, Sec- tion II, p. 5. 19. I have collected copies of articles from Bartlesville, Tulsa, and Oklahoma City papers, and from the Denver Post, the Si. Louis Post-Dispatch, the University Daily Kansan, the Dallas Morning News, and the Kansas City Star, as well as a variety of African-American newspapers, in ad- dition to the national coverage men- tioned above. There may well have been more. 20. R. Brown, "Remember Bartlesville." 21. L.Robbins, "Toward Ideology and Auton- omy," 86-93 and appendix C. 22. "Patriotism in Bartlesville," carbon copy of typed letter to the editor, The Nation, Aug. 12, 1950, item no. 13, Ruth W. Brown Papers. 23. Several newspaper clippings refer to the Board having met only annually, to ap- prove the budget. Volume 35, Number 4