From the One-Mule Tenant Farmer to the Hillbilly Highway: How Librarians Can Support the White Working Class Kathleen de la Peña McCook ABSTRACT The following article presents an overview of the poverty and dispossession of the white working class in the twenty-first century. It explores the manner in which librarians’ diminished connec- tion to labor and denigration of Trump voters are combining to erode the library mission of ser- vice to all. It concludes with suggestions for reconnection and renewal. T he 2016 election of Donald J. Trump has torn the United States into two broad campsloosely rooted in the two major political parties, Republican and Democrat, who are,at this writing, deeply at odds. After the 2016 elections, liberal Democrats have vari- ously castigated voters for Donald Trump as dumb idiots, simpletons, morons engaged in a dance of the dunces (Brennan 2016; Chait 2016; Drum 2016; Romeo 2016; Rosenthal 2017). These sentiments have also been expressed publicly and privately by library friends and col- leagues who are grappling with how to work and provide library service in communities where values collide.1 How do librarians work across personal philosophical boundaries to help all people in their communities? Will librarians be able to serve all patrons in a nation split down the middle into those who are opposed to the policies of the forty-fifth president of the United States, Donald J. Trump, and those who support him and his policies? Despite Trump’s failure to win the pop- ular vote, he did have the most small donor support. He raised 69% of his individual contri- butions from small donors, compared with Sanders’s 44% in 2016, Clinton’s 22% in 2016, and even Obama’s 28% in 2012 (Campaign Finance Institute 2017).Thank you to Lynn Hattendorf Westney, who reviewed this article and made helpful suggestions. 1. “F@uck You, ALA” (Hathcock 2016) and Albanese’s (2017) article that explains this has posted responses that dem- onstrate the polarization of the field at this time, especially in the comments. Library Quarterly: Information, Community, Policy, vol. 87, no. 3, pp. 257–267. © 2017 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-2519/2017/8703-0007$10.00 257
258 • The Library QuarterlyWho are the Trump voters? To group them together as a monolithic white privileged sec- tor is to lose focus. It is too easy. It is why there is such acrimony. No one wants to be disre- spected; no one wants to be viewed as “deplorable” (Kuper 2017). The politics of resentment do us no good. Whenever a liberal calls out Trump supporters as ignorant or fooled or misin- formed, that does absolutely nothing to convey the facts that the liberal is trying to convey (Cramer 2016). The Harvest Gypsies and the “Company Store” The migrants are hated for the following reasons, that they are ignorant and dirty people, that they are carriers of disease, that they increase the necessity for police and the tax bill for schooling in a community, and that if they are allowed to organize they can, simply by refus- ing to work, wipe out the season’s crops. They are never received into a community nor into the life of a community. Wanderers in fact, they are never allowed to feel at home in the com- munities that demand their services. —John Steinbeck, writing of Okies and Arkies in The Harvest Gypsies, 1936 The white working class has been an object of intermittent study. Among the most well- known early examinations were those of James Agee and Walker Evans (1941) in Let Us Now Praise Famous Men and John Steinbeck (1936) in The Harvest Gypsies.2 To read these works is to gain a different perspective. Agee’s differentiation among the well-being of tenant farmers based on their ownership of a mule is a stark representation of the white poverty of those times in rural Alabama. Steinbeck’s observations of the mainly white farmers who migrated to California sound similar to objections to Mexican migrant workers today. In Dixie’s Forgotten People: The South’s Poor Whites, J. Wayne Flynt (1979) notes that after World War II, poor whites were characterized as otherworldly religious fanatics and redneck racists. These stereotypes were reinforced in the popular imagination by movies based on novels by Erskine Caldwell (Tobacco Road), Flannery O’Connor (Wise Blood), and James Dickey (Deliverance).3 The ancestry of Appalachian hill people is traced in James Webb’s (2004) Born Fighting, which differentiates the landless Scots-Irish from Anglo-English aristocratic landowners whose families engaged in the slave trade and whose wealth established great universities (Beckert,2. “Originally published in seven parts in the San Francisco News between October 5 and 12, 1936. In 1938 the Simon J. Lubin Society published The Harvest Gypsies with an added eighth chapter in pamphlet form under the title, Their Blood is Strong” (Steinbeck 1936). 3. Erskine Caldwell’s Tobacco Road was published in 1932; the movie released 1941; Flannery O’Connor’s Wise Blood was published in 1952; the movie released 1979; and James Dickey’s Deliverance was published 1970; the movie released 1972. For a fictionalized story of industrialization’s effects see Sherwood Anderson’s Poor White, 1920.
How Librarians Can Support the White Working Class • 259Stevens, and students 2011; Kenney 2017).4 Yet in today’s public discussions of the 2016 elec- tions, white working-class people are viewed as a monoculture, creating an ever-widening chasm between voters. Liberals once sympathized with coal miners and the indebted in Ap- palachia, but after the 2016 elections, liberals turned on them and gloated that they might lose health care (Jones 2016). Merle Travis’s “Sixteen Tons” (1946) was a chart-topper in 1955: You load sixteen tons, and what do you get? Another day older and deeper in debt Saint Peter don’t you call me ’cause I can’t go I owe my soul to the company store In 2008 when running for president, referring to working-class voters in hollowed-out Rust Belt towns, Barack Obama made a prediction that has been realized by the results of the 2016 elections. He said, “They get bitter, they cling to guns or religion or antipathy to people who aren’t like them or anti-immigrant sentiment or anti-trade sentiment as a way to explain their frustrations” (Pilkington 2008). Studies that help us to learn more about the white working class may heighten our under- standing of the varieties of classes and beliefs and of income inequality. This is not to make a case but to expand the context. Recent characterization of evangelicals as “the Taliban” (Weatherby 2017), shared on social media by a former American Library Association president, could be modulated by reading scholarly studies of evangelicals (Anderson 1979; Vann 2007; Worthen 2016).5 The intense religiosity of the gospel songs of Johnny Cash, Jerry Lee Lewis, and Elvis Presley provides additional insight into the spirituality and work life that informs their followers (Fox 2004; Armstrong and Greider 2013; Bragg 2014). Stereotypes held by either end of the political spectrum will serve to deepen the chasm between people. Recent books on poverty such as $2.00 a Day (Edin and Shaefer 2016) and Evicted (Desmond 2016) depict the lives of poor people of diverse backgrounds—African American, Latino, and white—struggling in an unequal society. What they share is a working-class background. There is no white privilege in these worlds. Two recent academic assessments provide addi- tional insight. White Trash (Isenberg 2016) takes a phlegmatic approach to the history of the white working underclass up to the twenty-first century, examining the travails of indentured servants in seventeenth-century Virginia, landless poor whites in the Carolinas, and trailer park dwellers today. In the study Strangers in Their Own Land, Arlie Russell Hochschild (2016), a Berkeley sociologist, explores the conservative white culture in south Louisiana and observes4. “Universities and Slavery: Bound by History,” 2017 conference, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, https://www .radcliffe.harvard.edu/event/2017-universities-and-slavery-conference. 5. And, to see even more from the side of the white working class, see Lacy (2012) about country music fans and Felson and Pare (2010) about gun owners.
260 • The Library Quarterlythat although these people cringe at being called rednecks, ignorant Southern Bible thumpers, and white trash, they suffer from fading honor and are reluctant to defend themselves because they do not want to join the parade of “poor me’s.” More empathetic, wise, and close to the bone is J. D. Vance’s (2016) Hillbilly Elegy, a memoir that provides personal insight into the multigenerational downward economic drift of white working-class families. He traverses the Hillbilly Highways from Kentucky to Ohio trying to assess the reasons, including drug addiction, for disintegration of his Appalachian heritage. In Dreamland, Sam Quinones (2016) examines the heroin and opioid epidemic that plagues Ohio and small cities throughout the nation. He attributes this epidemic of misery to fatalism, the availability of painkillers and heroin, and the demise of manufacturing. Along the same lines is Brian Alexander’s (2017) Glass House: The 1% Economy and the Shattering of the All-American Town, which sees the fracturing of social contracts in Rust Belt towns as contributing to job losses, slashed wages, poor civic leadership, social dysfunction, and drugs. Of all the things I have read to sort out this election, the most insightful and funny is the explanation by David Wong (2016) of how Trump voters, mostly outside cities, view them- selves: “The good guys are simple folk from the countryside while the bad guys are decadent assholes who live in the city and wear stupid clothes.” He uses examples from Star Wars, The Hunger Games, and Braveheart. To the ignored, suffering people, Donald Trump is a brick chucked through the window of the elites. Libraries Should Serve All Classes of People Today librarians are working to respond to the challenges presented by the Trump adminis- tration. The “Libraries Respond: 2016 Election” website maintained by the American Library Association Office for Diversity, Literacy, and Outreach Services includes space to keep cur- rent events in conversation with libraries’ ongoing work in and commitment to equity, diver- sity, and inclusion.6 This site contains: • Resources for serving immigrants, refugees, and asylum seekers • Statements of library associations • Official ALA responses to the election • Resources for serving the gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender community • Ways to make people feel safe and welcome in the postelection library Three groups left out of responses as of this writing are union members, the drug-addicted working class, and veterans. Classism may be the reason. As Berman wrote in 2005, “the most6. ALA Office for Diversity, Literacy, and Outreach Services, “Libraries Respond: 2016,” http://www.ala.org/advocacy /diversity/libraries-respond.
How Librarians Can Support the White Working Class • 261vulnerable and dispossessed among us are citizens and neighbors who deserve compassion, support, and respect—if we can do these things in our heads and hearts, then there’s a real chance to overcome classism.” Berman was the catalyst in the development of the ALA Policy Statement on Library Services to the Poor (see appendix).7 This statement includes all ethnic- ities and primarily addresses issues of class. The dismantling of the labor movement has created a lack of respect for low-income work- ers (Draper 2017). Union members were once the focus of ALA committees and library services (Schneider 1990; Hubbard 2002). That focus has diminished. This reflects the larger society’s lack of support for labor. As Harold Schaitberger, of the International Association of Fire Fight- ers, observed “there need to be discussions about how to maintain a progressive, diverse co- alition without ignoring blue-collar white union members who have felt disenfranchised and angry and in many ways left on the sidelines” (Levine 2016). Writing of the failure to win working-class votes, Brenner (2016) noted, “It’s past time for union leaders to admit that the Democratic Party is run by suits. The people calling the shots are perfectly comfortable with trade deals like NAFTA, and completely out of touch with working-class voters.” The most coherent recent characterization of the reduction of interest in unions from the Democratic Party, their longtime supporter, is by Thomas Frank (2016), whose book Listen, Lib- eral, or, What Ever Happened to the Party of the People? summarizes how the party became an equal competitor with Republicans for Wall Street’s affections to be the party of finance interested in attracting technocrats and creatives. Unions have been increasingly viewed as retro and un- professional. Librarians write little about services to labor today. The AFL-CIO/ALA Joint Committee on Library Services to Labor Groups in the Reference and User Services Association holds annual programs, but there is not a robust literature about services to working people. The John Ses- sions Memorial Award, presented annually by the Reference and User Services Association of the American Library Association, recognizes a library or library system that has made a sig- nificant effort to work with the labor community.8 However, there has been no larger assess- ment of these services in more than a decade. The blog Union Library Workers does provide a union perspective, but it is produced by the Progressive Librarians Guild, not a large organi- zation.9 Another potential area of service is assisting people with addiction problems—a challenge that has been increasingly affecting the white working class (Case and Deaton 2015; Rotondaro 2017). Only one recent article in the library literature, “Outreach to Addiction” (Schnitzer 2015), addresses this problem. It is as if no one cares.7. ALA Policy Statement: Library Services to the Poor, http://www.ala.org/aboutala/governance/policymanual /updatedpolicymanual/section2/52libsvcsandrespon#B.8.10. 8. Wikipedia, s.v. “John Sessions Memorial Award,” https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Sessions_Memorial_Award. 9. Progressive Librarians Guild, Union Library Workers, http://unionlibraryworkers.blogspot.com/.
262 • The Library QuarterlyIncluding Everyone Finally, two hopeful notes—first, library service to veterans is a connection to working-class voters of all ethnicities. Only 7.3% of Americans have served in the military, but they share a common experience that libraries can support (Chalabi 2015). Of the 21 million veterans liv- ing today, 16 million are white, 2.6 million are African American, 1.5 million are Hispanic or Latino, and 300,000 are Asian American (US Department of Veterans Affairs 2017). The stand- out response of librarians to serving this population is the 2016 Public Library Quarterly article that provides an overview of library services to veterans in 40 states (Roy et al. 2016). American Libraries featured California libraries’ initiatives to work collaboratively with veterans groups (Inklebarger 2017). These programs would be inclusive additions to the “Libraries Respond” website. Second, in a shining example of the public library serving to bridge cultures, Wendy Camp- bell, director of the Darby (MT) Community Library, was awarded the 2016 Downs Intellectual Freedom Award.10 When the planned Perspectives on Islam program sparked strong protest by several community members,11 Campbell met with the library board, library staff and vol- unteers, library patrons, community leaders, the local school board, high school teachers and administrators, the county sheriff’s office, the state librarian, and the American Library Asso- ciation Office for Intellectual Freedom to find a way to hold the program and help expand cultural awareness in her community (School of Information Sciences 2016). On March 9, 2016, so many people turned out for the presentation by Professor Samir Bitar, a lecturer of Arabic language and cultures at the University of Montana, that library officials were forced to turn back the overflow at the door. Campbell (2016) set the stage with her wel- come: “Libraries are vital to our communities as safe places for education and communication. This program is one of three in a series on historical and contemporary cultures. Tonight we learn of the culture of Islam. I will be honest with you that the culture is intrinsically tied to its religion, so you will also learn of this religion tonight. Libraries do not promote or condemn. We offer opportunities for education. It is a safe place where we come together for respectful and peaceful discourse.” The program was a success. There was a full audience. There was no protest. The library brought people together and, in the words of James LaRue, director of the ALA Office for Intellectual Freedom who nominated Wendy Campbell for the Downs Award: “The library, meanwhile, secured its position in the community as a force for education that neither promoted nor condemned various ideas, but provided a safe and courteous forum for their consideration” (School of Information Sciences 2016).10. Darby is in the Montana Bitterroot Valley. The public library serves 4,000 people in an area of 1,380 square miles— bigger than Rhode Island. 11. Montana Historical Society Education Office, “Footlockers”: Montana.gov, https://mhs.mt.gov/education/footlocker; Montana Historical Society Education Office, “Coming to Montana: Immigrants from Around the World,” 2014, https://mhs .mt.gov/Portals/11/education/docs/footlocker/Immigrants.pdf. See Brower (2016) for additional information on the climate of fear and loathing that initially created concern.
How Librarians Can Support the White Working Class • 263Instead of casting aspersions on the other side, librarians can create the opportunity for dialogue. By respecting all people and encouraging discussion and understanding, the nation’s libraries can act as catalysts to overcome resentment and distrust. After all, the LSA came about with the support of a bricklayer and a librarian (Healey 1974). Appendix ALA Policy Statement: Library Services to the Poor The American Library Association promotes equal access to information for all persons, and recognizes the urgent need to respond to the increasing number of poor children, adults, and families in America.12 These people are affected by a combination of limitations, including illiteracy, illness, social isolation, homelessness, hunger, and discrimination, which hamper the effectiveness of traditional library services. Therefore it is crucial that libraries recognize their role in enabling poor people to participate fully in a democratic society, by utilizing a wide variety of available resources and strategies. Concrete programs of training and development are needed to sensitize and prepare library staff to identify poor people’s needs and deliver relevant services. And within the American Library Association the coordinating mechanisms of programs and activities dealing with poor people in various divisions, offices, and units should be strengthened, and support for low-income liaison activities should be enhanced. The American Library Association shall implement these objectives by: 1. Promoting the removal of all barriers to library and information services, particularly fees and overdue charges. 2. Promoting the publication, production, purchase, and ready accessibility of print and nonprint materials that honestly address the issues of poverty and homeless- ness, that deal with poor people in a respectful way, and that are of practical use to low-income patrons. 3. Promoting full, stable, and ongoing funding for existing legislative programs in sup- port of low-income services and for pro-active library programs that reach beyond traditional service-sites to poor children, adults, and families. 4. Promoting training opportunities for librarians, in order to teach effective tech- niques for generating public funding to upgrade library services to poor people. 5. Promoting the incorporation of low-income programs and services into regular li- brary budgets in all types of libraries, rather than the tendency to support these proj- ects solely with “soft money” like private or federal grants.12. American Library Association, “Library Services to the Poor (Old Number 61),” Policy Manual, 2017, http://www.ala.org /aboutala/governance/policymanual/updatedpolicymanual/section2/52libsvcsandrespon#B.8.10.
264 • The Library Quarterly6. Promoting equity in funding adequate library services for poor people in terms of materials, facilities, and equipment. 7. Promoting supplemental support for library resources for and about low-income populations by urging local, state, and federal governments, and the private sector, to provide adequate funding. 8. Promoting increased public awareness—through programs, displays, bibliographies, and publicity—of the importance of poverty-related library resources and services in all segments of society. 9. Promoting the determination of output measures through the encouragement of community needs assessments, giving special emphasis to assessing the needs of low-income people and involving both anti-poverty advocates and poor people themselves in such assessments. 10. Promoting direct representation of poor people and anti-poverty advocates through appointment to local boards and creation of local advisory committees on service to low-income people, such appointments to include library-paid transportation and stipends. 11. Promoting training to sensitize library staff to issues affecting poor people and to attitudinal and other barriers that hinder poor people’s use of libraries. 12. Promoting networking and cooperation between libraries and other agencies, orga- nizations, and advocacy groups in order to develop programs and services that effec- tively reach poor people. 13. Promoting the implementation of an expanded federal low-income housing pro- gram, national health insurance, full-employment policy, living minimum wage and welfare payments, affordable day care, and programs likely to reduce, if not elimi- nate, poverty itself. 14. Promoting among library staff the collection of food and clothing donations, volun- teering personal time to anti-poverty activities and contributing money to direct-aid organizations. 15. Promoting related efforts concerning minorities and women, since these groups are disproportionately represented among poor people. References Agee, James, and Walker Evans. 1941. Let Us Now Praise Famous Men: Three Tenant Families. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. Albanese, Andrew Richard. 2017. “Making ALA Great Again.” Publishers Weekly, February 17. http://www .publishersweekly.com/pw/by-topic/industry-news/libraries/article/72814-making-ala-great-again.html. Alexander, Brian. 2017. Glass House: The 1% Economy and the Shattering of the All-American Town. New York: St. Martin’s.
How Librarians Can Support the White Working Class • 265Anderson, Robert M. 1979. Vision of the Disinherited: The Making of American Pentecostalism. New York: Oxford University Press. Armstrong, Edward G., and Paul L. Greider. 2013. “Presentation of Identity in the Work Songs of Johnny Cash.” Popular Music and Society 36 (2): 216–33. Beckert, Sven, Katherine Stevens, and students of the Harvard and Slavery Research Seminar. 2011. Harvard and Slavery: Seeking a Forgotten History. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University. Berman, Sanford. 2005. “Classism in the Stacks: Libraries and Poverty.” American Library Association. http://www.ala.org/offices/olos/olosprograms/jeanecoleman/05berman. Bragg, Rick. 2014. Jerry Lee Lewis: His Own Story. New York: HarperCollins. Brennan, Jason. 2016. “Trump Won Because Voters Are Ignorant, Literally.” Foreign Policy, November 10. http://foreignpolicy.com/2016/11/10/the-dance-of-the-dunces-trump-clinton-election-republican -democrat/. Brenner, Mark. 2016. “This Is Not a Drill: Bracing for the Trump Era.” LaborNotes, November 17. http:// labornotes.org/2016/11/not-drill-bracing-trump-era. Brower, Derek. 2016. “Fear Meets Loathing: Anti-Muslim Protests Put Refugee Advocates on Edge.” Mis- soula Independent, March 3. http://missoulanews.bigskypress.com/missoula/fear-meets-loathing/Content ?oid52711525. Campaign Finance Institute. 2017. “President Trump, with RNC Help, Raised More Small Donor Money than President Obama.” Press release. Campaign Finance Institute, February 21. http://www.cfinst .org/Press/PReleases/17-02-21/President_Trump_with_RNC_Help_Raised_More_Small_Donor _Money_than_President_Obama_As_Much_As_Clinton_and_Sanders_Combined.aspx. Campbell, Wendy. 2016. “Perspectives on Islam in Montana: How a Small Community Weathered Contro- versy.” American Libraries, April 15. https://americanlibrariesmagazine.org/2016/04/15/perspectives-islam -montana/. Case, Ann, and Angus Deaton. 2015. “Rising Morbidity and Mortality in Midlife among White Non-Hispanic Americans in the 21st Century.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 112 (49): 15078–83. Chait, Jonathan. 2016. “Here’s the Real Reason Everybody Thought Trump Would Lose.” New York Maga- zine, May 11. http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2016/05/heres-the-real-reason-we-all-underrated -trump.html#. Chalabi, Mona. 2015. “What Percentage of Americans Have Served in the Military?” FiveThirtyEight, March 19. https://fivethirtyeight.com/datalab/what-percentage-of-americans-have-served-in-the-military/. Cramer, Katherine J. 2016. The Politics of Resentment: Rural Consciousness in Wisconsin and the Rise of Scott Walker. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Desmond, Matthew. 2016. Evicted: Poverty and Profit in the American City. New York: Crown. Draper, Alan. 2017. “How Dwindling Union Power Helped Usher In Trump.” American Prospect, January 2. http://prospect.org/article/how-dwindling-union-power-helped-usher-trump. Drum, Kevin. 2016. “Quote of the Day: Republican Voters Are Idiots.” Mother Jones, November 17. http:// www.motherjones.com/kevin-drum/2016/11/quote-day-republican-voters-are-idiots. Edin, Kathryn J., and H. Luke Shaefer. 2016. $2.00 a Day: Living on Almost Nothing in America. Boston: Mariner. Felson, Richard B., and Paul-Philippe Pare. 2010. “Gun Cultures or Honor Cultures? Explaining Regional and Race Differences in Weapon Carrying.” Social Forces 88 (3): 1357–78. Flynt, J. Wayne. 1979. Dixie’s Forgotten People: The South’s Poor Whites. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
266 • The Library QuarterlyFox, Aaron A. 2004. Real Country: Music and Language in Working-Class Culture. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. Frank, Thomas. 2016. Listen, Liberal, or, What Ever Happened to the Party of the People? New York: Metropolitan. Hathcock, April. 2016. “F@ck You, ALA.” At the Intersection (blog), December 15. https://aprilhathcock .wordpress.com/2016/12/15/fck-you-ala. Healey, James Stewart. 1974. John E. Fogarty: Political Leadership for Library Development. Metuchen, NJ: Scare- crow. Hochschild, Arlie Russell. 2016. Strangers in Their Own Land: Anger and Mourning on the American Right. New York: New. Hubbard, Elizabeth Ann. 2002. “Library Service to Unions: A Historical Overview.” Library Trends 51 (1): 5–18. Inklebarger, Timothy. 2017. “Bridging the Gap for Vets.” American Libraries, March 1. https://american librariesmagazine.org/2017/03/01/bridging-gap-veterans-library-services/. Isenberg, Nancy. 2016. White Trash: The 400-Year Untold History of Class in America. New York: Viking. Jones, Sarah. 2016. “Liberals Should Try Not Having So Much Contempt for the Poor.” New Republic, De- cember 13. https://newrepublic.com/minutes/139327/liberals-try-not-much-contempt-poor. Kenney, Tanasia. 2017. “How the Slave Trade Helped Finance Columbia University.” Atlanta Black Star, Jan- uary 27. http://atlantablackstar.com/2017/01/27/slave-trade-helped-finance-columbia-university/. Kuper, Simon. 2017. “We Need to Start Being PC about the White Working Class.” Financial Times, Feb- ruary 24. https://www.ft.com/content/21fbdb8e-f883-11e6-bd4e-68d53499ed71. Lacy, Robert. 2012. “When Country Was Country.” Sewanee Review 120 (1): 151–56. Levine, Carrie. 2016. “Clinton Got Union Money, but Trump Won Many Workers’ Hearts and Minds.” Cen- ter for Public Integrity, November 18. https://www.publicintegrity.org/2016/11/18/20480/clinton-got-union -money-trump-won-many-workers-hearts-and-minds. Pilkington, Ed. 2008. “Obama Angers Midwest Voters with Guns and Religion Remark.” The Guardian, April 14. https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/apr/14/barackobama.uselections2008. Quinones, Sam. 2016. Dreamland: The True Tale of America's Opiate Epidemic. New York: Bloomsbury. Romeo, Nick. 2016. “Are You an Idiot in Donald Trump’s America?” Chicago Tribune, December 20. http:// www.chicagotribune.com/news/opinion/commentary/ct-donald-trump-voters-idiots-20161220-story .html. Rosenthal, Phil. 2017. “ABC-7 Suspends Sportscaster Mark Giangreco for Calling Donald Trump a ‘Cartoon Lunatic.’” Chicago Tribune, February 23. http://www.chicagotribune.com/sports/breaking/ct-mark -giangreco-suspended-trump-spt-0224-20170223-story.html. Rotondaro, Vinnie. 2017. “The Science of White Working Class Pain: Trump’s Appeal Is Rooted in the Body as Well as the Mind. Salon, January 8. http://www.salon.com/2017/01/08/trump-seduced-white-working -class_partner/. Roy, Loriene, Maria Barker, Lanita L. Hidalgo, and Frances A. Rickard. 2016. “Public Library Services for Veterans: Selected Brief Case Studies.” Public Library Quarterly 35 (3): 222–42. Schneider, D. W. 1990. “Library Service to Labor Groups.” In Adult Services: An Enduring Focus for Public Librar- ies, edited by K. M. Heim and D. P. Wallace. Chicago: American Library Association. Schnitzer, A. E. 2015. “Outreach to Addiction—A Month of Investing in Ability: A Case Study.” Medical Ref- erence Services Quarterly 34:334–42. School of Information Sciences. 2016. “2016 Downs Intellectual Freedom Award Given to Wendy Camp- bell.” University of Illinois School of Information Sciences, December 7. https://ischool.illinois .edu/articles/2016/12/2016-downs-intellectual-freedom-award-given-wendy-campbell.
How Librarians Can Support the White Working Class • 267Steinbeck, John. 1936. The Harvest Gypsies. New Deal Network. http://newdeal.feri.org/steinbeck/hg01.htm. Travis, Merle. 1946. “Sixteen Tons.” Folksongs of the Hills. Capitol Records. US Department of Veterans Affairs. 2017. “Frequently Asked Questions: Where Can I Find Detailed Demo- graphic, Period of Service, or Socioeconomic Data about Veterans and Non Veterans?” https://www.va .gov/vetdata/faqs.asp#q003. Vance, J. D. 2016. Hillbilly Elegy: A Memoir of a Family and Culture in Crisis. New York: Harper. Vann, Barry. 2007. “Irish Protestants and the Creation of the Bible Belt.” Journal of Transatlantic Studies 5 (1): 87–106. Weatherby, J. C. 2017. “It’s Time to Start Calling Evangelicals What They Are: The American Taliban.” Me- dium, February 23. https://medium.com/@jcweatherby_49412/its-time-to-start-calling-evangelicals -what-they-are-the-american-taliban-4a41731296e4#.cw5fu0qiz. Webb, Jim. 2004. Born Fighting: How the Scots-Irish Shaped America. New York: Broadway. Wong, David. 2016. “How Half of America Lost Its F**king Mind.” Cracked, October 12. http://www.cracked .com/blog/6-reasons-trumps-rise-that-no-one-talks-about/. Worthen, Molly. 2016. Apostles of Reason: The Crisis of Authority in American Evangelicalism. New York: Oxford University Press.Kathleen de la Peña McCook: distinguished university professor, School of Information, University of South Florida. McCook was the first in her family to finish high school. She is the author of In- troduction to Public Librarianship (2004, 2011, 2017). She is a member of ALA and the Progressive Librarians Guild. A life member of REFORMA, she received the Elizabeth Martinez Lifetime Achieve- ment Award in 2016. She is also a member of American Federation of Teachers Local 7463. She received the library science degree from the University of Chicago Graduate Library School in 1974. E-mail: kmccook@usf.edu.