THE RELATION OF SUBJECT INTERESTS TO ACTUAL READING T NHE normal situation in any community, so far as we have been able to learn, reveals a very wide discrepancy between what people read and what they prefer. Many different conditions determine how nearly a given reader reads what he wants. Hence a sensible plan of procedure is to find out what the relationship is between actual reading and desired reading; then to study each of the conditions that affect this relationship. The present paper undertakes to compare the subjects of most interest to particular groups of readers with the subjects upon which the same persons do most reading in newspapers, magazines, and books. Such comparisons suggest other condi- tions, in addition to subject interest, that largely determine the amount of satisfaction obtained from reading. The more clearly such conditions can be defined and evaluated, the more possible it becomes to satisfy the given readers. By investigations such as this we should eventually deter- mine what conditions may be so controlled as to increase the reader's satisfaction with what he actually reads. This is the common purpose of publishers and librarians. If it be assumed that the reading desired by a group is both authentic and im- portant, the investigation may also be significant for educators, political scientists, and students of social welfare. Hence the work herein reported should not be regarded as of merely tech- nical interest. It may be helpful at this point to mention some of the con- ditions that make for satisfaction in reading. Such conditions very largely determine to what extent a given reader reads what he most wants. Furthermore, such conditions will be found to range from those than can not usually be controlled, as for example, the particular subjects upon which the reader wishes information, to the conditions that can be controlled, 42
SUBJECT INTERESTS AND ACTUAL READING 43 as for example, the accessibility of a given book or article in wide demand. Perhaps the most important of the conditions making for sat- isfaction in reading are those imposed by the reader himself- his tastes, his habits, and his needs. These are, of course, partic- ularly difficult to control. It is thus necessary to find out what they are and conform to them as closely as possible. For this reason, it is essential to determine first what people want to read about, since a knowledge of the subjects discussed in con- temporary literature that adults most want to read about is the necessary point of departure in any attempt to supply accepta- ble reading. Other preferences of the reader--such as prefer- ences for certain authors, for a particular style, for treatments of a given length, and the like- must also be determined if the reader is to be satisfied as completely as possible. A second set of conditions is due to the nature of existing reading matter itself. Disappointment in reading results very frequently from the combination of an interesting subject and an uninteresting style. Recent studies of subject interest among readers have shown clearly that many of the subjects of most interest to certain groups are not represented in actual reading because congenial writing on the subjects is scarce. Readers of wide education who are interested in problems of child training, for example, are satisfied neither by the superficial scraps in newspaper columns nor by the technical treatises produced by psychological clinics. They want something in between. Again, readers of limited education who are interested in spe- cific problems of economics or science can seldom find such sub- jects authoritatively treated in language that is clear and in a style that is pleasing. The scope of treatment also has much to do with its readabil- ity. Magazine articles are too fragmentary for some readers in- terested in subjects that are treated almost exclusively in mag- azines, whereas books are too ponderous for other readers inter- ested in subjects that are almost exclusively treated in books. A third group of conditions affecting the accessibility of read- ing matter is perhaps most significant of all, since it determines
44 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY whether the reader gets what he wants, provided the reader knows what he wants and provided that such reading exists. The accessibility of desired reading matter depends upon sev- eral conditions. First, in logical order, it depends upon adver- tising. Unless the prospective reader learns of a given article or book he cannot, of course, take steps to secure it. The book itself is, to be sure, the best sort of advertising. The recom- mendations of friends, paid advertising, subject bibliographies, and other forms of advertisements are needed to bring the read- er in touch with more satisfactory reading than he encounters by mere chance. Other conditions affecting accessibility might be listed at considerable length, such as the cost of reading matter, the frequency of desired periodicals, the library resources of home, club, and community, the number and variety of bookstores, and the conditions that determine how easy it is for the reader to seek out his reading-such as time, occupation, and wealth. At the risk of giving the appearance of definiteness and final- ity to what is indefinite and tentative, the conditions affecting satisfaction in reading may be listed as follows: I. The reader's preferences, involving i. Desire to read on particular subjects 2. Tastes regarding style, authority, length, form, appearance, and other qualities of the reading matter 3. Pleasure derived from reading as compared with other activities II. The nature of existing literature, involving 4. The amount of writing upon preferred subjects S. The literary merit of literature on such subjects, "readability" 6. Authenticity, truthfulness, scholarship, or convincingness 7. The emphasis of other qualities affecting its appeal to different read- ers-e.g., length, form of publication, printing, appearance, etc. III. The availability of satisfying reading, involving 8. Amount and foym of advertising 9. The number and location of libraries and other sources from which reading matter may be borrowed io. Number and location of sources from which reading matter may be purchased i i. Cost of the reading desired
SUB7ECT INTERESTS AND ACTUAL READING 45 To list such conditions is enough to make clear the point of this introductory statement; namely, that what people would read if they could is not the same as what they actually read. This is true because all of the eleven conditions mentioned are seldom entirely satisfactory to the reader. Reading that is en- tirely satisfactory to a given reader is limited in amount, is not always known to exist, and is seldom within easy reach. Some fortunate individuals-either very wealthy persons of leisure or those within easy reach of good libraries-do perhaps read much and read just about what they want. Most of the literate popu- lation does not. The question then is "What, if anything, can be done about it?" How may one proceed to increase the satis- factions obtainable from reading? The answer we propose has three parts. First, we can sepa- rate the conditions that can not be directly controlled, such as the reader's desire to read on particular subjects, from the con- ditions that can be controlled to some extent, such as the appeal of the reading matter itself and its accessibility. Second, we can find out for each of several typical groups of readers what sort of reading is defined by the conditions that cannot be controlled. For example, the fact that the given group of readers is most eager to read on particular subjects would help to define the reading desired when we know what the preferred subjects are. The preference of the group for certain authors or for a certain style would further facilitate the selection of acceptable reading. Again, the scope of treatment, complexity of style, extent of illustration, and other qualities of the books preferred by each group can be determined to a degree that should approximate a useful definition of the read- ing matter that the group finds satisfactory, at least in respect to purely informational material. Third, we can modify certain other conditions to whatever extent is needed in order (a) to increase the supply of reading that meets the indicated demand and (b) to make it more ac- cessible. This assumes that the self-interest of publishers may be relied upon to produce articles and books upon the desired
46 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY topics and in the desired form when such desires are known for each group that the publishers aim to please. It assumes further that librarians and other distributors of reading matter will im- prove their methods of distribution when the conditions have been identified that now make desired reading inaccessible to certain groups. It is perhaps somewhat visionary to suggest that the program outlined in the foregoing paragraphs could ever, or should ever, be carried out in detail. What is practicable, however, is a pos- sibility rendered plausible by data presented in this report; namely, that three of the conditions mentioned are so much more influential than other conditions in their effects upon the satisfaction obtained from actual reading that the others may be disregarded for practical purposes. If so, the task of using the data would not be too difficult. These conditions, for the general reader, are probably subject interest, readability, and accessibility. All three may in time be sufficiently controlled to increase very considerably the amount of satisfactory literature available to various adult populations. That is to say, the material on the preferred sub- jects can be increased in amount, its method of treatment can be better adjusted to the given readers, and it can be more wide- ly advertised. Such measures would increase the readers' sat- isfaction, since the correspondence between the subjects of most interest and the subjects most read about becomes close when the actual reading is reduced to material which (i) includes the given subjects, (2) is attractively written, and (3) is easily ac- cessible. This fact supplies the motive for the research herein reported and constitutes whatever practical justification there may be for the study as a whole. PROCEDURE With so much by way of perspective, we may attack the cen- tral question-What is the relation of actual reading to subject interest? In other words, to what extent is the reading done by a typical group of adults concerned with subjects upon which the group expresses most desire to read? To answer this ques-
SUB7ECT INTERESTS AND AICTUAL READING 47 tion it is necessary, first, to discover what subjects are interest- ing and uninteresting as such; then, to determine how much material is actually read upon each subject; and, finally, to make the comparison. The three steps will be discussed in turn to explain the method of procedure. The section on "findings" presents the evidence. A. WHAT SUBJECTS ARE MOST INTERESTING? The desire of a given group of readers to know more about the subjects discussed in what they read has been said to con- stitute one of the more important conditions of satisfaction in reading. While this statement applies with greater force to non- fiction, it is also applicable to fiction. We have then to suggest methods by which to discover how much interest a given group of readers has in the subjects discussed in contemporary lit- erature. Because such methods have been described in detail else- where,I a very brief statement will be sufficient here. The pro- cedure consists (i) in selecting a sufficient number of individ- uals to represent the group being studied. This number is found to vary from 50 to I20 persons. (2) The individuals so selected are asked to rate a list of subjects which has been prepared by classifying the subjects discussed in American periodicals pub- lished during the past ten years. (3) From the ratings thus ob- tained it is possible to score the topics according to the interest of the group so that the relative interest in the subjects is in- dicated. (4) The scores so obtained are then checked for reliabil- ity, in order that the variation of relative group interest in the topics may be accurately known. When the variation is small, the scores are highly reliable. Because this procedure has been applied to nearly two hun- dred different groups, with successful checks for reliability in each case, it may be safely accepted for use in defining subject interests to be compared with the subjects upon which the members of a group actually read. I Douglas Waples and Ralph W. Tyler, What people want to read about (Chicago, I93').
48 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY B. ON WHAT SUBJECTS DO PEOPLE ACTUALLY READ? Previous methods.-The problem of finding out what people read has been attacked by many different methods and on the basis of many different assumptions. The methods of attack naturally vary with the nature and size of the reading popula- tion studied, the type of reading considered, and the time- elements involved. In general the purpose of most work in the field has been to determine what people want to read on the assumption that what people do read is what they want. Since the primary purpose of the present study is to examine the validity of this assumption, it is necessary to mention a few of the traditional methods of recording actual reading with brief comments on each. i. The most obvious method consists in collecting sales fig- ures and library circulation records. Sales figures are commonly used to show which newspapers and magazines are most widely read. Library circulation records are used to indicate which books are most popular. For example, the books scored each month in The Bookman are based upon relative circulation as reported by over a hundred libraries; those in the Publishers' weekly are based upon sales reported by one hundred selected bookshops. When used to determine what people actually read, the evi- dence obtained from sales figures and library records has severe limitations. The most serious weakness is that readers are riot differentiated.' The data do not show what people buy or bor- row the materials but merely the number of copies sold or vol- umes borrowed. Hence, it is not known what proportion of the population or community is represented nor how the readers of one type of material differ from readers of other types. The figures may apply to the reading of a very few people only and not represent the community as such. 2. Another type of evidence is obtained by having individ- uals list their favorite readings. This method is defective for the reason that it serves merely to indicate titles that the reader ' The single exception known to the writer is the work of Walter Hofmann of Leipzig who distributes circulation data according to age, economic status, and sex.
SUB7ECT INTERESTS AND ACTUAL READING 49 happens to remember having liked of those he happens to re- member having read. Chance enters so largely into such recol- lections, particularly when the effort to recall is limited to the very few minutes devoted to filling out a blank, that the results are both unreliable and incomplete. Since the responses are ob- tained directly from individuals, however, this method has the advantage of showing what items are read by persons of the same sex, age, occupation, educational level, or other classifica- tion. In this way it becomes possible to study the effect of these factors upon the selection of reading. The effect of sex, for example, may be studied by comparing what is read by men and women who are alike in respect to age, schooling, occupation, environment, and other conditions. 3. A third method widely used is to prepare in advance a list of titles upon which the reader is asked to check the titles he has read. The value of this method clearly depetds upon the completeness of the list and upon the accuracy with which the checking is done. How complete the list can be depends upon how narrow a field it attempts to cover. If the list, say, is confined to historical novels dealing with the American Rev- olutionary War, there will be many hundred titles to be checked of which no individual member of the group is likely to have read more than a very few. Hence the method imposes the very difficult task of compiling a complete list of titles; and the more nearly complete the list is, the more difficult it is to check. Again the accuracy with which the checking is done de- pends upon the ability of the group to identify the titles read, in some cases long since, and upon their honesty in expressing their recollections. Our controlled experiments have shown no reason to suspect the honesty of adults in reporting actual read- ing, but their ability to identify even the books they have read is highly variable, depending, of course, upon how much book- reading they do. Magazine stories and articles and press items can only be identified accurately just after they have been read. The complete check-list of titles is thus impracticable as a meth- od of obtaining a complete record of the reading done by a group in newspapers, magazines, and books.
50 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Since most of the difficulties noted are due to the extreme length of any list that approximates completeness, the attempt has often been made to reduce the list by means of samples. That is to say, historical novels on the Revolutionary War would be represented by one or two novels of this type that are as likely to be read as any that might be listed. This procedure, however, has been found to sacrifice validity to convenience. Experience with this method as applied to university students has demonstrated clearly that samples chosen arbitrarily do not represent the class. 4. A fourth method has certain advantages over the three already mentioned. This consists in having individuals, selected to represent any desired groups, record all their reading for a sufficient period of time to offset seasonal variations. Since the task of writing down the list of newspaper items read each day might take longer than to read them, various supplementary methods need to be used to cover newspaper reading. Of these, the most satisfactory is that developed by Gallup' of Iowa, which is to ask each individual reader to go over "yesterday's" paper and say what items were read and how carefully. Similar though less definite findings have been obtained by Nafziger2 of Wisconsin who prepared a check-list of regular press features which was mailed to subscribers with the request that they mark the features read daily. If some such provision is made for the peculiar difficulties of newspaper reading, the diary method of finding out what se- lected groups actually read is highly useful as applied to maga- zines and books. It has, however, two important limitations. One is that the individuals who can be persuaded to record their reading are necessarily those most interested in the prob- lem. They are accordingly likely to take their reading seriously. For this psychological reason, if for no other, they are likely to read more material, or what they consider to be a better x C. H. Gallup,"An Objective method for determining reader interest in the content of a newspaper" (unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Iowa, 1928). I Ralph 0. Nafziger, "A Reader-Interest survey of Madison, Wisconsin," 7ournal- ism quarterly, VII (I930), I28-4I.
SUB7ECT INTERESTS AND ACTUAL READING 5I quality of material, by virtue of the fact that they have agreed to record it. In other words, the method is of such a character as to defeat its own purpose of determining the normal reading habits of the individuals studied. Yet this limitation does not apply to all groups equally. The diary is probably most success- ful with groups of limited schooling who are induced to record what they read. The method is thus well suited to the industrial groups herein examined. A second weakness of the diary method is its difficulty of application. That the method is difficult is sufficiently attested by the fact that, so far as the writer is aware, it has never been applied with sufficient thoroughness to determine the actual reading of any typical group of adults in newspapers, maga- zines, and books, combined. The individual diary is an obvious method of collecting group data, of which the reliability and completeness can be determined statistically. Hence, the fact that it has not yet been used to determine the total reading of any single adult group for a given period of time can only be explained by the difficulty of persuading a sufficient number of persons to keep diaries with sufficient care. S. The last method to be mentioned is the most valid and the least practical. It consists in having an observer record what individuals read without their being aware that the record is being made. Experiments conducted by Tompkins with most of the meth- ods here mentioned have demonstrated the superiority of this "observer" method to each of the other four. Its practical dif- ficulties are obvious. Summary.-The discussion to this point has attempted to establish two important facts: first, that the conventional way of finding out what reading is preferred by typical readers is to determine what they actually read, which for reasons stated is different from what the same individuals would read if they could; and, second, that the methods previously used to deter- mine actual reading have serious weaknesses. No one of the five methods described can be considered effective when used alone to record the actual reading of a given group in all three
52 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY of the major types of publication-newspapers, magazines, and books. Furthermore, it is only when all types of reading are taken into account that the record is complete and it is only when groups are studied instead of individuals that satisfactory reliabilities can be obtained. Finally, the methods have never been applied in combination to any one group of readers so as to produce a complete picture of their actual reading even within a given time-limit. Procedure used in the present study.-It is now appropriate to outline, for comparison with the methods just described, the procedure we have used to record actual reading for which sta- tistical reliabilities have been determined.' As a result of experiments conducted by Miriam D. Tomp- kins with the five methods suggested in the foregoing para- graphs, it became evident that the "observer" method, while it is the most effective is also the most difficult to apply. This method was accordingly abandoned. Nor was any use made of sales figures and circulation data, for the reason that such data do not identify the readers. Each of the other three methods was used to some extent. a) Books. Adults having less than six grades of schooling are found to have short-lived memories of the books they have read. Hence, each member of the industrial groups studied was given a blank on which he was asked to write down the books, by author and title, that he had read during the previ- ous two weeks. This simple procedure proved entirely sat- isfactory as a means of securing an accurate record of the books read by the groups during the particular weeks covered. The significant fact in connection with the record of book-reading by the industrial groups, however, is that there were only I9 non-fiction titles read. While I86 fiction titles were reported as read by about I3I people, most of their reading was confined to magazines and newspapers. The check-list method was used to determine the reading by university students in non-fiction books upon current topics of I This procedure is presented in detail in the Appendix. Appendixes are omitted from this article but will appear in a subsequent monograph bearing the same title.
SUB7ECT INTERESTS AND ACTUAL READING 53 general interest published since I928. This method is described on page 47. b) Magazines. Facts concerning magazine reading were se- cured from the industrial groups by means of diaries. Form I 2, shown in the Appendix, was used by I3I individuals to record magazine reading each day over two periods of two weeks each. The items reported were examined and the non-fiction articles were selected for counting and classification. When the articles classified under a given topic were weighted according to the average length of the article in the given magazine, the number of articles read by the group was taken as an index of the amount of magazine reading on that topic. c) Newspapers. Newspaper reading by the same individuals was determined by a special form of check-list" prepared for each of the two days on which newspaper reading was tested. One check-list was composed of I76 questions, more than half of which represented items occurring in one or more of all the local papers published within twenty-four hours of the time the list was checked by the readers. The other questions were fictitious, and did not appear in any local paper published during the twenty-four-hour period. Each reader was asked simply to check each question that he remembered having read about in a local paper during the last twenty-four hours. The number of fictitious questions checked was very small, indicat- ing that the returns are highly valid. Returns were obtained from groups of men and of women factory workers on August 28, I930, and, with a new check- list, from the same groups on March 31, I931. The returns showing how many men and how many women checked each question were corrected to allow for the number of papers each one had read and for the relative space given to each item in each paper. The questions were then classified according to the same subject-headings that were used to classify the maga- zine articles and books. Hence it was easy to compare the amounts of reading upon each subject in each of the three sources. x Prepared with the assistance of Professor R. W. Tyler of Ohio State University, who acted as consultant on all statistical problems of the study.
54 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY d) Total reading. The result of combining the three types of data described was a score for each subject to indicate the rela- tive amount of reading done in books, magazines, and news- papers by the men and women factory workers, respectively, during the indicated periods of time. The subject-scores were then examined statistically to find the number of readers and the periods of time necessary to furnish a complete record of non-fiction reading which would not be affected by seasonal changes or by the addition of more members to the groups. If one assumes that differences between the amounts of read- ing done in the two periods of time are typical differences, it is possible to calculate how many similar samples of the reading must be taken to yield a reliable index of the reading done by these groups. By this means it is known that a reliable index of newspaper reading would be obtained by testing sixty factory workers of each sex on thirteen days in addition to the two days actually tested. A reliable index of magazine reading would be obtained by diaries covering eight weeks in addition to the four weeks actually covered. It was not possible to de- termine from the four weeks record of book-reading how long a time the record should cover to insure reliability, because too few non-fiction books were read to indicate central tendencies. C. SUBJECT INTEREST VERSUS ACTUAL READING The relationship between actual reading and the subjects of most interest was studied with reference to two populations, namely, the employees of a Chicago textile factory and the students of the University of Chicago. Four types of data were obtained from the factory workers, namely, ratings of subjects for reading interest, checks to show what newspaper items had been read, diaries to record magazine reading, and lists of books read during two periods of two weeks each. Two types of data were obtained from the college groups: ratings on subject in- terest and checks on a list of non-fiction books to show which had been read. Data on book-reading were obtained from col- lege students because returns from the factory workers on book- reading were inadequate.
SUB7ECT INTERESTS AND ACTUAL READING Ss Such data make it possible to compare the subjects of most interest to these groups with the subjects most and least read about in newspapers, magazines, and books-all three, or with the subjects read about in each type of publication separately. The comparisons also show how much material on the various subjects each type of publication contains. FINDINGS Almount of reading.-The relative amounts of reading on par- ticular subjects will be shown later in connection with the read- ers' interests in the subjects. At this point, Table I is presented to show the gross amounts of reading reported by each sex in each type of publication for the two periods studied. These figures agree closely with the reports of previous inves- tigators. The reader will note that about go per cent of the TABLE I AVERAGE NUMBER OF THOUSAND WORDS READ PER WEEK BY FACTORY WORKERS IN DIFFERENT SOURCES (August, 1930, and March, 1931) Source Men Percenta e of Women Percentage of Source Men ~~~Total WmnTotalI Non-fiction books 1930 ........... 5 .............. 6 .............. 1931 ........... 14 .... . (No non-fiction) . Both ........... I9 6 .4 6 2.9 Non-fiction maga- zine articles 1930 ........... 5 .............. 7 .............. I931 ........... 3 .............. 8 ............ Both ........... 8 2.7 I5 7 1 Newspapers I930 .......... 9 I .. ........ 24 ...... 1931 .1... . 178 .............. I65 ............. Both .......... 269 90.9 I89 90 Total reading 1930 0....... 1O .............. 37 .............. 1931 ....... 195 .1... 173 ............. Both ....... 296 100 210 100
56 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY total reading by these factory workers is confined to the daily press. The remaining io per cent is divided between magazine reading and book-reading. The men read more in books and the women more in magazines. In all sources combined, the men read more than the women. The table is important if only to show the necessity for study- ing reading in newspapers and magazines in any attempt to describe the reading of the industrial population. Reading studies, based on library records and other data restricted largely to books, may be wholly misleading. Reading versus interests.-The relation between the subject interests and the actual reading of the factory groups is most clearly and accurately conveyed by the coefficients of correlation contained in the first column of Table II. For the non-statisti- cal reader it may be remarked that the closer a correlation is to I.OO, the closer the correspondence of actual reading with read- ing interest. It will be noted that the coefficients in the table are with one exception either zero or nearly zero. This means that there is only a very slight tendency for the factory workers to read more on the subjects of most interest than on the subjects of TABLE II RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN SUBJECT INTERESTS AND ACTUAL READING, SHOWN BY COEFFICIENTS OF CORRELATION r PE. Factory women: Newspaper reading versus subject interest .003 .o62 Magazine reading versus subject interest.... .25I .058 Composite reading versus subject interest ........ .025 .062 Subject interest (August, 1930) versus subject in- terest (March, 193I). r=.80?.o22 . Factory men: Newspaper reading versus subject interest ....... . 13I .o6i Magazine reading versus subject interest ..049 .o62 Composite reading versus subject interest ....... . .136 .o6i Subject interest (August, 1930) versus subject in- terest (March, I93I). r=.8i ?.o2I
SUB7ECT INTERESTS AND ACTUAL READING 57 least interest. The exception is the correlation between maga- zine reading and subjects of interest to the factory women. It appears that women find more material on subjects of interest to them in the magazines they read than either women or men find in any other type of reading. Yet even in magazines the women's subject interests are expressed only to a very slight degree. Newspaper reading, space, and subject interest.-It has already been shown in Table I that newspapers constitute 9o per cent of the reading by these groups and in Table II that what is read about in newspapers has only a chance relationship to the subject of most interest (r=.003. for the women and .13I for the men). Yet the relationship between actual reading on dif- ferent subjects and space devoted to the subjects is marked. For men the correlation is .857 and for women .8oo. Evidently the men's reading is slightly more influenced by relative space than the women's. It is therefore important to know the rela- tion between the amount of space given to the various subjects and the relative appeal of the subjects to the given readers. This relationship, as one might expect, is low. The correlations between space and subject interest are, for men, .173; and for women, -.oi 8. The relative amount of space given to the subjects in which the factory workers had previously expressed their reading in- terests was determined by counting the column inches devoted to each subject in each of the morning and evening newspapers read by the group during the two days of the test. The re- sults of this count show that only four of the twenty-three most interesting subjects receive as much as fifty column inches in both issues of the newspapers examined. Another twelve of the twenty-three most interesting subjects received less than fifty column inches. Another four received less than five column inches. The remaining three did not appear at all. Yet the four most interesting subjects that receive fifty inches or more are all among the subjects which the men read most about in the newspapers. Only one subject of major interest to women received fifty inches, but this one is among the sub-
58 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY jects also most read about by women. Thus, the most interesting subjects are all among the subjects most read about when they re- ceive considerable space. How much reading is done on uninteresting subjects that receive large amounts of space? Of the 117 subjects on which interest ratings were obtained, only 20 received as much as fifty inches, or enough space in the two issues of the six papers to be conspicuous. Of the 20 subjects, i8 occur among the 23 subjects on which most newspaper reading is done by men and I occur among the 23 subjects on which women read most. Of the i8 subjects most read about by men, 8 have less than average interest and I0 have more than average interest. Of the iS subjects most read about by women, 9 have less than average interest and only 6 have more than average interest. It thus appears that both men and women read on any sub- ject that receives large space. This is consistent with what any- one knows from his personal experience in reading newspapers; because they are unavoidable one reads or skims the items that receive large amounts of space with small regard to the subjects treated. Tables III and IV have some bearing on each of the three assumptions made to explain the failure of the groups to select from the newspapers the subjects of major interest. First, the small proportion of the subjects with a high interest rating that receive enough space to be conspicuous suggests the compara- tive scarcity of newspaper material on the subjects. Second, the tendency of both sexes to read on subjects that are featured by considerable space indicates the strong appeal of the inter- esting write-up, which few of the subjects of major interest re- ceived in the papers read. Third, the fact that the readers did not take the considerable trouble to secure other papers in which the preferred subjects receive more space reflects the ob- vious fact that a paper in the hand is worth several in the library; that is, the accessible material-whether satisfactory or not-has far more chance of being read than material at a distance. But what is the most significant fact for our present purpose is that the subjects preferred by either sex are the subjects on which
SUB7ECT INTERESTS AND ACTUAfL READING 59 TABLE III TWENTY-THREE ToPics ON WHICH MOST NEWSPAPER READING Is DONE BY MEN: PLACED IN FIRST TENTH FOR AMOUNT OF READING PLACED IN SECOND TENTH FOR AMOUNT OF READING Topic tinterest Topic tlnterest No. Rating No. Rating * 3. Captains of industry ....... 4 *IO. Educators and religious lead- * 4. Successful business men and ers . 7 women ................... 4 I4. Criticism of government poli- * 9. Actors and actresses ...... . 8 cies ....................... 6 * I6. Party politics ............. 8 *33. Labor and the labor market .... 2 * 17. Problems of state and city *42. Chemical inventions .5 government ............... 4 44. Electrical inventions : ...... 3 * 36. Marketing and sales methods IO 50. Developments in farming 7 * 64. Animals .................. 6 73. Organizations, social, political, * 82. Criminals ................. 3 and fraternal ............... IO * 83. Crimes ................... 2 *75. Problems of city life ......... 6 * 84. Courts and the administra- *86. Prohibition violations and en- tion of justice ............. 6 forcement ................... I *IO9. Sports .................... I *87. Public morals .............. 6 II2. Getting along with relatives. 8 *92. Elementary and secondary ed- ucaton. 5 * These topics received 50 or more column inches in the newspapers read. t Rating I is high and so is low. $ Topics in italics are those which were placed in the first or second tenth both in actual reading and in reading interest. TABLE IV TWENTY-THREE ToPics ON WHICH MOST NEWSPAPER READING Is DONE BY WOMENt PLACED IN FIRST TENTH FOR AMOUNT OF READING PLACED IN SECOND TENTH FOR AMOUNT OF READING Topic tInterest Topic fInterest No. Rating No. Rating * 3. Captains of industry ....... 7 I. Typical personalities ..... . 8 * 4. Successful business men and * Io. Educators and religious lead- women ................... 4 ers ....................... 8 * 9. Actors and actresses ...... . 6 * I6. Party politics .............. 9 * I7. Problems of state and city 4I . Social values of science. IO government ............... 7 44. Electrical inventions . ........7.. 7 * 36. Marketing and sales methods IO 49. Developments in aviation. . . 6 * 64. Animals .................. 4 So. Developments in farming. .. 8 * 82. Criminals ................. 6 * 75. Problems of city life ........ 5 * 83. Crimes ................... 3 * 86. Prohibition violations and * 84. Courts and the administra- enforcement. 5 tion of justice ............. 6 I07. Movies .......... . 3 * 87. Public morals ............. 6 113. Parents' relationships with *IO9. Sports .................... 2 children . .................. I 1I2. Getting along with relatives 4 * These topics received 50 column inches or more in the newspapers read. f Rating I is high and Io is low. I Topics in italics are those which were placed in the first or second tenth both in actual reading and in reading interest.
6o THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY most reading is done when they receive considerable space. This fact supports the assumption stated on page 46 that the rela- tionship between subject interest and actual reading becomes closer to the degree that material on the preferred subjects is made as accessible as material on other subjects. Newspaper versus magazine reading.-There is practically no relation between the amount of newspaper reading and the amount of magazine reading on the same subjects. The pre- dicted coefficients for complete samples are .084 for the men and .055 for the women. Of the 23 topics read about most in the newspapers, only 3 are among the 23 subjects most read about in magazines by men. Seven such subjects occur in the women's reading. For men, of the complete list of II7 topics, 27 appear in the record of magazine reading which do not also appear in the newspaper reading. Twenty appear in the newspaper read- ing but not in the magazine reading. Sixteen subjects appeared in neither newspapers nor magazines. The discrepancy is much the same for women readers. Magazine reading and subject interest.-The relation between the subjects of most interest and the subjects most read about in magazines is also slight, though it is closer for the women than for the men. As shown in Table II, the correlation between magazine read- ing and subject interest is for men .049 and for women .25I. This means that, for the men, only 4 subjects of sufficient inter- est to rank in the upper fifth of the list of subjects were also in the upper fifth for actual reading. For the women, Io subjects were in the highest fifth for both reading and interest. Thus there are many interesting subjects on which little magazine reading is done and many uninteresting subjects that each sex does read about in magazines. Tables V and VI show the relative interests of each sex group in the subjects on which most non-fiction is read in magazines. It will be noted that, of the 23 subjects most read about in magazines by each sex, Ii subjects are below average interest for the men whereas only 7 are below for the women. In the case of magazine reading by these groups, it is not
SUBfECT INTERESTS AND ACTUAL READING 6i TABLE V TWENTY-THREE ToPIcs ON WHICH MOST MAGAZINE READING Is DONE BY MEN PLACED IN FIRST TENTH FOR AMOUNT OF READING PLACED IN SECOND TENTH FOE AYoUNT OF READING Topic tlnterest Topic tlnterest No. Rating No. Rating S. Statesmen and politicians.... 7 7. Artists and musicians .. 9 II. Royalty and social leaders . io I3. Sportsmen . ................. 2 I2. Military and naval heroes.... 4 I6. Party politics . ............... 8 22. Foreign governments and poli- 32. The money market and invest- tics ................... 9 ments . ................. 8 28. Industrial conditions-pros- 41. Social values of science.. 8 perity ................... 4 43. Mechanical inventions .. 4 49. Developments in aviation ... . I 54. Medical progress and public 56. Personal hygiene ............ I health . ..................... 3 58. Nature of human nature and 68. Modern civilization. . 5 intelligence ................ 6 IO7. Movies . .......v 3 64. Animals ................... 6 I09. Sports ...................... I 66. Marine life ................. 8 I I I. Hobbies and the use of leisure . S 78. Interesting places abroad .... 5 IOI. Writers and writing ......... 0O *Topics in italics are those which were placed in the first or second tenth both in actual reading and reading interest. t Rating x is high and io ia low. TABLE VI TWENTY-THREE Topics ON WHICH MOST MAGAZINE READING Is DONE BY WOMEN' PLACED IN FIRST TENTH FOR AmouNTr OF READING PLACED IN SECOND TENTH FOR AmouNrr OF READILNC Topic tInterest To ic tlnterest No. Rating No. Rating 4. Successful business men and 3. Captains of industry. 7 women ................... 4 9. Actors and actresses .......... 6 43. Mechanical inventions ........ 8 47. Facts about mankind ......... 5 49. Developments in aviation.. ... 6 57. Personal beauty .............. I SS. Prevention and treatment of S8. Nature of human nature and specific ills . . I intelligence ............... 3 56. Personal hygiene . . I 59. Personal qualities analyzed..... I 62. The successful life ............ 2 65. Birds and insects ............ 7 64. Animals ...... 4 69. Comments on modern America 6 72. Modern styles, manners, and 88. Marriage and divorce. 2 customs .................... 3 109. SpOrtS ...... 2 78. Interesting places abroad .. ... 2 113. Parents' relationships with chil- 93. College and higher education . 7 dren ..I II5. The home garden ....... ..... 3 II7. Household management andfood preparation .................. I 0 Topica in italics are those which were placed in the first or second tenth both in actual reading and reading interest. t Rating I is high and io is low.
62 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY possible to show how many of the preferred subjects are among the subjects most read about when the factor of accessibility is controlled, as was shown for newspaper reading. The diffi- culty lies in the fact that accessibility depends very little on rel- ative space given to different subjects in particular magazines. It depends very largely upon what magazines are available as compared with magazines not available, and we do not know which magazines are not available. All we know is that the magazines actually read by the given readers contain interest- ing articles on relatively few of the subjects preferred by those of either sex. Some evidence on this point may be found by comparing the magazine titles of the following list with the preferred subjects shown in Tables VII and VIII. In mak- ing the comparison it is important to note that while several well-edited and comprehensive magazines appear on the list, they are read by very few persons. The magazines read by as many as IO of the 131 individuals reporting include non-fiction articles on a very limited range of subjects. The inference seems safe that more magazine reading on the preferred subjects would result if magazines containing articles on the other pre- ferred subjects were more accessible. However, the data are not conclusive on this point; hence the case for accessibility of ma- terial on preferred subjects as a factor of reading satisfaction must rest on the newspaper data previously shown. LIST OF MAGAZINES* American boy ................. I Colliers ....................... 6 American girl . ........ I Columbia. 6 Americanforest ......... i Comfort and home .i xmerican Legion ......... 4 Cosmopolitan .................. 2 American magazine ......... I3 Delineator ....................i iI American mercury ......... 4 Extension ..................... I Athletic journal . ........ I Field and stream ............... i Atlantic monthly ......... i Forum ...................... i Baseball . ........ I Geographic .................... 5 Better homes and gardens . .. 4 Good housekeeping ............. 7 Bookman ......... 2 Harper's ...................... I Boys' life ......... 2 Hygea ....................... 3 Christian Science sentinel ..... . 2 Ladies' home journal ........... 7 0 The figures indicate the number of persons reading each magazine during the four weeks' period.
SUB 7ECT INTERESTS AND ACTUAL READING 63 LIST OF MAGAZINES-Continued Liberty ........... I8 Popular mechanics ............. 6 Literary digest ........... 4 Popular science ................ 3 McCall's ............ Review of reviews .............. I Modern mechanics ........... 2 Saturday evening post ........... 8 Motion picture ........... 4 Science and invention ........... 2 Nature magazine ........... 2 Screen play .................. I Pathfinder . .......... I Scribner's .................. I Physical culture ............ Survey graphic ................ I Pictorial review ........... 7 Woman's home companion .. ..... 4 Photoplay ........... 3 World's work .................. I Book reading and subject interest.-Books of non-fiction are relatively inaccessible to the readers studied. What books they read are for the most part purchased from news stands or bor- rowed from friends. It is thus to be expected that of the 83 books reported by the men, 7I of which were identified, 47 were fiction, i 5 general non-fiction, and 9 technical. The women read 17i books. Of the 146 which were identified, I39 were fiction, 5 non-fiction, and 2 technical. Of the fiction read by men and women combined, it was pos- sible to identify the authors of i86 titles. Of these, 55 were sensational stories of the news stand variety that would scarcely appear on public-library shelves. Six were juvenile fiction. Classics and superior fiction accounted for 35 more titles. The remaining go titles represented the usual run of popular novels. The ig non-fiction titles reported are as follows (for both sexes, they represent interesting and uninteresting subjects in about equal proportions): Birney, T. W., Childhood Carrington, H., Psychology for beginners Coyner, D. H., Lost trappers Douglas, B., Science of baseball Eddy, M. B., Science and health Farwell, J. V., Corner stones of character Geister, E., Ice breakers Irving, W., Life of Washington Jeans, J., The Mysterious universe Joseph, M., Short story writingfor profit Lippmann, W., A Preface to morals Lord, C. B., Young man and journalism
64 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Mencken, H. L., Notes on democracy Mencken, H. L., Treatise on the gods Murray, G. P., The Fountain of youth Papini, G., The Life of Christ Stern, R. B., Clubs, making and management Villard, 0. G., Prophets, true andfalse Wakeling, A., Fix it yourself The titles were read by eight men and four women over a period of four weeks. Because only these Ig non-fiction titles were reported by the entire sex groups combined, it would be absurd to attempt a correlation with subjects of interest. Neither would it be profitable to continue the record of book- reading by the factory population for a much longer time. Even if book-reading were recorded for an entire year, the non- fiction titles constitute so small a proportion of the total read- ing that they have a negligible effect upon the ranking of sub- jects according to the amount of actual reading. The reasons which may explain the failure of these readers to find satisfaction in books are again consistent with the assump- tions made at the outset, namely, not all the preferred subjects are discussed in books available, and some books are harder to obtain than others. Yet no data to check either one of these assumptions could be obtained for the industrial groups, since the amount of book-reading was so small. The one assumption on which no evidence has yet been supplied is that which con- cerns the "readability" of material. Hence the following evi- dence obtained from college students" is introduced to show the closer correspondence between book-reading and subject in- terest that results when attractively written books are available on the preferred subjects. The data consist of comparisons between the subjects of most interest to students and the subjects on which the same stu- dents read most books. The-subjects of most interest were de- termined by the same check-list that was returned by the fac- tory workers. The subjects on which the students read most books were determined by having them check a list of I24 non- x Here used by courtesy of Leon Carnovsky.
SUB7ECT INTERESTS AND ACTUAL READING 65 fiction titles. The titles are those which were (a) published (with very few exceptions) between I928 and I930, (b) exten- sively advertised in general magazines, (c) widely reviewed as shown in the Book review digest, and (d) directly pertinent to one or more subjects of the interest check-list. The number 124 resulted from the decision to represent by two titles each the subjects on which non-fiction books of the foregoing description were available. Such books were available on 62 subjects, hence I24 titles composed the check-list. In checking the list each student indicated how much of each title had been read, as "none at all," "less than half," "half but not all," or "the whole book." Thus by adding the values rep- resenting different amounts of reading in the two titles relating to each subject by each member of the group, a score for actual reading by the group was obtained for each subject. Such scores were then readily correlated with the interest scores on the same subjects. Returns on the check-list of titles were obtained from twenty odd groups of students on the same university campus. The groups were formed with reference to sex, college year, field of specialization for senior college and graduate students, and other differences such as intelligence, parents' schooling, race, place of residence, and scholastic standing. An entirely typical group, for the present illustration, is a group composed of Fresh- men girls. This group is properly sampled by the 7I individuals making returns, since, when the 7I scores for subject interest are divided at random and the two halves are correlated, the coefficient is .90+.oi2. The reliability coefficient of the scores on actual reading, similarly obtained, is .758 ? .048. When the subject scores of the Freshmen girls were compared with the scores for actual reading, the result was much the same as for the factory workers; there was no more relationship than might result from mere chance. In fact, for the Freshmen girls, there is a slight tendency to do more reading. in non-fiction books on uninteresting subjects than on interesting subjects, since the coefficient of correlation is negative (r= - .117). To see what effect on this relationship might be due to differ-
66 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY ences in the "readability" of the books, the list of I24 titles was reduced by omitting those that are written in a style that is technical, or difficult for any other reason. The number of titles thus omitted was 74, reducing the list to 50 titles attractively written and reducing the number of subjects from 62 to 34. When the interest scores on the 34 subjects were correlated with the reading scores based on the attractively written books, the coefficient rose from - - 117 to + .334. The important influence of "readability" upon the relation of subject interest and actual reading is thus apparent. When the books are equally readable, more reading is done on the subjects of most interest. While the relationship between subject interest and actual reading in non-fiction books is positive and significant when dif- ferences in "readability" are minimized, a coefficient of .334 is still a long way from perfect correspondence. That is to say, the difference between this coefficient and the highest one our reliabilities would permit (about .8o) shows clearly the presence of other variable factors in the situation. One such factor that can most safely be assumed on the basis of data presented is accessibility. This we have seen to be high- ly influential in its effects upon reading in newspapers and mag- azines. We do not know the relative accessibility to the given students of the books on the non-fiction check-list. If we did, we could determine the correspondence between subject inter- est and book-reading when the readers' selection is confined to books that are both readable and accessible. Data are being collected to this end which should certainly establish a closer correspondence between subject interest and actual reading than .334, the relationship which exists when the books actually read differ widely in their accessibility to the group as a whole. The foregoing evidence on student reading in non-fiction books thus supports the assumptions made at the outset to ex- plain the consistency of data on book-reading and the data on reading in newspapers and magazines as related to subject in- terest. The relationship is scant because attractively written material on the preferred subjects is not readily accessible to the readers.
SUB7ECT INTERESTS AND ACTUAL READING 67 CONCLUSION Tables VII and VIII show the 23 subjects ranked in the high- est fifth of the complete list for interest to the men and women TABLE VII READING ON SUBJECTS OF MOST INTEREST TO FACTORY MEN SUBJECTS IN UPPER HALF OF THE LIST WHEN RANKED FOR ACTUAL READING SUBJECTS IN UPPER FIFTH OF THE LIST _ _ FOR INTEREST Neers- Magea- Books Corm- Total papers zines posite T oic No0. 6. Scientists ......................... ....... ....... ....... I3. Sportsmen ......................... ....... ....... ....... I8. Laws and legislation ............... ....... ....... ....... ....... ....... I9. Citizenship ....................... ....... ....... 2I. International attitudes ............. ....... ....... ....... ....... ....... 24. Preparedness ..................... .............. ....... ....... ....... 29. Prices and costs of living ........... . ...... .............. ....... ....... 33. Labor and the labor market................. * * 45. Science and warfare ............... .............. ....... ....... ....... 49. Developments in aviation ........... ....... SS. Prevention and treatment of specific ills............................... ....... ....... ....... ....... ....... 56. Personal hygiene .................. ....... 59. Personal qualities analyzed ......... ..................... .............. 79. Interesting places in the United States ....... * ....... 8o. Interesting peoples.... ....... ....... 83. Detection and prevention of crime ... * * .... * ...* 86. Prohibition violations and enforce- ment ............................*. ....... * * 93. College and higher education ........ ....... ....... ....... 95. Adult education ................... ....... ....... 1og. Sports ............................ ....... IIO. Travel and outdoor life ............. ... ... ....... .......... ... .... .. I I3. Parents' relationships with children. * .............. II4. Successful marriage ............... ....... ....... ....... ....... ....... Total number of subjects (23) .7 IO 2 10 I4 factory workers, together with the subjects ranked above the median in respect to the amount of reading reported on each in the three types of publication. The "composite" column shows which of the 23 subjects fall in the half of the I I7 sub- jects most read about when the scores for all three types of reading are combined and the subjects are reranked according-
68 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY ly. The "total" column shows what the subjects are that ap- pear above the median in any one of the three reading records. TABLE VIII READING ON SUBJECTS OF MOST INTEREST TO FACTORY WOMEN SUBJECTS IN UPPER HALF OF iTHE LzsT WHEN RANKED FoR ACTUAL READING SUBJECTS IN UPPER FIrrr OF TUE LIrr FOR INTEREST News- Maga- Boos Com- Total papers zines Bok posite Toa Topic No. 23. The next war ..................... ................................... 29. Prices and costs of living ........... .............. ..................... 54. Public health and medical progress... ....... 55. Prevention and treatment of specific ils............................... ....... ....... S6. Personal hygiene ......................... 57. Personal beauty ................... ..... 59. Personal qualities analyzed ......... ....... * ....... 6o. Getting along with other people. ....... * ....... * 62. The successful life ........................ ....... 78. Interesting places abroad ........... ....... ....... 79. Interesting places in the United States ....... . ...... ....... ....... ....... 8o. Interesting peoples ............................... ....... ....... ....... 88. Comments on marriage and divorce. * * .... * * go. Attitudes-men versus women ...... . ...... ..................... ....... 95. Adult education ................... .............. ....... ....... ....... 97. Religion and the world today . .............. IOO. The use and abuse of reading ....... . ............. .............. ....... IO9. Sports ...... . . . ....... I IO. Travel and outdoor life ............. ....... ....... .............. ....... iII. Hobbies and the use of leisure ....... ....... ....... ... I I3. Parents' relationships with children.. ...... I I4. Successful marriage ............... . ...... ....... ....... ....... ....... 117. Household management and food preparation ..... ....... ...._. Total number of subjects (23) .4 14 I I I 14 It will be noted that of the 23 subjects of most interest to the men, 9 subjects (indicated by blanks in the "total" column to the right) are not read about to any considerable extent in either newspapers, magazines, or books. As the following list of such subjects makes plain, they are all subjects upon which substan-
SUB7ECT INTERESTS AND ACTUAL READING 69 tial reading might do much to improve the social adjustment and to widen the social perspective of the readers concerned: laws and legislation, international attitudes, preparedness, prices and costs of living, science and warfare, prevention and treatment of specific ills, personal qualities analyzed, travel and outdoor life, and successful marriage. Similarly for the women, the 9 preferred subjects on which little or no reading is done are: the next war, prices and costs of living, interesting places in the United States, interesting peoples, attitudes-men versus women, adult education, the use and abuse of reading, travel and outdoor life, and successful marriage. Taken as a whole, the contents of these tables support the general finding that no significantly positive relationship exists between the subjects of most interest and the subjects on which the industrial groups do most reading. The interpretations sup- plied in this paper, however, go beyond this fact to conditions that help to explain it. They suggest very plainly what every librarian knows, namely, (I) that accessibility, whether repre- sented by space in the given newspapers, or selection of maga- zines, or availability of books, is perhaps the most important single influence upon actual reading, except for readers in highly specialized fields who will take any amount of trouble to obtain an important reference; (2) that "readability," as analyzed on page 43, is the next important influence, and (3) that accessibil- ity and readability in combination virtually determine what the general reader reads. What every librarian does not know, and what has probably not been demonstrated before in equally objective terms, is that so small a proportion of the "readable" printed matter available to the American citizen is concerned with the particu- lar questions upon which he most wants to read. It is altogether probable that this condition applies to the half of the total adult population that has been estimated to read little but news- papers. If so, the publisher, librarian, book dealer, or teacher
70 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY who brings interesting and trustworthy reading on the desired subjects within easy reach of the multitude will deserve well of his country. The possibilities of this achievement obviously depend upon such further studies as may furnish group stand- ards for "readability" and "accessibility" that the publisher and librarian may put to practical use. DOUGLAS WAPLES GRADUATE LIBRARY SCHOOL UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO