THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Volume 69 OCTOBER 1999 Number 4 RHIZOMORPHIC READING: THE EMERGENCE OF A NEW AESTHETIC IN LITERATURE FOR YOUTH Kathleen Burnett' and Eliza T. Dresang2 A new aesthetic in children's literature emerges through the application of Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari's six metaphoric principles of the rhi- zome. This approach to appreciation of children's literature supports the principles of Deleuze and Guattari used to describe human communica- tion and employed as a metaphor for the ideal or rhizome book: connec- tion, heterogeneity, multiplicity, asignifying rupture, cartography, and decalcomania. The associated "rhizomorphic reading" presupposes an ac- tive, sense-making reader who understands the significance of establishing connections, appreciating heterogeneity, affirming multiplicity, and validat- ing and reincorporating rupture. After establishing characteristics of the aes- thetics associated with two other book forms-the mirror aesthetic with the root-book, and the aesthetic of refabrication with the radicle-system book- we focus on discussion of the new hypertextual aesthetic associated with the rhizome book. Examples of this new aesthetic drawn from contemporary young people's literature follow the theoretical explanations, including rele- vant hypertext theorists, of each rhizomorphic principle. 1. Kathleen Burnett, associate dean and associate professor, School of Information Studies, Florida State University, 101 Louis Shores Building, Tallahassee, Florida 32306-2100; Tele- phone 850-644-8124; Fax 850-644-9763; E-mail burnett@lis.fsu.edu. 2. Eliza T. Dresang, associate professor, School of Information Studies, Florida State Univer- sity, 101 Louis Shores Building, Tallahassee, Florida 32306-2100; Telephone 850-644-5877; Fax 850-644-9763; E-mail dresang@lis.fsu.edu. [Library Quarterly, vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 421-445] ? 1999 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-2519/ 1999/6904-0001$02.00 421
422 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Introduction3 In A Thousand Plateaus (1987) Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari4 pro- posed the use of the metaphor of the rhizome for understanding the current merging of print and electronic communication.5 Their history of communication is delineated in terms of three types of books, all currently in use: the root-book (earliest), the radicle-system book (sec- ond), and the rhizome (most recent). Examples of the proposed new aesthetic to which the principles of the rhizome are applied appear both in handheld book form and in various digital formats and in both reflect the hypertextual nature of the digital world. In this article, we have defined "literature" as referring to writing or illustration or other graphic representation demonstrating excellence of form or style and expressing ideas of widespread or long-term interest. Therefore, litera- ture, as defined, is independent of medium. The Root-Book Deleuze and Guatarri's root-book "imitates the world, as art imitates nature: by procedures specific to it that accomplish what nature cannot 3. In this article, the terms youth, young people, and children are used interchangeably to de- scribe the readers of children's literature, referring to preadolescents and adolescents through the end of high school. 4. The discussion of Deleuze and Guattari's work [1] in this article is limited to the application of the introductory chapter of A Thousand Plateaus (1987) -particularly to the metaphor of the rhizome developed in this chapter-and to the analysis of contemporary literature for young people. We are aware that the use of such a small portion of Deleuze and Guat- tari's work out of context may raise issues that are not addressed in this article, especially issues of politics and power. We are also aware that the use of Deleuze and Guattari's principles of the rhizome as a theoretical framework may be taken as an acritical adoption of the work as a whole of these French theorists. This situation is not the case. The use of the rhizome metaphor as a theoretical framework allows the authors to examine the contemporary situation through a contemporary lens and is more akin to the techniques of literary criticism than those of social science. The rhizome is adopted here as an intu- itively obvious metaphor for contemporary life as evidenced in publishing for children. 5. The application of this metaphor to the discussion of hypertext technology, literature, and design was first noted by Kathleen Burnett [2, 3] and subsequently by Stuart Moulthrop [4], both prior to the emergence of the World Wide Web in 1994. By the time an earlier version of this article was presented at a conference entitled "Defining Print Culture for Youth: Children and Reading since 1876" in Madison, Wisconsin (May 1997), the applica- tion of Deleuze and Guattari's metaphor to the description and analysis of the World Wide Web was widely accepted. This article extends the application of the metaphor to the under- standing of recent phenomena in print as well as electronic publishing for children and young adults. Eliza Dresang has described this aesthetic as part of her critical approach to children's literature known as "radical change" in her recent book Radical Change: Books for Youth in a Digital Age [5]. There she relates the aesthetic to the interactivity, connectivity,
RHIZOMORPHIC READING 423 or can no longer do" [ 1, p. 5]. Historically, the root-book emerged dur- ing the Renaissance and reflects the mirror aesthetic associated with that period's art and literature. The aesthetic of the root-book is often associ- ated with handpress production, but its expression is by no means limited to that technology, appearing in literature created using photographic, offset, and even computer-based production techniques. The techniques most often associated with the production of the root-book are those that predominated prior to the development of the pasteup technique (that Deleuze and Guattari refer to as assemblage) [1, p. 4]. The history of the root-book is one of linear production. In its earliest form, the writing of the root-book was synonymous with its publication. Today, the production of the root-book is still characterized as a linear process consisting of five steps: (1) manuscript written, (2) manuscript submitted and edited, (3) manuscript composed in type, (4) type sheets proofread and executed, and (5) publication disseminated. In its earliest manifestations (and still today in certain fine printing and vanity publishing circles), the production of the root-book is characterized by oneness and stability. As the production process has become more fragmented (through the intervention of editors, publish- ers, designers, and printers who are not the author), the root-book has maintained its mirror aesthetic. Even in its more recent manifestations, the root-book strives to be an exact replica of the author's words, a repre- sentation or signification of an individual's thoughts. The Radicle-System Book According to Deleuze and Guattari, the radicle-system book differs from the root-book in that "the principal root has aborted, or its tip has been destroyed; an immediate, indefinite multiplicity of second- ary roots grafts onto it and undergoes a flourishing development" [1, p. 5]. Historically, the radicle-system book emerged concurrently with the avant-garde art movements such as cubism, Dada, de Stijl, and sur- realism. The assemblage techniques common to the radicle-system book and these art movements are often associated with photography and photo-offset production, but as with the root-book, its expression is not limited to that technology. Examples of the radicle-system book predate the development of the offset press by more than a century; further examples of the continuing viability of the aesthetic of refabri- and access evident in contemporary society and associated with the emergence of the digital environment.
424 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY cation associated with this book type can be found in some books and some CD-ROM productions of the last few years. The production process of the radicle-system book is less emphati- cally sequential than that of the root-book, the organizing principle being collage or assemblage. This principle allows for alteration and reorganization at almost every stage of the production process. It in- cludes at least two additional steps: the first, the mock-up or layout stage, normally falls between the second and third root-book steps; the second, the pasteup stage, falls between the third and fourth steps in the production of the root-book. Although representation is an essen- tial element in the aesthetic of refabrication generated by the pasteup technique, it is often obscured. Photography, a technology frequently associated with representation and the mirror aesthetic, is employed in the production of the radicle-system book to ends that appear to be in direct opposition to representation. Here it is most often em- ployed to reorganize the disparate elements of the radicle-system book into a new assemblage or refabrication. The Rhizome Book The third book type, the rhizome, is most often associated with and best supported by the technologies of electronically mediated ex- change. However, examples of the influence of the new aesthetic of this book type can be found in literature produced using letterpress, offset, and any number of other production technologies. Deleuze and Guattari describe the rhizome: "A system of this kind could be called a rhizome. A rhizome as a subterranean stem is abso- lutely different from roots and radicles. Bulbs and tubers are rhizomes. Plants with roots or radicles may be rhizomorphic in other respects altogether.... Burrows are too, in all their functions of shelter, supply, movement, evasion, and breakout. The rhizome itself assumes very di- verse forms, from ramified surface extension in all directions to concre- tion into bulbs and tubers.... The rhizome includes the best and the worst: potato and couchgrass, or the weed" [1, pp. 6-7]. The rhizome book is a metaphor. Rhizomes themselves are organic forms that proliferate, like crabgrass or kudzu, beyond our control to determine and shape them. Telecommunications systems exhibit rhi- zomorphic characteristics, as do computer networks, especially in their growth and proliferation.6 Books may also be rhizomorphic in their 6. Research conducted by the Ovum market research company has predicted that the number of people with Internet access worldwide will quadruple by 2005. In a report tided "In- ternet Market Forecasts: Global Internet Growth 1998-2005," Ovum forecasts 206 million
RHIZOMORPHIC READING 425 form, format, or content, as well as in their production. As in each of the earlier book types, the rhizome has an associated aesthetic, this time one that we suggest reflects the hypertextual nature of the digital environment. This hypertext aesthetic is more complex and requires an in-depth exploration from the perspective of contemporaneous analysis. The Rhizome Book and Literature for Youth For decades literature for youth has had a generally predictable, straightforward plot structure and format. Numerous examples in re- cent children's literature that depart from this time-honored pattern are interesting but are difficult both to understand and to explain. When taken as individual literary works, they may disturb some critics. Others may attribute them to individual creativity, as has been the case for the less prevalent departures from the norm in the past. Still others may not yet have realized how substantial or significant this rupture with tradition has become or why the current environment nurtures it. The nature and quantity of this new children's literature that breaks traditional linear rules of presentation in unpredictable and challeng- ing ways make it a fertile test bed for Deleuze and Guattari's hypertext aesthetic. In her book titled Radical Change: Booksfor Youth in a Digital Age [51, Eliza Dresang designates the manifestations of this aesthetic that reflect the interactivity, connectivity, and access of the digital world as chang- ing forms and formats, changing perspectives, and changing focus in literature for youth. The changing forms and formats bring graphics in new forms and formats, words and pictures reaching new levels of synergy, nonlinear organization and format, nonsequential organiza- tion and format, multiple layers of meaning, and interactive formats. The changing perspectives incorporate multiple perspectives-visual and verbal images, previously unheard voices, and youth who speak for themselves. The changing focus rests in subjects previously forbidden, settings previously overlooked, characters previously unseen, new types of communities, and unresolved endings. To introduce this aesthetic, Dresang uses an award-winning picture book, Peter Sis' Stany Messenger [8]. The arrangement of the contents of this book to convey meaning reflects the flexibility and the synergy of print and graphics in the digital world. The sparse but compelling dial-up connections and 17.5 million permanent connections in the year 2005 [6]. For longitudinal data on Internet growth, see Jim Pitkow (1997) [7].
426 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY text tells the story that appears in easy-to-read type at the bottom of the page, often in the lower left-hand corner. The "real" words of Galileo and his contemporaries appear in a much more difficult to decipher font configured in a way that suggests their message-for ex- ample, in the shape of an eye or a telescope-on a spacious, white background. This visual presentation signals that the medieval schol- ars' words contain concepts that require more thought from the reader. The text appears around and superimposed on the bold pic- tures that cover most of the double page spreads. Graphic symbols within the pictures and throughout the pages become an integral part of the whole story. The hypertextual nature of the book allows readers to chose a simple straightforward, linear experience, reading only the text in modern type or to become an interactive participant in creating a more complex, multilayered story through weaving together the non- linear components. A thorough reading of this picture book demands a high level of intellectual involvement. The child reader of this book is introduced to ideas, such as the dogma of the church and the rejec- tion of truth, that were previously considered too sophisticated for inclusion in books for youth. The application of Deleuze and Guattari's rhizome metaphor to children's literature provides a theoretical frame- work for scholarly analysis of this emerging hypertextual aesthetic and many of its manifestations. Deleuze and Guattari delineate six principles of the rhizome that provide a vivid metaphor for this new hypertextual aesthetic in litera- ture for youth: (1) connection, (2) heterogeneity, (3) multiplicity, (4) asignifying rupture, (5) cartography, and (6) decalcomania [1, pp. 7- 9]. These principles are explicated in the following sections. Each section begins with a discussion of the principle itself, followed by dis- cussion of its application to recent literature for youth, drawing on specific examples. The examples cited are not intended to be exhaus- tive. We have chosen two books judged best books for young adults by the American Library Association, MAUS I and MAUS II [9, 10], their CD-ROM companion [11], and several interrelated web sites [12-15] to provide consistency of reference in the illustration of several of the rhizomorphic principles. For a more extensive listing of recent litera- ture for youth exemplifying this aesthetic, see Dresang's book [5] and the accompanying web site [16]. Principles of Connection and Heterogeneity Theory The principles of connection and heterogeneity state that "any point of a rhizome can be connected to any other and must be" [1, p. 7].
RHIZOMORPHIC READING 427 In this sense a rhizome is different from a tree structure, where the order is fixed by a hierarchy of relationships. Cognitive jumps, which must be mechanically forced in a hierarchy, are intuitively sustained in a rhizome. A rhizome is the only structure that can effectively sustain connections between different media without giving hegemony to lan- guage. This principle may explain in part the dramatic increase in picture-book production during the 1990s.7 As books take on more characteristics of the rhizome, adult readers become more accustomed to rhizomorphic reading. The appearance of a genre of picture books for young adults and adults [17, p. xi] is probably less symptomatic of the rising illiteracy that alarmists often warn of than it is of increasing comfort with rhizomorphic reading. For many youth born between the late 1970s and 1990, the cognitive jump to rhizomorphic reading was accomplished through nontradi- tional, nonprint avenues such as the introduction of the computer to the home,8 exposure to video games, recent television programming, and participation in electronically mediated communication, espe- cially computer mediated interactive forums such as chat rooms and multiuser dimensions (MUDs), multiuser object-oriented dimensions (MOOs), and multiuser shared hallucinations (MUSHs). Children born since the late 1990s have benefited from the migration of this new aesthetic into the print world. As adults, they will be less likely than their parents-and even than their older brothers and sisters- to associate literature with any one medium. Linear schools and work- places that formerly forced youth to straighten out their thinking as they matured are themselves changed by the digital environment and over time are less likely to force into a predetermined mold the new thinking patterns of youth growing up in a digital world. The move to a nonlinear digital world with billions of microchips at work each day is too pervasive to be considered a passing fad. The dramatic increase in books reflecting this aesthetic in the children's literature selected for award or distinction in the 1990s is documented in Dresang's com- parison of books receiving these kudos in 1990 and 1998 [5, p. 318]. This analysis does not, however, assume that all or even most reading will fit this aesthetic. Just as the root-book and the radicle-system book 7. In 1997, children under age 18 numbered 69.5 million, or 26 percent of the population, down from a peak of 36 percent at the end of the baby boom (<http://www.childstats.gov/ acl998/highlite.htm>). Nonetheless, the number of picture books has dramatically in- creased, suggesting a reason beyond population growth. 8. In 1996, approximately 19 percent of households with children were online. It is projected that in the year 2000 almost 50 percent of households with children will be online [18, p. 23]. Federal legislation providing assistance to school and public libraries with online access is projected to assume 100 percent hookup by the year 2000.
428 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY continue to exist alongside the rhizomorphic book in Deleuze and Gu- attari's metaphorical treatise, more traditional approaches to reading will coexist with rhizomorphic reading. Over the past decade a number of scholars have pointed out the convergence of hypertext technology and the notion of connection, notable among them: Stuart Moulthrop [19-21],J. David Bolter [22], Kathleen Burnett [2, 3], Kathleen Burnett and E. G. McKinley [23], George P. Landow [24, 25], Janet H. Murray [26], and Michael Joyce [27]. As Moulthrop stated in 1990, "Seen from the viewpoint of textual theory, hypertext systems appear as the practical implementation of a conceptual movement that rejects authoritarian, 'logocentric' (i.e., truth-affirming) hierarchies of language, whose modes of operation are linear and deductive, and seeks instead systems of discourse that admit a plurality of meanings where the operative modes are hypothe- sis and interpretive play" [19, p. 1]. While the characteristics of rhizomorphic authoring and reading are most easily demonstrated in the context of hypertext, the new aesthetic is not technologically bound. In Hypertext: The Convergence of Contempo- raiy Critical Theo?y and Technology [24], Landow cites numerous authors and literary critics whose work in the print medium demonstrates "proto-hypertextual" characteristics. In a paper delivered at the Inter- national Association of Word and Image Studies Third International Congress in Ottawa, Canada (August 1993), Burnett [28] pointed out the implicit hierarchy in Landow's account, citing several women wnt- ers whose work should be acknowledged as "proto-hypertextual." Bur- nett and McKinley [29], in a paper delivered at the 1994 Annual Con- ference of the International Communication Association, extended this work to include women writers of color. Heterogeneous connec- tion is a central theme in the latter two papers that demonstrates the importance of this notion not only to understanding what rhizo- morphic authoring and reading are but also in constructing a history that nurtures and encourages through inclusion and connection rather than exclusion and hierarchy. To date, children's literature has not been discussed in this context other than in Dresang's work [5, 30, 31 ]. Nonetheless, recent children's publishing includes many fine examples of connection and heterogeneity. Examples As readers become more accustomed to rhizomorphic reading, new genres emerge across all media. The Diary Project [32] is an interactive, public space where youth are invited to tell their own stories. It was inspired by the book version of Zlata Filipovic's diary kept during the early days of the breakup of the former Yugoslavia [33]. The entries
RHIZOMORPHIC READING 429 in this rhizomorphic domain of self-expression give rise to multilogues, which in turn help children and young adults to find communities of common interest and concern across geographic boundaries. The multilogic, communitarian, interactive assertion of the reader-as-au- thor and reader-as-participant is a key component in the new aesthetic in children's literature. Such multilogic domains, both print and elec- tronic, enable the connectivity of what Deleuze and Guattari refer to as semiotic chains: "A rhizome ceaselessly establishes connections be- tween semiotic chains, organizations of power, and circumstances rela- tive to the arts, sciences, and social struggles. A semiotic chain is like a tuber agglomerating very diverse acts, not only linguistic, but also perceptive, mimetic, gestural, and cognitive; there is no language in itself, nor are there any linguistic universals, only a throng of dialects, patois, slangs, and specialized languages" [1, p. 7]. Palm of My Heart: Poetry by African-American Children [34] is a multi- authored and, therefore, heterogeneous collection. It is also heteroge- neous in that it addresses an audience that until recently has been virtu- ally disenfranchised by children's publishing. In 1997, only 6 percent of all publishing for children was by or about people of color. This percentage reflects "encouraging signs of growth in the first half of this decade" in the area of multicultural literature for children and young adults [35, p. 1]. The heterogeneity of authorship in Palm of My Heart fosters identifi- cation for the rhizomorphic child reader. Any child reader will find a child author in this volume whose color, age, or expression strikes a chord. Having found that chord, the rhizomorphic child reader looks to establish meaningful connections to other poems and poets. While poetry has always been an experimental form, few poets writing for youth in the past have experimented with the type of heterogeneity and connectivity that appears here and increasingly in other contemporary poetry for youth. The short poems by children can be read as heteroge- neous texts, with subtexts brought out by the typography, as in the first poem by Pre-Chezz Rudolph: Black stride? It's: the arch of my back the curve of my spine the way I stand and my stance is pride. [34, unpaged] A thin horizontal rule separates this poem from the one that follows it by T. J. Moore, Jr.:
430 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Bhack culture is a secret shared in the night. A whispered thought, the wonders of the mind, a swirling of belief. [34, unpaged] Typographic variation is used as a device to establish meaningful con- nections between the heterogeneous texts of The Palm of My Heart [34]. Bold type is used to create new poems of connection comprised of words by the heterogeneous authors. For example, the bold type in the two poems cited above form a poem of connection: Black pride. Black culture is the wonders of the mind. This connection runs throughout the slender volume, creating a single interconnected, multiauthored poem ending with the line "Black spirit is energetic" [34, unpaged]. Jon Scieszka and Lane Smith [36] also use typographic variation in The Stinky Cheese Man and OtherFairly Stupid Tales, but to different ends. Here the words grow, shrink, change color and direction; words be- come visual elements that do things, as does the "Table of Contents," which, like a stage curtain, takes a disastrous fall: The Table of Contents was. It fell and squashed everybody. The End. [36, unpaged] In The Stinky Cheese Man, typographic variation emphasizes heterogene- ity. While the pictures have a consistent style, the words mix things up. Black and White [37], by David Macaulay, is a particularly interesting example of the principles of connection and heterogeneity in simulta- neous interaction. Connections are drawn through the use of color and form between the four panels representing four apparently separate stories. A black and white dog, Holstein cows, newspaper, stone path- ways, a bandit, and a chorus (in which the bandit and cow udders myste- riously appear) integrate the stories of a boy's first trip alone on a train, an unusual day in the life of a family, waiting for a train, and utter (udder) chaos. And yet, the stories can also be read as separate, hetero- geneous narratives without any recognition of the carefully orches- trated interconnection. MOOs also occur across space, connecting individuals otherwise geographically dispersed. Connection, in addition to interest in the story, is among the primary motivations for getting involved in a role- playing MOO. Participants note that at certain stages in their lives where face-to-face interactions are difficult and often too intense to
RHIZOMORPHIC READING 431 deal with, MOOs provide a shielded safe house for interaction and communication. These environments are more psychologically evocative than tradi- tional face-to-face role-playing games, as Sherry Turkle has noted, "be- cause they further blur the line between the game and real life, usually referred to in cyberspace as RL. In face-to-face role-playing games, one steps in and out of a character. MUDs [and MOOs], in contrast, offer a character or characters that may become parallel identities" [38, p. 186; author addition]. Connection and heterogeneity also operate at the individual level. The ability to try out multiple parallel identities helps youth to experi- ment with connecting their apparently heterogeneous selves. In Life on the Screen [38], Turkle examines this in some depth. She concludes that contrary to popular fears, experimentation of this type is a largely healthy phenomenon. Principle of Multiplicity Theory "A multiplicity has neither subject nor object, only determinations, magnitudes, and dimensions that cannot increase in number without the multiplicity changing in nature.... An assemblage is precisely this increase in the dimensions of a multiplicity that necessarily changes in nature as it expands its connections. There are no points or positions in a rhizome, much as those found in a structure, tree or root. There are only lines" [1, p. 8]. Landow and others have noted the hypertextual nature of prehyper- text literary projects. As mentioned above, Landow establishes a rather conspicuously white-male canon as he debunks the traditional "linear" canon for a hypertextual one. Multiplicity, as a principle of the new aesthetic of rhizomorphic reading, recognizes a multiplicity of relation- ships beyond the canonical or hierarchical. As connectivity blurs the boundary between author and reader, multiplicity problematizes the hierarchy that is canonical. In recent children's publishing, the tradi- tional canon has come under scrutiny through a variety of lenses, in- cluding the focus on multicultural literature mentioned previously. In addition, recent children's literature is scrutinizing long-held notions of the preferences and abilities of child readers. Recent literature for youth demonstrates levels of complexity in form, format, plot, and structure once thought to be too complicated for a young audience. Topics previously considered to be taboo, such as sex, sexual orienta- tion, violence, child abuse, and others, are emerging as themes in
432 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY books for young as well as older children. These taboo topics are also part of the new aesthetic of rhizomorphic reading. Because every point in the rhizome is connected to every other point [1], all topics that may touch a child's life-however complex or difficult to under- stand-belong to the rhizome of children's literature. Examples The use of a comic book format to tell the story of a Holocaust survivor in MA4US illustrates the principle of multiplicity. Deleuze and Guattari describe the ideal rhizome book as follows: "The ideal for a book would be to lay everything out on a plane of exteriority ... on a single page, the same sheet: lived events, historical determinations, concepts, indi- viduals, groups, social formation" [1, p. 9]. The comic book format is superficially monolithic-panels marching across the page in three regular rows, much like an army in formation. In his discussion included on the CD-ROM version of MAUS, Spiegelman highlights the use of a variety of techniques to com- municate connection and multiplicity. Comparing the panels illustrat- ing a trip to a sanitarium that occurs early in the novel [9, p. 32] and the gates to Auschwitz [9, p. 157], Spiegelman points to the way layout emphasizes both the connection between these two experiences and their disparity. The gates to Auschwitz page [9, p. 157] is designed to subliminally remind the reader of something seen earlier in the book [9, p. 32]; the panel structure is in many ways reminiscent of the earlier page when Vladek is going with Anja to a sanitarium in Czechoslovakia. That page has a train, followed by windows, looking in at the passen- gers, followed by a large panel of them looking out at the swastika they are seeing for the first time. The size of the panel emphasizes the im- portance of this image. The later page [9, p. 157], in which the couple takes another journey, has a parallel structure starting with a truck, instead of a train, but also an open panel that is not enclosed by panel borders. There are no windows in the truck, but each of the two panels serves itself as a window, inviting the reader to enter inside the vehicle. A large panel follows each. The panel on page 157 is the largest panel in the book. Too big to be contained within the book, this panel repre- sents the entrance to Auschwitz. In the earlier page [9, p. 32], the swas- tika is the central motif at the center of the panel. That swastika is seen near the center of the panel on the side of the truck [9, p. 157] and with the words "Arbeit macht Frei" (work makes you free) above it [11, audio file, "Defining the Page"]. A closer look at the panels in the book version reveals many "irregu- larities"-open panels containing present commentary on the past, close-ups contained in cameo-like circles, and panels set at a disjunc-
RHIZOMORPHIC READING 433 tive angle, reflecting the despair pictured. In many ways multiplicity is more honestly employed in the print than in the CD-ROM version, where the overcoding clearly organizes the presentation although the hypertextual technology employed more readily supports multiplicity than does the handheld book. An example of multiplicity can be found in the MOOs based on Anne McCaffrey's fantasies set on the planet of Pern. While motivation for joining a MOO is often connection and the identification of a ho- mogenous community within the larger heterogeneity of the Internet, multiplicity is perhaps the most clearly evident operating principle of the MOO environment itself. Dragonsfire MOO [13] is an environment established by common agreement among its participants based on their multiple interpretations of McCaffrey's Pern novels. Respect for others' perspectives is a requirement for participation. Participants of one MOO often participate in others. For example, for those interested in role-playing in Pern, no fewer than four MOOs and fourteen MUSHs exist, with many of the participants in one playing a different role in another. The list of dragons maintained at the Drag- onsfire web site includes information about dragons hatched at Drag- onsfire MOO that have flown off to other MOOs, such as Harper's Tale [14], Star Stones [15], and VirtuaPern [12]. Each MOO builds its own textual environment, taking off from different points in McCaffrey's series. Each of these environments represents a group interpretation, a multiplicity of perspectives interwoven, of the Pern novels. This inter- pretation is constantly growing and changing, molded by its partici- pants who themselves, grow, change, and move from one to the other and back again. To the extent that overcoding exists in the MOO environment, it does so by consent of the participants, and it operates as a kind of contract between the author of the works on which the MOO is based and the readers who take an active role in extending the story. In this example of rhizomorphic reading, readers become active agents in constructing shared spaces built solely of words. In addition, MOOs are programmed environments that require programmers to build and shape the environment. MOO programming capability is typically controlled through the specification of user types. The user type with the most far-reaching programming capability is usually denoted as "wizard." One or more wizards may participate in a given MOO. Desig- nations of user types for lower levels of programming capability vary from MOO to MOO, with the assignment of such capability resting ultimately with the wizards, though most MOOs operate on a consen- sual basis in the assignment of programming capability. Wizards also have the capability of "spamming" participants who do not conform
434 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY to the MOO guidelines. Spamming blocks the participant's access to the MOO, effectively disabling participation. Most MOOs have fairly strict rules regarding the use of spamming; many require consensus at some level of participation for spamming to be executed. An example of the principle of multiplicity operating in a handheld book without significant overcoding is Walk Two Moons by Sharon Creech [39]. Creech layers multiple journeys and tales in this story of a girl's coming to terms with her mother's death. Walk Two Moons be- gins with the introduction of a story told by the girl, Salamanca: "The reason that Phoebe's story reminds me of that plaster wall and the hid- den fireplace is that beneath Phoebe's story was another one. Mine" [39, p. 274]. This layering of story behind a story occurs throughout Walk Two Moons. Sal tells Peebee's story to her grandparents as together they retrace the route of her mother's fataljourney. Her grandparents' com- ments on the telling and their reactions to the tale are incorporated by Sal into her own understanding and acceptance of what happened to her mother and what that means for her. "On the tombstone, be- neath her name and the dates of her birth and death, was an engraving of a maple tree, and it was only then, when I saw the stone and her name-Chanhassen "Sugar" Pickford Hiddle-and the engraving of the tree, that I knew, by myself and for myself, that she was not coming back" [39, p. 268]. Walk Two Moons emphasizes Salamanca's struggle to find her own meaning in the layers and interpretations of stories. It is particularly remarkable that it does so without moralizing or passing judgment on the decisions made by the characters whose lives are con- tained in these stories. Principle of Asignifying Rupture Theoty Children's literature critic Perry Nodelman uses the term vaniation to explain a phenomenon of literary change within sameness in a manner that complements the asignifying rupture principle of Deleuze and Gu- attari. Nodelman observes, "So variation most clearly represents the process by which the past claims the present, the old the new, the adult the child. But merely because the varying continues, there is the impli- cation that the claiming always fails-for if it succeeded, why the need to try to do it yet again?" [40, p. 10]. Deleuze and Guattari explain it in this way: "A rhizome may be bro- ken, shattered at a given spot, but it will start up again on one of its old lines, or on new lines.... Every rhizome contains lines of segmentarity
RHIZOMORPHIC READING 435 according to which it is stratified, territorialized, organized, signified, attributed, etc., as well as lines of deterritorialization down which it constantly flees. There is rupture in the rhizome whenever segmentary lines explode into a line of flight, but the line of flight is part of the rhizome" [1, p. 9)]. The principle of asignifying rupture operates in a variety of contexts, affecting content, form, and format, as well as blurring the traditional relationship between author and reader. An incidence of asignifying rupture requires rupture, a line of flight, and incorporation of both the rupture itself and the line of flight into the organic whole of the rhizome. It is tempting to state that the tradi- tional narrative structure (the line of flight)-setting the stage, intro- ducing the problem (possibly a rupture), working through the proW lem, resolving the problem, and "they all lived happily ever after"- operationalizes the principle of asignifying rupture. However, this sum- marization is too simple and not what Deleuze and Guattari intended by this principle. Often in traditional narrative structures the reso- lution of the problem is accomplished through one of two vehicles: (1) the problem is revealed as a misinterpretation of an innocent situa- tion, thereby rendering it insignificant; or (2) the character or situation giving rise to the problem is rendered impotent (or just plain disap- pears), thereby erasing its significance. In either case, the happy end- ing produces the risk of dismissing the problem, the rupture, and the line of flight. This is particularly true in moral tales and stories that are intended to instruct the reader or provide support and direction in resolving the conflicts of everyday life. The happy ending does not necessarily always undercut the continued flight; in some cases, it is incidental to the ruptures that will last with the reader long after leav- ing the book. In a rhizome book, the rupture and the line of flight maintain or even gain in importance following the resolution (if any). Examples Several books for youth illustrate the principle of asignifying rupture: MAUS is a biographical tale of rupture and flight framed within an- other; The Middle Passage [41] is a powerful pictorial rendering of the horror of the rupture, captivity, which resolves itself into more than a century of slavery; and the theme of Walk Two Moons is the need for survivors to acknowledge and work through the ultimate rupture- death. In each case, problem, a rupture, and the line of flight retain their significance following the resolution that signals the end of the book. The principle of asignifying rupture also manifests in form and for- mat. The publication of the same material in multiple media or the migration of content, theme, or subject matter from one medium to
436 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY another are instances of asignifying rupture. This occurrence has some- times been furthered through a disjunction between content and me- dium or format. Alternative media present the reader with multiple lines of flight to be traced and reassembled into the organic whole of the reader's rhizome. Disjunction between content and format or medium may result in reader discomfiture, making the reader care, compelling the rhizomorphic reader to imagine new and personal lines of flight. In her analysis of classic children's literature, such as The Secret Garden [42], that has passed into the public domain [43, 44], Margaret Mackey concludes, "Children may well think of The Secret Garden as a collection of different images, or as a kind of palimpsest, an overlay of images common to several separate versions. A discussion that over- looks the possibility of response involving a kind of mental collective of stories ... is a discussion, which ignores the realities of the current state of children's literature" [44, p. 20]. She goes on to say that we need to engage in "some genuine efforts at re-imagining the story, with it particular powers and constraints of plot and imagery" [44, p. 21 ]. In other words, we need to acknowledge new, personal lines of flight without abandoning the old. Recently, the personal and sometimes private imaginings of the rhi- zomorphic reader have found extensions into the public realm of shared electronic spaces where the initial work of the author may pro- vide nothing more than a foundation for building a shared vision. This shared vision may or may not include the author. In this instance of the operation of the principle of asignifying rupture, discomfiture is more likely to fall on the side of the author or intellectual property owner than with the rhizomorphic readers. For the rhizomorphic reader, the extension of text into virtual reality, of personal expression into shared vision, reflects the purpose of creating stories in the first place. The comic book format of MAUS is itself a form of asignifying rup- ture. There is no humor in the dark tale of flight that Spiegelman por- trays in words and pictures, so why a comic book? The comic book naturally forms a rhizome with the world precisely because it is a form we do not take seriously. Deleuze and Guattari refer to an "aparallel transition of the book and the world" [1, p. 11] . Dressed in the "aparal- lel" of the comic book, MAAUS is all the more effective. It creates rup- ture where rupture is not expected. In the prologue to MAUS I, Spiegelman presents a slice-of-life in Rego Park, New York, 1958-a time in the interstices between the nar- ration and narrative of AL4US. The "slice of life" approach is indica- tive of asignifying rupture and is one that he incorporates throughout the graphic novel, both in his narrator's unreflective presentation of
RHIZOMORPHIC READING 437 the present and his more reflective rendering of the past. This ap- proach affords the reader the opportunity to experience the tale through a kaleidoscopic multiplicity of lenses. His father, a Polish Jew represented as a mouse in an environment peopled by pigs (Poles) and cats (Germans), traces his own path through the landscape that is the Holocaust, and establishes a new home for himself and his family in Rego Park. But as the prologue makes clear, life in Rego Park is no paradise. Half the way around the world, bullies still tease young boys. Yet, in this exclusive "mouse" community one thing has changed- the bullies are no longer easily identified by their species, for the bullies Artie calls his friends are neither pigs nor cats, but mice just like him. The message is as dark and complex as the black-and-white panels of the cartoon. Life is not simple in MA US, nor is it black and white. "There is," according to Deleuze and Guattari, "no difference be- tween what a book talks about and how it is made" [ 1, p. 4]. In a further amplification of the "slice-of-life" or asignifying rupture technique, Spiegelman includes video segments in the CD-ROM version of the interviews with his real-life father that provided the material for MAUS [11]. Deleuze and Guattari describe the notion of "a book" as some- thing like MA US: "A book has neither object nor subject; it is made of variously formed matters, and very different dates and speeds. To attribute the book to a subject is to overlook this working of matters, and the exteriority of their relations.... In a book, as in all things, there are lines of articulation or segmentarity, strata and territories; but also lines of flight, movements of deterritorialization and destrati- fication. Comparative rates of flow on these lines produce phenomena of relative slowness and viscosity, or, on the contrary, of acceleration and rupture. All this, lines and measurable speeds, constitutes an assem- blage" [1, pp. 3-4; emphasis in original]. In mid-1998, Arlene Sardine [45], a picture book by Chris Raschka, brought the concept of asignifying rupture to books for the very young. Arlene was a little fish called a brisling who lived in a fjord with ten hundred thousand friends. Arlene was pretty happy except that she wanted to be a sardine-and that is exactly what she achieves. To ac- complish her dream, Arlene dies half way through the book. The plot conventions of books for young children do not allow the heroine to die at all, much less before the book comes to an end. To provide even more tension between the expected and the delivered, Raschka uses vivid, happy colors and lyrical words all the while that Arlene is being chopped and canned. This author/artist took his own line of flight, while maintaining the journey/quest foundation so common in books for youth. MOOs began as a kind of asignifying rupture. The socially con-
438 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY structed boundary between print on paper and electronic text was capi- talized on by early participants in the MOO culture (primarily teenag- ers), who felt unconstrained by publishing conventions in constructing these role-playing games on their favorite writers' themes. MOOs form a rhizome with books. Each contributes to the other. The lines of flight taken by the MOOs move the stories in directions unexplored in the books. This movement is also an operationalization of the principle of asignifying rupture. McCaffrey continues to publish her books as though she were unaware of these alternate tellings, and the participants in MOOs proceed as though they were not aware of the publication of All the Weyrs of Pern [46]. Rhizomorphic readers, such as these MOO participants, are authors in their own rights. MOOs are essentially writing spaces within which readers collaborate to create new worlds along lines of flight constructed from a shared interpreta- tion of an author's work. The principle of asignifying rupture is also operationalized cultur- ally. One fifteen-year-old aficionado of MOOs often participated in two Pern MOOs simultaneously while keeping a third window open to a MOO based on RobertJordan's Wheel of Time series. When asked how he stayed in character and remembered where he was at any given moment, he seemed puzzled. "It's just like reading four books at a time," he said.9 For the rhizomorphic reader, the establishment of si- multaneous lines of flight and construction of new meaning through multilayered interpretation is as natural a way to "read" as the isolated reading of a book in direct page order was for the prerhizomorphic reader. Rhizomorphic readers construct meaning through synthesis from multiple, simultaneously experienced sources. Often these mean- ings are created interactively and shared spontaneously, without the intervention of adults, either in the form of supervision or through the mechanisms of publication. Principles of Cartography and Decalcomania Theory "What distinguishes the map from the tracing is that it is entirely oriented toward an experimentation in contact with the real. The map does not reproduce an unconscious closed in on itself; it constructs the uncon- scious.... It is itself a part of the rhizome. The map is open and connect- able in all of its dimensions; it is detachable, reversible, and susceptible 9. The fifteen-year-old boy in this anecdote is the son of one of the authors of this article. He prefers to remain anonymous.
RHIZOMORPHIC READING 439 to constant modification" [ 1, p. 12]. What makes it possible for the rhizo- morphic reader to synthesize input from multiple sources simulta- neously, through multiple media, in a shared context? Each rhizomorphic reader's interpretation of a text is as individually valid as any other reader's individual interpretation. New interpreta- tions can be grafted onto the old, providing fresh ways of interacting with the text and sharing meaning constructed in the process of this interaction. The map is the reader's orientation within the context of relationships to all texts and all readers of these texts, as well as the more limited context of the single text in isolation from other texts. A rhizomorphic reader's map is closely related to geographic maps. It shows the path of the reader through the surrounding territory, but always from the point-of-view of the reader. It is as though the map were perpetually shifting as the traveler moved from one quadrant to the next. Some of that territory is charted-it is well mapped out in terms that the reader understands and connected to familiar territory or nodes-and some is uncharted, either because it consists of unlinked nodes that exist in the text much as an undiscovered island might exist in the sea, disconnected from the lines of transfer and communica- tion linking other land areas, or as an unidentified planet in space with the potential for discovery, and even exploration, butasyetjusta glimmer in the sky-or because it is linked in ways that are meaningless to the reader in his present context. The reader can zoom in on zones of inter- est,jump to new territories using previously established links, or by estab- lishing new links of his own, retrace an earlier path or create new islands or nodes and transportation routes or links to connect them to his previ- ous path or the islands or nodes charted by others. The rhizome operates by variation, expansion, conquest, capture, and offshoots. Unlike the graphic arts, drawing, or photography, unlike tracings, the rhizome pertains to a map that must be produced, con- structed, a map that is always detachable, connectable, reversible, modi- fiable, and has multiple entryways and exits and its own lines of flight. It is tracings that must be put on the map, not the opposite. In contrast to centered (even polycentric) systems with hierarchical modes of com- munication and preestablished paths, the rhizome is an a-centered, nonhierarchical, nonsignifying system without a military general and without an organizing memory of central automaton, defined solely by a circulation of states [1, p. 21]. The rhizome is as individual as the individual in contact with it. It is that individual's perception, that individual's map, that individual's understanding. It is also, and at the same time, a completely different something-another individual's perception, another individual's map, another individual's understanding. It provides no structure for
440 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY common understanding.'0 It is a state of being, reflective always of the present, a plateau in a region made up entirely of plateaus-"a contin- uous, self-vibrating region of intensities whose development avoids any orientation toward a culmination point or external end" [1, p. 22]. Examples Through much of the telling of MAUS, Vladek, the father character, rides a stationery bicycle, peddling incessantly and getting nowhere. Vladek's tale is one of crisscrossing territory, often without direction or purpose. Maps of the territory and sketches of bunkers overlay the frames in the handheld version of AL4US. Additional maps, sketches, and diagrams are available to the readers of the CD-ROM version. In both the handheld and CD-ROM versions, these maps fall into the category that Deleuze and Guattari refer to as "tracings." They show possible lines of flight but are separated from the territory. Vladek and Anja, the mother character in MA US, walk in the direction of Sos- nowiec along a swastika-shaped path. "But where to go?" the caption reads in part. If the world consists only of a swastika tracing, there is no choice. Tracings are placed on the map when the same scene is replayed from different perspectives. In Voices in the Park [47], Anthony Browne employs four voices to tell and retell the story of a trip to the park. While the mother (a typical Browne ape turned human) sees a "rough- looking child" from which to protect her son, her son thinks this "child" a fascinating creature. Form and content merge as Browne employs a different style type for each voice, a type that exemplifies the personality of the speaker. The son's type is light colored and tenta- tive. The rough child's is casual and friendly. The mother's is large and demanding. Contrasting colors, forms, and perspectives interpret and reinterpret an event, which integrates to become a map to the "thou- sand plateaus" of understanding. Black and White is a map, not a tracing. Deleuze and Guattari talk about the rhizome in terms of "mak[ing] a map, not a tracing.... What distinguishes the map from the tracing is that it is entirely ori- ented toward an experimentation in contact with the real" [1, p. 12]. 10. As one reviewer of this article pointed out, there is the potential for tyranny in this posi- tion, but this assertion makes the statement no less true. Previously, authors and publish- ers of children's literature kept such difficult material and concepts from children with the motive of protecting their innocence. In recent years, authors and publishers have been more willing to present the child reader with a less expurgated version of the terri- tory. Eliza Dresang [5] sees this situation as an expression of faith in the child reader to develop his or her own map, that is, to make sense of the territory if it is honestly pre- sented. If it is not, how can the child make sense of it all?
RHIZOMORPHIC READING 441 Interestingly, McCaulay's warning to the reader on the title page is not specific about the number of stories the book appears to contain. The frames operate as windows or plateaus-flat, horizontal representa- tions of three-dimensional reality. They are a visual representation of what Deleuze and Guattari describe as the process of writing of A Thnousand Plateaus: "We are writing this book as a rhizome. It is com- posed of plateaus.... Each plateau can be read starting anywhere and can be related to any other plateau" [1, p. 22]. Tracing the frames of Black and White as individual plateaus, it would seem that there are four stories. However, the reader is also given the option to follow the thief out of the prison window on the title page, down the tied sheets over the second page, and into the watering hole on the fourth page. The line of flight of the thief is given an additional dimension (shadowing elevates the tied sheets from the plateau of the page) and acts as a "tracing." "The tracing should always be put back on the map," emphasizes Deleuze and Guattari [1, p. 13; emphasis in origi- nal]. The tracing does not reproduce the map but, instead, provides another means of reading it. The tracing of the thief does not stop in the water hole. Two openings later, this tracing shifts from the stories to the right of the gutter to those on the left. Now the thief appears on the television in the lower left frame. It has shifted from one plateau to another. And, while the children in the frame where the thief now makes his appearance are clearly looking off to the right and re- sponding to their parents' unexpected appearance, the dog (white with a black patch across his face) is just as clearly questioning his relation- ship to the image on the television (Mom? Dad?). The tracing of the thief crosses plateaus in this and other ways. The black-and-white thief becomes the dog, newspapers, and Holstein cows that appear across the plateaus, blending and merging in a kaleidoscopic pattern. Toward the end of the book a brief interval occurs devoid of color and framing. The four framed stories are merged in a single black-and-white pla- teau. The tracing has been placed back on the map. Throughout Black and White the reader following the thief down the tied sheets sees the surrounding frames as views from the window of a train, as the boy in the first frame, "Seeing Things," might view the passing scenery. On the final page of the book, following that point traditionally identified with the end of the content, another layering of framing is superimposed on the previous, altering the meaning of what came before. A hand places a toy train station, identical to that seen in earlier frames, on the floor. In the upper-right corner we can just see the dog's nose and in his mouth, a bit of newspaper. Two addi- tional bits fall like confetti from the sky, again, as in the earlier frames, one with the Library of Congress CIP data, and the other with the copy-
442 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY right information for Black and White. This simple device integrates the author and the reader into the text as fellow imaginers. The tracing is placed on the map. The book forms a rhizome with the world. Conclusions A new aesthetic is emerging in contemporary children's literature and with it a new reader. Deleuze and Guattari's six metaphoric principles of the rhizome book-connection, heterogeneity, multiplicity, asigni- fying rupture, cartography, and decalcomania-provide a framework for understanding the relationships between this new hypertextual aesthetic and reading behavior. While many alarmists (among the best known is Neil Postman [48, 49]) have worried that the introduction of electronic media into homes and schools will mean the end of a literate and educated populace, the authors of this article have observed and delineated something quite the opposite. As Don Tapscott documents in Grozing Up Digital [18], there is no evidence of a direct correlation between increased use of electronic media and declining literacy. On the contrary, the use of electronic media by young people appears to point to an extension of the values associated with literacy. Rhizomorphic reading reaches beyond the isolated practice of absorbing and understanding handheld texts. For the rhizomorphic reader, the act of reading extends beyond text, off the printed page, and into new electronic spaces that facilitate the construction of shared meanings. It is a participatory and creative act of sense-making. The rhizomorphic reader is an actively engaged author, simultaneously and interactively synthesizing new inputs from multiple sources and through multiple media and sharing these spon- taneously in electronic spaces constructed entirely of words. The imag- inings of authors bold enough to venture into the new aesthetic to- gether with the reimaginings of the rhizomorphic reader forge new, dynamic meanings for authoring, reading, and literacy. Literacy is the fundamental skill set on which our ability to maintain an informed populace has rested for centuries. This situation has not changed, but the definition of what it means to be literate must change. No longer will it be adequate to ensure that our children can decode symbols on a page. Today's developing rhizomorphic reader must be adept at decoding and much more. These active and multiprocessing readers have the potential of becoming better informed, more active citizens than their counterparts of the previous generation. We are con- fident that the growing cadre of authors, illustrators, designers, and publishers of children's literature pushing beyond the mirror aesthetic
RHIZOMORPHIC READING 443 of the root-book and the refabrication aesthetic of the radicle-system book to experiment with a new hypertextual aesthetic of the rhizome are addressing an audience of young, rhizomorphic readers who will not succumb to the siren song of the electronic media but will emerge as the leaders of a better informed, highly literate society of tomorrow. These young readers will teach us the importance of establishing con- nections, making sense of heterogeneity, affirming multiplicity, validat- ing and reincorporating rupture-in short, they will be our guides as together we blaze new paths through a landscape of infinite possibili- ties. REFERENCES 1. Deleuze, Gilles, and Guattari, Felix. A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia. Min- neapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1988. 2. Burnett, Kathleen. "Multimedia as Rhizome: Design Issues in a Network Environment." In ASIS Proceedings of the Mid-Year Conference on Networking, Telecommunications, and the Net- worked Information Revolution, May 1992. Silver Spring, Mo.: ASIS, 1992. 3. Burnett, Kathleen. "Towards a Theory of Hypertextual Design." Postmodemn Culture 3 (1993): 1-12. 4. Moulthrop, Stuart. "Rhizome and Resistance: Hypertext and the Dreams of a New Cul- ture." In Hyper/Text/Theory, edited by George P. Landow. Baltimore:Johns Hopkins Uni- versity Press, 1994. 5. Dresang, Eliza T. Radical Change: Books for Youth in a Digital Age. New York: H. W. Wilson, 1999. 6. CyberAtlas: The Reference Desk for Web Marketing. (HTML file) URL: <http://www. cyberatlas.com/ > (last accessed April 14, 1999). 7. Pitkow, Jim. "The WWW User Population: Emerging Trends." GVU WWW User Surveys. (HTML file) URL: <http://www.gvu.gatech.edu/user surveys/papers/ 1997-10/sldOO1. htn> (last accessed April 14, 1999). 8. Sis, Peter. Starry Messenger: Galileo Galilei. New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 1996. 9. Spiegelman, Art. Maus: A Survivor's Tale I: My Father Bleeds History. New York: Pantheon, 1986. 10. Spiegelman, Art. Maus: A Survivor's Tale II: And Here My Troubles Began. New York: Pan- theon, 1991. 11. Spiegelman, Art. The Complete Maus. CD-ROM. New York: Voyager, 1994. 12. VirtuaPern MOO. (HTML file) URL: <http://www.virtualpern.com/> (last accessed April 14, 1999). 13. Dragonsfire MOO. (HTML file) URL: <http://www.omnigroup.com/People/Friends/ arien/df/> (last accessed April 14, 1999). 14. Harper's Tale MOO. (HTML file) URL: <http://www.lightsphere.com/ht/> (last ac- cessed April 14, 1999). 15. Star Stones MOO. (HTML file) URL: <http://mserv1.wizax.net:9988/> (last accessed April 14, 1999). 16. Radical Change Web Site. (HTML file) URL: <http://slis-one.lis.fsu.edu/radicalchange/> (last accessed April 14, 1999).
444 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 17. Ammon, Bette D., and Sherman, Gail. Worth a Thousand Words: An Annotated Guide to Picture Books for Older Readers. Englewood, Colo.: Libraries Unlimited, 1996. 18. Tapscott, Don. Growing Up Digital: The Rise of the Net Generation. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997. 19. Moulthrop, Stuart. "In the Zones: Hypertext and the Politics of Interpretation." In Evolv- ing Perspectives on Computers and Composition Studies. Urbana, Ill.: National Council of Teachers of English, 1990. 20. Moulthrop, Stuart. "You Say You Want a Revolution: Hypertext and the Laws of Media." Postmodern Culture, vol. 1 (May 1991). (HTML file) URL: <http://jefferson.village. virginia.edu/pmc/ > (last accessed April 14, 1999). 21. Moulthrop, Stuart. "Traveling in the Breakdown Lane: A Principle of Resistance for Hyp- ertext." Mosaic 28 (1974): 55-77. 22. Bolter,J. David. Writing Space: The Computer, Hypertext, and the Histoy of Writing. Hillsdale, NJ.: L. Erlbaum Associates, 1991. 23. Burnett, Kathleen, and McKinley, E. G. "Modeling Information Seeking." Interacting with Computers 10 (1998): 285-305. 24. Landow, George P. Hypertext: The Convergence of Contemporaty Critical Theory and Technology. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1992. 25. Landow, George P. Hyper/Text/eory. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1994. 26. Murray, Janet H. Hamlet on the Holodeck: The Future of Narrative in Cyberspace. New York: Free Press, 1997. 27. Joyce, Michael. Of Two Minds: Hypertext Pedagogy and Poetics. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1995. 28. Burnett, Kathleen. "Is Hypertext a Feminist Project?" Paper presented at the Interna- tional Association of Word and Image Studies Third International Congress, Ottawa, Can- ada, 1993. 29. Burnett, Kathleen, and McKinley, E. G. "Toward the Construction of a Feminist Post- Modem Hyperidentity of Cultural Integration." Paper delivered at the International Communication Association Conference, Sydney, Australia, 1994. 30. Dresang, Eliza T., and McClelland, Kate. "Black and White: A Journey." The Horn Book 71 (November/December 1995): 71-78. 31. Dresang, Eliza T. "Influence of the Digital Environment on Literature for Youth: Radical Change in the Handheld Book." Library Trends 45 (1997): 639-64. 32. The Diary Project. (HTML file) URL: <http://www.diaryproject.com/> (last accessed April 14, 1999). 33. Filipovic, Zlata. ZLata's Diary: A Child's Life in Sarajevo. New York: Viking, 1994. 34. Adedjouma, Davida, ed. 7he Palm of My Heart: Poety by African-American Children. Illustrated by Gregory Christie. New York: Lee & Low, 1996. 35. Kruse, Ginny Moore; Horning, Kathleen T.; and Schliesman, Megan. Multicultural Litera- ture for Children and Young Adults: A Sekcted Listing of Books by and about People of Color, Volume Tuo, 1991-1996. Madison: Cooperative Children's Book Center, University of Wis- consin-Madison, Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction, 1997. 36. Scieszka,Jon. The Stinky Cheese Man and OtherFairy Stupid Tales. Illustrated by Lane Smith. New York: Viking Press, 1992. 37. Macaulay, David. Black and White. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1990. 38. Turkle, Sherry. Life on the Screen: Identity in theAge of Internet. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1995. 39. Creech, Sharon. Walk Two Moons. New York: HarperCollins, 1994. 40. Nodelman, Perry. "Children's Literature as Variation: A Theory of the Genre." Paper presented at Stockholm University, Sweden, September, 1995.
RHIZOMORPHIC READING 445 41. Feelings, Tom. The Middle Passage: White Ships/Black Cargo. New York: Dial, 1995. 42. Burnett, Frances Hodgson. The Secret Garden. New York: F. A. Stokes, 1911. 43. Mackey, Margaret. "Little Women Go to Market: Shifting Texts and Changing Readers." Children's Literature in Education 29 (1998): 153-73. 44. Mackey, Margaret. "Strip Mines in the Garden: Old Stories, New Formats, and the Chal- lenge of Change." Children's Literature in Education 27 (1996): 3-22. 45. Raschka, Chris. Arlene Sardine. New York: Orchard, 1998. 46. McCaffrey, Anne. All the Weyrs of Pern. New York: Ballantine Books, 1991. 47. Browne, Anthony. Voices in the Park. New York: DK Ink, 1998. 48. Postman, Neil. The Disappearance of Childhood. New York: Delacorte, 1982. 49. Postman, Neil. Technopoly: The Surrender of Culture to Technology. New York: Knopf, 1992.