/A User-Centered Design for Information Professionals Anna Nookes Schulze Most information professionals would agree that user-centered design makes an important contribution to high quality information systems. However, there is no gen- eral agreement about how to define the term "user-centered design," or how best to implement user-centered design strategies in the development of systems and servic- es. This paper describes a wide range of meanings associated with user-centered design in information studies and in other cognate disciplines, and argues for a more coherent and widely accepted definition. It proposes that a general definition of user- centered design drawn from the literature of human-computer interaction (HCI) could serve as a basic framework for system design and support interdisciplinary work. It also describes some useful methods of implementing this framework in the develop- ment of user-centered information systems. The field of library and information studies (LIS) has long taken pride in its rich tradition of user-centered systems and services. In recent years, the idea of user-centeredness has become exceed- ing popular in the literature of this dis- cipline and many cognate disciplines as well. "User-centered," "user-centric," and "user-focused" are all expressions to be found in the spoken and written communication of scholars of every stripe. Although user-centered design is widely supported in theory, in practice its conceptualization and implementa- tion differ widely. HCI specialist John Karat has remarked that much like "fam- ily values" the term "user-centered design" has become "a concept that everyone subscribes to, but for which there seems to be no agreed-upon defini- tion."1 The meaning of user-centered design is extraordinarily diverse, and depends greatly on the discipline, back- ground, and research interests of its pro- ponents. This paper introduces the con- cept of user-centered design and its broad range of meanings across disci- plines. It suggests ways in which infor- mation professionals can draw from a more interdisciplinary perspective on user-centered design. Finally, it outlines an approach to user-centered design from the literature of HCI that can be readily adapted by information profes- sionals for the design of user-centered information systems. User-Centered Design There are many fields and subfields that interact in the design and implementa- tion of information systems: information retrieval, information needs and uses, HCI, and systems engineering are just a few. In these and many other fields the concept of user-centered design is endowed with a diverse range of both 1 1 6 Volume 42, Number 2
User-Centered Design for Information Professionals 1 1 7 About the Author Anna Noakes Schulze is a Doctoral Student, School of Information, University of Michigan. common and arcane meanings. In differ- ent contexts and circumstances, user- centered design may refer to the following meanings: ■ Enhancing system performance - Engineers, computer scientists, and information retrieval specialists have all tackled user-centered design from the perspective of enabling systems to deliver better results to users. Research into cata- loging, indexing, and textual infor- mation retrieval, not least of all the eternal struggle to improve recall and precision together, have all con- tributed to the design of systems that serve users better.2 However, many would agree that a focus on system performance metrics alone more accurately signifies a system- centered approach than one which is truly user-centered. ■ Designing for particular users - At the heart of this approach is an understanding that one size does not fit all. Different user groups have fundamentally different require- ments. As we have seen in the litera- ture of LIS, both past and current, the needs of novice users are not the same as those of expert - or even moderately expert - users.3 Users with differing levels of technical aptitude, or working in different do- mains will not have the same needs.4 This fact is explicitly recognized by researchers and practitioners in HCI who posit user-requirements gather- ing as an essential starting point in user-centered design. ■ Understanding the user - Both information and HCI researchers share in a rich stream of ongoing research on user-needs assessment. The HCI specialist arrives at an understanding of users and their needs by examining their: 1. culture, meaning the organiza- tional characteristics and con- text in which they work; 2. capabilities, including their abil- ities, competencies, resources, and limitations, and; 3. tasks, or what users do in the present, what they intend to do in future, and how a proposed system may change the patterns of communication and work activity. The HCI expert can attain a pro- found understanding of users and their needs by examining culture, capabili- ties, and tasks in the aggregate.5 These methods of understanding users and their needs have been refined and tested over decades of research. Understanding the User Information professionals are also deeply engaged in understanding the user, although they approach this understanding from a slightly different angle. They want very much to get into the users' heads - to understand their motivations, behavior, and capabili- ties.6 They want to identify the infor- mation needs that users may not fully express, or even understand them- selves.7 They also want to be aware of the physical, affective, and cognitive states that users encounter in the Spring 2001
118 Journal of Education for Library and information Science process of information seeking.8 Although different, the respective approaches of information researchers and researchers in HCI can be integrat- ed to great advantage. Finally, user-cen- tered design can also mean: ■ Continual user input into the design process - This is the most common and comprehensive interpretation of user-centered design in the HCI liter- ature, as advocated by Gould, Lewis, Nielsen, Landauer, and many others. This approach encompasses all of the meanings of user-centered design listed above and places the users at the center of an integrated, iterative design process that involves them before, during, and after a system is developed and built. This emphasis on early and contin- ual contact with the potential users of a system is echoed by Shackel in his dis- cussion of user-centered design: Designers must understand who the users will be and what tasks they will do. This requires direct contact with users at their place of work. If possible, designers should learn to do some or all of the users' tasks. Such studies of the user should take place before the system design work starts.9 Karat maintains that "all techniques that involve users in design can be called user-centered design tech- niques."10 However, what best defines the concept of user-centered design to his mind are two chapters in the Handbook of Human-Computer Inter- action by Gould, and by Whiteside, Bennett, and Holtzblatt, respectively.11 Gould's chapter describes four princi- ples for designing usable systems: ■ early focus on users and tasks, through direct and ongoing contact; ■ empirical measurement, i.e., testing against established nontrivial per- formance measures; ■ iterative design, in which succes- sive prototypes are tested and refined; and ■ integrated design, or the simultane- ous coordination of these principles throughout the design process.12 These various descriptions of user- centered design give a sense of the wide range of meanings it is endowed with whether across or within disciplines. Researchers and practitioners need to be aware of these meanings in different contexts in order to teach effectively, to work productively with other resear- chers, and to communicate with others from the cognate disciplines concerned with user-centered design. There is an ever-increasing empha- sis on interdisciplinarity in the informa- tion professions. However, this concept is often misunderstood, or confused with multidisciplinarity. Belkin makes a useful distinction between the two terms. Multidisciplinarity involves a bringing together of experts from differ- ent fields to work on aspects of the research problem most relevant to their own discipline. Belkin reminds us that true interdisciplinarity is a different matter altogether. It involves a coherent melding of the theory, methods, prac- tices, and general expertise of many cog- nate disciplines within the individual scholar and practitioner.13 As the vari- ous parties involved in user-centered design begin to research and assimilate the literature of their respective fields, one can trace the early stages of an ideo- logical convergence. The day may still come when we all speak the same lan- guage when we speak of user-centered design. What is lacking as yet is a com- prehensive, integrated theory of user- centered design that is applicable across cognate disciplines. Information professionals who as- pire to be the designers of user-centered information systems share a great num- ber of natural advantages. They have a Volume 42, Number 2
User-Centered Design for Information Professionals 1 1 9 long tradition of strength in the areas of document representation, organization of information, information needs, and information-seeking behavior. Regarding the latter, they have dissected users' search strategies, examined patterns of query formation, and modeled their cog- nitive states in the process of informa- tion seeking.14 All of these strengths can contribute to good design of information systems. However, what has often been lacking in the resulting information sys- tems is good usability. In his influential book, Usability Engineering, Nielsen defines system usability as multifaceted and comprising the following: ■ learnability: the extent to which the system is easy for the user to learn; ■ efficiency: the extent to which the system is efficient to use, enabling high productivity; ■ memorability: the extent to which the system is easy to remember, so that the user doesn't have to relearn it after a lapse in use; ■ errors: the extent to which the sys- tem has a low error rate in general, is free of catastrophic error, and facili- tates recovery from user error; and ■ satisfaction: the extent to which the system is pleasant to use.15 For most users, an information sys- tem that has good usability will allow for a quick assessment of what the sys- tem offers and how it works. The user should be able to determine what needs to be done in order to obtain the needed information in a reasonable amount of time and without much duress. The poor usability of many informa- tion systems may be due to an approach to the design of information systems that emphasizes function (system features) over form (interface design). Information professionals tend to focus attention pri- marily on designing the system func- tionality, such as the choice of access points, Boolean searching, truncation, stemming, proximity and adjacency operators, and many others. Users are offered a choice of modes or techniques in their information searching tasks - browsing and direct searching, keyword and field delimited queries, and so on. Unfortunately, this level of care and attention does not always extend to the design of user interfaces for these sys- tems. Information professionals are often guilty of making information sys- tems that are confusing, unintuitive, and unhelpful for the users they mean to serve. For good usability, it is essential that the system's form give considera- tion to its function. The single most crucial role of the user interface is to communicate the value of the system to the user. From the user's perspective, the interface is the system. A good interface directs the user's attention to important informa- tion, makes it obvious what a user needs to do, and provides help and guidance throughout the information-seeking process. If the interface fails to accom- plish these objectives, the user may per- ceive the overall system as a failure - no matter how well its functionality was designed. What information profession- als can, and should, do is draw relevant knowledge from cognate disciplines such as HCI so as to enhance their abili- ty to provide useful, efficient, and time- ly access to information. This cognate knowledge can be used to develop a more holistic approach to user-centered design that balances the demands of sys- tem form and function. University of Michigan researchers Gary and Judy Olson have defined user- centered design in a way that embodies the meaning and spirit of Belkin's defi- nition of interdisciplinarity while pro- viding a framework for the practice of user-centered design: User-centered system design consists of observation and analysis of users at work, assistance in the design from Spring 2001
1 20 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science relevant aspects of theory, and itera- tive testing with users.16 None of the concepts expressed in this definition is inherently foreign to traditions of LIS research into user-cen- tered design. Rather, they are highly compatible with, and complementary to, the information professional's long- established mission of providing users with well-designed, useful, and power- ful information systems. Furthermore, this definition of user-centered design allows for the inclusion and melding of design theory from many disciplines within its framework. To reiterate, the concept of user-centered design accord- ing to the Olsons comprises three key elements: ■ observation and analysis of users at work ■ assistance in the design from rele- vant aspects of theory ■ iterative testing with users Each of these points will be exam- ined in turn below, to clarify what they entail and to outline some of the basic methods that information professionals can use to advantage in the development of information systems. Observation and Analysis of Users at Work User-centered design is predicated on the observation and analysis of users at work in their natural setting. We can never assume that it would be sufficient to estimate who users are, what they do, and what they need without early, direct, and continual contact. We must have contact with the actual or the intended users of the systems we design. Demographic data alone would not be sufficient, nor can we presume that users are just like us, and want all the things that we would want in their place. Observations, interviews, and focus groups are all useful and effective methods for gaining important knowl- edge about users, their tasks, and the environment in which they operate. Furthermore, we need to analyze the users' goals and procedures as they perform their work. This means under- standing the steps, sequence, and pat- terns of use involved in user tasks. It necessitates developing concrete, de- tailed examples of what users do in the present and scenarios of possible future use. In doing so, we can begin to define problems in the information flow and any constraints that must be considered in the design process. User tasks can be unpacked and analyzed by generating scenarios, storyboards, and more specif- ic kinds of analysis such as activity dia- grams and data flow diagrams. Assistance in the Design from Relevant Aspects of Theory Design theory is inherently interdiscipli- nary. It begins with an understanding of the most salient aspects of human infor- mation processing. These include mem- ory and its limitations, reaction time, and characteristics of human visual pro- cessing. We need to acquaint ourselves with general design guidelines such as those expounded by Norman.17 These include such principles as providing affordances, which are visual cues in the design that suggest what the user needs to do. In order to be effective and suc- cessful designers of information sys- tems, we need to be aware of graphic design principles, particularly those that apply to the design of graphical user interfaces.18 In addition, we need to understand and exploit the physiologi- cal, perceptual, and cognitive guidelines for the use of color.19 Iterative Testing with Users Iterative testing with users should occur throughout the development cycle of an information system. As soon as the actu- Volume 42, Number 2
User-Centered Design for Information Professionals 1 21 al or intended users have been identi- fied, they can begin to participate in the design process. Mock-ups, storyboards, and other kinds of simulations can be used to convey the look and feel of a sys- tem before a single line of code is writ- ten. This allows users to identify possible problems and deficiencies that would be very costly to correct once the designers have committed to a fully functional system and interface. These methods help to support cycles of rapid prototyping and feedback in which the design concept is incrementally refined. Usability testing provides invaluable input in the latter stages of the design process. This method involves user test- ing of the system under realistic condi- tions and with typical user tasks.20 Where usability testing includes per- formance metrics that the system must achieve (such as, "80 percent of users must be able to formulate their query in the first twenty seconds at the inter- face") then the process is referred to as usability engineering.21 Conclusion The professional and scholarly horizons of information professionals are expand- ing profoundly at this time. With an increasing emphasis on interdiscipli- nary work, researchers will need to bor- row or adapt the best ideas from diverse cognate disciplines. Educators will need to ensure that a deep-rooted knowledge of user needs and user-centered design principles is an integral part of the design of information systems in the classroom.22 Practitioners must continue to develop and hone their professional skills in user-needs assessment, inter- face design, project management, and evaluation methods. All information professionals will need to work toward an integrated, interdisciplinary theory of user-centered design in order to contin- ue providing users with systems and services that better serve their needs, now and in the future. References and Notes 1. J. Karat, "Evolving the Scope of User- centered Design," Communications of the ACM 40, no. 7 (July 1997): 33-38. 2. David C. Blair and M. E. Maron, "An Evaluation of Retrieval Effectiveness for a Full-text Document-retrieval System," Communications of the ACM 28 (Mar. 1985): 289-99. 3. C. H. Fenichel, "An Examination of the Relationship Between Searching Behavior and Searcher Background," Online Review 4, no. 4 (1980): 341-47. 4. C. Borgman, "All Users of Information Retrieval Systems are not Created Equal: An Exploration into Individual Differences," Information Processing and Management 25, no. 3 (1989): 237-51. 5. J. D. Gould and C. Lewis, "Designing for Usability: Key Principles and What Designers Think," Communications of the ACM 28 (Mar. 1985): 300-11; R. Rubinstein and H. Hersh, "The Human Factor: Designing Computer Systems for People," in R. M. Baecker and W. A. S. Buston, eds., Readings in Human- Computer Interaction: A Multidisci- plinary Approach (San Mateo, Calif.: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 1987); D. A. Norman, "Design Principles for Human-computer Interfaces," in R. M. Baecker and W. A. S. Buston, eds., Readings in Human-Computer Inter- action: A Multidisciplinary Approach (San Mateo, Calif.: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 1987); C. Lewis and J. Rieman, "Getting to Know Users and Their Tasks, in Task Centered User Interface Design (Self-published over the Internet, pp. 14-19), republished in Readings in Human-Computer Inter- action: Toward the Year 2000, 2d ed. (San Francisco: Morgan Kaufman, 1995); T. K. Landauer, "User-centered Design Methods," in The Trouble With Computers: Usefulness, Usability and Productivity (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Pr., 1995). Spring 2001
122 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 6. T. Saracevic, P. B. Kantor, and A. Y. Chamis, "A Study of Information Seeking and Retrieving: I. Background and Methodology," Journal of the Ameri- can Society for Information Science (JASIS) 39, no. 3 (May 1988): 161-76; D. Ellis, "A Behavioral Approach to Infor- mation Retrieval System Design," Journal of Documentation 45, no. 3 (1989): 171-212. 7. N. J. Belkin, "Anomalous State of Knowledge as a Basis for Information Retrieval," Canadian Journal of Information Studies 5 (1980): 133-43. 8. B. Dervin, and M. Nilan, "Information Needs and Uses," Annual Review of Information Studies and Technology (ARIST) 21 (1986): 3-33; C. C. Kuhlthau, "Inside the Search Process: Information Seeking from the User's Perspective," Journal of the American Society for Information Science (JASIS) 42, no. 5 (1991): 361-71. 9. B. Shackel, "Usability- Content, Frame- work, Definition, Design and Evaluation," in Human Factors for Informatics Usability, B. Shackel, ed. (New York: Cambridge Univ. Pr., 1995), 31. 10. J. Karat, "Evolving the Scope of User- centered Design," Communications of the ACM 40, no. 7 (July 1997): 38. 11. J. D. Gould, "How to Design Usable Systems," in Handbook of Human- Computer Interaction, M. Helander, ed., (New York: North-Holland, 1988); J. Whiteside, J. Bennett, and K. Holtzblatt, "Usability Engineering: Our Experience and Evolution," in Handbook of Human- Computer Interaction, M. Helander, ed. (New York: North-Holland, 1988), 791-817. 12. J. D. Gould, "How to Design Usable Systems," in Handbook of Human- Computer Interaction, M. Helander, ed. (New York: North-Holland, 1988). 13. N. Belkin, Panel presentation on inter- disciplinary research, 1999 ALISE An- nual Conference, Philadelphia, Pa., January 27, 1999. 14. M. J. Bates, "Information Search Tac- tics," Journal of the American Society for Information Science (JASIS) 30, no. 5 (1979), 205-14; T. Saracevic and P. B. Kantor, "A Study of Information Seeking and Retrieving: III. Searchers, Searches and Overlap," Journal of the American Society for Information Science (JASIS) 39, no. 3 (May 1988): 197-216; M. J. Bates, "The Design of Browsing and Berry-picking Techniques for the Online Search Interface," Online Review 13, no. 5 (Oct. 1989): 407-24; B. Dervin, "From the Minds Eye of the User: The Sense- making Qualitative-quantitative Metho- dology," in Qualitative Research in Information Management, J. D. Glazier and R. R. Powell, eds., (Englewood, Colo.: Libraries Unlimited, 1992). 61-64. 15. Jakob Nielsen, Usability Engineering (Chestnut Hill, Mass.: AP Professional, 1993), 26. 16. G. M. Olson and J. S. Olson, "Defining a Metaphor for Group Work," IEEE Software 9 (May 1992): 93-95. 17. See D. A. Norman, The Design of Everyday Things (New York: Doubleday, 1990, C1988). 18. A. Marcus, "Principles of Effective Visual Communication for Graphical User Interface Design," UNIX World, (1990). 19. G. Murch, "Color Graphics - Blessing or Ballyhoo" (excerpt), Computer Graphics Forum 4 (1985): 133-35. 20. R. L. Mack, and J. Nielsen, "Usability Inspection Methods" (excerpt), in Usability Inspection Methods, J. Nielsen and R. L. Mack, eds. (New York: Wiley, 1994), 1-23. 21. See J. Nielsen, Usability Engineering (Boston: Academic, 1993). 22. Jane M. Carey, "Integrating Human Factors into the Information Systems Curriculum," in Human Factors in Information Systems: Emerging Theo- retical Bases, Jane M. Carey, ed. (Norwood, N.J.: Ablex, 1995), 133-51. Volume 42, Number 2