Social Justice as Topic and Tool: An Attempt to Transform an LIS Curriculum and Culture Nicole A. Cooke, Miriam E. Sweeney, and Safiya Umoja Noble ABSTRACT Training culturally competent and socially responsible library and information science (LIS) professionals requires a blended approach that extends across curricula, professional practice, and research. Social justice can support these goals by serving as a topic of inquiry in LIS curricula as well as by providing a scholarly framework for understanding how power and privilege shape LIS institutions and professional practice. This article applies social justice as a topic and tool for transforming LIS curricula and culture by exploring the implementation of social justice– themed courses and an extracurricular reading group in one LIS department. Exploring curricular and extracurricular cases in a shared institutional setting contextualizes key challenges and con- versations that can inform similar initiatives in other institutions. Transforming LIS culture to prioritize social justice values, epistemologies, and frameworks requires multivalent strategies, community buy-in, and shared responsibility in terms of the labor of leading and sustaining engagement with social justice. W hile students pursue graduate degrees in library and information science (LIS),it is hoped that they will learn the basics necessary for competent, inclusive,and caring professional practice. This is increasingly important as librarians face ever-more-diverse patron demographics and an increasingly complicated society that influ- ences, shapes, and colors their organization’s services and resources. In an often eclectic col- lection of graduate courses, how often do students have the opportunity to learn about the harder, sensitive, or more personal topics that may permeate their professional environments, such as race, class, sexuality, and gender? If it is expected that aspiring information profes- sionals work with diverse populations, they should be equipped to deal with such populations and be able to deal with them in a respectful, compassionate and open-minded manner. Likewise, for LIS to become diversified in terms of faculty and student recruitment and retention, prioritization of these skills, values, and epistemologies must be integrated into the fabric of LIS culture. Library Quarterly: Information, Community, Policy, vol. 86, no. 1, pp. 107–124. © 2016 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-2519/2016/8601-0007$10.00 107
108 • The Library Quarterly Teaching social justice as a topic in the curriculum is one way to begin addressing the ho- listic development of future information professionals. It allows students to become more en- gaged and results in personal growth and hopefully a transformation of thinking. Such stu- dents will be better prepared and more successful in their roles as information professionals. However, multiple strategies are needed to raise the visibility of social justice and to further embed it as a value in LIS education. In this sense, social justice also functions as an important framework for fostering critical, inclusive, and culturally competent professional engagement. This article applies social justice as a theory, topic, and technique for transforming LIS curric- ula and culture by exploring the implementation of social justice–themed courses and an ex- tracurricular reading group about race and diversity that were successfully executed at the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) at the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, in the last 3 years in response to student concerns stemming from a town hall meeting. Exploring multiple interventions in a shared institutional context is help- ful for identifying synergies and shared challenges and contributes to envisioning holistic ap- proaches for transforming LIS culture into social justice culture. What Is Social Justice? There are many definitions of social justice; some focus on eliminating privilege and margin- alization, and others focus on upholding human rights. Still others emphasize the end of op- pression and the formation of new systems of social, political, and economic justice. For the purposes of this article, and the definition that is used in the social justice class taught at GSLIS, social justice is thought of as “educating ourselves and others, and taking action to change the status quo. Social justice is about giving voice to communities who have been forced into silence; social justice is about equity and equal access” (Rodriguez and Cummings 2007, 12). Once a definition is determined, the best way to develop professionals who can both op- erate within that framework and also promote it in their communities is a tall, but impor- tant, order. In their text Public Libraries and Social Justice, John Pateman and John Vincent (2010) suggest that librarians need to embrace equality and diversity, focus on targeted needs-based services, know their community and its components, be active in and collaborative with their community, be empathetic with their community, and fully engage and coproduce services with their community. Equally, efforts at teaching theories of power contextualized by neo- liberalism and capitalism in LIS courses (Noble et al. 2014) provide a framework for think- ing about the kinds of interventions LIS professionals can make in service of social justice in broader social, political, and economic contexts. Though LIS students may recognize and value cultural competency as an important skill set and educational focus, Kafi Kumasi and Renee F. Hill (2011) demonstrate that knowledge gaps still persist in the actual learning of culturally competent practice. Such traits are not always intuitive and can be difficult to “teach” in the classroom, but skills and strategies can be
Social Justice as Topic and Tool • 109 taught and reflections shared that can encourage students to become culturally competent (El Turk 2003; Overall 2009), empathetic, and socially just and aware professionals. This trait development is important for all levels of graduate LIS education, including doctoral students and faculty (Cooke 2013, 2014b). This process is also dynamic and ongoing and should be viewed as a holistic endeavor that promotes social justice in the curriculum, in extracurricular activities, and in professional development opportunities within the institution. Integrating social justice across LIS education is vital for transforming LIS culture into social justice cul- ture, a move that is a precondition for diversifying the profession and, in turn, better serving patron communities in service of a more just society. Bharat Mehra, Kevin S. Rioux, and Kendra S. Albright (2009) note the contemporary strides made by LIS in integrating social justice goals into practice and research. This article con- tributes to these efforts through the exploration of the strategies and challenges of employing social justice as both a subject and tool for discussing diversity, equality, racism, power, and privilege in LIS education. Exploring curricular and extracurricular cases in a shared institu- tional setting allows us to contextualize particular struggles and conversations that can inform similar initiatives in other institutions. This article will also address how some forms of social justice theory focus on the distribution of new possibilities, which might be actualized in the context of the work of LIS professionals as members of society. Ultimately, LIS should work toward integrating a politics of recognition and voice with tangible interventions. Institutional Context In spring 2011, the GSLIS held a schoolwide town hall meeting where students identified the racial climate of the school as an area that needed to be addressed. Racial climate was dis- cussed broadly in terms of student life issues, the desire for a more culturally inclusive cur- riculum, the need for higher cultural competency across the faculty and student body, pri- oritizing recruitment of faculty and students of color, and an emphasis in cultivating research spaces engaged with critical cultural analytic frameworks and methodologies. The frank dis- cussion was taken seriously by the administration, which responded by immediately forming six working groups charged with exploring these concerns from multiple axes across the school. The groups as originally formed were Cultural Competence and Pedagogy, Critical Theory and Research Spaces, Curriculum, Structure/Grievances, Student Experience, and Fac- ulty Roles and Responsibilities. These working groups were formed in an advisory capac- ity to evaluate their given area; solicit feedback from students, staff, and faculty; and make recommendations about ways forward that could positively shift the school environment to- ward more inclusive practices. In addition to these internal working groups, an external diversity consultant conducted a series of focused discussions with students, faculty, and staff to further identify concerns and solicit feedback on productive ways forward in an effort to form a more purposeful commu-
110 • The Library Quarterly nity in terms of diversity and inclusion. These focus groups included the prioritization of a meeting for students of color to speak openly and candidly about their experiences with “whiteness” as an enduring and defining feature of the institutional climate. Whiteness and white privilege, both as social constructs (hooks 1992; McIntosh 1998; Lipsitz 2005) and as expressions of cultural normativity, were themes brought forward by students of color who were vocal in trying to decenter their “race” (or themselves as racialized Others) as the core “problem” to be solved. This reframing had the benefit of shifting the focus from people of color as the problem to their (white) colleagues, faculty, and administration as the source of inquiry. The challenge of shifting understanding from “race” to “whiteness” as a core critique of the culture of the institution was manifest in many of the working groups’ subsequent initiatives. The focus-group discussions reveal that even preliminary discussions about race and racism in the institution require facility with social justice theories and frameworks to ade- quately critique the ideologies present in the rhetorical framing of what, or whose, actions are problematic. Thus, social justice tools are not only necessary but also preconditional for formulating successful interventions that shift power and privilege in the profession toward equality. The diversity consultant made a number of recommendations for the school, specifically naming curriculum, cultural competence, critical theory, and pedagogy as key areas to tar- get for interventions. Many one-to-one conversations and strategy sessions were happening concurrently among faculty, students, and administrators to support a social justice frame- work for the school. Some of the consultant’s recommendations most salient to this discus- sion included: • Take care not to isolate a particular group, and shift the responsibility of confronting/ talking about racism from people of color to the entire community. • Identify experts (especially on campus) who can help staff and faculty increase cross- cultural understanding and competencies. • Offer everyone concrete tools for constructive discussions of racism and diversity. (Unsworth 2011) These recommendations, along with others, were offered as guides for the working groups as they put forth specific interventions in their targeted areas. One of the courses as well as the reading group discussed in this article were mobilized as direct results of these working groups and recommendations for cultivating a more inclusive, aware, and diverse culture in the school. Subsequently, two faculty members of color were hired, two additional courses on services to diverse user groups and social justice in LIS were introduced into the curriculum in the following years, and a standing diversity committee was established.
Social Justice as Topic and Tool • 111 Reading around Race Institutional diversity initiatives are often connected to strategic plans for recruitment and retention of faculty and students of color, curricular reform, or cultivating cultural compe- tency in the classroom. Less discussed are extracurricular efforts to carve out space for the deeper investigation of racial formation, structural racism, white privilege, the academy, and the profession as racialized and gendered space. It is important to note that the reading group discussed here is an ongoing project that is continually redefining itself to meet the changing needs of the institution. This discussion does not seek to capture the changing nature of the group over time (though that would be an insightful contribution); rather, it will focus on some of the challenges presented around the formation and early stages of the group in fall 2011 and spring 2012, when one of the authors served as a cofacilitator. Reading around Race (RAR) was a direct outgrowth of the Critical Theory and Research Spaces (CTRS) working group, one of the initial working groups created in response to the town hall. In the town hall meeting, a student participant observed that faculty and students in the department might benefit from facilitated engagement with critical cultural frame- works for race. Though LIS makes broad claims to interdisciplinarity, critical cultural theories (such as race, gender, and class) tend to be underrepresented in LIS research in favor of the- oretical frameworks stemming from the social sciences and computer science (Pawley 2006). A strength of the critical cultural theoretical frameworks is their explicit engagement with structural power systems. Thus, the CTRS working group was convened to formally explore ways to integrate critical cultural theories as tools to facilitate nuanced understandings of how race, and in particular whiteness, structure departmental and professional culture. The cofacilitators and an advisory board of interested staff, faculty, and students set the mission, scope, and agenda of the CTRS in an organizational meeting. From Working Group to Reading Group The advisory board’s decision to transform the CTRS working group into an informal reading group was made in order to more broadly provide tools to support critical discussions of race, racism, and white privilege within the departmental community. Though the working group was originally formed to explore the potential of creating research spaces dedicated to critical theory frameworks and methods, the advisory group was concerned that both the concepts of “critical theory” and “research spaces” might prove limiting for cultivating broad involve- ment and impacts. For instance, “research spaces” connotes a formal scholarly space that might not be accessible to staff, students, and instructors not actively engaged in research projects. Additionally, the research-group structure often demands more formal responsibili- ties and greater time investments, which were seen as possible barriers to participation. A reading group, in contrast, was thought to be a format both familiar and flexible enough to
112 • The Library Quarterly welcome faculty, staff, and students who might have a range of knowledge and facility with the subject matter. A biweekly schedule was outlined for the group with a brown-bag format that had the potential for discussing preselected readings, involving guest speakers, or col- laborating on a wide range of departmental activities. This format and scoping reflected the desire to create a flexible space that could meet the evolving needs of the school and support social justice across research, curriculum, and service. Naming the reading group proved to be a complex task that revealed organizational, po- litical, and ideological dimensions implicit in the formation of the group. Names convey or- ganizational intent and scope that have practical applications such as denoting the purpose of the group as distinct from simultaneous working groups and initiatives. However, naming also performs ideological work in reflecting political alignments, epistemologies, and power structures (Olson 2001). The initial discussion of what to name the group occurred in the first organizational meeting and reveals challenges associated with identifying and defining the subject of inquiry, and purpose, of the group. The top contenders for reading group names included the terms “diversity,” “critical theory,” “whiteness,” and “race” in their titles. Members of the advisory group were concerned that “critical theory” was too broad, potentially allowing the conversation of race to be by- passed completely in favor of focus on other structures. “Diversity” was similarly rejected as too vague, reflecting critiques by Christine Pawley (2006) and Sara Ahmed (2012) that “diver- sity” often operates as a catch-all: attempting to be inclusive of everything while effectually discussing nothing. In an attempt at specificity, “whiteness” was suggested as a key term, re- flecting the desire from the town hall for critical whiteness to be adopted as a guiding frame- work for understanding departmental culture. However, there was concern that naming the group “Reading about Whiteness” (or something similar) would be misinterpreted by faculty, staff, and students as advocating a “prowhite,” or white supremacist, frame rather than as a critical takedown of whiteness as a hegemonic structure. The fact that this seemed a plausible misinterpretation further underscores the need for examinations of power and privilege in LIS as well as for development of critical cultural literacy more broadly. In the end, Reading around Race was selected as a name representing a middle ground between general and spe- cific frameworks. It was felt that RAR provided specificity in terms of identifying race as the primary structure of inquiry and remained inclusive of prioritizing critiques of whiteness and white privilege. Reading around Race was meant to indicate the fluidity of race as a concept while still naming it explicitly for examination. RAR remained the name of the group for two semesters, at which point leadership in the group changed and the name was changed to Inclusions and Exclusions Reading Group. Although this name change indicates the desire of the group to broaden and explore intersectional subject matter (gender, class, sexuality, ability), it also
Social Justice as Topic and Tool • 113 obscures the origins of the group as a specific intervention to address student concerns about the racial climate and undermines the initial efforts to center race, whiteness, and white privilege as the primary sites of inquiry. Running the Group Leading extracurricular conversations about race, racism, and white privilege poses challenges similar to those involved in leading these conversations in the classroom, including structuring discussion to incorporate participants who hold a range of positions and may possess varying degrees of knowledge and facility with the subject matter. However, the extracurricular setting also poses unique challenges for tackling these topics; namely, it lacks the structural advantages of the classroom in terms of benefiting from a supporting curriculum, scaffolded instruction, and formal mechanisms for feedback and assessment. The absence of these struc- tures demands that the group explicitly address questions about process that are often for- gone in the classroom. The first of these concerns is deciding who should be involved with leading and facilitat- ing the group and what their roles should be in terms of selecting content and guiding dis- cussion. RAR used the model of a faculty-and-student team of volunteer cofacilitators, both of whom had familiarity with, or experience teaching from, social justice frameworks. The RAR advisory group suggested drawing from the community-generated reading lists that stemmed from the town hall discussions as material to prioritize for the first semester of meeting. This practice guided the selection of readings for the first sessions, though at each meeting participants were encourage to submit specific topics or reading suggestions to RAR’s online discussion board. The facilitators consulted the discussion board for each session and integrated many of the suggestions into the first semester’s meeting. The topics and readings covered in the first semester included racial formation (Omi and Winant 1994), racial micro- aggressions (Solórzano, Ceja, and Yosso 2000; Harwood, Browne-Huntt, and Mendenhall 2010), whiteness and white privilege (McIntosh 1998; Jensen 2005), LIS and race (Honma 2005; Pawley 2006), and pedagogy and race in the classroom (Delpit 1988; Tatum 1992). The facilitators provided loose guidance in the RAR meetings by convening the sessions, coordinating introductions among participants, and providing prompts for discussion when needed to keep the conversations flowing. The benefit of an open group structure is that par- ticipants can come to sessions at the convenience of their schedules. However, this presents a challenge to facilitators in terms of supporting discussion among participants with varying levels of expertise, familiarity, and comfort with the subject matter at any given time. In a classroom, information is introduced through purposeful sequencing, then is scaffolded and reinforced through repetition so that skills and concepts are sharpened over prolonged en- gagement. RAR’s free-form structure presented some challenges for sustaining and deepening
114 • The Library Quarterly conversations among a constantly shifting knowledge base. Though RAR began to establish a core group of participants who were present for advancing conversations, new individuals would often attend who did not have the benefit of previous discussions to draw on. Group turnover was particularly pronounced at the start of each new semester, when the core group would turn over and new participants would join who had not been present for some of the key discussions (e.g., framing race as a structural system of inequality) fleshed out the semester before. This issue raised questions about whether or not, or how often, topics and readings should be reintroduced in the group. The facilitators opted not to reread previous readings since these had all been made available in an online content management system for the group that was open to the departmental community. Topics are fluid, however, and can and should be constantly engaged through new frameworks, examples, and contexts. Whereas in a class setting topics and readings are carefully selected to create a narrative over the course of a semester, in RAR a larger narrative of recurring themes, topics, and critical frameworks was built over time. Participants who attended regularly had the advantage of building facility with the topics as the overarching structure of the group unfolded over time, whereas par- ticipants who attended only once were more dependent on their existing skills and knowl- edge base to orient them to the topic of the day. RAR raises a question of audience or, more specifically, how to move the efforts of the group outward to incorporate a broader departmental audience as per the original mission of the group. Integrating social justice topics and tools into LIS education and culture requires buy-in from the entire community (administrators, faculty, staff, and students). However, a catch-22 is created because community members who are already informed and interested (and see themselves as implicated) tend to participate in critiquing institutional power struc- tures and developing interventions. Transformation, however, is necessarily dependent on the involvement and actions of the people who see themselves as separate from, or unaffected by, social justice issues, a position that is itself shaped by access to power and privilege. In this sense, RAR has served a role for those who have already bought in to the premise that there is value in advancing critical discussions of race and racism in institutional culture. This is an important step, to be sure, though in the future, further buy-in across the departmental com- munity is needed to effect change in the wider institutional culture. Creating space for scholarly conversations about race, power, and privilege outside the classroom has the potential benefit of incorporating a broader audience, including staff, fac- ulty, students across the program, and program partners and affiliates across campus. The presence of regularly scheduled critical inquiry into how whiteness, masculinity, and middle- class values continue to shape professional values, epistemology, and practice raises the over- all visibility of these issues in the departmental community. Moving these conversations to open community spaces can signal that these conversations and critiques are important, valid,
Social Justice as Topic and Tool • 115 and central to LIS education and practice. There are ideological challenges in terms of defin- ing what (and whom) the group is addressing that are nuanced (for example, naming race versus specifically naming whiteness) though critical for transforming the culture of the in- stitution. Likewise, dealing with a constantly shifting knowledge base and rotating leadership poses organizational challenges that can limit the depth of conversation, weakening the ef- fectiveness of the intervention. These limitations are not evidence that extracurricular inter- ventions such as reading groups should be dismissed; instead they indicate that they are partial interventions that contribute to social justice culture and should be part of multivalent strategies, particularly as offering support to curricular efforts. Social Justice in the Curriculum Prior to the town hall meetings and preceding events, classes related to diversity or social justice had been taught indirectly by core faculty members for close to 30 years but were in decline with the retirements and departures of a few key people. Other important, yet occasional, classes were taught by adjuncts, faculty affiliates, and doctoral students who were not specifically focused on social justice in LIS. Courses on social and community informatics as well as the digital divide were often offered, incorporating themes of social justice but not exclusively dedicated to discussing a range of social justice issues in LIS. In the preceding decades, the school had been known for grassroots and community-based technology train- ing in its community informatics initiatives, which worked with local nonprofits, community organizations, and churches, many of which served low-income communities of color. How- ever, these courses did not always pedagogically address social justice theories and methods as central to the applied projects, or the way in which identity, power, and privilege were impacting these efforts. This was a theme from the town hall meetings, where a lack of preparation in diversity and social justice was expressed by some as compromising the integ- rity of such work. Many faculty and researchers were committed to thinking through how to address issues of institutional power and privilege between the university and the com- munity, and this was part of the dialogue in working groups and task forces. Some faculty began to incorporate changes to their syllabi in response to the critiques by students. As a direct result of the town hall meetings, doctoral students revived a class entitled Race, Gender, and Sexuality in the Information Professions that had been dormant for a decade. This is not to minimize the contributions of these instructors, but the point must be made that classes not taught by full-time faculty members have a greater chance of becoming dor- mant or falling out of rotation because there is a greater chance of instructor turnover, which prevents a long-term commitment and plan to incorporate them into the curriculum. GSLIS made a commitment to further diversify the faculty, which, in addition to facilitating the growth and improvement of the racial climate, contributes to recruitment efforts and
116 • The Library Quarterly strengthens the curriculum. As a result of post–town hall faculty hires, the curriculum has seen a significant and substantial addition with the development of a brand-new course, In- formation Services for Diverse Users, and the revitalization and regularization of a social justice course, Social Justice in the Information Professions (Cooke 2014a), both taught by one of the authors. These courses, along with the aforementioned Race, Gender, and Sexuality in the Infor- mation Professions course and coupled with the desire to add a firm diversity and social jus- tice foundation to the curriculum, were inspired by the LIS literature written by diversity advocates in the profession. The call to critically examine LIS (Olson 1998, 2001; Bishop et al. 1999, 2003; Peterson 1999; Patterson 2000; Dunbar 2006; Jimerson 2006; Lonetree 2006; Pawley 2006; Boast 2011; Gilliland 2011) and to diversify librarianship and its graduate curric- ulum ( Josey, 1993, 1994; Winston 1998, 2001; Gollop 1999; Totten 2000; Josey and Abdullahi 2002; Turock 2003; Adkins and Espinal 2004; Honma 2005; Lance 2005; Kim and Sin 2006, 2008; Pawley 2006; Neely and Peterson 2007) are ongoing discussions that are not completely solved by providing scholarship money to promising graduate school candidates. Once enrolled in a program, graduate students need to be welcomed into the life of the school and retained in the program. Retention is a complex issue that includes components such as continued funding, mentoring, career guidance, and a reflective and informative curriculum. A reflective curriculum means that courses should present skills and strategies an aspiring information professional or researcher will need, and present content that represents the interests of the academic community in which they study and the communities they will be serving as LIS professionals (Jaeger and Franklin 2007). As such, diversity and social justice must appear in some capacity in the curriculum. When considering how to create opportunities for diversity and social justice in the curriculum, the existing literature written by diversity champions and LIS faculty members proves inspirational (Chu 1999, 2013; Wheeler 2005; Overall 2009; Subramaniam and Jaeger 2010). Issues of diversity and social justice need to be palatable and broad enough to be considered relevant and important to a wide range of students who differ in backgrounds, understanding, and professional goals. Teaching such issues in the LIS classroom should also be firmly backed by theory and research, which provide the foundation for the concrete knowledge and skills students can apply in the field. Specifically, it was decided that new and revised diversity and social justice courses at GSLIS would focus on the development of em- pathy and cultural competence in students. Courses also focus on the broader social, histori- cal, and economic contexts in which experiences ranging from oppression to marginalization occur and that are tantamount to understanding racial, gender, class, and power formations in both the local and global contexts (Noble 2014; Noble et al. 2014). These are often the conditions and contexts in which many librarians and information professionals find them- selves living and working.
Social Justice as Topic and Tool • 117 Setting the Stage Although students may self-select into these elective courses, which is perhaps an indication of their willingness to discuss difficult topics, care should still be employed when addressing issues of race, class, diversity, privilege, and social justice in the classroom (this issue is even more acute in the online classroom). The introductory session for each course begins with an introduction to the topic and contextual definitions of terms such as “diversity,” “privilege,” and “social justice,” and a great deal of time is spent discussing the concepts of empathy and cultural competence (which has its own class session later in the semester). Students are briefed on expectations for the class, especially those related to the class climate: respect for the instructor and peers is essential, as is risk-taking. Students are expected to be brave in sharing and processing their opinions; they are encouraged to think broadly and consider is- sues from others’ perspectives; they are encouraged to disagree and debate in a scholarly and productive way; and they are asked to become comfortable with being uncomfortable. Conversations about sensitive and possibly inflammatory topics are not easy and require sincere effort in order to be productive; as such, a conducive and safe learning environment must be established early in the course. With this discussion in mind, at the conclusion of the introductory course sessions, the instructor acknowledges that courses such as these are not for every student, for a variety of reasons—not all students may be ready for hard conversations, some may realize that they really aren’t interested in learning about other cultures and communities in the way the courses address these topics, and others simply may not be interested in the amount and type of work the course requires. Students are encouraged to drop the class with absolutely no penalties or ill will. The approach to setting up diversity and social justice classes is to provide full disclosure about course content and provide students with an opportunity to exercise choice as to whether or not the class will suit their personal and academic needs. Only then can students be prepared to be full and capable coproducers of knowledge and understand- ing in the classroom. The Courses The Race, Gender, and Sexuality in Information Professions course was redesigned to exam- ine how issues of race, gender, and sexuality are represented in the information professions. To do this, the socially constructed (mis)representations (or lack of representations) of race, gender, and sexual identity were critically examined in different settings as they intersect, overlap, and impact information use, technology practices, and the design of information resources and services in LIS and related fields. Students are also exposed to theoretical works that address racial formation and race relations in the United States (Omi and Winant 1994), economic and public policy affecting public resources such as libraries and schools (Harvey
118 • The Library Quarterly 2005), the politics of technology in communities (Pacey 1983), and the problems of multi- cultural discourses in education (McCarthy 1994). A combination of these and other works on color blindness (Brown et al. 2003) and the social construction of whiteness (Lipsitz 2005) provides the framework for thinking about the ways in which social justice among LIS pro- fessionals can be a deployable intervention. The overarching goal in creating the Information Services to Diverse Users course was to examine diversity in a broad sense, discussing issue of race; gender; sexual orientation; dis- ability; age; incarceration; cultural communication; cultural competence’ political, social, and technological divides; information poverty; immigration; homelessness; and other social con- ditions that can influence how library and information professionals provide services and resources to diverse communities and constituents. Time is also dedicated to discussion of how to incorporate this knowledge into professional positions and advocate for explicit LIS positions that cater to diverse populations (Mestre 2010). Information Services to Diverse Users is a full-semester course and was designed to be a studio class that features a wide variety of guest lectures from practitioners in the field who are currently and actively working with diverse clientele. Students are provided with an opportunity to learn about theory and re- search in these topic areas and are presented with concrete knowledge and skills that they can apply in the field. In order to develop these practical skills, students engage in various projects focused on community analysis (Grover, Greer, and Agada 2010), patron outreach, market segmentation, and grant writing. Social Justice in the Information Professions is an 8-week class that focuses on the legacy of social justice activities and movements that have historically characterized the LIS field. This class also features the underlying theories and principles that emphasize the need for socially just services, resources, and policies in our libraries. However, this course is less prac- tical than Information Services to Diverse Users, instead concentrating on reflection and the internal self-work needed to facilitate the development of empathy and cultural competence. Featuring the tenet that equality is not always justice, students enrolled in Social Justice in the Information Professions are encouraged to think past providing access to information; access should be coupled with the tools to intelligently and meaningfully discern and utilize infor- mation in a way that positions LIS professionals on the same playing field with those around them. Specifically, this course aims to adhere to the key themes of social justice teaching as put forth by Wade (2001), who, in addition to discussing equality of treatment and equity of opportunity, stresses giving students a voice and helping them develop empathy through multiple perspectives. Creating and maintaining elements of diversity and social justice in the LIS curriculum (whether in stand-alone classes or woven throughout the curriculum) is essential in creating this type of awareness and empathy. The goal is for students to come out of these classes with the ability to recognize, accept, and celebrate the differences that exist within the diverse
Social Justice as Topic and Tool • 119 communities they will be serving. That is the only way they will be able to effectively and justly serve their constituents. Serving library patrons in a socially just way requires LIS pro- fessionals to be able to discern between access and equality and have the fortitude and per- sistence to work toward the eradication of systematic marginalization and privilege. Per the earlier-established definition of social justice, these classes strive to prepare students to work toward “giving voice to communities who have been forced into silence” (Rodriguez and Cummings 2007, 12). The State of Affairs The school and the curriculum are currently still dealing with growing pains but are showing signs of coming out of this forced period of transition in an improved condition. Two faculty members from diverse backgrounds were hired shortly after the town hall meetings; hiring and recruitment practices are now acutely focused on recruiting and retaining candidates from underrepresented populations. This is especially true as it pertains to recruiting students for the graduate programs. The Task Force for Inclusion (originally entitled the Diversity Task Force) has evolved into an official standing committee made up of faculty, staff, and students. The Inclusions and Exclusions Reading Group (formerly RAR) remained, sometimes fluctu- ating with content and leadership, and in 2014 became an official programming arm of the Diversity Committee in an effort to institutionalize this important venue for scholarly and honest conversations. Perhaps most significant is the new focus on diversity and social justice within the cur- riculum (Cooke 2014a). A brand-new class focusing on services to diverse populations was created and first offered in 2013; a revised version of a previously dormant social justice class was offered in 2014 and regularized into the curriculum (as described above); and a course focusing on race, gender, and sexuality in the information professions had been brought back into the curriculum in 2010. These three courses will hopefully form the core of a future curricular concentration in diversity and information services. Under the auspices of the newly constituted Diversity Committee, schoolwide discussions continue in an effort to further inject diversity into the environment and to try to envision what the curriculum would look like if diversity were seamlessly incorporated into every class. If proven a feasible endeavor, especially when considering faculty interest and expertise, this type of integration will take time. In the meantime, students have several high-quality and substantive electives from which to choose if they want to begin delving into issues of diver- sity and social justice in library and information science. Prior to these classes, students may have only discussed such issues in an introductory course entitled Libraries, Information, and Society. Although the aforementioned classes are electives and thus tend to attract self- selecting students, they provide an opportunity for students to have more than one formal- ized discussion and a chance for reflection during the course of their graduate studies. The
120 • The Library Quarterly presence of these classes in the curriculum serves an even greater purpose by demonstrating the school’s commitment to these issues and giving prospective and current student, faculty, and staff an opportunity to see themselves in the fabric of the organization. Going forward, one of the main challenges in continuing to shift the culture toward social justice is sustainability in terms of the labor of teaching, leading, and engaging social justice issues in the institution. As the diversity consultant noted, it is necessary to shift the re- sponsibility of confronting racism away from students and faculty of color to the entire com- munity. However, the burden of sustaining these conversations, whether in the classroom or in other professional spaces, tends to disproportionately fall upon faculty and students of color. This burden is extracted from faculty of color in terms of taking on additional service roles or being constantly directed to diversity interventions that their white colleagues, by virtue of white privilege, can opt out of or wholly ignore. Buy-in from faculty (and adminis- trators) across the board is needed to interrogate the way whiteness structures the definition and deployment of the very interventions meant to disrupt it. Additionally, faculty who teach social justice courses (also disproportionately faculty of color) often contend with extra stressors in the classroom environment, including students who may be openly hostile to the subject matter and/or the instructor. This can result in receiving lower teaching evaluations for social justice courses, experiencing more stress sur- rounding teaching, and lower overall morale. Meanwhile, instructors who do not integrate social justice topics and frameworks into their classes unwittingly perpetuate the false nar- rative that their coursework is “neutral” and “unbiased” rather than ideologically and polit- ically informed and racialized. This has the effect of structuring a racialized learning envi- ronment that supports color-blind ideology, further entrenching whiteness in departmental and professional culture. Sustainability is created when the burden shifts from defining social justice as the “problem” of faculty, staff, and students of color and becomes distributed across the community in ways that purposefully engage and critique whiteness and white privilege (among other structures) as defining features of institutional and professional practice. Conclusion Fostering cultural competence and an awareness of the range of social justice issues and ap- proaches in LIS education requires a blended approach that emphasizes culture; context; and critical thinking that extends across curricula, professional practice, and research. Components of this blended approach include developing students’ ability to critically reflect on the role of information technologies and institutions in society as well as their own positionality and privilege that shape their practice. Honing these reflection skills is particularly important in the current information environment, which is shaped by widening racialized and gendered wealth gaps, decreased funding for social services and education, and increased data surveil- lance initiatives from both public and private sectors. Information professionals are involved
Social Justice as Topic and Tool • 121 at every level of information provision and technology design and thus are uniquely poised to impact the communities they serve as well as the broader society. Social justice integration creates opportunities for students to gain a more holistic and inclusive perspective on the relationships between people, information, and technology, with the ultimate potential of shaping a more just society. Investing in multiple interventions across the institution can help reinforce social justice as an LIS value by giving students and faculty tools for building cultural competence, increased access to interdisciplinary theoretical frameworks, and an understanding of how racialized ideologies shape professional practices and epistemologies. Although implementing new courses and professional development opportunities is not without significant challenges, it offers positive steps in making social justice both visible and embedded in the institutional space. Social justice both functions as a topic of professional inquiry and also provides a scholarly framework that can be leveraged for the broader transformation of LIS culture as social justice culture. Shifting LIS culture to prioritize social justice is imperative for training the next generation of critically minded, socially responsible, and culturally competent infor- mation professionals. References Adkins, Denice, and Isabel Espinal. 2004. “The Diversity Mandate.” Library Journal 129 (7): 52–54. Ahmed, Sara. 2012. On Being Included: Racism and Diversity in Institutional Life. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. Bishop, Ann Peterson, Bharat Mehra, Imani Bazzell, and Cynthia Smith. 2003. “Participatory Action Research and Digital Libraries: Reframing Evaluation.” In Digital Library Use: Social Practice in Design and Evaluation, edited by Ann Peterson-Kemp, Nancy A. Van House, and Barbara B. Buttenfield. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Bishop, Ann Peterson, Tonyia J. Tidline, Susan Shoemaker, and Pamela Salela. 1999. “Public Libraries and Networked Information Services in Low-Income Communities.” Library and Information Science Research 21 (3): 361–90. Brown, Michael K., Martin Carnoy, Troy Duster, and David B. Oppenheimer. 2003. Whitewashing Race: The Myth of a Color-Blind Society. Oakland: University of California Press. Chu, Clara M. 1999. “Transformative Information Services: Uprooting Race Politics.” Speech, Black Caucus of the American Library Association Conference, Las Vegas, July 19–22. Chu, Clara M., ed. 2013. “ALISE Diversity Statement.” Association of Library and Information Science Education. http://www.alise.org/alise—alise-diversity-statement. Boast, Robin. 2011. “Neocolonial Collaboration: Museum as Contact Zone Revisited.” Museum Anthropology 34 (1): 56–70. Cooke, Nicole A. 2014a. “Creating Opportunities for Empathy and Cultural Competence in the LIS Cur- riculum.” SRRT Newsletter 187. http://libr.org/srrt/news/srrt187.php - 9. Cooke, Nicole A. 2014b. “The Spectrum Doctoral Fellowship Program: Enhancing the LIS Professori- ate.” InterActions: UCLA Journal of Education and Information Studies 10 (1). http://escholarship.org/uc/item /7vb7v4p8.
122 • The Library Quarterly Cooke, Nicole A. 2013. “Diversifying the LIS Faculty (Backtalk column).” Library Journal. http://lj.library journal.com/2013/09/opinion/backtalk/diversifying-the-lis-faculty-backtalk/-_. Delpit, Lisa D. 1988. “The Silenced Dialogue: Power and Pedagogy in Educating Other People’s Children.” Harvard Educational Review 58 (3): 280–99. Dunbar, Anthony W. 2006. “Introducing Critical Race Theory to Archival Discourse: Getting the Conver- sation Started.” Archival Science 6 (1): 109–29. El Turk, Ghada. 2003. “Diversity and Cultural Competency.” Colorado Libraries 29 (4): 5–7. Gilliland, Anne. 2011. “Neutrality, Social Justice and the Obligations of Archival Education and Educators in the Twenty-First Century.” Archival Science 11 (3–4): 193–209. Gollop, Claudia J. 1999. “Library and Information Science Education: Preparing Librarians for a Multicul- tural Society.” College and Research Libraries 60 (4): 385–95. Harvey, David. 2005. A Brief History of Neoliberalism. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Harwood, Stacy, Margaret Browne-Huntt, and Ruby Mendenhall. 2010. “Racial Microaggressions and the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign: Preliminary Analysis of Focus Groups with Students of Color Living in University Housing.” http://eblackcu.net/portal/archive/files/racial-microaggression -report_e7ff1be7be.pdf. Honma, Todd. 2005. “Trippin’ over the Color Line: The Invisibility of Race in Library and Information Studies.” InterActions: UCLA Journal of Education and Information Studies 1 (2). http://escholarship.org/uc /item/4nj0w1mp hooks, bell. 1992. Black Looks: Race and Representation. Boston: South End. Grover, Robert, Roger C. Greer, and John Agada. 2010. Assessing Information Needs: Managing Transformative Library Services. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO. Jaeger, Paul T., and Renee E. Franklin. 2007. “The Virtuous Circle: Increasing Diversity in LIS Faculties to Create More Inclusive Library Services and Outreach.” Education Libraries 30 (1): 20–26. Jensen, Robert. 2005. The Heart of Whiteness: Confronting Race, Racism and White Privilege. San Francisco: City Lights. Jimerson, Randall C. 2006. “Embracing the Power of Archives.” American Archivist 69 (1): 19–32. Josey, E. J. 1993. “The Challenges of Cultural Diversity in the Recruitment of Faculty and Students from Diverse Backgrounds.” Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 34 (4): 302–11. Josey, E. J. 1994. “The State of Diversity.” Reference Librarian 21 (45–46): 5–11. Josey, E. J., and Ismail Abdullahi. 2002. “Why Diversity in American Libraries.” Library Management 23 (1/2): 10–16. Kim, Kyung-Sun, and Sei-Ching Joanna Sin. 2006. “Recruiting and Retaining Students of Color in LIS Pro- grams: Perspectives of Library and Information Professionals.” Journal of Education for Library and Infor- mation Science 47 (2): 81–95. Kim, Kyung-Sun, and Sei-Ching Joanna Sin. 2008. “Increasing Ethnic Diversity in LIS: Strategies Sug- gested by Librarians of Color.” Library Quarterly 78 (2): 153–77. Kumasi, Kafi, and Renee F. Hill. 2011. “Are We There Yet? Results of a Gap Analysis to Measure LIS Students’ Prior Knowledge and Actual Learning of Cultural Competence Concepts.” Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 52 (4): 251–64. Lance, Keith Curry. 2005. “Racial and Ethnic Diversity of US Library Workers.” American Libraries 36 (5): 41–43. Lipsitz, George. 2005. “The Possessive Investment in Whiteness.” In White Privilege: Essential Readings on the Other Side of Racism, edited by Paula S. Rothenberg. Gordonsville, VA: Worth. Lonetree, Amy. 2006. “Missed Opportunities: Reflections on the NMAI.” American Indian Quarterly 30 (3): 632–45.
Social Justice as Topic and Tool • 123 McCarthy, Cameron. 1994. “Multicultural Discourses and Curriculum Reform: A Critical Perspective.” Educational Theory 44 (1): 81–98. McIntosh, Peggy. 1998. “White Privilege: Unpacking the Invisible Knapsack.” In Race, Class, and Gender in the United States: An Integrated Study, edited by Paula S. Rothenberg. New York: Macmillan. Mehra, Bharat, Kevin S. Rioux, and Kendra S. Albright. 2009. “Social Justice in Library and Information Science.” In Encyclopedia of Library and Information Sciences, 3rd ed., edited by Marcia J. Bates and Mary Niles Maack. New York: Taylor & Francis. Mestre, Lori. 2010. Librarians Serving Diverse Populations: Challenges and Opportunities. Chicago: Association of College and Research Libraries. Neely, Teresa Y., and Lorna Peterson. 2007. “Achieving Racial and Ethnic Diversity among Academic and Research Librarians: The Recruitment, Retention, and Advancement of Librarians of Color—a White Paper.” College and Research Libraries News 68 (9): 562–65. Noble, Safiya U. 2014. “Trayvon, Race, Media and the Politics of Spectacle.” Black Scholar 44 (1): 12–29. Noble, Safiya U., Jeanie Austin, Miriam E. Sweeney, Lucas McKeever, and Elizabeth Sullivan. 2014. “Changing Course: Collaborative Reflections of Teaching/Taking ‘Race, Gender, and Sexuality in the Information Professions.’ ” Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 55 (3): 212–22. Pacey, Arnold. 1983. The Culture of Technology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Olson, Hope A. 1998. “Mapping beyond Dewey’s Boundaries: Constructing Classificatory Space for Mar- ginalized Knowledge Domains.” Library Trends 47 (2): 233– 54. Olson, Hope A. 2001. “The Power to Name: Representation in Library Catalogs.” Signs 26 (3): 639–68. Omi, Michael, and Howard Winant. 1994. Racial Formation in the United States: From the 1960s to the 1990s. New York: Psychology. Overall, Patricia Montiel. 2009. “Cultural Competence: A Conceptual Framework for Library and Infor- mation Science Professionals.” Library Quarterly 79 (2): 175–204. Pateman, John, and John Vincent. 2010. Public Libraries and Social Justice. Surrey: Ashgate. Patterson, Lotsee. 2000. “History and Status of Native Americans in Librarianship.” Library Trends 49 (1): 182–93. Pawley, Christine. 2006. “Unequal Legacies: Race and Multiculturalism in the LIS Curriculum.” Library Quarterly 76 (2): 149–68. Peterson, Lorna. 1999. “The Definition of Diversity: Two Views; A More Specific Definition.” Journal of Library Administration 27 (1–2): 17–26. Rodriguez, L. A., and Tatiana Cummings, eds. 2007. “Cultural Times.” http://www.humboldt.edu /multicultural/Download/cultural_times/fall_2007.pdf. Solórzano, Daniel, Miguel Ceja, and Tara Yosso. 2000. “Critical Race Theory, Racial Microaggressions, and Campus Racial Climate: The Experiences of African American College Students.” Journal of Negro Edu- cation 69 (1/2): 60–73. Subramaniam, Mega M., and Paul T. Jaeger. 2010. “Modeling Inclusive Practice? Attracting Diverse Faculty and Future Faculty to the Information Workforce.” Library Trends 59 (1): 109–27. Tatum, Beverly Daniel. 1992. “Talking about Race, Learning about Racism: The Application of Racial Iden- tity Development Theory in the Classroom.” Harvard Educational Review 62 (1): 1–25. Totten, Herman L. 2000. “Ethnic Diversity in Library Schools: Completing the Education Cycle.” Texas Library Journal 76 (1): 16–19. Turock, Betty J. 2003. “Developing Diverse Professional Leaders.” New Library World 104 (11/12): 491–98. Unsworth, John. 2011. “Outcomes of the Spring 2011 Townhall Meetings.” Message posted to GSLIS bulle- tin board, August 23. https://courses.lis.illinois.edu/mod/forum/discuss.php?d=169421.
124 • The Library Quarterly Wade, Rahima C. 2001. “And Justice for All: Community Service Learning for Social Justice.” Education Commission of the States. http://www.ecs.org/html/Document.asp?chouseid=2913. Wheeler, Maurice B. 2005. “Faculty Development and Cultural Diversity in Teaching: LIS Education’s Last Frontier.” In Unfinished Business: Race, Equity, and Diversity in Library and Information Science Education, edited by Maurice B. Wheeler. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow. Winston, Mark D. 2001. “Recruitment Theory: Identification of Those Who Are Likely to Be Successful as Leaders.” Journal of Library Administration 32 (3–4): 19–35. Winston, Mark. 1998. “The Role of Recruitment in Achieving Goals Related to Diversity.” College and Research Libraries 59 (3): 240–47. Nicole A. Cooke: assistant professor, the Graduate School of Library and Information Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Cooke’s research interests include diversity and social justice in librarianship; information behavior, particularly in an online context; e-learning; and critical information literacy. She has published articles in Library Quarterly, Library and Information Science Research, InterActions: UCLA Journal of Education and Information, and the New Review of Academic Librarianship. Cooke coauthored Instructional Strategies and Techniques for Information Professionals (Chandos, 2012). She holds PhD and MLS degrees from Rutgers University and a MEd in adult education from Penn State. E-mail (corresponding author): nacooke@illinois.edu. Miriam E. Sweeney: assistant professor, School of Library and Information Studies, the University of Alabama. Sweeny’s research explores intersections of gender, race, and information technologies, focusing particularly on digital media and Internet technologies. Her current projects examine how gender and race shape the design, use, and meaning of anthropomorphic computing interfaces, artificial intelligence, emojis, and virtual workers. She has related research interests in information ethics, Internet research methods, feminist informatics, and social justice in library and information science. E-mail: miriam.e.sweeney@slis.ua.edu. Safiya Umoja Noble: assistant professor, Department of Information Studies in the Graduate School of Education and Information Studies, UCLA. Noble conducts research in sociocultural informatics, including feminist, historical, and political-economic perspectives on computing platforms and software in the public interest. Her research is at the intersection of culture and technology in the design and use of applications on the Internet. E-mail: snoble@ucla.edu.