Aslib at War: The Brief But Intrepid Career of a Library Organization as a Hub of Allied Scientific Intelligence 1942-1945 PAMELA SPENCE RICHARDS World War I was a stimulant to documentation development in the United King- dom: both the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research and the Associa- tion of Special Libraries and Information Bureaus (Aslib) have their roots in that conflict's impact on national perceptions of the strategic importance of scientific and technical information. When a new breakdown of international scientific communication threatened in 1939, Aslib was swift to plan and, in 1941, imple- ment a project for the centralized microfilming and dissemination of enemy scien- tific periodicals. America's entry to the war in 1941 added technical resources and manpower to expand both the project and its impact on Allied defense science. Credit for the project's conceptualization and implementation during a period of extraordinary national hardship must be given to the men and women at Aslib in 1939-45. ENGLAND'S EXPERIENCE with scientific documentation predates that of the United States: its scientific institutions are older - the Royal Society goes back to 1660 - and its imperial obligations brought about the development during the nineteenth century of a global network for the dissemination to the colonies of scientific and Pamela Spence Richards is Associate Professor, School of Communication, Information and Library Studies, Dept. of Library and Information Studies at Rutgers University, 4 Huntington St., New Brunswick, New Jersey 08903. This article is cowinner of the 1988 ALISE Research Paper Competition. Ms. received 6/88; accepted 6/88. Spring 1989 279
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science technical information vital to government. Furthermore, the terrible ex- periences of the war of 1914-18, which Prime Minister Lloyd George called an "engineer's war, "' had convinced England of the strategic im- portance of scientific and technical information. Thus in 1916 the ministry-level Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR) was founded not only to encourage but to provide for the dissemination of strategic scientific and technological research in various fields.2 DSIR personnel were, in turn, directly involved with the planning in 1924 of the first conference of the Association of Special Libraries and Informa- tion Bureaus (Aslib), an organization founded specifically to further the goals and objectives of the special libraries and information bureaus that were proliferating in the United Kingdom as a result of the stimulation of basic research by DSIR.3 The history of documentation - or information science, as it is more commonly called today - is in England largely synonymous with that of Aslib, its members and their activities. But Aslib 's imprint is not on Brit- ain alone. Recently declassified records4 in the U.S. National Archives describe contributions Aslib made during World War II to international scientific documentation, for which American recognition, in particu- lar, is appropriate. Drawing on these records, as well as on supplemen- tary material in the (British) Public Records Office, this article will at- tempt to show how, as a result of accelerated activity during a period of deepening crisis and isolation for Britain, Aslib became, by 1942, the major locus of scientific intelligence collection activities for England's allies. The Influence of Henry Tizar d Aslib, unlike its American counterpart, the Special Libraries Associa- tion, enjoyed from early on the active participation of men at the highest level of national government. None of these was so distinguished as Henry Tizard, the Cambridge physicist and former military pilot, whose championing of radar development in the late 1930s while serving as the Scientific Advisor to the Chief of Air Staff would be a major factor in England's victory in the Battle of Britain. Earlier in his career, while head of the DSIR headquarters staff until his resignation in 1928 to be- come Rector of the Imperial College of Science and Technology, Tizard concentrated his efforts on bridging the chasm that tends inevitably to separate academic, industriad and military research and information. Tizard 's early involvement with Aslib stemmed from the high priority he attached to the efficient flow of information. His biographer empha- sizes that the ' 'main belief which underlay [his] work was that a nation's industriad success in the twentieth century - and perhaps its industrial survival - can only be achieved by the planned utilization of scientific knowledge."6 Tizard's generation of British scientists was particularly sensitive to 280 Volume 29, Number 4
Aslib at War the various obstacles that lie in the path of the utilization of scientific knowledge originating abroad. England had suffered mightily in 1 9 1 4- 1 8 by being deprived of German technology - it was to replace this technology, after all, that DSIR had been founded - and during the 1920s and 1930s the problems became compounded by the fact that cer- tain countries with whom the West had little traditional book trade con- tact began attracting scientific attention. Thus, when Tizard accepted the presidency of Aslib in 1930, one of his initiatives was to call to an Aslib-sponsored conference representatives of a number of England's abstracting agencies7 in order to address this problem. The results of a questionnaire circulated to the attendees after the meeting showed that while materials in the Western European languages were routinely translated and abstracted by English scientific reviews, Russian and Japanese science (as well as Hungarian, Polish and Czech) was widely ignored.8 While no action was taken at that time, the Aslib initiative is the earliest indication known to the author of western documentalists considering the question of access to Russian and Japanese scientific materials. The Science Museum Library, This preoccupation with the accessibility of foreign publications brought Aslib into natural cooperation with En- gland's largest collection of foreign scientific journals, the Science Mu- seum Library in the South Kensington section of London. Founded in 1857 to serve the staff of the new Natural History Museum, it developed into England's major archive of scientific knowledge after the British Museum's decision to transfer to it the responsibility for the natural sci- ences. (The Patent Office Library was actually larger by 1900, but its governance by the Board of Trade limited its accessibility.) After the breakdown in the book trade during World War I, the concern of Sir Sidney Harmer, then the director of the Natural History Museum, about the inability of British scientists to locate foreign materials in En- gland led directly to the publishing effort of the Royal Society's conjoint board that resulted in the World List of Scientific Periodicals. Its first edition (1925-1927) gave the locations in 150 libraries- 21 in the United Kingdom- for about 25,000 titles published from 1900 to 1920. This and three subsequent editions, which showed the Science Museum Li- brary to be the main British locus for science information, became the basic finding tool for British scientists through the 1950s.9 As a backup to the World List, Aslib in the 1930s encouraged cooperation between spe- cial libraries in the same field. The groups were helped to form union catalogs of their holdings that they could use to beg copies of one another if the Science Museum Library failed them in their quest for a periodi- cal, foreign or domestic. War Fears and Preservation Measures. It is a tragic irony that during the very years that Aslib was bestirring itself to mend the rifts in England's access to foreign scientific information caused by the conflict of 1914-18 Spring 1989 281
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science and to improve future information flow, protective measures were al- ready being taken in Britain to minimize the effects of a threatening new war. On the one hand, scholarly communication in documentation was at unprecedented levels in the late 1930s: Aslib representatives attended the 1937 World Documentation Conference, exchanged views with the large delegation sent by the German Nazi government, and listened to H. G. Wells laud the high purpose of documentalists as guardians of the ' 'World Brain. "10 The following year Aslib itself hosted the annual con- ference of the International Federation of Documentation (FID) at Ox- ford, where plans were laid for a Gutenberg Jubilee FID meeting in Mainz in 1940. But even as improvements in international cooperation were being planned and implemented, heads of British libraries were be- ing sent antibombardment directives by their government: As early as 1934 the commissioner of Works informed the director of the Science Museum that two large country homes had been made available for de- fense emergency storage by their owners. While the Germans consid- ered antiaerial attack precautions by librarians defeatist,11 the late 1930s saw many of London's great libraries securing valuable or less-used books in the countryside. By September 1939, for example, some 20,000 volumes of the Science Museum Library's collections were stored in an outbuilding on Major F.H.T. Jervoise's estate at Harriard Park, near Alton in Hampshire. (They were later transferred for storage at Cam- bridge University.) Eventually some 80,000 volumes from the Science Museum Library were evacuated, but the library remained open throughout the war with a considerably smaller and older staff than usual. The War's Effects on Scientific Collections and the Book Trade. Through good fortune the Science Museum Library itself got off very lightly in the air attacks that brought about the destruction of more than one million volumes in British libraries by the end of the war. The Patent Office Li- brary, too, was spared, while the British Museum Library lost almost 250,000 books in one terrible night in May 1941, 13 and University Col- lege, London, lost 70,000 volumes. In the provincial cities that became targets after November 1941, the science holdings that were damaged were chiefly those in public libraries: Liverpool Public Library's losses totaled 243,000 volumes, and Coventry Public Library lost 150,000; Exeter and Plymouth's public libraries were also hard hit.14 But the great university libraries were unharmed: the library of the Cambridge Philo- sophical Society (now the Cambridge Periodicals Library), arguably the most important collection of current scientific knowledge outside of London, was not damaged, although the Cambridge Union suffered a direct hit.15 The outbreak of the war greatly complicated the problem of foreign publications acquisition and dissemination with which Aslib had been wrestling for more than a decade. Libraries in England, as elsewhere, 282 Volume 29, Number 4
Aslib at War traditionally acquired their foreign subscriptions either through ex- change agreements with libraries and association publishers abroad, or through the book trade. These networks disintegrated gradually as Hitler's armies occupied more and more of continental Europe and his submarines wrestled for control of the Atlantic. Soon after hostilities be- gan, the British government restricted the purchase of enemy goods to holders of special import licenses, a system which caused some hardship: The Cambridge Philosophical Society Library, for example, was unable to obtain such a license for months and had to make its large overseas orders through the university library.16 Booksellers in neutral countries such as the Netherlands (neutral until May 1940) and Switzerland were still able to order from Germany; a Dutch firm could report in the winter of 1939 that ' 'up till now we have had no trouble in dispatching German journals to abroad."17 Journal exchanges, involving no transfer of money with the enemy, continued as well as the somewhat circuitous mails would permit. Materials from the Soviet Union, till June 1941 an ally of Germany, slowed to a trickle, however. Information channels were critically damaged by the German inva- sion of Denmark, Norway, the Netherlands, Belgium, and France in the spring of 1940. British orders for German periodicals were then shifted, when possible, to antiquarians in Sweden, Portugal and Switzerland, although Swiss book dealers ceased being able to export effectively after the German occupation of Vichy France in late 1942. The import of American publications also was increasingly imperiled as the Battle of the Atlantic grew in ferocity after 1941 . For example, a whole shipment of November 1940 issues of American scholarly and scientific periodi- cals bundled together for distribution to British libraries was lost when the ship carrying it was sunk by a torpedo.18 By April 1941 Aslib reported that no copies of French, German or Italian periodicals had reached the United Kingdom after the issues of May 1940, and that technical litera- ture from Russia was greatly delayed.19 The loss of foreign scientific and technical information sources co- incided with an acceleration in demand for technical materials from the armed forces and industry. While the Keeper of the Books at the Science Museum Library anticipated reduced usage, and consequently let 40% of his staff go, borrowing from that institution actually increased dra- matically: The total number of borrowing institutions rose from a pre- war level of 450 to over 1,000 by 1945. The library reported that the areas most heavily impacted on by defense activities were physics, chem- istry and engineering - all subjects in which German journals were tra- ditionally strong.20 Aslib Mobilizes for the Crisis. In the six months preceding the United States' entry into the war, Aslib sharpened its focus on the problem of the shortage of German periodicals. The organization had already, in June 1940, started to issue a series of Wartime Guides to sources of special- Spring 1989 283
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science ized information, indicating where in Britain hard- to- get and foreign publications could be found on such subjects as fuel, electrical engineer- ing, telecommunication, agriculture and general engineering.21 Now Aslib turned its attention to photocopy as a means of multiplying the few existing issues, but this was a recourse fraught with legal problems: The International Copyright Law and the Patents, etc. Emergency Act of 1939 restricted photocopying of imported materials to those cases where there was full evidence of the urgent need of the material.22 It was pre- cisely to document such a need that in June 1941 the Royal Society, with the help of Rockefeller Foundation money, asked Aslib to survey British specialized libraries to determine how the breakdown of scientific com- munication was affecting them. Eight hundred ten circulars were sent out in Aslib's "Enemy Periodicals Project." Of the 245 libraries that replied, most had not received any German publications at all since May 1940, and all agreed that American journals were not an adequate sub- stitute.23 Besides documenting the critical need for improved acquisitions of enemy periodicals, the Aslib survey revealed an interesting anomaly, namely that British government libraries had much less trouble than other institutions in acquiring such publications. Aslib found that it was not hard for booksellers to get import licenses or to obtain permission from the Treasury to pay agents in neutral countries. The big problem seemed to be that transit through Switzerland and Portugal was very slow; Aslib's report to the Royal Society noted, however, that "These problems are totally absent in a few select cases of powerful bodies such as the Bank of England, which is neither willing to share its supply of periodicals or divulge its source of supply."24 The case of His Majesty's Stationery Office (H.M.S.O.) was particularly interesting: It claimed to Aslib that it was not using special privileges, such as diplomatic pouches, for delivery, but Aslib nonetheless sensed discrimination: Nothing definite can be proved, but in practice the packages of publications or- dered by HMSO come through with reasonable regularity, whereas those for other importing agents are subjected to indefinite delay. The result has been to discourage all but the most persistent importers and thus virtually to throttle all supplies except those coming to government libraries.25 The recommendations which the Aslib leadership formulated as a result of the survey were forwarded in a " Secret" memorandum to the Scientific Advisory Committee of the War Cabinet in August 1941 . The recommendations were that (1) periodicals continue to be collected by individual libraries; (2) Aslib or some other agency become a clearing house for locating scientific and technical publications in the United Kingdom; (3) Aslib issue bulletins publicizing materials newly arrived in the country; (4) Aslib investigate means by which librarians and booksellers might more swiftly receive German periodicals; and (5) Aslib encourage the collection, somewhere in the country, of one copy of 284 Volume 29, Number 4
Aslib at War every item on a list of important periodicals.26 While this last recommen- dation seems to be laying the groundwork for a possible future photo- copying project, solutions to the legal obstacles to such a project were not swift in coming. In October 1941 another "Secret" memo to the War Cabinet's Scientific Advisory Committee contained complaints from Aslib's Secretary, Miss E.M.R. Ditmas, that the Patent Office seemed intent on interpreting literally the Patents Emergency Act of 1939, and her insistence that something be done to end the deadlock.27 In November 1941 DSIR called a meeting of representatives of gov- ernment libraries, H.M.S.O. and Aslib to consider the reproduction problem. Aslib must have convinced the policy makers of the critical na- ture of scientific information supply, for the outcome of the meeting was the recommendation that microfilm be adopted as a means of duplicat- ing enemy periodicals in short supply.28 Thus, a month before Pearl Harbor, a British library organization had laid the foundations for the documentation plan that would, with American military help after 1942, secure the flow of enemy scientific publications to the Allies for the dura- tion of the war. Anglo-American Scientific Information Exchange Before 1942. Before we be- gin a discussion of American involvement with the Aslib project, it is necessary to examine the patterns that had been developing between 1939 and 1942 in Anglo-American scientific information exchange. We know from the authorized biography of William Stephenson, chief Brit- ish wartime intelligence liaison with the United States, that as the possi- bility of England's defeat loomed larger in the course of 1940-1941, ef- forts were made to transfer its scientific secrets to the United States: English code-breakers had learned that the German invasion was set for mid-September 1940, and Churchill hoped that, in the event of its suc- cess, Roosevelt would let the British carry on from American bases, linked with anti-Nazi guerrillas in English redoubts.29 The Americans, on the other hand, were mindful that British defense research was in many areas greatly more advanced than that of the United States - specifically in air-borne radar and in weapons applications of atomic energy - and they were interested in information the British might give them. Britain had been a leader in nuclear science since Rutherford first split the atom in 1919. In March 1940 two refugee scientists working in Birmingham, England, wrote a report to Britain's defense chiefs dem- onstrating the practical feasibility of an atomic bomb. They described the critical mass of uranium necessary, how to separate enriched ura- nium, detonation and the terrible effects of radiation.30 This report (which was brought to the United States by William Stephenson)31 led to the creation in England of an atomic bomb project, the Maud Commit- tee, and by the summer of 1940 work was going on in London, Oxford, Cambridge, Birmingham, Liverpool and at the Imperial Chemical In- Spring 1989 285
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science dustries (ICI) laboratories - all places vulnerable to German bombs and, possibly, occupation. The official historian of the British atomic en- ergy commission later reported There is no doubt that the work of the Maud Commission had put the British in the lead in the race for the bomb. . . . Without the work of the Maud Committee, the clarity of its analysis, its synthesis of theory and practical programming, its tone of urgency, the Second World War might well have ended before the atomic bomb was dropped.32 This, then, is the background of the establishment of the formal offi- cial network set up to assure the mutual exchange of scientific informa- tion between England and America: The United States represented a safe haven for advanced British science, and the Americans were inter- ested in acquiring the latest British technology in certain areas. At this point we encounter once again the influential activity of Henry Tizard: It was he who, while acting as scientific advisor to the air chief, had first suggested a scientific liaison with Washington in 1939. Finally, in July 1940 President Roosevelt invited a full-blown British scientific mission to the United States, which Tizard headed. Not only did his September 1940 mission carry with it a large amount of technical equipment,33 but accompanying Tizard were experts in a variety of fields who were per- sonally responsible for a massive transfer to their U.S. counterparts of high-level research information in many areas, in some of which the British were soon to relinquish their lead. In atom bomb research, for example, the English physicist (and later Nobel laureate) John Cock- croft found at the time of the mission that ' 'nearly all the work in Amer- ica seemed to be behind that carried out in Britain and that it was not proceeding as fast as the British work. ' ' Within a year and a half, how- ever, "it was clear . . . that the Americans, who had been well behind the British in the race for the bomb had drawn level and were indeed passing them by . " The Tizard mission led directly to the establishment in early 1941 of both a London Office of the U.S. National Defense Research Commit- tee and a Washington office of the newly established British Central Sci- ence Office (BCSO). While the scientific information exchange was plagued on both sides by fears of patent infringement and suspicion that sharp-minded businessmen might use the information to capture post- war markets,36 both offices nonetheless functioned as important con- duits. The BCSO had a staff of seventeen scientists. Its functions were to (1) act as a center for visiting scientists from England; (2) maintain cor- dial relations with the various scientific departments of the U.S. govern- ment; (3) query the U.S. government on subjects forwarded from offi- cial agencies at home; (4) act as a clearing house for the mutual exchange of technical reports; (5) report on scientific and technological policy changes in the United States, and (6) purchase books, journals, specifi- cations, and chemical apparatuses relevant to scientific projects at 286 Volume 29, Number 4
Aslib at War home.37 (It was through this office that copies of the minutes of the Maud Committee were sent to the U.S. National Defense Research Commit- tee. A British historian noted that the traffic the other way was much lighter.)38 It is curious that while by early 1949 an agreement had been reached on the exchange of British and American scientific documentation, no effort had been made to collaborate in solving the increasingly vexing problem of the acquisition of German scientific publications. This fail- ure can be largely explained by the fact that for over two years after the German invasion of Poland, America remained neutral and developed a set of mechanisms for importing German periodicals different from those of belligerent Britain. In 1939 a consortium of American library associations set up a Joint Committee on Importations that attempted with diminishing success to arrange for shipments of multiple copies of desired continental publications. By mid- 1942, however, the most effec- tive acquisitions operation was being run by a military unit known as the Interdepartmental Committee for the Acquisition of Foreign Publica- tions (IDC), operating under the Office of Strategic Services (OSS). The IDC bought single copies of foreign journals overseas in neutral Switzer- land, Portugal and Sweden, reproduced them on microfilm and distrib- uted the films to government agencies. The IDC -supplied microfilm was technically available to all American libraries through the Library of Congress, but publicity about the operation was limited to a select num- ber of research libraries.39 The Aslib Microfilm Service (AMS). Given the pattern established by 1942 of Anglo-American cooperation in scientific information ex- change, and the difficulties the Americans were by this time experienc- ing in importing enemy publications, it was perhaps inevitable that the United States should become involved in Aslib 's microfilm project. By early 1942 the Aslib Microfilm Service (AMS) was on the point of be- coming operational. The decision had been made by DSIR and HMSO to permit duplication of the foreign materials coming in to HMSO be- fore they were distributed to the various agencies that had ordered them, and from the master negative to make microfilm copies or enlarged pa- per prints on demand. In January 1942 a Standing Advisory Commit- tee40 was appointed to AMS and serious fund-raising had begun for the purchase of cameras: ultimately the Rockefeller Foundation donated $10,000, British industry more than £2,000, and the Royal Society £200. 41 It was at this point that Washington heard about the Aslib project and dispatched to London a man who was ultimately responsible not only for coordinating British and American microfilming efforts in the AMS, but for centralizing several disparate English government proj- ects there as well. Eugene Power, a 36-year-old expert in the microreproduction of sci- entific materials and vice-president of University Microfilm, Inc., in Spring 1989 287
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Ann Arbor, Michigan, arrived in London on April 2, 1942, as a special representative of the Library of Congress and an unofficial agent of the IDC.42 Power, whose work for the American Council of Learned Soci- eties' British Manuscripts Project43 brought him to England frequently, was asked by the U.S. Coordinator of Information (COI) - the forerun- ner of the OSS, which was not founded till June 1942- to help the COI in filming enemy documents obtained by the British for shipment to the U.S. University Microfilm was interested in setting up a retail service for hard-to-get foreign scientific periodicals, and he agreed. It became immediately apparent to both him and to Aslib that it would be most efficient to merge U.S. and English efforts and have the AMS, strength- ened by whatever technical resources the Americans could proffer, sup- ply both the British and American markets, with Power being the U.S. agent for the product. But Power knew that the COI was also interested in enemy newspapers, an area in which Power had no personal business interest: the COI was planning to open enemy newspaper procurement stations in Lisbon and Berne, but its present needs were critical. While Aslib was not in the business of microfilming newspapers, Power learned that the British Ministry of Information (MOI) was launching a plan to collect, film and distribute copies of issues of the continental press to pertinent government agencies. It was Power's accomplishment, be- fore leaving London in May 1942, to bring together all of the different agencies interested in importing enemy publications and to establish a group, formalized as the Executive Committee of the Aslib Microfilm Service, in which American intelligence and the British MOI shared a concern in the operation with Aslib. By December 1942 the personnel were assembled and the mecha- nisms were in place for Allied cooperation. By that time the OSS had set up a full-scale Research and Analysis Branch in London, with Allan Evans in charge of IDC activities. Evans represented American interests on the AMS Executive Committee (a second American representative from the OSS, R. H. Carruthers, would be added in early 1944), while the spokesman for His Majesty's government was the Honorable H. Howard of the General Overseas Division of the Ministry of Informa- tion. It was as a result of these individuals' active cooperation that the * 'Terms of Agreement between Participating Bodies" were drafted and then finally officially approved by the executive council in June 1943. The terms stipulated that the AMS was a permanent undertaking of Aslib, under whose association rules it would be conducted, but that ' 'for the duration of the war emergency, Aslib joins with representatives of His Majesty's Government and the United States Government in a Joint Committee which shall administer the operation and procedures of the A. M.S. and its laboratory." The Joint Committee was to be made up of the Secretary of Aslib and the director of the microfilm service, with a delegation from the Aslib Council of four additional members; 288 Volume 29, Number 4
Aslib at War one member to represent the Royal Society; two members from His Majesty's government to be nominated jointly by the MOI and HMSO: and two members from the U.S. government to be nominated by the director of the OSS, London.45 The day-to-day operations of the AMS were the charge of the direc- tor, Lucia Moholy, a dynamic woman who had been responsible for the microfilm work sponsored at Cambridge University by the Rockefeller Foundation. Because the Science Museum Library subscribed to more foreign periodicals than any other British library, Aslib asked its librar- ian, J. Lancaster Jones, if its microfilm operation might be housed there. Lancaster Jones, who had been microfilming his library's enemy periodicals even before the AMS came into being, readily agreed, and during the winter of 1942-43 the library, on the South Kensington cam- pus of the Imperial College of Science and Technology, was the center of activity. In April 1 943 , with more microfilm cameras coming in from the United States and the AMS taking on additional work for U.S. intelli- gence unrelated to its own periodicals project, Moholy and her staff moved to roomier quarters in the flat of the superintendent of the nearby Victoria and Albert Museum.46 Here were installed five American Ko- dak Microfile cameras, the best then available - microphotography de- velopments in the United States then being more advanced than else- where;47 the new quarters also had a laboratory for processing film. Here the AMS remained until the end of the war, to all outward appearances simply a British library service, charging its subscribers a penny a page for microfilm copies and a shilling for paper enlargements. From the declassified OSS war diary we are now finally able to learn the AMS' sources of supply. These included HMSO, at which arrived all the periodicals subscribed to by it as the agent of about fifty govern- ment departments; the Foreign Office Ministry, through which streamed quantities of papers and journals sent by press attaches, partic- ularly the Lisbon post; the Air Ministry, which supplied AMS with So- viet journals; and the Ministry of Economic Warfare - characterized by Moholy as a particularly reluctant sharer - sent over its German eco- nomic journals. One of the most important sources and most willing col- laborator was the Ministry of Information, which received a vast amount of material from the combined Allied units copying continental materials in Stockholm (the IDC agent there, Adele Kibre, was respon- sible, with British aid, for shipping back to MOI 192 reels of micro- film).48 The British and American agents responsible for collecting the periodicals in the neutral countries and channeling them back to En- gland tried to the extent possible to mask their identities through sub- scriptions in the names of cooperative (or fictitious) resident nationals. The logistics of getting the individual copies of the periodicals to the Victoria and Albert Museum for copying, after they arrived at the vari- ous government ministries from the collecting posts abroad, lay in the Spring 1989 289
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science hands of the OSS branch headquarters at 72 Grosvenor Street. Evans had the services of several U.S. Marines whose days were spent picking up newly arrived items at the ministries, delivering them to the AMS, and making sure they were returned to the lender within the strict time- limit imposed: forty-eight hours for scientific and technical periodicals; twenty-four hours for newspapers. Within this time, three negatives were made of the periodicals: one for the AMS' own retail service, one for the IDC to send to Washington, and one for Eugene Power's Ameri- can retail service. All in all, the AMS was enormously productive: By the end of 1943 the Service was regularly receiving about 280 titles from the British government posts and IDC agents in Lisbon, Stockholm and Istanbul, and by late 1945 its total production of microfilms photo- graphed, copied, recorded, and indexed was 5.5 million pages. Not all of this went on to Washington. As the war progressed, IDC offices in neu- tral countries sent increasing amounts of film direct to the United States, and the AMS and the IDC were acting as supplements to one another, filling out each other's want-lists. In the beginning, however, during those bleak, defeat-filled months of 1942 preceding the November North African invasion, the AMS and British agents working under harrowing conditions on the European mainland were responsible for virtually all the continental journals received by the IDC's Washington headquar- ters.49 In retrospect, the smooth working of the whole AMS arrangement must in large part be attributed to the mutual respect of Evans and Mo- holy. She referred to him after the war as a man of ' 'lucidity of vision and fairness of judgment. "50 The OSS War Diary, in turn, refers repeatedly to Moholy's enthusiastic cooperation and indicates that Evans came in- creasingly to rely on her for the tracing of non-Aslib related items for which requests came in from the American forces or scientists. Evans on his part could be counted on to intervene for her whenever any impedi- ments appeared in the channels from the HMSO and the Foreign Of- fice. The end result, according to the War Diary, was that "the willing cooperation of Mrs. Moholy caused her and her staff to assume in some degree the appearance of being an extension of the R[esearch] and A[nalysis] staff in London and thus greatly to increase the scope and ef- fectiveness of IDC operations."51 The diary indicates that this state of affairs was a source of irritation for some Aslib officials, presumably on proprietary or nationalistic grounds, or perhaps because a library orga- nization was felt to be no place for the military to intrude. This dissatis- faction may partially account for the fact that in her 1946 article on the AMS in Aslib's own Journal of Documentation, Moholy does not mention the enormous amount of non-Aslib related work done by the Service and keeps references to American military involvement in the periodical copying minimal. A more important factor in her reticence may have been the fact that the entire operation was classified "secret' ' during the 290 Volume 29, Number 4
Aslib at War war; indeed official U.S. reports about the IDC released even in late 1945 did not mention Aslib 's involvement at all.52 The Periodical Reprint Program in the United States . The story of the AMS copies does not end with their final availability in microfilm, however. Users were not as enthusiastic about microfilm as documentalists and there was, moreover, a shortage of microfilm readers due to wartime conditions. Moholy attributed to the microfilm format the failure of the AMS retail trade to live up to the expectations,53 but the critical paper shortage in England at that time left her few alternatives. This was not the case in the United States, where by early 1943 the IDC launched an operation whereby the scholarly reprint house of Edwards Brothers in Ann Arbor, Michigan, published photo-offset paper copies of the conti- nental periodicals under a license from the U.S. Alien Property Custo- dian (APC), which had seized the periodicals' copyrights. Not all of the microfilm sent from the AMS and the IDC agents was reprinted: An Advisory Committee on the Periodical Republication Program was set up in October 1942 to assist the APC in choosing titles for reprint. Of the eleven members of the committee, eight were the top librarians or docu- mentalists in the United States, including E. J. Crane (editor, Chemical Abstracts), Watson Davis (president, American Documentation Insti- tute), Sarah Jones (librarian, Bureau of Standards), Keyes Metcalf (president, American Library Association), Luther Evans (assistant li- brarian of Congress), and Paul North Rice (executive secretary, Associ- ation of Research Libraries). The constitution of this group guaranteed that the literature needs of the most important disciplines would be con- sidered. By the end of the war the APC had sent to a group of selected research libraries seven circulars announcing the availability of reprints of a total of 1 16 separate continental journals; principally German and Austrian, the reprinted titles also included sixteen French, three Dutch and one Belgian journal. These periodicals covered almost every phase of scien- tific and technological wartime interest, including acoustics, aviation, biochemistry, electronics, engineering, enzymology, explosives, mathe- matics, pathology, petroleum, plastics, rubber and virus research. An analysis done by the APC at the war's end showed that 94 percent of the over 900 subscribers to the reprints used them for war purposes and that 58 of the subscribers were in the British Empire.54 The British Central Science Office in Washington subscribed to the reprints for HMSO, which then forwarded them to UK government agencies; other British libraries could subscribe through H. K. Lewis, Edwards Brothers' U.K. agent. The efficiency of both Aslib 's microfilm service and the APC's peri- odical reprint operation depended, of course, on the ability of the conti- nental publishers to fill the orders placed by the British and IDC agents - sometimes using cover names and address - in neutral coun- Spring1989 291
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science tries. Every effort was made by the British and Americans to keep the whole network secret, lest word of its strategic importance to the Allied war effort endanger the source of supply. Accompanying one of the first announcements of AMS' operations in 1942 was the request "that no communication be made of this information to the Press or to anyone outside your own institution."55 The Americans were equally security- conscious: Accompanying all seven of the circulars sent out by the APC announcing available reprinted periodicals was the warning: "NOT FOR PUBLICATION! If any publicity is given, it will mean the cessa- tion of the supply of copy and total failure of the enterprise. ' ' (In fact, the APC only disclosed at the end of the war that it had gotten all of its copy from the OSS, and only in 1985 did the declassification of the OSS Lon- don war diary make public the extent to which the OSS used British sources for its supply.) Correspondence now in the West German national archives has re- vealed that the subscriptions purchased by British and American agents in neutral countries were not actually in much jeopardy till rather late in the war. The nature and quality of the materials published in Germany after 1939 make it evident that the Nazis continued their peacetime pol- icy of encouraging the dissemination of science, both as a means of ex- panding scientific frontiers within the Reich and occupied territories and of demonstrating to the world German scientific superiority. The suspicion that the information thus made available might be of strategic value to their enemies seems to have dawned only in 1943, when Berlin issued a decree banning the export of German printed matter potentially damaging to the Reich. Top party officials apparently found compliance lax. In early 1944 Martin Bormann wrote colleagues in the Ministry of Propaganda reminding them of the earlier decree.56 By the end of that year certain book dealers in Sweden had been identified as key Allied suppliers: the Gumpert firm in Goteberg, for example, and Fritzes Hov- bokhandel in Stockholm.57 In September 1944 a surprising breach of security on the Allied side led to the Germans' discovery of the American book reprint program: An advertisement placed in the (British) trade publication The Bookseller for Edwards Brothers' reprinted German books, and listing H. K. Lewis as their sole U.K. distributor, was seen by the Germans. The advertise- ment occasioned yet another Reich directive to monitor carefully the ex- port of German books as well as specific instructions to the German Swedish post to obtain the catalog of the "judischen Firma H. K. Lewis. ' '58 While the advertisement did not focus attention on the period- ical reprint program, by December 1944 suspicions in Berlin were suf- ficient to produce a suggestion that periodicals be removed from the book trade altogether.59 It is quite incomprehensible how H. K. Lewis could have been per- mitted to place such an advertisement, but it does not seem to have had 292 Volume 29, Number 4
Aslib at War much effect on the flow of German materials. American records do refer to a temporary slowdown at an unspecified time in deliveries of German periodicals to Lisbon due to Nazi suspicion about the subscribers (all of whom were proved to be legitimate Portuguese),60 but it is unclear whether the incident was a result of the H. K. Lewis advertisement. The circumstances of war were in any case making official restrictions on German exports irrelevant: Germany's publishing output had been dec- imated by the gigantic Royal Air Force attack of December 3, 1943, on Leipzig, which destroyed 90 percent of the publishing center's pub- lishers, paper manufacturers, and type founders. By October 1944 Ger- man periodical publishing was reduced to 10 percent of its prewar pro- duction. Thus, even had the Germans exercised effective export restrictions after the fall of 1944 - and I have found no evidence that they did - there were by that time relatively few important publications left for them to control. Impact of the Combined Aslib-IDC Operation on the War. Having reviewed the background and operations of Aslib 's microfilm service and its ex- tension through the American republication program, it is appropriate now to ask whether these efforts had any real effect on the course of the war. The archives of HMSO in England's Public Records Office con- tain many letters from research officers of British industrial firms prais- ing the importance of the reprinted materials to their various types of war work. The area, however, in which there is the most dramatic evi- dence of a substantial contribution in this regard was in the development of the atomic bomb, the main work on which had by 1943 shifted from England to the United States. Since German scientists at the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute had first split the uranium atom in 1938, there was considerable fear among Allied scientists, especially the Americans,61 that the Germans might be ahead of them on the bomb, and the air- mailed microfilm shipments of enemy scientific periodicals were eagerly awaited in the United States. We know that the Germans were indeed working on an atomic bomb only till 1942. At some point in that year the project was abandoned as impractical, for a variety of reasons, including both the loss of Germa- ny's heavy water supply in Norway through enemy action, and because the Germans badly overestimated the amount of enriched uranium nec- essary.62 In any case, the Germans' conclusions about the impracticabil- ity of atomic fission for war use resulted in the declassification of the project and the release of valuable research: Eight articles in the 1942 and 1943 issues of Zeitschrift fur Physik and three in 1943 issues of Die Nat- urwissenschaften, by Otto Hahn, Fritz Strassmann, H. J. Born, W. Seelmann-Eggbert and their associates at the Kaiser Wilhelm Institut fur Chemie and the Radiologisch Abteilung der Auergesellschaft, gave detailed descriptions of experiments with the fission of the uranium atom, the gaseous and other byproducts obtained, and the energies re- Spring 1989 293
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science leased. These articles, all of which were reprinted by the ADC , produced much excitement among members of the Manhattan Project, who were able to skip certain proofs of their own as a result of the German findings. At the end of the war the articles were credited as having been factors in making the atom bomb possible by 1945.63 Conclusion British awareness of the importance of scientific and technical infor- mation, originating in World War I and focused through the Depart- ment of Scientific and Industrial Research and Aslib, was acute enough to justify commiting precious resources during the darkest days of World War II to the continuation of foreign information supply. The United States government's mechanisms for foreign publications-gathering in 1941 were only as old as the new war emergency, and for most of the first year the United States was at war, a small group of British documental- ists were critical to America's access to the enemy's science. Unquestionably the addition of American resources to the Aslib mi- crofilm project, and the project's extension through the Alien Property Custodian's reprinting program, greatly increased its strategic value to the Allies. But had the American government been forced to start its own publications procurement operation from scratch, its effectiveness would have been severely retarded. Forty years later the former chief of the IDC remembers that it was the Aslib project that ' ' got the IDC off to a flying start."64 Thus, much of the credit for the United States' contin- ued access to enemy scientific and technical information, and for Ameri- ca's ability to exploit this information expeditiously, must be given to those responsible for the timely planning and implementation of the Aslib Microfilm Service, which we are now able to recognize as one of World War IPs extraordinarily successful examples of Allied scientific intelligence cooperation. References and Notes 1 . Ludwig, Karl-Heinz: Technik und ingenieure im Dritten Reich (Dusseldorf: Droste Verlag, 1974) p.32. 2. Neville, Sir Harry: The Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (London: Allen & Unwin, 1962), passim. 3. The Library Association, founded in 1877, was preoccupied chiefly with the leadership and services of public, nonspecialized libraries. 4. ' 'War Diary of the Research and Analysis Branch, OSS, London, Records Group 226, Mil- itary Records Division, US National Archives (declassified 1985), 12v. 5. Of the fifty-two charter members of SLA in 1909, only one was a representative of a govern- ment agency. See Encyclopedia of Library and Information Science 28:386-443 (New York: Dekker, 1980), s.v. "Special Library and the SLA," by Frank McKenna. 6. Clark, Ronald: Tizard (London: Methuen, 1965), p.76. 7. Indexing and abstracting in England followed a mixed support pattern before the war. The (British) Bureau of Chemical and Physiological Abstracts was supported by members of the scien- tific societies involved, but the government funded some similar activity through its Agricultural Bureaux and DSIR research stations. 8. Hutton, R.S. : "The Documentation of Science Information among Scientists," Empire Scien- 294 Volume 29, Number 4
Aslib at War tifie Conference 1946 (Royal Society: London, 1946), p.691. 9. Houghton, Bernard: Out of the Dinosaurs: The Evolution of the National Lending Library for Science and Technology (London: Clive Bingley, 1972), p.21. 10. Rayward, Boyd: "The International Exposition and the World Documentation Congress, Paris 1937," Library Quarterly 53:263 (July 1983). 1 1 . Richards, Pamela Spence: "Aryan Librarianship: Academic and Research Libraries under Hider," Journal of Library History 19:252 (Spring 1984). 12. Mackintosh, E.S.B.: "War History of the Science Museum Library 1939-1945," mimeo- graphed, 1945. File 201 in the archives of the Science Museum Library (SML), London. 13. Harris, P.R. : "Microfilm Replacements in the British Library Reference Division," Micro- form Review 15:16 (Winter 1986). 14. Library Association Committee for the Recovery of Books and Manuscripts, The Restoration of Libraries: A Brief Account of the Inter-allied Book Centre (London: Library Assn. , n.d.), p. 7. 15. Interview with Elizabeth Evans, wartime librarian at the Cavendish Laboratory, later li- brarian at the Cambridge Philosophical Society, Cambridge, Eng., July 3, 1986. 16. Ibid. 17. Swets en Zeidinger Boekhandel to the Librarian, Cambridge Philosophical Society, Decem- ber 20, 1939. Archives of the Scientific Periodicals Library, Cambridge Univ. (formerly the Cam- bridge Philosophical Society Library). 18. Memorandum on "The Aslib Foreign Periodicals Survey and Other Bibliographical Proj- ects Discussed with Dr. O'Brien on Dec. 12, 1941," p.3, mimeographed, in file 2109/2 SML. 19. War Cabinet, Scientific Advisory Committee, "Supply and Availability of Enemy Periodi- cals in this Country," Oct. 7, 1941, mimeographed, marked "Secret," ibid. 20. Mackintosh, E.S.B.: op.cit., p. 69. 21. Hutton, R.S.: "Origin and History of Aslib," Journal of Documentation 1:14 (June 1945). 22. "Aslib Enemy Periodicals Project," June 1941, mimeographed circular to member li- braries, in file 2109/1, SML. 23. "Report on Work Done for Aslib Enemy Periodicals Project," July 15, 1941, mimeo- graphed, in file 2109/2, ibid. 24. War Cabinet, Scientific Advisory Committee, "Report to the Royal Society by the Associa- tion of Special Libraries and Information Bureaux on the Survey of Scientific Periodicals from En- emy and Enemy-occupied Countries," August 15, 1941, mimeographed, marked "Secret," ibid. 25. Idem, "Supply and Availability of 'Enemy' Periodicals in This Country," Oct. 7, 1949, mimeographed, marked "Secret," ibid. 26. Idem, "Report to the Royal Society," Aug. 15, 1941, ibid. 27. Idem, "Supply and Availability," Oct. 7, 1941, ibid. 28. Moholy, Lucia: * 'The Aslib Microfilm Service: The Story of its Wartime Activities, ' 'Journal of Documentation 2:147 (Dec. 1946). 29. Stevenson, William: A Man Called Intrepid (New York: BJ, 1976), p. 40. 30. Gowing, Margaret: Britain and the Atomic Age (London: St. Martin's, 1964), p. 40. 31. Stevenson, p. 113. 32. Gowing, p. 39. 33. Ronald Clark, p. 268. 34. Gowing, p. 39. 35. Ibid., p. 127. 36. Clark, p. 281. 37. King, Alexander: "International Relations in Science," Empire Scientific Conference 1946, p. 121. 38. Gowing, p. 65. 39. Richards, Pamela Spence: "Gathering Enemy Scientific Information in Wartime: the OSS and the Periodical Republication Program ," Journal of Library History 16: 253-55 (Spring 1981). 40. Represented on the committee were The Royal Society, by Professor E.N. da C. Andrade, Dr. E.F. Armstrong, Professor V.H. Blackman, and Dr. C.H. Desch; the government libraries, by Sir David Chadwick (Agricultural Research Council, A. A. Gomme (Patent Office Library), Dr. F.H.K. Green (Medical Research Council), Mr. J. Lancaster Jones (Science Museum Library), andC.A. Spencer (DISR): and Aslib, by EJ. Carter, E.M.R. Ditmas, and Dr. R.S. Hutton. Mo- holy, p. 147. 41. Ibid., p. 148. 42. "War Diary of the Research and Analysis Branch, OSS, London," V.I, p.3, Records Group 226, Military Records Division, U.S. National Archives. Spring 1989 295
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 43. The British Manuscripts Project, underway from 1941-1945, entailed the microfilming of those British archives identified as especially valuable by a group of U.S. scholars. See Alan Mar- shall Meckler, Micropublishing: A History of Scholarly Micropublishing in America 1938-1980 (Westport, Conn.: Greenwood, 1982). 44. War Diary, V.2, p.43. 45. Moholy, p. 149. 46. Mackintosh, p. 67. 47. Meckler, p.56. 48. War Diary, V.l,p.72. 49. Interview with F.G. Kilgour, wartime chief of the IDC, Columbus, Ohio, May 20, 1987. 50. Moholy, p. 150. 51. War Diary, V.I, p.66. 52 . A 1983 British article on the AMS follows the example of Moholy and makes little mention of U.S. involvement. See Mary Ann Colyer, "Aslib Microfilm Service," Aslib Proceedings 35 (June/ July 1983): 297-302. 53. Moholy, p. 152. 54. U.S. Alien Property Custodian, "Report to the President on the Periodicals Republication Program," Washington, 1945, mimeographed. 55. Aslib Microfilm Service, "Preliminary Note," 1942. file 2109/3 SML. 56. A circular letter of Bormann dated January 11, 1944, refers to an earlier decree of Hitler (about which Bormann claims already to have written in April 1943) to stop the export of German print that could be used against Germany. File NS 6/440, Federal Archives, Coblenz. 57. Chancery memorandum of November 21, 1944, ibid. 58. Krallert to Karasek, September 26, 1944, item #275, ibid. The advertisement noticed by the Germans may have been the one carried by the Bookseller on June 29, 1944, under the heading ' 'German Technical Books. ' ' 59. Chancery Memorandum of December 16, 1944, item #571, ibid. 60. Chapman, Edward: former chief of the U.S. Alien Property Custodian's Copyright Admin- istration, manuscript notes, in possession of the author. 61 . See the reprint of Samuel Goudsmit's ALSOS (Los Angeles: Tomash, 1983) with an intro- duction by R.V. Jones, who expresses amazement at how little in comparison to the British the Americans knew about the Germans' nuclear activities, or indeed, lack of them, and how conse- quendy the Americans were unnecessarily fearful of German competition (p. xi). 62. Jones, R.V.: The Wizard War: British Scientific Intelligence 1939-1945 (New York: Coward, 1978), p.483. 63. U.S. Alien Property Custodian, "Report to the President on Periodical Republican Pro- gram," Washington, D.C. Nov. 1, 1945. Mimeographed. 64. Interview with Frederick G. Kilgour, Columbus, Ohio, May 27, 1987. 296 Volume 29, Number 4