A Young Adults as Problems How the Social Construction of a Marginalized User Category Occurs Mary K. Chelton Two examples of the process of user categorization in professional communication are analyzed to show how marginalization occurs as a direct product of communicative activity. In one example of the process on a professional electronic discussion group, even while admitting that young adults avoid using the OPAC and seem uninterested in their information requests, the librarian blames them for their own behavior and absolves herself from any responsibility to help them. In another example, the repre- sentation of adolescents as "problem users" on a journal cover is examined. The impli- cations of viewing communication as an explanatory, constitutive force that produces librarians' understanding of users are discussed. Communication is primarily viewed within the library and information sci- ence (LIS) profession as a means toward an end. It is a process for the transfer of information from one person to another or between a system and a person. Rarely is communication viewed as con- stitutive; that is, as the means by which professional understandings of reality are interpreted and produced. The fol- lowing discussion draws on the latter view of communication to show how the constitutive process actually works in two examples that are in direct opposi- tion to professional rhetoric advocating equity of service to users. Librarians often engage in conven- ient verbal categorizations to describe and provide service (e.g., "adult," "young adult" and "children"; "users" and "nonusers"; etc.), and to define different occupational roles (e.g., "clerical," "para- professional," or "professional"; "line" and "staff; "public service" and "techni- cal service"; etc.). Most of these catego- rizations are conventional and commonly taken for granted in the field. They come under scrutiny only when they are con- tested, such as recent concerns over "librarian" versus "information profes- sional," or "customer" versus "patron" or "user." What remains largely unexam- ined, however, is not which categoriza- tion should be privileged, but rather how the process of categorization works. By this is meant social categorization through nouns and referents in daily speech, as opposed to the formal catego- rization and classification schemes used in everyday work as librarians. Since cat- egorization is a basic human communica- tion activity, this aspect of categorization and the consequences of its noncon- scious enactment warrant further exami- nation, especially when it works against stated professional goals. Goffman suggests that everyone has both a unique, individual personal iden- tity as well as a simultaneous categorical identity.1 For example, a person may be 4 Volume 42, Number 1
Young Adults os Problems 5 About the Author MaryK. Chelton is Associate Professor, School of Library and Information Studies, Queens College, New York. short and slender with blue eyes and brown hair at the same time she is also, categorically speaking, a woman, wife, mother, sister, librarian, fiction reader, customer, etc. The personal and the cat- egorical reside simultaneously in the same person. The difference, however, is that her categorical identity is socially derived through interaction in specific contexts with other people. It cannot be uniquely claimed, and in some instances, the person so categorized may not wish to claim membership at all. Everyone is familiar with the phrase, "I'm not a , but ," which is often used by people trying to present an argument or idea without being labeled part of the social category most closely associated with it. According to Goffman, the reason certain social categories are less prefer- able than others is because they have acquired a "stigma," which he defines as "a deeply discrediting attribute." People in these categories are considered to be less than normal when judged against some agreed-upon social standard, if they possess certain undesirable real, imagined, or attributed characteristics. The stigmatized person possesses some sort of attribute "that makes him differ- ent from others in the category of per- sons available for him to be, and of a less desirable kind. ... He is thus reduced in our minds from a whole and usual per- son to a tainted and discounted one."2 Categorizations in the Workplace Picking up on the work of Gofrman, Li- psky develops an analysis of public sector agencies, which he terms "street-level bureaucracies," characterized by chroni- cally scarce resources, ambiguous per- formance expectations, and a clientele not of their own choosing. Frontline serv- ice workers, or "street-level bureaucrats (SLBs)" caught in these organizational dilemmas, enact an interpretation of agency policy intended more to maximize control over clients than to implement what seems to them to be an idealized policy far removed from their perceived circumstances. One of the ways they do this is through a variety of communica- tive activities that Lipsky characterizes as "client control routines."3 In effect, such routines "construct" the ideal clients with whom these SLBs would prefer to interact, instead of the people who are actually there. Lipsky states, "An important part of this process is the way people learn to treat themselves as if they were categorical entities." These client control routines fall into four dimensions: (1) distribut- ing agency benefits and sanctions; (2) structuring the contexts of client- provider interactions; (3) teaching clients how to behave as clients; and (4) allocating psychological rewards and sanctions to clients who enter into rela- tionships with SLBs. Basically, these routines allow the service providers to "develop conceptions of their work and of their clients that narrow the gap between their personal and work limita- tions and the service ideal. These work practices and orientations are main- tained even while they contribute to the perversion of the service ideal or put the worker in the position of manipulating citizens on behalf of the agencies from which citizens seek help."4 Gutek raises the issue of service Winter 2001
6 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science providers becoming overly dependent on categorical assessments, because of the nature of contemporary service interactions is changing from personal and "relational" to more anonymous and "transactional" encounters, espe- cially with the increased use of technol- ogy. In this milieu, she suggests that "[e]ncounters encourage stereotyping by both parties because each has only a sin- gle short exposure to the other; in con- trast, relationships - with their history of interaction - gradually allow provider and customer to gain a relatively accu- rate view of each other." This may explain the interactions between librari- ans and young adult library users in cer- tain library service environments. Even if neighborhood young adults are repeat users with whom library staff are famil- iar, the after-school time and staff con- straints may force librarians into the mode of transactional rather than rela- tional encounters, in which stereotypi- cal categorizations come into play.5 How Categorization Works- An E-mail Example As part of a larger study on adult-ado- lescent service encounters in libraries, a query about why adolescents were trou- blesome was sent to PUBYAC, an Internet discussion list for librarians who work with children and young adults. In response to that query, the fol- lowing e-mail posting came back from a working librarian: I'll be happy to tell you why I find this age group "problematic." So many come to the reference desk with no idea of why they are there. They shove a piece of pa- per in my face and say, "This is my home- work. Where can I find this?" When I ask them what the assignment is, they appear to be looking at it for the very first time. Or they simply mumble, "I don't know." It's the total lack of concern and the assump- tion that I'll figure it all out for them and go fetch the materials that irritates me. We have OPACS, and many of these patrons won't even go near them. When I ask if they've checked the catalog, they reply they don't know how to use it. They will ask for staples, paper, direc- tions, permission to use the phone, but they won't ask for help using the OPACs. They don't come to the library for any other purpose than to socialize and both- er patrons who have legitimate business in the library. We're across the street from a high school. At 2:45, it is like a parade that crosses the street and enters the library. We hired a monitor to do nothing else but keep order in the library when the teenagers are here. In contrast to those who won't use the OPACs are the ones who love to bring a terminal down by screwing around in the DOS program. We have security features, but some have figured this out. One will bring it to my attention that a terminal is down, then two or three of his friends eagerly wait for me to log back on so they can watch. (I'm wise to this.) I know I sound "negative" but so many patrons in this age group don't need the services of the library or the librarians. They simply want a place to hang out until their parents pick them up. I love helping a kid find stuff for a tough research project. I enjoy taking vague questions and formulating reference questions. But having homework assign- ments and reading lists shoved in my face by healthy, intelligent, able-bodied young people who have no interest in their own homework just plain "bugs" me.6 Several things are going on here, the most significant of which is how the librarian creates a marginalized, unwor- thy client category whose behavior is viewed as the cause of the problematic status of the category itself. This is clas- sic "blaming the victim" logic, judging Volume 42, Number 1
Young Adults os Problems 7 from the above-quoted e-mail. The implied problem, as the librarian sees it, is that these young adults do not behave according to her standard of a "legitimate user." Since they don't know why they are there, they appear unconcerned about making themselves understood, assuming that she will figure it all out for them; won't ask for help with the OPACS; socialize and bother "legitimate users"; necessitate the hiring of a moni- tor; breach OPAC security features; and "shove" assignments at her. (One pre- sumes that her idea of a "legitimate user" would be someone who behaves exactly opposite of the description given.) The "legitimate user" is actually the absent totality of the stated description, the whole of which is predicated upon an unwritten and unstated standard that the teenagers, by definition, do not meet. By describing what is wrong with them, the librarian is simultaneously describing what is right with a different and pre- ferred category of users, and attaching a moral judgment to both categories. Adolescents are "bad," and post-adoles- cent young adults are "good." Strong, also drawing on Goffman, identifies a similar technique used by doctors in charity pediatrie clinics in Scotland as a form of moral work in which parental inadequacy is revealed through a type of discussion of wrong-doing termed "char- acter work."7 It is notable that the librarian does not denigrate the entire category of ado- lescent users; she also admits that there are exceptions who follow her expected rules: "I love helping a kid find stuff for a tough research project. I enjoy taking vague questions and formulating refer- ence questions." This implies that not all kids are unworthy, that there is a hierarchical ordering of acceptable behavior in which "worthy" young peo- ple may be contrasted to "unworthy" young people. The "worthiness" of behavior is related to the librarian's inference of what is acceptable in, as opposed to out of, a library setting. Thus what Jayyusi terms: moral matters - standards, criteria, judg- ments, implications, etc. - are bound up with various other practical matters - cat- egorizations, descriptions, inferences, etc. It is not the case that this relationship is between something called a description or a fact on the one hand and a moral notion, or a value, on the other hand. Rather . . . description (and 'fact') rests for its character and specifics on moral and other normative standards. . . .8 The Deference Deficit Another failing of this group as expressed in the librarian's perspective is the lack of respect for the librarian herself, who obviously expects to be treated like something other than a ser- vant. This lack of deference is recipro- cated by the librarian's assertion that she has nothing that these young people need, despite her earlier acknowledge- ment that several of them admitted not knowing how to use the OPAC when asked if they had looked there. The young people display no sense of social obligation in their demeanor which, in turn, leads to frustrated expectations on the part of the librarian. This interplay is an act of communication that discon- firms the professional self-image of the librarian. As Goffman explains, "Thus rules of conduct transform both action and inaction into expression, and whether the individual abides by the rules or breaks them, something signifi- cant is likely to be communicated."9 The fact that the behavior may well be unin- tentional on the part of the adolescents is almost irrelevant, because the librari- an perceives it to be intentional within the context of their interaction; it there- fore becomes real to her. As Deetz argues, it is on the basis of perceptions Winter 2001
8 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science that "human beings make judgments, decide courses of action, develop feel- ings, and make claims about the nature of reality."10 Since the e-mail post is exclusively the librarian's, it is difficult to ascertain intentionality without cor- roborating data from the adolescents. Something to be considered in ana- lyzing all library interactions with ado- lescents, however, is that because their library -related information needs are often imposed by other people such as parents or teachers, they have no deep interest in what they are looking for, and the "rule" expecting them to appear interested may seem to them to be either irrelevant or downright silly.11 What is being communicated from their perspec- tive might be construed less as inten- tional disregard for the librarian and unwillingness to help themselves, and more as intentional rebellion against rules of conduct meaningless to them in the first place. The librarian may per- ceive a mere lack of deference when she is actually being confronted with an insurrection. Goffman says, "to be point- edly refused an expected act of defer- ence is often a way of being told that open insurrection has begun."12 This may be a way of teenagers claiming their own category for themselves on their own terms, as opposed to how adults prefer to define them.13 For such adolescents, the "reward" for rebellion - their deviance from the behavior of the desired type of library user - is the withholding of service, jus- tified by the librarian's assessment of, and imposition of sanctions for, their be- havior. This is a perfect example of how Lipsky's client control routines work.14 How Categorization Works- the Representation Example In the May/June 1996 issue of Public Libraries, a feature article entitled "Managing the Problem Patron" appears, with a thematic cover illustration relat- ed to it. On the cover, underneath the name of the journal and the title of the article, there is a stylized picture of an angry, cursing teenager who is shredding a library book; an obviously blaring radio is in one hand and a spilled soda can is seen at his left foot. The cover illustration choice is particularly note- worthy because "noisy teenagers" is list- ed within the article itself as only one of thirteen types of problem patrons, rang- ing from "bathroom habitues" to "peo- ple who tear or scissor library materials." On the cover, though, the teenager has a pair of scissors sticking out of his waistband, so it might be sur- mised that he is representing two prob- lem subcategories, as well as the larger "problem patron" category, despite the distinctions made in the text. Nowhere on the journal cover does the word "teenager" appear; only the highlighted title of the article is juxtaposed with the image. Of all the thirteen subcategories of problem patrons listed in the article, which also includes "loud drunks," "vandals," "drug users," and "thieves," only the category of "noisy teenagers" is represented on the cover. Ironically, while the article illustrat- ed by the journal cover does categorize teenagers as problem patrons, the author's advice in the text to ignore the stereotype that all teenagers in groups are gang members, to realize that they lack self-confidence, and to treat them with humor as individuals is much more sym- pathetic than the responses that might be invoked by the instantly recognizable cover illustration. The question that has to be asked is why this illustration was chosen by the designer and then, in turn, by the American Library Association (ALA) Graphics staff, (assuming other choices were available), when it directly contradicts the author's advice in the text.15 Since neither the designer nor the Volume 42, Number 1
Young Adults os Problems 9 ALA Graphics staff may be presumed to be professional librarians, but were dele- gated the responsibility for designing the journal, the cover image becomes more interesting because it draws on the stereo- type of teenagers already available within the larger culture. With this stereotype embodied within the represented image, it can easily be invoked by librarian view- ers of the image, even if it also is repre- senting a different concept, that of the problem patron. As Hall notes, representation is the practice of embodying meanings within a symbolic form that evokes and repro- duces shared interpretations within par- ticular cultures. In representation, social reality is not directly experienced but evoked through how it is interpreted by those who hear or see symbolic repre- sentations of it.16 Many of these mean- ings are tacit; that is, they are implied or understood visually, without the need for words. The choice of the representa- tion of the teenager for the Public Libraries cover, obviously made without consultation with the author of the arti- cle who is much more sympathetic to the age group, represents tacit knowledge within the profession as much as it rep- resents the teenager as problem patron. The cover thus functions simultaneously to evoke knowledge already there and simultaneously to reproduce it. Regardless of the image and how it portrays adolescents, the issue of why "noisy teenagers" are problem patrons needs to be examined further. The ratio- nales for the "problem patron" catego- rizations presented by Curry in her article include "societal changes beyond the control of a librarian or Board," "ease of access and user comfort" replac- ing security concerns, user demands for priority service, legal and organizational regulations, and staff frustration and embarrassment.17 Without in any way discounting the seriousness of these issues to those involved with them, these rationales function communica- tively to justify the rationing of services to users in the categories they create. This is exactly the process Lipsky calls "constructing the client," described pre- viously.18 When the text is juxtaposed with the cover illustration, however, the stereotype of a "rowdy teenager" is rein- forced, without ever having asked the question, "Who has the problem here?" As Hall points out, "[Stereotypes get hold of the few 'simple, vivid, mem- orable, easily grasped and widely recog- nized' characteristics about a person, reduce everything about the person to those traits, exaggerate and simplify them, and fix them without change or development to eternity." Stereotypes symbolically fix boundaries around individuals and make them unaccept- able, and stereotyping tends to occur where there are "gross inequalities in power," with the stereotype directed against the powerless group. The power here is symbolic. Through categorizing and representing adolescents this way, they are ritually expelled, in Hall's terms, through their classification as deviants.19 Information Shorthand Selection and categorization are basic to perceptual processes in that they provide a means of coping with too little informa- tion within a limited amount of time and attention.20 This sorting process helps to provide relevance and meaning to social experiences, but, as Gutek points out, can lead to stereotypical assessments on the part of time-stressed service providers in increasingly anonymous interaction con- texts.21 Librarians are not immune to the almost constant negative media barrage about teenagers, so when adolescents appear for help in libraries, but do not behave in an expected ideal way, it becomes much too easy for librarians to Winter 2001
10 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science attribute "troublemaker" status to them. This is particularly true when inferences are drawn from appearance alone, even before any suspect behavior is actually observed.22 As Gutek suggests, "Despite the fact that encounter providers often attempt to personalize an encounter, cus- tomers can easily be (and often are) stereotyped on the basis of their dress, race, sex, and so on, because the broad and visible social categories to which customers belong offer the only real basis for making inferences about them."23 For example, the librarian above suggests in her e-mail that teens repeat- edly avoid using the OPAC or asking her for help using it, and that they prefer instead to crash the system to annoy her for their own amusement. She also com- ments that they really do not need the library for "legitimate" uses. Rather than address the complicated issues that she herself suggests are significant enough that the behaviors seem to be presented repeatedly - i.e., avoiding OPAC use, asking for help using the OPAC, and "hanging out" to wait for rides, etc. - she writes them off as "troublemakers" who fall outside some ideal standard. "Legitimacy" and stereotyping thus are intertwined for her. She does not appear to realize that neither are preordained, but rather are socially constructed reali- ties that fly in the face of recent LIS research; nor does she realize that she could do something about them. Neuman, among others, documents the problems adolescents have with online databases - prior knowledge of the sub- ject, spelling, database syntax, etc. - all of which are amenable to information literacy instruction.24 Thomas, in an examination of library environments, comments that libraries do not encour- age social interaction or even plan for it architecturally, implying that the normal social needs of adolescents are guaran- teed to frustrate both the young people and the librarians coping with space planning that ignores normal adolescent behavior.25 Implications for US Education and Practice Students and practitioners need to understand that the way they talk about and represent users matters far beyond superficial discussions of "political cor- rectness," because discourse is itself a form of social action that produces and reproduces their understandings of pro- fessional reality. Communication is not just a transfer process but rather a pow- erful constitutive force in everyday pro- fessional life, which draws on discourse readily available in the larger culture within which library services reside. As such, it has the potential to marginalize certain users by assigning them to stereotypical and stigmatized categories, which, in turn, create a reason to ration services to them. Categories always function concep- tually as a means of comparison with other categories, often invisible and out of consciousness. Assigning someone to a prejudicial category has consequences, not the least of which is to perpetuate bias and marginalization. LIS educators might consider asking students to engage in analyses of professional com- munication. This would sensitize them not only to the negative categorization process, how it works and is perpetuat- ed, but also to the unstated comparison categories embedded in the category assignment so that they do not continue perpetuating it unconsciously once they leave school. Professional electronic dis- cussion groups and images in profes- sional journals offer many examples for analyses. The communicative construc- tion of the mythical "ideal user" within the work setting, as well as the power of the socialization toward this myth that occurs there, should become as impor- Volume 42, Number 1
Young Adults as Problems 1 1 tant a part of LIS professional education as the construction of an information system. References and Notes 1. Erving Goffman, "Interaction Order," American Sociological Review 48 (1983): 1-17. 2. Erving Goffman, Stigma: Notes on the Management of Spoiled Identity (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1963), 3. 3. Michael Lipsky, Street-Level Bureauc- racy: Dilemmas of the Individual in Public Services (New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1980), 1-158. 4. Ibid, xiii, 59-60. 5. Barbara A. Gutek, Dynamics of Service: Reflection on the Changing Nature of Customer/Provider Interactions (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1995), 254-56. 6. Mary K. Chelton, Adult-Adolescent Service Encounters: The Library Context (Ph.D. diss., Rutgers, The State University of New lersey, 1997), 17, 23, 193-94. This e-mail posting was the result of a PUB YAC posting in 1994 regarding kids as problems. The author asked anyone willing to share their ideas with her why adolescents were problems for research she was doing on the sub- ject. Such e-mail responses were taken as informed consent to use the contribu- tor's words without personal attribution. This was one of five responses that was received. 7. P. M. Strong, Ceremonial Order of the Clinic: Parents, Doctors and Medical Emergencies (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1979). 8. Lena Jayyusi, Categorization and the Moral Order (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1984), 166-81. 9. Erving Goffman, "Nature of Deference and Demeanor," Interaction Ritual: Essays on Face-to-Face Behavior (New York: Pantheon, 1967), 51. 10. Stanley A. Deetz, Democracy in an Age of Corporate Colonization: Develop- ments in Communication and the Politics of Everyday Life (Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1992), 115. 11. Melissa Gross, "Imposed Query," RQ 35, no. 2 (1995): 236-43. 12. Erving Goffman, Interaction Ritual, 61. 13. Harvey Sacks, "Hotrodder: A Revolu- tionary Category," in Everyday Lan- guage: Studies in Ethnomethodology, ed. George Psathas (New York: Irvington, 1979), 7-14. 14. Lipsky, Street-Level Bureaucracy, 59-60. 15. Ann Curry, "Managing the Problem Patron," Public Libraries 35, no. 3 (1996): 181-88. 16. Stuart Hall, "Introduction," Represen- tation: Cultural Representations and Signifying Practices, ed. Stuart Hall (London: Sage Publications, 1997), 10. 17. Curry, "Managing the Problem Patron," 181-85. 18. Lipsky, Street-Level Bureaucracy, xiii, 59-60. 19. Stuart Hall, "The Spectacle of the 'Other,'" Representation, 257-59. 20. Penelope J. Oakes, S. Alexander Haslam, and John C. Turner, Stereotyping and Social Reality (Oxford, U.K.: Blackwell, 1994), 108-09. 21. Gutek, Dynamics of Service, 48. 22. Chelton, "Adult-Adolescent Service Encounters," 184-87. 23. Gutek, Dynamics of Service, 145. 24. Delia Neuman, "Designing Databases as Tools for Higher-level Learning: Insights from Instructional Systems Design," Educational Technology Research and Development 41 (1993): 25-46; Delia Neuman, "High School Students' Use of Databases: Results of a National Delphi Study," Journal of the American Society for Information Science 46 (1995): 284-98; Delia Neuman, "Learning and the Digital Library," Library Trends 45 (1997): 687-707. 25. Nancy P. Thomas, Reading Libraries: An Interpretive Study of Discursive Practices in Library Architecture and the Interactional Construction of Personal Identity (Ph. D. diss., Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, 1996). The author gratefully acknowledges the assis- tance of her colleague, Roberta Brody, in finalizing this paper. Winter 2001