THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Volume XVII OCTOBER 1947 Number 4 RESEARCH LIBRARIES IN THE WAR PERIOD, 1939-45I LUTHER H. EVANS CHARACTERISTICS OF AMERI- CAN LIBRARIES T _O ALL thoughtful Americans, not merely to members of the library profession, it is a cause for heart- felt thanksgiving that we have come out of the most devastating war in human history with our land and cultural pos- sessions unscathed. Thanks to our geo- graphical location, and, even more, to the watchfulness and bravery of our armed forces, our cities, our homes, and our pos- sessions have been spared the destruction visited upon so many other nations across the seas. But global warfare has kindled in us a deeper global conscious- ness, a freshly quickened realization of the essential interdependence of all peoples. We have come to recognize a pressing moral imperative to help set the world back on its feet again, and to bend our collective energies toward the firm upbuilding of the world's cultural activi- ties. Now, as always, these activities are symbolized by the care and wise use of books. "Burn your books-or, what amounts to the same thing, neglect your books-and you will lose freedom, as surely as if you were to invite Hitler and his henchmen to rule over you"2 is one of the great lessons of this war. Viewed in this light, the librarian's profession, that of preserving and creatively promoting the use of man's recorded knowledge, is no mean one, and the great libraries of this country, steadily carrying on their ac- tivities in peace and in war, have played no small part in keeping alive the tradi- tion of the liberal arts. It is not yet time to write the final history of what we have been doing these last six years-full per- spective is lacking, and parts of the story are still untold-but a brief chronicle of our principal activities may be of some help in sorting out our ideas about what we are engaged upon today and what we may accomplish in the postwar years. The American Library Directory for 1945 lists about twelve thousand librar- ies of various types in the United States. Roughly two-thirds of these are public libraries, some eighteen hundred are associated with colleges and universi- ties, about four hundred come under federal or state supervision, and the remainder consist of hospital, institu- tional, or special collections. In a sense, This article was prepared at the request of the American Council of Learned Societies. 2Wendell Willkie, "Freedom and the Liberal Arts," in Humanities after the War, ed. by Norman Foerster (Princeton: Princeton University Press, '944), p. 5. 24I
242 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY any library may be called a research li- brary if it can be used at all for investiga- tion and informational purposes. But the greater the depth and spread of its collec- tions, the more valuable it is for scholar- ship. A score of our libraries have more than a million volumes; granting the existence of duplicates, the quantitative figures remain formidable. The major re- search collections, in general, are those that have grown up with the liberal-arts colleges (more than half of which have over twenty-five thousand books), to- gether with certain federal institutions, public libraries in some of the larger cities, and a handful of specially endowed institutions. Few of them are devoted ex- clusively to the humanities or the social sciences, for the character of libraries is determined by the catholic needs of read- ers, faculties, and administrators. Re- search collections today are endowed with phenomenal capacities for repro- duction, describable in terms of geomet- rical rather than arithmetical proportions. Students of library history have com- mented in particular upon the remark- able growth during the past half-century of the book collections in the American college and university. This has been due not only to increasing recognition, through financial support, of the role of the research library in educative proc- esses-particularly in graduate study- but to marked expansion in size of the academic institutions themselves, re- quiring libraries to support additional curriculums, extend their subject ranges to newly developed branches of study, and strengthen their resources in already well-established fields. Added to this has been a pressing necessity to keep pace, so far as budgets allow, with the ever in- creasing quantity of material flowing from the world's presses in the form of books, serial publications, documents, pamphlets, and ephemera. The present- day research library has come to repre- sent not only the reflective memory but the active consciousness of the human race. Dr. Pierce Butler's comment is well worth quoting: The Librarian may be a technical specialist -in the technologies of book preservation and use-but he is never a subject specialist. He is equally concerned with every ramification of every science and of every humanistic disci- pline, not for their own sake, but for the sake of scholarship as a whole. The library may there- fore be regarded as an integrating machine in which all the diverse intellectual factors of civilization are reduced to a single index value and library history as a running record of its fluctuations.3 REFERENCE SERVICES DURING THE WAR Perhaps the easiest generalization that may be offered about the activities of re- search libraries during the years of na- tional emergency and war is that their reference and book-finding functions be- came primary for a while, outstripping in daily importance their services for per- sonal education, academic research, and diversion. In Washington, the great gov- ernment libraries by their very nature became key-points for quick supply of information needed for the conduct of national defense and the war; but total mobilization was required, and a wide net was cast throughout the country for any collections having data of value for the war effort. As might be expected, scientific and technical materials were in greatest demand. The Army Map Serv- ice, for example, searching out every available scrap of geographical informa- tion on areas of military or strategic im- portance, exhaustively inventoried the map resources of the country and estab- lished branch offices at New York, Chi- 3 Books and Libraries in Wartime (Chicago: Uni- versity of Chicago Press, 1945), p. IO.
RESEARCH LIBRARIES IN THE WAR PERIOD 243 cago, and San Francisco, where it could draw more easily on materials in the New York Public Library, the University of Chicago Libraries, the University of Cal- ifornia, and many other collections. The Office of Scientific Research and Devel- opment, directing research (much of which required pre-existent university facilities) on the improvement of weap- ons for the armed forces, army medical care, and the development of substitutes for scarce basic commodities, imposed upon the country's libraries the task of locating all relevant printed matter in the natural-and applied-science fields. A great deal of the research of these and other agencies, conducted in deepest secrecy, is only just beginning to come to light. War investigation has demonstrated that while much in a library may belong in the "little-used" category, librarians as a group can ignore nothing which may conceivably be needed for present or fu- ture research. This is only a fresh recogni- tion of what we have observed for a long time. The humanistic scholar, for his part, will not only call for standard monographs and learned journals within his field; if, say, he is studying a partic- ular literary period, he will also need large quantities of pamphlets, manu- scripts, and ephemera to sharpen his sub- jective awareness of the background. The social-sciences investigator, with the zeal for primary data which has particularly characterized his studies since World War I, is quite as exacting in his de- mands. A number of libraries which had been patiently accumulating materials in some special field found them to be of greater research value than had been anticipated. The Detroit Public Library, to mention one example, had been gath- ering together publications on India dur- ing peacetime because the automotive industry had been interested in that country as a field for export; army in- vestigators found them helpful in plan- ning military bases. Shortly before Pearl Harbor, Columbia University Library had accepted for storage a large quantity of printed matter from the Japan Insti- tute, Inc., and the New York Public Li- brary had received the Japanese Tourist Bureau's picture collections; needless to say, these did not gather dust on the shelves. Quick marshaling of out-of-the- way data not infrequently proved to be of vital importance. The Library Associ- ation of Portland, Oregon, once was asked on short notice to muster exact in- formation about every port in Nigeria for a ship reported in jeopardy which needed to find harbor but, for its own security, could not wireless its precise location. Such examples can easily be multiplied. Interlibrary loans rose in volume as war activity intensified. College and university libraries relaxed considerably their peacetime restrictions on allowing less common books to leave their build- ings; when volumes were needed for legitimate war research, some made di- rect loans to individuals by mail instead of through the usual processes. Micro- film and photostat requests mounted to meet the manifold needs of government. During the first five months after Pearl Harbor the Library of Congress copied well over a million-and-a-half pages onto film; run into a single continuous strip, it would extend more than thirty-two line- ar miles. Photoduplication laboratories proved a blessing in the case of many si- multaneous requests for the same scarce items; and the low cost of microfilms has brought about their use as a research tool on a wholesale basis. An interesting new step in library economy was taken by the Army Medical Library, which had been lending some thirteen thousand volumes
244 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY a year; at the beginning of 1943 it an- nounced that it would furnish microfilms free to all government offices and to in- dividuals connected with accredited in- stitutions when this method of securing research material was preferred. That the move was not unwelcome is evidenced by the rise in its monthly figures of pages copied, from 34,948 in January, 1943, to 128,263 in the last month of the year. German libraries, prior to the war, had been planning to supplant interlibrary loans with microfilm copying, and it seems likely that the coming years will see an increasing trend in this direction in our own country. In greater or lesser degree, the impact of war was felt by all libraries, from the largest, serving an entire nation, down to the small public institution, minister- ing to its own local community. Popula- tion shifts produced by industrial expan- sion created special regional problems. Quiet sectors suddenly became crowded communities, with a consequently larger proportion of people visiting the local li- brary in search of reading matter or the answers to bothersome questions. Many, in the endeavor to learn new trades, came looking for vocational information. In- dustries called upon near-by libraries to supply technical material. The Los An- geles Public Library reported in 1941 that its most popular subject was aeronauti- cal engineering, since more than 6o per cent of the nation's planes were being manufactured in the surrounding area. Extension of the Selective Service Act in the same year, organization of civilian defense, and the introduction of consum- er rationing brought many requests for information on governmental regulations, air-raid precautions, food conservation, and kindred topics. Later, war informa- tion centers were set up in many public and some college libraries to furnish quick answers. These had the support of the Office of War Information and the United States Office of Education, re- ceiving special publications and exhibit material of current interest. While most libraries went about their everyday business in much the same fashion as before-though at greatly ac- celerated tempo-some found occasion to extend their services to the commu- nity in a more positive manner. Iowa State College Library, in addition to sup- plying technical information for indus- trial firms and investigators, prepared weekly radio broadcasts dealing with current publications, publicized defense- group programs on war bonds, food con- servation, and allied topics, and encour- aged campus discussion groups. The Cleveland Public Library established an intercultural library to promote ex- change of views among the different ethnic groups in its locality. Each na- tionality (there were twenty-four initial- ly) was assigned an alcove containing a selection of books written in its own lan- guage together with materials in English dealing with the history and culture of the group and a display of art objects. The Detroit Public Library conducted an energetic community program, strik- ingly illustrated by its issue, shortly after the much-publicized local riots of June, 1943, of a guide to factual works explain- ing the findings of scientists on the ques- tion of race. College and university libraries saw the character of their clientele consider- ably altered during the war. By the end of 1942, nearly five hundred academic institutions had been declared eligible centers for Army and Navy specialized training programs, and civilian student enrolments had dropped precipitately. Undergraduate curriculums were accel- erated, and graduate studies-except in
RESEARCH LIBRARIES IN THE WAR PERIOD 245 such war-priority subjects as medicine- declined in volume as the young men of our country put on their uniforms. Facul- ty members, bearing heavier teaching loads during a longer academic year, or working long hours on war-necessary in- vestigations, had less opportunity to car- ry on their peacetime studies. Much of the military instruction was performed by the textbook method, with little or no emphasis on background reading. Young men who passed their days in the class- room and on the drill-field found the li- brary more valuable for recreational reading than for serious research. Har- vard's report for 1942 is not untypical, citing many of its smaller libraries either closed for the duration or turned over to the armed forces, and reporting "the fewest number of visiting scholars" since I939. Significantly, too, it points out a marked decrease in book-borrowing by individuals, attributed to a more than 50 per cent drop in graduate school enrol- ment coupled with absorption of under- graduates on streamlined study sched- ules. While the mass training programs of the armed forces did not depend heavily on library resources, special curriculums furnished exceptions. The Navy's school for colonial administration at Columbia University drew considerably on the New York Public Library's outstanding files of official publications of the leading countries and their possessions. A num- ber of libraries made special efforts to in- crease their resources in subjects studied by trainees. The University of California Library, for example, implemented lin- guistic study programs by searching out dictionaries and grammars not only for Chinese and Japanese but also for Mon- golian, Manchurian, and other less famil- iar tongues required by far-wandering military forces. Purchases by academic libraries to accommodate trainees lay chiefly in such fields as aeronautics, chemistry, engineering, medicine, me- teorology, mathematics, economics, ge- ography, and foreign languages. WAR DOCUMENTATION Publications of our government were much in demand during wartime. While the output of official material increased considerably, owing to the need of ac- quainting the public with new laws and regulations arising from the emergency and with the vastly expanded activities of the government, there was a correspond- ingly strong trend to shorten mailing lists and to effect economies in the print- ing and distribution of new material. After much negotiating by the American Library Association and other interested bodies, the Office of Government Re- ports (later the Office of War Informa- tion) agreed to place some four thousand libraries of all types on its circulating list to receive publications relating to the war effort which were deemed suitable for general distribution. But this left out the large number which were issued in confidential and secret editions or run off in near-print form with such limited circulation that libraries were unable to secure copies. With the end of the war strenuous attempts have been made to track down enough of these to stock at least the main depositories and research centers of the country. The Army and Navy have agreed to release I50 copies of each of their departmental publications for distribution through the Library of Congress as they become down-graded from the "secret," "confidential," and "restricted" categories. The Office of Scientific Research and Development has made similar arrangements in the case of some three million copies of its wartime issues, and it is hoped that other agencies
246 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY will follow suit. Libraries are benefiting from termination of other national war- time activities. The Army Map Service plans to place sets of thousands of its maps in some I 5o research centers throughout the country; the Office of War Information has turned over its enormous collection of photographs of the American scene to the Library of Congress; and the Office of Censorship, as soon as the war ended, released about 360,ooo books accumulated in the course of its work. Government production of motion pic- tures during the war years has been pro- digious. In the middle I930's it was cal- culated that about seventeen thousand reels of film were in government custody; in 1940 the figure was set at sixty thou- sand, and it had multiplied to three hun- dred thousand in I943. Even the latter is dwarfed by the one million reels of sur- plus I6-millimeter film estimated to be on hand at the end of T945, to say noth- ing of uncounted 35-millimeter nega- tives and surplus 35-millimeter prints. In co-operation with the National Ar- chives and the Museum of Modern Art in New York City, which had been per- forming pioneer work in collecting cine- ma material for historical research, the Library of Congress created a national motion-picture archive in I945. It will be world wide in scope, accumulating mate- rial without restriction as to subject, title, or field of knowledge. In addition to government transfers, the archive includes paper prints of some thirty-five hundred motion pictures deposited for copyright between I894 and I9I2-the incunabula of the cinema industry-and a selection of some nine hundred titles chosen each year from entertainment and documentary films produced in the Unit- ed States and abroad. Thus it will pre- serve for future historians a first-hand record of the changing aspects of today's world. The significance of the motion picture as an organ of expression, an instrument for conveying information, and a serious subject for research is becoming increas- ingly recognized. Special topical collec- tions have long been put to effective use by the American Museum of Natural History, the Theodore Roosevelt Memo- rial Association, the Wistar Institute, and other organizations. Visual educa- tion departments now operate in colleges and universities of virtually every state in the union; one of their wartime serv- ices was helping the Treasury and the Of- fice of War Information with distribution of films explaining matters of public in- terest. The Cleveland Public Library went one step further by establishing a film-lending library in I942, using mate- rials from the Office of War Information, the National Film Board of Canada, and the Office of the Co-ordinator of Inter- American Affairs. It seems clear, as a re- sult of the vast improvements in the technique of informing and educating through motion pictures which have been achieved by our armed forces, that this medium is going to take a significant place in the scheme of postwar instruc- tion, and, in consequence, will be of growing concern to librarians. Development of cinema collections is only one indication of the attention that has been devoted to documenting the present. Research libraries have realized that it is not only obligatory but eco- nomical to accumulate anything bearing on the war while it has actually been in progress, rather than to wait for some fu- ture time when much printed and written matter will have become rare or have totally disappeared from view. When the United States entered the war, a central Committee on Conservation of Cultural
RESEARCH LIBRARIES IN THE WAR PERIOD 247 Resources was formed in Washington, stemming from the National Resources Planning Board. Composed of custodians of the federal government's cultural, scientific, and historical possessions join- ing together with members of profession- al organizations, it gave much publicity to the need for preserving war-significant data, however ephemeral in nature. Simi- lar committees were organized in various states to offer more specific advice. Many libraries had already begun the undertak- ing in a systematic way. The largest spe- cial collections at the present time are those of the Hoover Library on War, Revolution, and Peace-which had long since become pre-eminent for the study of communism, fascism, national social- ism, and other vital movements flowing from the first World War-and of Yale University Library, which early in the critical period had asked alumni all over the world to send in anything of rele- vance. At the University of Illinois, Washington and Lee University, and a score of other centers there is now a wealth of pamphlets, letters, books, and propaganda matter through which the multifarious aspects of the war may be explored. In Washington the amount of material accumulated by the Library of Congress and the National Archives is prodigious; and it is noteworthy that the War Department and many agencies di- rectly connected with the national effort not only have gone to great length to conserve their records but have set up special units of writers to sift their vast files and prepare written histories of their complex activities. ACQUISITIONS FROM OVERSEAS In their endeavor to gather essential materials, libraries have been confronted with the insurmountable problem of be- ing largely shut off from foreign sources of supply. The war has emphasized how interdependent is the world of scholar- ship and how greatly we had been relying upon acquisitions from other countries to support advanced research in Ameri- ca. Half of the annual expenditures of our libraries prior to the war were in foreign markets; a recent survey has shown that some four thousand scientific and tech- nical periodicals alone were on order in 1939 and 1940 from Germany, Italy, Japan, and the nations of Europe and Asia which had been overrun by the Axis. Great gaps now exist in our files of books and learned journals. After the war in Europe began, most libraries chose to have material for which they had placed orders stored on the Conti- nent rather than risk losses in the un- certainties of transatlantic shipping. Whether it has survived is only now be- ing determined by a mission we have sent to locate stockpiles in Leipzig and other central European cities. During I94I scattered consignments of books were still arriving via Lisbon or Siberia for such institutions as the Newberry Library, which kept contact with agents abroad; but after Pearl Harbor it was only from Great Britain that libraries continued to receive direct shipments on a scale comparable to that of the pre-war period. The Library of Congress, thanks to energetic representatives operating overseas with the help of military and State Department authorities, has alone managed to keep a stream of material flowing in from Europe, Africa, and Asia; but between what it has acquired and what it needs to satisfy research demands there is still a huge gulf. While individual libraries were barred during the war from securing what they needed from enemy and enemy-occupied countries, government intelligence and scientific investigation insistently de-
248 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY manded as much of what was currently being published in those same countries as could be obtained. A Joint Committee on Importations, formed by seven na- tional library associations, sent agents to neutral countries on buying missions with consolidated want-lists, and suc- ceeded in arranging the release of Axis- originated shipments which had been in- tercepted by British authorities in Ber- muda. These measures were of help, but government agencies took over the ma- jor burden of providing for their needs. The Interdepartmental Committee for the Acquisition of Foreign Publications, a co-ordinating body gathering material through the Department of State and other sources, deposited nearly two hun- dred thousand pieces of printed matter and more than five thousand reels of microfilm in the Library of Congress be- tween June, 1943, and June, 1945; during recent months it has been especially help- ful in securing large quantities of Ori- entalia not otherwise obtainable. Certain publications were so scarce, yet so much in demand for war research, that reprint- ing in this country was deemed neces- sary. Under the First War Powers Act, approved on December i8, I94I, the Alien Property Custodian had been em- powered to take over copyrights of na- tionals of enemy countries-and, in some cases, of alien-occupied nations-on the government's behalf. Upon this basis licenses began to be granted in 1942 for reissue through microfilm or photo-off- set processes of a large number of scien- tific and technical publications. During the last twelve months of the war nearly a thousand volumes and pamphlets were reproduced in this fashion from German and other Axis-printed originals. The war cut into a number of ambi- tious projects for duplicating material abroad which we could never have hoped to obtain in original form but which was required for research in the various fields of learning. The long-standing arrange- ment by the Rockefeller Foundation and James B. Wilbur Fund for copying docu- ments in British archives bearing upon American history was brought to a halt in I939. In I940 the Modern Language Association of America turned its photo- stating and microcopying program in the fields of philology and literature toward books and manuscripts in the United States rather than in Europe. The Indic Section of the Library of Congress, sup- ported by the American Council of Learned Societies, had arranged in 1940 to have a camera installed at the Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal in Calcutta, and had formed film-exchange agree- ments with a score of Indian educational institutions. International developments interrupted the project after about sixty-five hundred pages of manu- scripts had been filmed for us, including medieval exemplars of Hindu ritual, Jain and Buddhist texts, and a handful of the old Kerala ritualistic materials of south- ern India. Another war casualty was an American Council of Learned Societies project for microcopying medical works, gazettes, and the Hsia-Hsia documents at Peiping. As a result of the emergency, one large project was born which happily has sur- vived throughout the war. In June, I940, representatives of universities, govern- ment agencies, and libraries met to dis- cuss the then ominous European situa- tion in a Conference on Microcopying Materials for Research in Foreign De- positories, jointly sponsored by the American Council of Learned Societies and the Library of Congress. Among its major decisions were an immediate copy- ing plan aiming both at aiding American scholars and at preserving copies of liter-
RESEARCH LIBRARIES IN THE WAR PERIOD 249 ary treasures abroad which were endan- gered by the war; and a long-range un- dertaking for the post-hostilities period, when it was thought that the center of learning might well have shifted from a devastated Europe to the United States. Scholars in the fields of literature, phi- lology, music, the fine arts, law, science, medieval studies, and kindred subjects were thereupon asked to submit want- lists of essential materials abroad which they wanted to have reproduced. The consolidated results called for more than twenty-five thousand items, totaling over ten million pages. Selections for im- mediate duplication were made in a broad fashion, with the whole picture of civilization in mind. It was decided to concentrate immediately upon what could be secured from English libraries, and filming operations began in I94I with the aid of a Rockefeller Foundation grant of $30,000 (later increased by an additional $ioo,ooo). Thanks to the gen- erous co-operation of British authorities, work was carried on without serious in- terruption throughout the war, though much of what was needed had been evac- uated for security to storage vaults and the coal mines of Wales. By the end of I945 about a thousand reels of film had been received through the British Manu- scripts Project, as it is now called. These include the Tanner papers at Oxford; all of the Persian, Arabic, and Urdu manu- scripts at Cambridge; the Amherst papers in the Public Records Office; and valuable material from the British Museum and the National Library of Wales. The films are available to scholars through the Li- brary of Congress. EVACUATIONS OF RARIORA The British Manuscripts Project orig- inated in a very real fear, which was ex- pressed at meetings of library associa- tions and learned societies, that war might bring vast destruction upon price- less original documents in the libraries of Europe. The fear was far from ground- less; by the summer of I941 we had had reports of serious damage to twenty-five libraries in England alone, and at the close of that year the toll of books de- stroyed in Britain was estimated at twenty million-to say nothing of great catastrophes on the continent of Europe and in the cultural centers of Asia. As likelihood grew that America might be brought into the war, serious attention was focused on protection of our own ir- replaceable treasures from possible aerial attack. Indeed, the late President Roose- velt, when he called together a commit- tee to discuss plans for the library at Hyde Park which stands today as his memorial, is reported to have expressed an opinion, influenced by the ominous outlook, that collections of rare material should be established outside metropoli- tan areas.4 After Pearl Harbor a number of larger libraries in municipal sites near the east and west coasts shifted their most valuable possessions to prearranged stor- age places. The New York Public Li- brary deposited about twenty-seven thousand books, prints, and manuscripts in near-by bank vaults and in a well- guarded storehouse at Saratoga Springs, New York-marking yet another episode in the journeyings of its Gutenberg Bible, the Tickhill Psalter, and the first printing of Christopher Columbus' letter of Feb- ruary I5, 1493, announcing the discovery of the New World. Similarly, treasures of the National Gallery of Art, the Folger Shakespeare Library, the Army Medical Library, the Metropolitan Museum of Art, The Pierpont Morgan Library, the 4 Lawrence Clark Powell, "The Functions of Rare Books," College and Research Libraries, I (December, '939), 97.
250 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Henry E. Huntington Library and Art Gallery, and other institutions were laid away in quiet rustication until I944, when it was judged that the danger pe- riod had passed. To insure that texts would be on hand, some of the libraries made film or photostat copies before- hand. The Huntington Library found itself in a position of particular advan- tage, having pursued a systematic policy for more than a decade of photostating literary and historical rariora to provide use copies in place of costly originals. Through this means it was also enabled to supply other libraries with duplicates to increase the chances of survival of texts in case America should be hard hit. Thanks to extensive preparatory work during the spring and summer of 194I- to a considerable extent voluntary labor on the part of its loyal staff the Library of Congress speedily evacuated a total of 4,789 cases of books, manuscripts, prints, maps, and music after Pearl Har- bor. How sizeable and difficult was this undertaking can be pictured by pointing out that if these materials were shelved side by side, in normal fashion, they would extend a distance of more than eight miles. Under guard and in wartime secrecy they were placed in storage at the University of Virginia, Washington and Lee University, the Virginia Military In- stitute, and Denison University. The priceless documents of American democ- racy-the Declaration of Independence, the Articles of Confederation, the United States Constitution, and manuscripts of Lincoln's Gettysburg Address and Sec- ond Inaugural-were laid tenderly away in the United States Bullion Depository at Fort Knox, Kentucky, accompanied by the Lincoln Cathedral copy of Magna Carta and the Gutenberg Bible. Consid- ering what might have happened had events taken a different course, one can- not regret that such thoroughgoing pre- cautions were taken to insure their safety. Some of the precious documents of our imperiled allies found refuge in the Unit- ed States. Magna Carta, which had been sent to America for exhibition at the New York World's Fair of 1939-40, was in- trusted to the Library of Congress by the British government during the war years rather than expose it to the dangers of an Atlantic crossing. After the struggle be- gan in the Far East in I937, scarce Chi- nese books flowed into American librar- ies. This was due in no small part to their owners' willingness to sell their posses- sions at relatively low prices to save them from theft or destruction by invading armies. Immediately before Pearl Har- bor, nearly three thousand of the rarest treasures of the National Library of Peiping were deposited for war safekeep- ing in the Library of Congress. By the generosity of the Chinese government these are being filmed so that American scholars may draw upon their rich re- sources. In return, three additional copies of the films are being supplied to Chinese libraries. By the end of October, I945, 2,558 works had been copied, rep- resenting about 2,500,000 book pages. Of particular interest are numerous original impressions dating from the Sung dynas- ty, including an edition of the WM- hsiian, an early sixth-century prose and verse anthology, struck off in I023 from blocks carved about A.D. 930. Next to the Diamond Suitra scroll (A.D. 868) in the British Museum, this is the oldest known specimen of Chinese printing. Noteworthy also are some 400 local his- tories of the Ming period; about i6o novels, short stories, and plays either printed before i644 or written out by hand during the seventeenth century; and the Ming Shih-lu, or Veritable Rec-
RESEARCH LIBRARIES IN THE WAR PERIOD 251 ords of the Ming dynasty, 309 manu- script volumes comprising the basic foundation for all future authentic his- tories of that period. LATIN-AMERICAN PROJECTS Libraries here and in Latin America have formed firmer bonds of friendship during the last six years. The far-reach- ing activities which have been under- taken derive not only from a shift of ge- ographical interests caused by curtail- ment of overseas communications but from increased implementation by our government of its "Good Neighbor Poli- cy." In 1938 the Division of Cultural Re- lations (later the Division of Science, Education, and Art, and, later still, the Division of Cultural Co-operation) was established in the Department of State to further reciprocal intellectual, edu- cational, and cultural enterprises be- tween the peoples of the United States and other countries. Owing to the onset of war soon after it was created, the larg- er part of its activities has been con- cerned with the Western Hemisphere. In June, 1941, the Office of the Co-ordinator of Inter-American Affairs (later, the Of- fice of Inter-American Affairs) was also created within the Office of Emergency Management, aiming among its func- tions to co-ordinate cultural and com- mercial relations between the American nations as a means of promoting hemi- sphere solidarity. The American Library Association has been especially active on behalf of these agencies. By the end of I944 its "Books for Latin America" project had sent more than seventy thousand volumes to about seven hundred public, school, and research libraries and had furnished about two thousand subscriptions to pe- riodicals. The Association also estab- lished the Biblioteca Benjamin Franklin in Mexico, the Biblioteca Americana de Nicaragua at Managua, and the Bibli- oteca Artigas-Washington in Monte- video, which offer collections of United States materials to the public and re- search workers and function as cultural centers with the aid of local organiza- tions. The Biblioteca Benjamin Franklin has set up a microfilm laboratory and be- gun a union catalog of libraries in Mexico. The American Library Association has, in addition, supplied professional litera- ture to Latin-American librarians, aided in conduct of library schools, and issued various publications, including a survey of book collections in United States col- leges and universities which bear on Latin-American history. Noteworthy among the acquisitions projects initiated during the war years is that of Brown University Library, which has filmed several thousand books print- ed in Spanish America before i8oo from copies at the Biblioteca Nacional in Santiago de Chile. Exchanges between the libraries of the Americas have also in- creased considerably. An earnest of the good-will that now exists is supplied by the sizeable contributions American li- braries have made toward the rehabilita- tion of the Biblioteca Nacional del Peru' and the Sociedad Geografica de Lima, which were destroyed by fire in May, 1943. The Library of Congress has been especially active in the Latin-American field. During the fiscal year I944-45, for example, it exchanged material with 279 institutions. It has published bibliogra- phies of Latin-American music, fine and folk arts, belles-lettres in English transla- tion, and periodicals; it has continued its collaborative work with the American Council of Learned Societies on the an- nual Handbook of Latin American Stud- ies; and in I942 it issued a survey of In- vestigations in Progress in the United
252 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY States in the Field of Latin American Hu- manistic and Social Science Studies. De- pository sets of the Library of Congress catalog and hundreds of thousands of cards covering selected subjects have been furnished to many institutions. Talking-books of Portuguese short sto- ries, poetry, and other literary material were presented with a recording machine to the Istituto Benjamin Constant for the use of the Brazilian blind. An Ar- chive of Hispanic Culture, established in 1940, has accumulated thousands of slides and photographs of Latin-Ameri- can art which have been lent and ex- hibited throughout the United States. MICROFILMING PROJECTS AT HOME The war has turned attention increas- ingly to photocopying projects based on material in our own country. By the end of the thirties the value of microfilming for scholarly purposes had become gener- ally recognized-witness, for example, the beginning of publication of doctoral dissertations in this form-and most of the larger libraries had either installed their own filming equipment or estab- lished local arrangements for photodup- lication. Some have made a regular prac- tice of filming their important newspa- pers to offset deterioration of the origi- nals. For research libraries, microfilming has opened up the exciting possibility of obtaining at comparatively low cost a copy of virtually anything they need in manuscript or print. Once a negative has been made, positives can be supplied wholesale. Hence microfilming has come to be a kind of large-scale republication medium for library purposes. A few in- stances of how this has applied may be mentioned. It has become possible to purchase films of all known extant Ameri- can periodicals between 174I and i8oo, and a project is nearing completion for copying all English books printed before i6oo which were listed in the Pollard and Redgrave Short-Title Catalogue. Entire files of the London Times and other Eng- lish or American journals have been copied. The University of Chicago Li- braries have distributed films of the United States Supreme Court briefs. Harvard University Library in 1939 be- gan a foresighted project-curtailed somewhat by the war-to supply films of thirty-seven newspapers published in the principal countries of the world, starting with the issues of July I, 1938, as a con- tribution to future historical research. The Library of Congress has copied all of the materials listed in the Census of Indic Manuscripts in the United States and Canada (New Haven, I938), and, in collaboration with the University of North Carolina, has been engaged in filming early legislative journals of the American colonies, territories, and states. The "richest treasure house of informa- tion ever left by a single man"-as Gil- bert Chinard described the Thomas Jef- ferson collection in the Library of Con- gress-was microfilmed in its entirety in I944. Sets of positive prints were ac- quired by the American Philosophical Society, the New York Public Library, Denver Public Library, and the libraries of the University of California at Berke- ley, the University of Chicago, the Uni- versity of Minnesota, the University of Virginia, and Columbia, Duke, Harvard, Princeton, and Stanford universities. Thus a collection of some sixty-five thou- sand pages of seminal source material for American history and letters is now ac- cessible to investigators from coast to coast. NEW APPROACHES TO LIBRARY PROBLEMS Not only microfilming, but improved techniques of printing by photographic
RESEARCH LIBRARIES IN THE WAR PERIOD 253 methods have engaged the attention of research libraries during the war. The photo-offset (lithoprint) process, for ex- ample, has made possible publication of the Catalog of Books Represented by Li- brary of Congress Printed Cards and the Association of Research Libraries' forth- coming reprint of the British Museum book catalog at costs far less than might be entailed by older methods. One of the newest means of reproducing material in quantity is microprint, one form of which is designed to copy a hundred pages of a book or manuscript on each side of a small sheet of photographic paper. A special reading machine is, of course, re- quired, as in the case of microfilm. Thus far the most ambitious project employing microprint has been republication of the more than four million pages of the Brit- ish House of Commons Sessional Papers, sponsored by the American Historical Association. The Sabin, Evans, and Harrisse bibliographies of Americana and the Church catalog of English literature have also been reissued in microprint form, and the Theater Library Associa- tion has projected a "Microprint Drama Library" which will contain five thou- sand plays representative of the British drama from I 500 to i 800 and the Ameri- can stage from its beginnings to I830. Microprint furnished the basis for a most stimulating and original suggestion for solving some of the problems of li- brary growth and of cataloging. In The Scholar and the Future of the Research Li- brary (New York, I944), Fremont Rider, librarian of Wesleyan University, pro- posed a "microcard" to replace the well- known catalog card; this would have the catalog description on one side and the actual book on the other !-in micro- print form. Thus the little-used materi- als of a research library would be reduced in bulk to virtual nothingness, could be filed without difficulty, and might be served quickly to an investigator through reading machines. Co-operative produc- tion of microcards by groups of libraries would disseminate copies of any given book at low cost, and agreements might evolve by which each would undertake to produce and supply the others with microcards of all books in an assigned subject field. There are still many tech- nical difficulties to overcome, but if they can be mastered, it is likely that Mr. Rider's proposals will be adopted in some form by many institutions. How to find space for yearly accretions of new material is a problem which in- creasingly plagues our librarians. Build- ing supplies were severely rationed during the war period, and institutions like the University of Chicago Libraries, which had to abandon new construction planned just before Pearl Harbor, were hard put to squeeze in additional vol- umes. Many had to divert building space to accommodate groups of war investi- gators. One solution for book overflows which had been supported by thirteen midwestern institutions under the Uni- versity of Chicago's leadership was co- operative erection of a storage center where a number of libraries might lease space for little-used volumes. This idea (the origins of which have been traced to a suggestion offered by President Eliot of Harvard in I902) was embodied in the New England Deposit Library, opened for service at Boston on March 2, I942. Harvard University Library, the Boston Public Library, the Boston Athenaeum, the Massachusetts Institute of Technolo- gy, and six other institutions in the area which collaborated in its erection share the storage space together. It is so oper- ated that volumes called for may be de- livered expeditiously to any of the par- ticipating members, thus providing a
254 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY partial pooling of resources. After only a year and a half of existence it was re- ported to be "comfortably full," and ex- pectations were that another unit of the same type might be required before very long. Now that the war has ended, much new construction is in prospect. Harvard is erecting a building devoted exclusively to the needs of undergraduates. The Army Medical Library-which during the war years leased space in the Allen Memorial Medical Library at Cleveland to accommodate its overflows and to pro- vide protection for rariora-is now plan- ning a larger home in the national capi- tal, near the Library of Congress Annex. CATALOGING AND BIBLIOGRAPHICAL AIS Since the appearance of the prelimi- nary second edition of the A.L.A. Catalog Rules in 194I, library literature has been full of discussion of the entire cataloging process and of how to readjust present methods to master the increasing flood of printed matter. War investigation has emphasized the need to create adequate card-entries for every type of material as quickly as possible so that it may get into the hands of the reader. Much has been written expounding the "biblio- graphic" and the "pragmatic" schools of thought on cataloging procedures, and doubtless much more will be written be- fore final agreement is reached. During the war many libraries diverged from es- tablished practices to speed urgently re- quired books through the cataloging process. Development of a revised code representing the consensus of American librarians has necessarily been a slow process. The Library of Congress deter- mined to draft a new set of rules for its own use early in 1942. Since many other institutions are dependent upon its cataloging services, a series of confer- ences was held to crystallize the views of libraries throughout the country. In I944 the American Library Association indi- cated that if the new code were found generally acceptable it would not under- take a further revision of the preliminary second edition of its own rules. After much deliberation and surveying of opinion the Library of Congress pub- lished its proposals for changes in de- scriptive cataloging rules and submitted them for general criticism in the spring of I946. Their criterion is defined in terms of service to the interests of a majority of readers, aiming to insure clear, accurate, and effective entries and eliminate non- essential matter. Helping the research student maintain an up-to-date conspectus of the increas- ing body of knowledge reported in print has been of much concern to librarians. Bibliographies have multiplied during the last six years, most of them in an- swer to special war needs. Some libraries issued perio(lic bulletins containing pre- pared abstracts of timely publications. In the scholarly fields, cumulative index- ing services to current material have multiplied during the past decade but they are still capable of much improve- ment. The humanities and the social sci- ences in particular are still not compre- hensively covered. In I938 a Joint Com- mittee on Indexing and Abstracting in the Major Fields of Research was organ- ized to examine the most pressing prob- lems and try to obtain solutions satis- factory alike to compiler, research work- er, and librarian. With support from the American Library Association, the As- sociation of Research Libraries, and a number of other organizations, it has embarked upon surveys of indexing, ab- stracting, and digest services in the fields of humanistic, scientific, social science, professional, and business literature. By the middle of 1943, despite inadequate
RESEARCH LIBRARIES IN THE WAR PERIOD 255 financing, it had completed initial studies of services received by the University of California Library and institutions in the San Francisco Bay area. A most important step in dissemina- tion of bibliographical data was the pro- duction in book form, under the sponsor- ship of the Association of Research Li- braries, of the Catalog of Books Repre- sented by Library of Congress Printed Cards, which had been in the planning stage for more than a decade. This began in 1942 and was completed-with a total of I67 volumes-in the early part of I946. It consists of photo-offset repro- ductions, eighteen to a page, of the near- ly two million Library of Congress au- thor and cross-index cards issued up to July 3I, 1942, as they are filed in a de- pository card catalog. A total of 425 copies were printed, enabling many in- stitutions which hitherto have been un- able to set aside space and funds to house and maintain a depository card catalog to secure one for everyday reference in relatively compact form. UNION CATALOGS The national Union Catalog main- tained by the Library of Congress con- tinued its services during the war period, despite removal for several years to Charlottesville, Virginia, for greater se- curity. With thirteen million card entries it has become the most basic reference tool in existence; yet the exhaustive search for scarce books to help the war effort demonstrated that it is still far from complete, and many want-lists had to be circulated for titles it was unable to locate. A committee of the Association of Research Libraries was formed in I942 to give special attention to its expansion. Present goals call for locating at least one copy of every important reference book in the United States somewhere in the country, preferably in several geographi- cal areas. Entries from the important regional union catalogs at Philadelphia and Cleveland are now being incorporat- ed; and a project is under way to interfile new titles sifted from more than seven million slips for American publications up to I840, and several million more between that date and I877, which re- sulted from the work of the American Imprints Inventory branch of the His- torical Records Survey. Many libraries regularly contribute entries for their more unusual acquisitions. About a hun- dred, moreover, have volunteered to make a partial or complete check of their holdings against the Catalog of Books Represented by Library of Congress Printed Cards, supplying the Union Catalog with entries not found there. This is a long and laborious task-Har- vard, for example, estimated that several years would be required to perform its share of the task-but, if carried out faithfully in co-operating libraries, it will mark a long stride toward what a vision- ary librarian of a century ago referred to as "that cherished dream of scholars, a universal catalogue."5 And if the Union Catalog can be brought to relative com- pleteness, it might someday be the basis of a publication like the great Deutscher Gesamtkatalog. Regional union catalogs accompanied by co-operative library undertakings have come very much to the fore since the middle thirties. Until then most areal union catalogs (with a few notable ex- ceptions like the California State Cata- log) consisted of Library of Congress de- pository sets with entries interfiled from additional libraries which prepared their own printed cards. Growing realization of the desirability of pooling book re- s C. C. Jewett, A Plan for Stereotyping Cata- logues by Separate Titles (Washington, i851), p. 13.
256 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY sources through interlibrary loans and co-operative arrangements within a spe- cific locality, the availability of an abun- dance of accessory labor from the Work Projects Administration, and improve- ment in photographic methods of repro- ducing library cards were among the chief factors which led to creation of a number of areal union catalogs during the years immediately preceding the war including those at Cleveland, Philadel- phia, and Denver, each of which contains several million entries. A survey pub- lished in 1942 listed forty-three union catalogs covering particular regions, of which twenty-five dealt with special sub- ject fields or types of material. Notable among those inaugurated since 1939 are those of the Vermont Free Public Li- brary Commission, which seeks to in- clude every library in its state, and that of the Pacific Northwest Bibliographic Center, which is covering the holdings of twenty-seven large research institutions in Washington, Oregon, Idaho, Mon- tana, and British Columbia. A number of subject surveys have also been started on a national or regional basis. The Census Library Project of the Library of Con- gress began in 1939 to compile a union catalog of demographic and population materials of the nations of the world, canvassing special collections throughout the country. The University of Chicago has been compiling entries for all art books in Chicago; and the Boston Medi- cal Library is performing a similar serv- ice for medical literature in the major Massachusetts collections. UNION LISTS AND SURVEYS OF RESOURCES Published union lists are highly useful tools, showing the student where he may find specific types of material. A major accomplishment during the war years was the issue, in I943, of the second edi- tion of the Union List of Serials in Li- braries of the United States and Canada. In scope this was considerably larger than the first edition (I927) and its two supplements (I93I and I933); it covered the holdings of more than 6oo libraries, as compared with the previous 225, and am- plified the total of individual titles from about 75,000 to over 1i5,0oo. A supple- ment issued in I945 supplied additional holdings reported up to the end of 1943. Noteworthy in the new edition was the inclusion of numbered monograph series and annual publications recording or summarizing research progress in specific fields. Other recently published union lists cover serials in libraries of the San Francisco Bay region (1939), southern California (I939), Indiana (I940), Colo- rado and Wyoming (1942), Milwaukee (939), Denver (1942), and Chicago (I944), and Louisiana and Arkansas newspapers in libraries of those states (194i and I942, respectively). The Phila- delphia Bibliographical Center has been issuing a sorely needed tool, the Union List of Microfilms (1942, with later sup- plements), based on acquisitions re- ported by libraries throughout the country. Several guides bearing on the humani- ties deserve special mention. In I940 publication of the Census of Medieval and Renaissance Manwscripts in the United States and Canada, by Seymour de Ricci and W. J. Wilson, was completed, a col- laborative undertaking sponsored by the General Education Board, the American Council of Learned Societies, and the Li- brary of Congress. With the appearance in the same year of Incunabula in A meri- can Libraries: A Second Census, edited by Margaret Bingham Stillwell, scholars were informed of more than thirty-five thousand copies of some eleven thousand
RESEARCH LIBRARIES IN THE WAR PERIOD 257 fifteenth-century imprints in American, Canadian, and Mexican collections. In 1944 William Warner Bishop issued the Checklist of American Copies of "Short- Title Catalogue" Books, which located a large percentage of the titles inventoried in Pollard and Redgrave and turned up a number not contained in that authorita- tive bibliography. In I945 the Index So- ciety began publishing a comprehensive continuation to the latter, the Short- Title Catalogue of Books Printed in Eng- land, Scotland, Wales, and British Ameri- ca and of English Books Printed in Other Countries, compiled by Donald Godard Wing, which will list nearly ninety thou- sand seventeenth-century imprints found in American, British, and certain Euro- pean libraries. The net result of these and other studies has been to show us that we in the United States are richer in re- search material than we had thought. Speaking of the increasing value of union surveys, interlibrary loans, and photo- reproduction for bringing texts into the hands of students in this country, Dr. Bishop remarked: If carried out fully, these plans mean the end of the comparative isolation of scholars and of their dependence on but meager library facilities. They are our answer to the problems of distance both from Great Britain and from centers of study in our own vast continent.... they are evidently the dawn of a new day in research.6 In recent years libraries have devel- oped introspective techniques of apprais- ing their individual and collective re- sources, as a means of guiding research to the strongest collections in any sub- ject field, uncovering material which might be overlooked, clarifying policies of individual specialization, and develop- ing more co-ordinated acquisition plans. The American Library Association Board on Resources of American Librar- ies has published several useful cross- section surveys of collections and tools. These include Union Catalogs in the Unit- ed States (Chicago, I942) and periodic reports on notable additions to library collections. For particular regions it has issued such analyses as Resources of New York City Libraries (Chicago, 1942), and it is working on a supplement to Re- sources of Southern Libraries (Chicago, I938). The Pacific Northwest Biblio- graphical Center, organized in 1940, au- thorized an immediate survey for the purpose of mobilizing regional book re- sources for the national emergency; this was published as Resources of Pacific Northwest Libraries (Seattle, I943). The Bibliographical Planning Committee of Philadelphia and several other groups- such as the Missouri Library Associa- tion-have made similar analyses of their areas. Los Angeles and northern Texas are among the most recently de- veloped regions of study. Among publi- cations of this nature which derived spe- cifically from the war effort were Guide to Library Facilities for National Defense (Chicago, I94I), issued by the Joint Committee on Library Research Facili- ties for National Emergency, and the in- valuable Special Library Resources (New York, 194I-47), sponsored by the Special Libraries Association. INCREASE IN REGIONAL CO-OPERATION While close-knit library co-operation has been talked about so much that it is almost in a class with the weather, there are signs that something is at last being done about it. Growth of regional union catalogs, accompanied by mutual inter- change of knowledge about resources and 6 William Warner Bishop (comp.), A Checklist of American Copies of "Short-Title Catalogue" Books (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, I944), pp. X-xi.
258 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY continuous co-operation through the in- terlibrary loan system, is a hopeful indi- cation of the relinquishment of rugged individualism in libraries situated close to one another. Bibliographical centers like those which have grown up within recent years at Denver, Philadelphia, and Seattle, have done much to bring to- gether book collections in a positive way. National organizations like the American Library Association, the Special Librar- ies Association, and the Association of Research Libraries have lent their influ- ence in the interests of greater co-opera- tion. Formation of the Association of College and Reference Libraries in 1938, and the launching of its journal, College and Reference Libraries, in I939, have turned special attention upon homogene- ous institutions possessing common needs and common professional interests. Card preparation and distribution serv- ices of the Library of Congress are sup- ported in part by co-operative cataloging contributions from several hundred li- braries, and the national Union Catalog represents the collective effort of many. Co-operation in storage of little-used books has begun with the establishment of the New England Deposit Library; colleges in the Connecticut Valley have been considering the possibility of merg- ing reference collections in a central lo- cation for common use; and several li- braries in the South have gone so far as to consolidate their entire resources physically in one building. Finally, co- operative purchasing of materials by the larger research libraries has gained con- siderable impetus in the war years. Co-operative arrangements on a re- gional basis offer libraries an opportunity to specialize in fields in which they are in- terested, with the assurance that pur- chases they make will not be wastefully duplicated and, at the same time, that other interests of their readers may be satisfied in the vicinity. A classic case is that of the John Crerar Library and the Newberry Library in Chicago, which have divided responsibilities by mutual consent since the beginning of this cen- tury, the former collecting in the natural and social sciences, the latter chiefly in the humanities. In Washington, the Li- brary of Congress, the Army Medical Library, and the Department of Agricul- ture Library have had long-standing agreements on division of responsibility for acquisitions in fields where they over- lap. In I944 the Library of Congress and the National Gallery of Art integrated their book-buying policies in similar fash- ion, clearly defining how each would function in maintaining collections of printed matter. Personnel from the Na- tional Gallery help strengthen the Li- brary of Congress' reference resources in the arts in return for loan and biblio- graphical services. The same type of ar- rangement now exists between the Li- brary of Congress and the United States Office of Education. The Carnegie In- stitution of Washington, the National Academy of Sciences, and the Pan- American Union Library have achieved a measure of co-ordination in book-pur- chasing. In several states-Oregon and Maine, for example-buying policies of the larger research libraries are regularly correlated. College and university libraries in some areas, particularly in the South, have been showing signs of drawing together more closely. Limitations on individual budgets during depression and wartime, loss of qualified personnel to the armed forces or government work, and the need to increase their range of holdings to sup- port advanced research have been among the causes. Moreover, as the American Council on Education pointed out in
RESEARCH LIBRARIES IN THE WAR PERIOD 259 1938 in its Studies on Co-operation and Co-ordination in Higher Education, a great many higher institutions of learn- ing in America are clustered together in somewhat haphazard fashion, creating rather illogical regional duplication of curriculums, research activities, and ac- cumulation of library materials. Areal co-ordination of activities and re- sources has been urged as a means of broadening the range of academic insti- tutions and offering greater facilities for graduate study. In Georgia the libraries of Atlanta University, Morehouse Col- lege, and Spellman College have been combined; and Emory University, Agnes Scott College, and the Georgia School of Technology have embarked on a co- operative library program. In New Or- leans, Tulane University Library and the Howard Memorial Library share a single building, enjoying close working rela- tionships and correlating their purchas- ing policies with Louisiana State Uni- versity. Duke University Library and the University of North Carolina Li- brary, which have operated in friendly liaison for more than a decade, have been acquiring what they need in certain fields with the understanding that there be no duplication of purchases and that each acquisition be a desirable addition to the basic resources of both. This pro- gram was enhanced in 1940 by a Rocke- feller Foundation grant, shared by Tu- lane University Library, enabling the three institutions to purchase Latin- American material in quantity; accord- ingly, each has agreed to be responsible for procuring books and serials from cer- tain assigned countries, retaining, at the same time, a right to roam farther afield if it wishes to add to subjects in which it has particularly strong collections. In Nashville, Tennessee, institutional co- operation has reached an advanced stage of development. Vanderbilt University, the George Peabody College, and Scarritt College have co-ordinated their curricu- lums to eliminate duplication of courses and have merged their book resources in the Joint University Libraries, dedicated in December, 194I, occupying a specially erected building at the intersecting point of the three campuses. A single instance of how such arrange- ments work to the advantage of research may be cited. In I944 S. H. Thomson re- ported having checked the country's principal libraries for four hundred monographs which had been selected by specialists as "indispensable" for medie- val and Renaissance studies. While not so well stocked as the million-volume in- stitutions, Duke University and the University of North Carolina were found to have 2I9 and 2IO titles, respectively; and, since 50 of these were not dupli- cated, a scholar studying at either insti- tution could have ready access to a total of 269.7 PLANS FOR NATIONAL CO-OPERATION At the present time, co-operative ac- quisition by research libraries on a na- tional scale is coming into the picture. The loss of access to foreign sources upon which we had formerly been dependent, and the gaps disclosed by the wartime canvass of library resources, have brought about an increased recognition of the need for insuring that in the future at least one copy of every publication in the slightest degree useful for research will be accessible inside this country, whether in original form or photographically copied. This objective had been discussed at a meeting of the Joint Committee on 7 "Monographic Holdings of American Libraries in the Medieval and Renaissance Fields," in Prog- ress of Medieval and Renaissance Studies in the United States and Canada, Bull. I8 (June, 1944), 28-52.
260 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Materials for Research of the American Council of Learned Societies and the So- cial Science Research Council in Decem- ber, 1939. Later it formed one of the pro- posals submitted for general considera- tion by an Experimental Division of Li- brary Co-operation which operated for one year (I941-42) at the Library of Congress, under a grant from the Car- negie Corporation of New York. It came up for further discussion at a meeting of members of the Association of Research Libraries in 1942, which resulted in the creation of a committee to investigate means of carrying it out. The most promising plan thus far put forth is the so-called "Farmington Pro- posal," formulated at the close of I942 by a council of distinguished scholars and librarians who had been appointed to ad- vise the Librarian of Congress. It was widely promulgated over the signatures of Keyes D. Metcalf and Julian P. Boyd, directors, respectively, of the Harvard and Princeton university libraries, and Archibald MacLeish, then Librarian of Congress. Briefly, it suggested that each of the large libraries henceforth under- take a positive responsibility to purchase on a world-wide scale in one or several as- signed fields. At the same time, if they chose, they would be at complete liberty to purchase according to their particular needs in fields not earmarked to them for specialization. Essentially, this would mean that without sacrificing their own individuality or interests libraries would be undertaking specific purchases which, when totaled up, would insure complete future coverage for the United States of everything of any value published abroad. Since interlibrary loans and photo- duplication methods make it a simple matter for any institution to draw upon what any other acquires, the Farmington Proposal advocates prompt cataloging of newly received material-preferably by centralized or co-operative means-and speedy filing of entries in the Union Cat- alog at the Library of Congress. Subject union catalogs might also be established through co-operative bibliographical work at some time in the future.8 The Farmington Proposal was gener- ally approved by learned societies, re- search libraries, and universities, but at- tempts to obtain funds for the prelimi- nary work of interlibrary organization were unsuccessful. Consequently, a num- ber of members of the Association of Re- search Libraries adopted a plan suggest- ed by Mr. Metcalf in March, I944. Each undertook to survey a typical year's book output of one foreign country. Lists of titles in more than a hundred subject fields were also checked against library holdings to gauge how thoroughly foreign production has been covered by research institutions acting independ- ently. An analysis of the initial surveys9 indicates that coverage could be consid- erably improved for the nation as a whole, and that the cost of dividing re- sponsibilities for acquisitions might not be excessive compared with what librar- ies individually have been spending abroad in normal times. The Farmington Proposal has not yet matured into a firmly adopted program; of recent creation, it has not had a chance to operate under conditions of relative normality. Sudden collapse of the Axis has required us to adopt interim meas- ures with the hope that long-range plans can in time be put into effect. But the principle of sharing specialization re- 8 Fremont Rider's recent suggestion for co- operative production of microprint cards (supra, chap. vii), furnishes another possible approach to cataloging and disseminating acquisitions. 9 Edwin E. Williams, "Research Library Ac- quisitions from Eight Countries," Library Quarterly, XV (October, 1945), 3 I3-23.
RESEARCH LIBRARIES IN THE WAR PERIOD 26I sponsibilities is operating to some extent in several joint projects now under way. POSTWAR UNDERTAKINGS Since 1943 diplomatic and consular of- ficers abroad have been reporting regu- larly to the Department of State on the availability of printed materials in their territories. Frequently they have helped supply the needs of federal libraries. Re- cently the State Department appointed a number of publication procurement of- ficers who have traveled to Great Bri- tain, France, Spain, Italy, and other countries on full-time book-gathering missions. As a necessary basis for this program, the Library of Congress has been asked to take the lead in co-ordinat- ing acquisitions for the government li- braries so as to eliminate unnecessary duplication and serve the best national interest. Wartime publications from Germany and central Europe are beginning to ar- rive in considerable quantity. In the summer of 1945 the Library of Congress arranged to order three extra copies of anything its agents could obtain so that other American libraries might share them. Agreements later were reached with the Military Intelligence Section of the War Department to let our research libraries share huge quantities of printed matter which had been condemned for destruction under the denazification pro- gram. A mission of librarians has been sent to Germany to make the necessary arrangements and to search out new sources of acquisition. Distribution of the material procured through this rapidly expanding project will be on a nation- wide basis, with due regard to specializa- tions. A committee composed of dele- gates from the principal library groups and educational and research associa- tions has attacked the problem of assign- ing over five thousand distinct priorities in 254 categories of material among more than a hundred libraries. Its cri- teria pay due regard to the strength of each institution's holdings; rotation of highest priorities regionally among the East, Middle West, West, and South, and among different institutions in the same region; and assignment of highest priorities to those libraries expressing a willingness to take all the material in any given category. Slavica have come into particular prominence during the war period. In 1943 the Rockefeller Foundation made a grant to the Library of Congress for the purpose of surveying American holdings in this highly important field. A group of scholars headed by Professor Michael Karpovich of Harvard prepared fourteen checklists of basic Russian books in his- tory, literature, philosophy, religion, art, economics, geography, and other sub- jects. These were then circulated to re- search libraries for checking and ampli- fication. The consolidated results (which are now being published) furnish a union list of standard Russian books in this country, coupled with a measurement of comparative strength and weakness in important collections. A further grant by the Rockefeller Foundation in I944 has enabled the Library of Congress to un- dertake preliminary cataloging of its rich Slavica, supplementing these biblio- graphical activities. In June, I945, repre- sentatives of a number of libraries con- ferred and agreed to devote part of their appropriations to co-ordinated purchas- ing of Slavic materials abroad. By the end of the year, however, the way had not yet been opened for regular acquisi- tion in any considerable quantity. Most urgent items on our present agenda are the strengthening of friendly ties with the other libraries of the world
262 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY and rehabilitation of those devastated by the war. The expanding cultural pro- grams of the Department of State and the formation of the United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Or- ganization offer new opportunities for constructive action. Preparations for re- sumption of international library rela- tions have been going on steadily throughout the war. Sets of Library of Congress cards printed since I939 have been stored here for foreign depositories, as have federal documents which normal- ly would have gone abroad. The Rocke- feller Foundation purchased fifty copies of the Catalog of Books Represented by Li- brary of Congress Printed Cards for post- war distribution; and, by a further grant of $IOO,OOO, it enabled the American Li- brary Association to buy thousands of books and scholarly journals represent- ing recent research in this country in the humanities, social sciences, and other fields. These are being shipped overseas as restored communications permit. The American Book Center, a voluntary in- dependent organization, has been collect- ing wholesale donations of volumes to help restock libraries in Poland, Finland, the Philippine Commonwealth, and oth- er war-shattered countries. In co-opera- tion with the Department of State, a pro- gram involving the exchange of books and librarians with China has been set under way by the American Library Association. The end of the war has brought no slackening in the activities of our li- braries; those in colleges and universities particularly have begun to feel the effects of the return of our young men from the services. Academic research is increasing in volume; government research is bent on the vast problems of constructing the peace. Let us hope that, instead of laying open its libraries to destruction, the world will now come to accept the knowl- edge and wisdom they have to offer.