ON THE IMPORTANCE OF UNIMPORTANT DOCUMENTS J. G. DE ROULHAC HAMILTON A SSUMING from the start that the collection and preservation of manuscript records of various kinds is an activity of large sig- nificance, the collector is at once confronted by two puzzling questions: "What manuscripts are sufficiently important to merit preservation?" and "How and by whom can such importance be de- termined?" Today, when American libraries are concerning them- selves as never before with the acquisition and care of manuscript material, these two questions arise, inevitably demanding answers. It is obvious, of course, that all manuscript records cannot be pre- served. If they were, not only libraries but every other sort of building would in the course of time be buried by the mounting flood of paper. Fortunately, however, libraries and homes do not have to answer the questions as far as they relate to governmental archives, nor is such material within the scope of this present discussion. The fact with- draws from our consideration perhaps the largest aspect of the whole problem, but the questions remain and are vitally important with re- spect to the sort of material with which a library has to deal. Library practice, which is highly variable, still further limits the questions. Every depository of manuscripts has its own field and its own goal fairly well determined. Only a very few, if any, institutions seek to acquire and preserve manuscripts without limit of geography or subject or both. The great majority limit their activity to the state in which they are situated. A lesser number devote their attention to a particular region. Some confine their work to a particular subject. The Library of Congress, and perhaps a few others, have the whole United States as a field, but they all limit their activities in various ways. All devote their attention and confine their gatherings to the papers of the great or the near-great, chiefly in the fields of politics, literature, science, the arts, and the war. The Manuscript Division of the Library of Congress, for example, has again and again declined to accept collections of manuscripts, because they related to persons without national reputation, and thereby lost, as it seems to me, the 5 II
SI2 TT-E LIBRAfRY QUARTERLY opportunity of beginning to build up in this greatest of American li- braries a truly national body of source material, picturing the life and thought of the American people, as the papers of the soldier, the states- man, the politician, the scientist, the author, and the artist, highly important as they are, can never do. I do not mean by this statement to belittle in any way the impor- tance of the records of the great. Even without acceptance of the truth of Carlyle's dictum "The History of the world is but the Biogra- phy of great men," it cannot be denied that their acts, thoughts, and relations with others are all of the utmost significance in historical in- vestigation and interpretation. American history could not be under- stood nearly so well if we had been deprived of the use of the papers of such men as Washington, Jefferson, John Adams, Madison, John Quincy Adams, Jackson, and Lincoln-to mention only these among a host of lesser lights. Such records of the great, in the fields of statecraft, war, literature, art, and science, constitute what I call "high-light material." All those who try to preserve historical records seek eagerly for this kind and properly so, since their value is immense. In the same way all types of lesser institutions, while not neglecting national figures, are keenly interested in lesser lights, men of local reputation, eminent, perhaps, only within the borders of a state or, perhaps, only in a locality within the state. But here, again, all the emphasis is laid upon leadership in war or politics. This is but a sur- vival of the old notion of what history is. That notion comes down to us from the dawn of traditional history and, from the modern view, is an utterly preposterous one, but it still persists. No further back than the early days of graduate study in history at the infant Johns Hop- kins University, Edward A. Freeman uttered the dogmatic definition which was once the inscribed motto of the history seminar there and of the "Johns Hopkins University Studies": "History is past Politics and Politics is present History." It is one of the stars in the crown of Herbert B. Adams that, whatever lip service he may have paid to this false historical creed, he utterly ignored it in his practice as the direc- tor of America's first great historical seminar. Admitting then, without reservation, the fundamental importance of high-light material, there still remains a fact in relation to it that must not be overlooked. By any sound standard of interpretation, the great are, in large part at least, products of their time and environ- ment. All are affected, not only by their immediate associates, but by
THE IMPORTANCE OF UNIMPORTANT DOCUMENTS S13 public opinion and popular movements-by contacts with individuals out of the mass of men. From that standpoint, alone, the records of the supposed unimportant individuals would have high value. But there is an even larger aspect of the case. More and more his- torians and historically minded people are impressed with the sig- nificance of social history-the portrayal of the life and thought, as far as such a thing can be achieved, of the people as a whole. In that life and thought can be found a far clearer explanation of the past than is to be gathered from the lives and thoughts of the great. If this be so, as, in spite of much dissent from sources not to be lightly disregarded, I firmly believe it is, then, such records as can be saved which portray that life and thought are incalculably valuable in the cause of history. It is strange how little attention has been paid to such material. Only comparatively few collecting agencies have set any value upon the records of ordinary folk, including the pitifully few that survive of the submerged mass of the humble and obscure, of those that "God must like because he made so many of them." And yet such records throw light-sometimes very bright light-on every movement of sig- nificance in American history. Applying the preliminary questions, before asked, to the records of the mass, we find of primary importance among them letters and such documents as appear in masses of correspondence. Just here the collector will be met by one of his greatest difficulties. Just as institutions have failed to see value in such material, so the owners in a majority of cases not only fail to see it but are hard to convince that it is there. In the course of a good many years I have interviewed some thousands of persons on the subject of preservation of the correspondence and other papers of their families. Only in a small majority of cases where there was no outstanding person in the family history have I failed to have them say: "Oh, they have no his- torical value. We haven't had any governors, or senators, or generals in our family"; or "Those things would not be of any interest outside the immediate family; they are all just family or personal letters." And some are never convinced of the contrary. I recall one case in particular where I was informed by an estimable and highly intelligent woman that all the papers of her family had been burned when they moved from the plantation to the city. She told of letters from Lee, Davis, Beauregard, and numerous other southern leaders that had so perished in flames, expressing her keen regret that she did not have them to turn over to me. She was entirely
514 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY trutlhful, according to her lights, but there were still seven trunks of family papers in her garret, which she protested had "of course, no historical value." A well-known classical scholar once told me of burning twenty-six- as I recall the number-boxes of the papers of his fathier and grand- father, both of whom had been intimately and creditably associated with public affairs in their state. "They had no historical importance; they were just personal letters, many of them just home letters." "Suppose," I asked him, "that you could find twenty-six boxes of personal correspondence of the time of Pericles or Aristotle, would you burn them?" "Of course not," he exclaimed with horror that anybody could be foolish enough, or ignorant enough, to ask such a question. "They would be tremendously valuable." "True enough," I agreed, "and, because of their age and the rarity of such material, much more valuable than those you burned. But can't you see that some people might be more interested in learning of the life and thought of America of the middle nineteenth century A.D. than in Greek life and thought of the fourth or fifth centuries B.C.?" He positively refused to believe that such a thing could ever happen. High-light material will always appeal to the imagination, but in many ways the run-of-the-mine stuff is more important and interest- ing. It deals with matters about which, often, no other information can be found. It is likely to be, on the whole, more reliable, as far as the knowledge of the writer extends. There is but rarely in a family letter any reflection of the writer's thought of possible publication, which has so often influenced the writings of men in public life, par- ticularly those in high station. Of course, they do not always reflect absolute truth, if such a thing exists in discussion of contemporary events; but they are marvelously full of that more important historical truth, so ably discussed in William A. Dunning's provocative essay, "Truth in history," namely, of the things which men believe to be true and which shape their thought and actions. WThat other values have they? They throw light upon the life and thought of people from every angle. If ever there is written a defini- tive history of African slavery in America, it will be largely based upon southern material of this sort in which its realities appear. If ever we get a clear and complete picture of the antislavery movement, it will come out of similar northern material. And so it goes with respect to many other subjects, such as educa-
THE IMPORTANCE OF UNIMPORTANT DOCUMENTS i5S tion and the schools; religion in all its aspects; morals and social cus- toms; illness, disease, and medical practice; individual economic and social life; family and community life; occupations; recreation and amusements; and even what people wore and what they ate. There are illuminating side lights on war, politics, and public men and meas- ures that cannot be found anywhere else. In other words, in material of this sort is to be found the social picture, the record of a civilization. The single letter, it is true, may not be necessarily important, but every one may have some color or atmosphere that is of value to the investigator; and, when multiplied by hundreds of thousands or even millions, they contain an immense body of important fact. And quite often the single letter or document may have the very information that someone seeks. Some years ago an acquaintance of mine met at an evening enter- tainment a man with an unusual name. He remarked, "I have been reading about your family." "Is that so? Where was that?" was the polite but totally unin- terested response. "Last night I was reading some letters of my grandmother and ran across this: 'Annie [mentioning the family name] has a baby, a daugh- ter born last Friday night, to be named Sarah.' " "My God!" exclaimed the other, rising from his chair with all the sudden celerity of a Jack-in-the-box. "Is that letter dated?" "I don't know whether it is or not. I didn't notice. But you can see." Title to an important property hung upon the date of the birth of that baby of which no other record could be found. The letter was dated and was valid legal evidence, upon which the case was decided. Thus a mention of birth, which challenges death for frequency of men- tion in old family correspondence and which, with death is only out- distanced by illness, may assume tremendous economic importance in the lives of certain individuals. Some years ago the more or less accidental preservation of a sur- veyor's notebook in a North Carolina garret settled a boundary dis- pute with a neighboring state and saved for North Carolina several hundred square miles of territory. In I919 the University of North Carolina published the Civil War diary of an almost illiterate Confederate soldier. It had considerable value as a characteristic reflection of private-soldier psychology, deal- ing chiefly with the writer's compelling interest in his feet, his stom- ach, heat and cold, and an opportunity and place to sleep. It lacked
5i6 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY any evidence of any thought or consideration of what he was fighting about or of any particular animosity toward his opponents-"them scamps" or "them rascals," as he occasionally called them. But Pro- fessor William A. Dunning and his well-known class in military his- tory in Columbia College found there the whereabouts of a particular regiment for which they had looked for some years and about which the War Department had no information. Supplementary to the personal and family correspondence of the great, the near-great, the ordinary, and the obscure, which have just been discussed, a word must be added conceriling a wide variety of other so-called unimportant documents. A few deserve special men- tion. Runs of old account-books have special values, particularly if they are of country stores serving a considerable district. The names con- tained constitute a partial, but just the same reliable, directory of the neighborhood. Prices of various commodities have importance, and of even greater significance is the information as to the commodities the community was buying and the methods of trade. Where barter pre- vailed or was even partially employed, as it usually was, a fresh value is found in the light thrown upon production in that localitv. A good many years ago, while on a fishing trip, I found in an isolated coast town the books of a general merchandise store for more than a hundred years, kept in the original frame building. It was the only store within many miles, and the town was the only outlet and inlet of trade and communication for a large district. These books had the accounts not only of ordinary trade with local customers but of goods brought in and of those shipped out. They constituted an amazing record of rural economic life. The owner clung to the books and was sure they had no importance except to himself. He promised, how- ever, that if he ever changed his mind or went out of business he would let me have the books for preservation. I went back to the community ten years later, chiefly to make an- other attempt on those books. I went to a community no longer iso- lated but now connected with the rest of the world by a hard-surfaced highway. The store was gone; running a filling station was more prof- itable under the new conditions. The books were also gone, some thrown away, others given to the hunters and fishermen who thronged the region. The accounts of a famous privateer-and, according to common rumor thereabouts, later pirate-had been torn out of the great leather-bound volume and given to "some man from Detroit."
THE IMPORTANCE OF UNIMPORTA4NT DOCUMENTS 5I7 Thus perished a remarkable body of "unimportant documents" but, nonetheless, a unique collection of important information. Millbooks, shopbooks, the records of early factories-all have similar value. Old church records, it might be supposed, would be regarded as important. They are very important, as a matter of fact, in social as well as in religious history, but the thousands of them found in garrets, junkrooms, and secondhand bookstores, separated from the congrega- tions of their origin, show that they are not generally so regarded. In counties where courthouse fires have occurred and in states where registration was not compulsory, old deeds and wills are worthy of preservation. I have known of one case, where an original will, re- turned to the executor after being recorded and still among his papers, determined the questioned ownership of many thousands of acres of valuable land. Lists and bills of sale of slaves have value in several ways. And they are not only a part of plantation history but constitute almost the first American records of a foreign race that is now American. Plantation diaries-one of the most valuable of sources for the his- torians of the ante bellum South-are often regarded by their owners as of no importance. Only three years ago I was told of the burning of a set of them containing an entry for every day for more than forty years. Included in each entry besides the plantation routine and fam- ily happenings was the temperature, wind, and weather report for the day. It is clear that one can never tell what will be turned up in such material, and, because of that, there is no absolute measure of value that can be applied to a document. A hundred, even a thousand, his- torical experts might pronounce it worthless, and the next reader dis- cover a fact, or even just a clue, that is, to him at least, of inestimable importance. The solution seems to be to attempt to save all of it. The older such manuscripts are, the greater their value is likely to be. But relatively modern material has value, even some of that which was written yesterday and some that will be written tomorrow, next year, and through the years to come. In my search for southern manu- scripts I am constantly asked to set a date limit on what I want. My invariable answer is that I want everything back of i88o and a great deal this side of that date. In the South that date, as far as any one year can be said to be a dividing-line in history, marks the end of an era. Reconstruction had come definitely to an end. As far as family
SI8 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY correspondence is concerned, it is even more important for a different reason. About that time people, in general, began to forget how to write letters-a process that has continued ever since, hastened, of course, by many influences too obvious to mention. While important letters are still written, family and personal correspondence, generally speaking, will never again be as important as in earlier days. It seems clear, if the history of any period is worth while, that the picture of its social system is vitally important, if not absolutely neces- sary to its complete understanding. And this can be drawn only with the aid of what are generally belittled or ignored as "unimportant documents." Of course, to become truly important, such documents must come under the eye of an expert or of someone with a special interest in their contents. To the uninitiated or uninterested it will seem forever unim- portant. The Rosetta Stone might readily have remained just a piece of rock had it not come to the attention of those who could, because of training and interest, comprehend its startling significance. "The stone which the builders refused is become the headstone of the cor- ner. And so, in lesser degree, of course, every despised and neglected document has possibilities. Every one of them may have the quality, the content, that will make it for some earnest seeker after truth, if not a Rosetta Stone, if not a headstone of the corner, at least a part of the material which, under a master's hand, becomes a complete structure.