CHILDREN'S READING1 I has been called "the most elemental and the most permanent of leisure interests, and the most vital - in its influence upon character and mind." It was, therefore, appropriate that a Committee on Reading should have been appointed by the White House Conference on Child Health and Protection to serve under Section III-G, the section on "Youth Outside the Home and School." This committee, headed by Carl H. Milam, secretary of the American Library Association, consisted of librarians who have done or are doing work with children, either in public or in school libraries; a representative of the publishers; a professional investigator of juvenile problems; and men and women who have had experi- ence in working with boys and girls in churches and in various organizations. The committee was assisted by many others, by publishers, by editors, by book-sellers, and by social welfare workers - in short, by people who have been in positions to ob- serve the reading habits and interests of boys and girls. Only the co-operation and continued criticism of these willing collab- orators made it possible to prepare, within the three months' time allowed, the report on the voluntary reading of our chil- dren and the agencies that provide them with reading matter. Whatever effect the report may have on the layman who reads it, it must inevitably cause teachers, librarians, and others who work with children to note the great gaps in our knowledge of juvenile habits of voluntary reading, the need for more thorough studies than any that have yet been made, and the need for studies of problems hitherto neglected. A survey of the material used in preparing the report will perhaps make these needs even clearer. The material consists chiefly of statistical information on 1 A survey of the material used in the preparation of the report of the Committee on Reading of the White House Conference on Child Health and Protection. J75
176 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY reading facilities and on the publication and distribution of ju- venile reading matter and of matter suitable for juvenile and adolescent reading; about ninety special studies of the reading habits of selected groups and of specific reading problems;1 also a great mass of more informal material, the records of the ex- perience of teachers, librarians, and others. The relative impor- tance of the three bodies of material was a question to be decid- ed before the actual writing of the report. II So meager was the material of the first type that the question of what children actually have to read was nowhere satisfactori- ly answered. Statistics concerning home libraries, except in a few rural districts selected for study, do not exist. Figures of juvenile book publication are issued annually; but figures of juvenile book sale cannot be obtained, for publishers are un- willing to make such information available to their competitors. Reliable statistics of the sale of subscription book sets and of the circulation of the junior book clubs are, except in three or four cases, not to be had. The circulation figures for some thir- teen juvenile magazines are of doubtful significance,2 for the un- satisfactory nature of their content is well known. But if statis- tics of the circulation of magazines for young folks, an analysis of the parts of newspapers of interest to boys and girls, and figures of home ownership of books indicate anything, it is that our boys and girls must find most of their reading matter out- side the home, and presumably in libraries of one sort or an- other. But statistics concerning library work with children in the country as a whole are also lacking. The American Library As- 1 This figure does not stand either for the number of studies summarized by Gray in his summary of investigations relating to reading or for the number of published studies, but merely for the number of studies available for use and used by the compilers of the report. However, it probably represents the number of important studies. 3 Circulation of 2,094,578 copies monthly - an average of about one for every seven- teen boys and girls under fifteen. The combined Youth? 's companion and American boy and four magazines which circulate chiefly among Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts, and Camp Fire Girls make up one-third of the circulation of the thirteen.
CHILDREN'S READING 177 sociation's study of public library conditions and needs/ pub- lished in 1926, gives interesting general statistics on public li- brary service, or the lack of it, but no statistics on the separate, departmentalized work with children that is considered an es- sential part of all library service at the present day. One asks in vain what part of the 47 per cent of our people without public library service are children; how many of the two and a quarter million books circulated annually from our public libraries are juvenile books or books withdrawn for juvenile reading; how many of the 15,000 and more trained or experienced librarians in the United States2 are trained for, or are doing work with, children*; what amount of the thirty-five and a third million dollars spent on public library work each year is spent on chil- dren's books, on the maintenance of children's rooms, or for salary of children's librarians ? Expediency and the lack of funds had necessitated the limitation of the American Library Asso- ciation study to library service in general, as the lack of funds and time has prevented many libraries from keeping the records necessary to any nation-wide survey of library work with chil- dren that might be undertaken - a fact brought out in the third volume of the American Library Association survey of libraries in the United States , published in 1927. A similar lack of information affects all reports on library work in schools. Three thousand public high-school and private preparatory school libraries are listed in the American library directory for 1930, but those listed are only those which co- operated with the compiler of the Directory by filling out blanks submitted to them; and so dissimilar are they in equipment and organization and in the service which they render that not even the statement, 'There are 25,000 public high schools and pri- vate preparatory schools in the United States, of which 3,000 are known to have well organized libraries," could be made; and the bare statement that there are 3,000 libraries listed in the 1 Library extension: A study of public library conditions and needs (Chicago: Ameri- can Library Association, 1926). 2 About 15,000 graduates of library schools are registered with the American Library Association; about 12,000 are members of the Association.
178 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Directory was felt to be without real significance. Concerning the number of elementary school libraries, which must have in- creased at a great rate in recent years, there are no figures at all. The failure, after much search, to find significant statistics concerning public and school library work led the compilers of the report to expect even less success in their investigation of libraries in institutions, in Sunday schools, hospitals, orphan asylums, and belonging to the boys' and girls' own organiza- tions, such as the Boy and Girl Scouts and the 4-H Clubs. A few libraries in children's hospitals and orphan asylums are well known, and some churches likewise are known to have ex- cellent libraries, not merely books for the workers in the Sun- day-school department but books for voluntary, recreational reading by the children themselves; however, only one sect or denomination was able to furnish any information concerning libraries maintained by its congregations, and the number re- ported was discouragingly small. Miss Leona Lavender, in charge of libraries in the Department of Sunday School Ad- ministration of the Baptist Sunday School Board, wrote: For a short while [our] department has been giving attention to church libraries in the hope of reviving old ones, building new ones, and furnishing help of all kinds for them From the partial survey that this department has made we now have a mailing list of about eighty libraries. Of course, there are many more just like theirs of which we have no record. We find that the majority of the libraries have just a few volumes, which, in many cases, are not being read at all, since no special effort has been made to get the books into the hands of the people.1 Replies far less definite than this, received from representa- tives of the leading religious bodies of the United States, made the compilers of the report take encouragement from the atti- tude of Miss Lucile F. Fargo, chairman of the Subcommittee on School Libraries, and the recognized authority on the subject, who wrote in the course of her subcommittee report: Collections of books are present in most schools, but the choice of books is notoriously poor, organization is lacking, and correlations with the socialized program of the school are extremely unsatisfactory. Statistics could not tell 1 Letter to Dr. J. M. Artman, member of the Committee on Reading, September 24, 1930.
CHILDREN'S READING 179 the story, because statistics deal primarily with the numbers of books and are largely silent on quality, appropriateness, and range of subject. Moreover, statistics can say little about adequacy of physical equipment and trained service. Statistics were wanted, but in the absence of statistics it was consoling to consider the inadequacy of any that might have existed. The lack of definite, statistical information seemed to neces- sitate, however, some statement concerning the non-statistical tone of the report; and accordingly, in the introduction to the report the statement was made: We deplore the necessity of using such phrases as "the majority," "a large number," and "comparatively few," throughout this report. Unfortunately we are dealing here with a field in which few statistics exist, and in which little research has been undertaken. But the examination of the statistics that do exist and of less formal information concerning book service to children had convinced the compilers of one thing, namely, that some chil- dren are bountifully served by the various agencies for book distribution while the majority are not served at all. Library facilities and good book stores exist almost without exception only in communities where there is a genuine communal book- consciousness and a fairly widespread circulation of the better magazines and of daily newspapers. The public, the school, and the institutional libraries and the book stores therefore serve for the most part the same children: there is no division and equali- zation of opportunities. The other children - children in the great areas of the United States, urban as well as rural - who are not served by these agencies usually have little to read except school textbooks and reading matter that comes into their hands almost by accident. And this, though only a tentative conclu- sion, seemed nevertheless worth recording. Ill The material of the second type consists of studies, made chiefly by students in various schools of education and recorded in Professor Gray's summaries of investigations relating to read-
i8o THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY ing,1 but supplemented by a few other studies not so recorded. Some of these studies, such as A. M. Jordan's North Carolina study2 and Miss Raschig's study of a Cincinnati high school/ are excellent; but all of them have been greatly limited in the field of investigation, and many have been limited even more in execution by the lack of funds or of time necessary for the in- vestigators to have made the fullest use of the data collected, to have recorded and tabulated all their findings, and to have worked out all suggested correlations.4 Furthermore, as the long bibliography prepared as a first step in the writing of the report revealed, there has been a great duplication of effort put upon certain subjects, and others have been neglected alto- gether; also, the studies have been made only in certain locali- ties, and for the most part only in localities where children have had comparatively easy access to books. The studies are of many types, as a perusal of the table of contents of Gray's Summary or of the annotated lists in the Summary and the annual supplements will indicate. In purpose they range all the way from simple lists of books and magazines actually read, sometimes classified as "enjoyed" and "not en- joyed," to elaborate studies of the relations of extrinsic factors - such as type, illustrations, size of page and of book, and color of binding - to children's choices and preferences. Some investi- gators have even attempted to find a correlation between the child's attitude toward a book and the reason for which he de- cided to read it. But altogether too many of these presumably scientific studies were invalidated from the very moment of their inception by the failure of the investigators to achieve a 1 W. S. Gray's summaries of investigations relating to reading, "Supplementary educational monographs," No. 28 (Chicago: Department of Education, University of Chicago, 1925); idem, Summary of reading investigations, Nos. 1-5 (1926-29), issued by the Department of Education, University of Chicago. 2 A. M. Jordan, Children's interests in reading (2d ed., rev., University of North Carolina, 1926). 3 E. A. Raschig, "An Investigation of the voluntary reading of Woodward High School: An interpretation of data and a consideration of method" (unpublished Mas- ter's thesis, College of Education, University of Cincinnati, 1928). 4 This is true even of so excellent a study as Miss Raschig's, referred to in the pre- ceding note.
CHILDREN'S READING 181 satisfactory and reliable method of gathering information. A program for assembling reliable data on actual reading interests (as contrasted with reading done) of typical groups in represent- ative and widely scattered localities - a program of the sort described by Dr. Douglas Waples in a recent issue of the Journal of adult education1 - seems not yet to have been developed by students investigating the reading tastes, interests, and habits of boys and girls. Indeed, many of the students who have gathered the data already reported are people who lack the in- sight, the experience, and the proper training essential to all successful work in this field. Too few investigators, even among those who have collected significant data, have had the understanding and penetration to write, in interpretation of their data, as one recent investiga- tor of adolescent reading interests and habits has written: If one could know with any degree of definiteness the underlying processes that governed the choice of books by an individual young person, and the modification of the human personality that went on under the stress of book- influence that played upon his consciousness, one might come near to untying at least one vexatious knot in the tangled skein of education. But psychology, though it is politely called a science, has much within it that is vague and un- defined, much that is altogether dark. One sees a few straws of behavior floating on the surface of a dark stream, and one guesses at the force of the currents which drives them about. A far commoner type of investigator is one who lists anony- mously certain books "objectionable for high-school pupils" re- ported as read, which, when examined, prove to be, among others, Candida, Boston, and Mambas daughters; one who fails to see that it is more significant that thirty-one high-school students should have read of their own volition and enjoyed The Island within by Ludwig Lewisohn than that fifty or so should have reported pleasure in reading Silas Marner and The Lady of the lake, books that were unquestionably read as part of the required work of the schools.2 And too often the results of 1 "What do adults want to learn?" Journal of adult educationy II (1930), 376-87. 2 The popularity of The Island within raises a question, of course, of racial back- ground. The point is, however, that in a study consulted it was referred to as "objec- tionable for high-school pupils" whose good taste was commended because they liked and enjoyed reading books required for reading in their work in English.
i82 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY research methods, especially when the tests are given, as most of them have been, in school classrooms, are conditioned by the conscious or expected responses of the boys and girls en- gaging in the tests, vitiated by the mere presence of the teacher in the room. The titles of many books and magazines read and liked by children are never recorded, even in tests answered anonymously. For these various reasons a qualifying statement concerning the reliability of these investigations and the use made of them in the report seemed as necessary as the statement concerning the use (or lack) of statistical information. In the introduction to the report it was stated, therefore, that "the existing scien- tific studies, while valuable, must be considered as inconclusive, because they are based on isolated pieces of research, and our conclusions, based in turn on them, must be presented as tenta- tive." This statement was not intended as a disparagement of the excellent, though limited, studies that do exist, but rather as an unbiased estimate of as yet unperfected scientific methods. IV Furthermore, it was from the first recognized by the com- mittee that trained librarians with many years experience in work with children could furnish reliable information adequate for a report on the voluntary reading of American children, and that scientific studies could not carry conviction to experienced workers unless the results of such studies agreed with opinions reached after long and varied experience, including experience in work with the same groups over longer periods of time than the periods covered by any scientific studies yet made. On the other hand, it seemed a little ridiculous that any scientific study, involving the expenditure of much time and often large sums of money, should present only the conclusion that "the students of the school studied and read a great variety of magazines" or that "fiction seems to have a greater grip on the reading inter- ests of boys and girls than reading matter of an informational sort" - conclusions any worker with children knows almost a priori to be true. And so, whether or not the information furnished by libra-
CHILDREN'S READING 183 rians and teachers and other workers with children carried the weight of the scientific studies, it seemed wiser to give more credence to the opinions of successful, experienced workers, and to rely on them as much as on the scientific investigations for evidence concerning the success of library work with children, the effect of various forms of recreation and activity and of di- rected methods in stimulating reading and encouraging good reading habits, and the types of books and magazines popular with children. Once the preparation of the report was actually under way, it became clear that this decision had been a fortu- nate one. Experienced librarians had not only published sig- nificant articles on children's reading but could also furnish in- formation on topics which had apparently never been touched by scientific investigators. To illustrate: In a report on the voluntary reading of chil- dren in the United States, where society is nowhere homogene- ous, it seemed essential that recognition should be made of the reading interests of the various and diverse groups that make up our social fabric. Mrs. Mitchell's study of Children and movies1 had made it clear, for instance, that reading habits must be studied in relation to the organized and supervised use of leisure time, because Boy and Girl Scouts as groups, she found, go to movies less and read more than any other of the groups which she studied. But the reading interests and habits of groups and of individuals differ as well with social environ- ment, with economic occupation or status,2 with age, with sex, and - so certain evidence suggested - with race. The reading in- terests and habits of the thousands of children of foreign birth and of children who, though born in America, grow up in a social environment that remains largely foreign could not be neglected in the report. But after considerable investigation only four studies of the 1 A. M. Mitchell, Children and movies (Chicago: University of Chicago, 1930). 2 This fact is brought out in several studies. See particularly the following: A. W. Jefferis, "A Study of reading interests of young people in industry" (unpublished Mas- ter's thesis, Department of Education, University of Chicago, 1927); H. G. Ormsbee, The Young employed girl (Woman's Press, 1927); W. F. Rasche, The Reading interests of young workers, "Vocational education monographs," No. 9 (Milwaukee Vocational School, 1925).
1 84 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY reading interests and ability of negro children were discovered/ and none of the reading habits and interests of children of other races; nor, in the many studies of children's reading, had the factor of race received much attention in the statements made concerning the home environment and the social background of the children studied. The aim of most of the investigators had been, apparently, to study "an even stratum of American middle-class life," "ioo per cent American" (and presumably Nordic) boys and girls, as if such undiluted groups anywhere exist. As a result, librarians had to be appealed to; and the in- formation which the committee was able to present concerning racial differences in reading interests and habits was drawn al- most wholly from their testimony.2 Material of this sort, based chiefly on experience and observa- tion and only rarely on tabulations and formal records, is to be found in innumerable articles contributed to various library magazines and pedagogical reviews,3 and additional material was communicated directly to the committee. Such material proved interesting and illuminating; but much of it had, like the scientific studies, to be used with caution. The enthusiasm of librarians for their work and a consequent tendency to dis- cover desirable results where desirable results are not actually evident; the gradual, unconscious narrowing of point of view that work almost exclusively with children sometimes brings; and a tendency toward excessive informality in writing which is a natural concomitant of informality in library work with children, are factors which vitiate much of the writing which some librarians have done about their own work. Furthermore, difference in experience leads to differences in opinions which 1 The report was, of course, one on reading interests and habits, and only incidentally on reading ability: the only known study on the reading interests of a racially foreign group is that made by P. A. Witty and S. D. Scruggs of the reading interests of negro children, summarized in the University of Kansas Bulletin of education, I (1926), 7-1 1. 2 The lively criticism of this part of the report aroused by the conclusions set forth emphasizes the need for prolonged scientific investigation of the subject. 3 Besides articles in the more general and well-known library magazines, helpful articles were found in various bulletins issued locally by libraries and in state library bulletins. Much significant information is to be found also in books written by Miss Anne Carroll Moore, Mrs. May Lamberton Becker, Miss Effie Power, and others.
CHILDREN'S READING 185 appear, as a result, as flatly contradictory as much of the data presented in the scientific studies and with the reasons for the differences unrecognized and equally difficult to account for. And on many topics, of course, librarians could give no help at all. The as yet incomplete extension of library work to the socially, the economically, and the physically handicapped, to boys and girls in industry, to rural children, to children in crowded city districts where no branch libraries as yet exist, and to children condemned by physical infirmities to spend their days in hospitals and similar institutions, has prevented a gen- eral recognition of the specific reading problems of these groups; and they have been as little studied by librarians as by other investigators. For one or another of these reasons, therefore, such topics as "what comes of children's reading"; /'the relation of reading to physical health and moral well-being"; "the effect of childhood reading on the mature individual"; "the place of reading in remedial work with problem children"; "the use of reading in overcoming physical, mental, economic, and social handicaps"; and "the relation of reading habits to mental characteristics and achievements," were recorded in the report not as topics concerning which we can as yet speak with authority but as sug- gestions for future study. Librarians, teachers, doctors, psy- chologists, sociologists, publishers, writers, and illustrators are only just beginning to give each other the mutual help and sym- pathetic co-operation necessary before any significant evidence on these topics can be presented. Ironically enough, the very topics most directly connected with the purpose of the con- ference for which the report was written - child health and pro- tection - had of necessity to be given the briefest treatment, or to be summarily dismissed. V For quite different reasons, however, another problem of great interest and of importance had to be reduced drastically in treatment in the effort to keep the report within the 10,000- word limit originally set. This is the problem of what children
i86 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY read, on which the most reliable information is available. The material contains much important information and some genu- ine amusement, especially when the answers children have made to questionnaires are recorded literally.1 To emphasize meas- ures of the greatest practical expediency and evidence of the most obvious significance to the layman more space in the re- port is given to the question of accessibility of reading matter. In spite of the lack of statistical information, this topic receives more attention than the question of what is actually read, es- pecially since it became increasingly apparent that what chil- dren read is essentially a question of what they have to read, and that "the problem of promoting good reading among Ameri- can children is, above everything else, a problem of making good reading matter accessible."2 Of the thirteen recommendations made by the committee, nine were, accordingly, concerned di- rectly with making reading matter accessible. VI For readers of this article the recommendations are, perhaps, a sufficient summary of the report. They are as follows: 1. Public library service should be made available to the 40,000,000 people (about 15,000,000 of whom are children) now without it, through the establishment of municipal and espe- cially of county (or other large-unit) libraries. 2. The establishment of such libraries and the improvement of libraries now in existence, and particularly the improvement of specialized service for children and for adolescents, should be made possible by generous local appropriations, by state aid, and by federal aid, and should be encouraged by the strengthen- ing of state library extension agencies. 3. Librarians working with children and adolescents in public and school libraries should have a minimum of a year's special- ized education for their work at a library school which meets the standards set by recognized accrediting agencies. 1 As in Carleton Washburne and Mabel Vogel, Winnetka graded book list (Chicago: American Library Association, 1926). 2 The conclusion of the report.
CHILDREN'S READING 187 4. Every school should have a library supported by adequate appropriations, and every school library should be in charge of, or under, the supervision of a person professionally qualified to select books and to direct reading as an important part of the work of the school and of the life of the child. 5. The development in every child of a permanent and de- sirable habit of reading should be the prime objective of the teaching of reading and English literature in the schools. 6. Parents should be made aware that theirs is the chief re- sponsibility for stimulating an interest in good reading and for making books available in the home. They should also be made to realize their duty of reading to, and with, their children. As- sociations of parents should place increased emphasis on that part of their program which affects children's reading interests, and should give their indorsement to all projects for the estab- lishment and improvement of agencies which provide good read- ing matter for children. 7. Publishers should continue the splendid publishing pro- grams of the past ten years which have brought to children some of the best work of the finest present-day writers and art- ists; they should be encouraged to extend their publishing pro- grams to include suitable books of various sorts needed, as in- dicated by scientific investigations and recommended by compe- tent observers. It is also urged that further efforts be made to make available at low prices the best in children's literature. 8. A spirited, well-written, purposeful, illustrated magazine for young children should be provided. 9. Writers and artists should be encouraged to give their fullest creative ability to children's books and magazines. 10. Bookstores should be encouraged; they should also be urged to employ as salesmen people trained in the selection and use of children's books, and to promote purchases by mail from rural areas. 1 1 . Institutions, organizations, churches, and special-interest groups of all sorts are urged to develop a library service designed to meet the reading and study needs of their groups, especially in communities without public libraries.
188 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 12. All methods that stimulate children's reading and create appropriate habits of reading should be studied and used in- telligently and persistently by librarians, teachers, parents, and all adults interested in child education and welfare. 13. Scientific studies should be made, by persons equipped by training and experience, of the reading preferences of children, of the influence of reading on character, of the place of books, reading, and libraries in the teaching process, and of the in- dividual and social factors which affect the wise use of books by children. One recommendation not made by the committee, but long deliberated, was for the establishment of a centralized bureau of information concerning children's reading. The collection and dissemination of information of this sort, how juvenile reading interests can be encouraged and improved, what books and magazines are necessary to satisfy these interests and for the work of improving them, and how reading matter can be made most satisfactorily accessible to our children, urban as well as rural, in crowded tenement districts or in cultured neighbor- hoods, is a problem to be best handled by a centralized bureau, in spite of the fact that funds for establishing library service and for improving service that already exists must be furnished lo- cally, and the further fact that local solutions must always be found for local needs. Such a bureau, no matter how or where established, provided it be under suitable auspices and have sufficient funds at its disposal, could organize and direct studies of the various sorts indicated as needed in the report, and sum- marized in the thirteenth recommendation. And not until we have learned more than we now know of what comes of chil- dren's reading, and of the relation of habits of reading to health and moral well-being, can we attempt to direct through reading the development of the child into a well-rounded individual and a desirable citizen, capable of making use of reading matter for pleasure, for continued education, and for the improvement of himself and of society. A. H. Starke Chicago, Illinois