Continuing Education PATRICIA SENN BREIVIK, editor ONE of the basic needs in the area of continuing education for the library and information science profession is for an effective nation- wide communication system so that concerned individuals and institutes can benefit from and build upon the experience of others. To this end, JEL is particularly happy to welcome Ed- win S . Gleaves, Director, Programs for Educational Support Personnel, George Peabody College for Teachers, Nashville, Tennessee, as the first guest columnist to share his experiences and insights on the topic. * * * "Peabody Perspectives in Library Science" An Experiment in Continuing Education On August 3, 1972, the fol- lowing memorandum was presented to the faculty and student representa- tives of the School of Library Sci- ence: PEABODY PERSPECTIVES IN LIBRARY SCIENCE (A Modest Proposal) The Idea: A series of in-service seminars/work- shops for librarians (and students), non- credit, dealing with areas of major con- cern in librarianship today. The Format: One or two lengthy sessions per month on a given topic, perhaps on the first and third Mondays of a given month, the first session devoted to presentation of the material by an authority in the field, be he a Peabody faculty member or a visiting speaker, and the second de- voted to a specific follow-up geared to- ward implementation of the ideas pre- sented - perhaps with specific proposals such as were drawn up at the Institute on Interlibrary Cooperation at Peabody (The State Plan for Library Services). Responsibility: To be sponsored by the School of Li- brary Science, perhaps in cooperation with the Mid-State Library Association and/or the Nashville Library Club. Dif- ferent faculty members would be respon- sible for the planning and organization of each series of seminars, working with a committee of two or three practicing librarians knowledgeable and interested in the subject. This "steering committee" could make previous contact with the ap- propriate people for the content of the seminars themselves. 225
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP Cost: A suggested registration/participation fee of $5.00 to defray costs of publica- tions, advertising, duplicating of neces- sary materials, and also, hopefully, to allow payment of modest stipends to some group leaders from outside the Li- brary School. Each seminar would be announced well in advance, and pre- registration would be by mail, payment in advance, allowing registrants to sug- gest special topics for discussion and resolution. Certificate: If possible, a certificate of attendance would be useful and perhaps an incen- tive to attend. We should investigate to see if the hours attended could count for in-service training for Metro librarians. Topics: Personal Relations for Librarian An Introduction to Management Theory The Art of Story Telling The Coming of the Cassette and Other New Media Cataloging of Special Materials An Introduction to Data Processing in Libraries How to Improve Reference Services for The Handling of Government Docu- ments Mass Communications and the Library Others Comment: This is a rough outline in need of revision, refinement and enrichment. Please put any specific or general sug- gestions in writing as soon as possible. If we follow through on the idea, I would like to begin in October or No- vember. Contrary to most such proposals, subsequent events followed the script rather closely, although the topics of the workshop did vary somewhat. To plan the new series of workshops for the first year, J. Michael Rothacker was appointed chairman of a Steering Committee composed of representa- tives from the faculty, the students, the Mid-State Library Association, and the Nashville Library Club. The Com- mittee energetically attacked the prob- lem of launching a new workshop series with no visible form of finan- cial support except the proposed regis- tration fee of $5.00 (students to at- tend free of charge). In accordance with the suggestion of dividing the proposed workshops into two sessions, each (7:00-10:00 p.m.) two weeks apart, the committee developed the following offerings for the year 1972- 73: "Story-Telling: The Lively Art" (October) ; "The Coming of the Cas- sette: Dealing With a New Medium in Libraries and Schools" (Novem- ber) ; "Management Techniques in Academic Libraries" (February) ; "Cataloging of Non-Print Materials" (March) ; and "Trends in Modern Children's Literature" (April, one ses- sion only). The response to all of these workshops exceeded our expec- tations. The revenues, though modest, were sufficient to produce materials in abundance for the participants and to compensate the principal contributors for their time. Attendance averaged over 50 persons per session. In all, about 20 persons - professors, visiting 226
librarians, educators - served as speak- ers or discussion leaders in these work- shops. As the first year drew to an end, we became convinced that the work- shop series, although an added re- sponsibility for several members of the faculty, should be continued. Thus for 1973-74 workshops were offered on the following topics: "Puppets on Parade" (October) ; "Public and Com- munity Relations for Librarians" (No- vember) ; "Cable Television and Li- braries" (February) ; and "Intellectual Freedom and Censorship" (March, sponsored in cooperation with the Tennessee Library Association and the Mid-State Library Association). For the three workshops held on the Pea- body campus, revenues were sufficient enough to begin to plan for a new series for 1974-75, and, moreover, to appoint a part-time coordinator of the series who is responsible for consult- ing with all interested persons, devel- oping plans for the workshop, pro- ducing materials for mailing, and, in general, providing information on the workshops. The coordinator for 1974- 75 is Ruth Crispin, an advanced grad- uate student who has had consider- able experience in children's work. Plans for 1974-75 include a mini- demonstration workshop on Creative Story-Telling for area teachers, offered in cooperation with the Metropolitan Nashville Board of Education; an off -campus offering in the Clarksville- Fort Campbell area on the topic of Current Events and Reading for the Continuing Education Busy Librarian, to be offered in co- operation with Zibart's Bookstore in Nashville; Enhancing the Use of the Library Media Center in the Instruc- tional Program; and Race Relations for Librarians, to be designed by mi- nority students on Title II-B fellow- ships in cooperation with the Race Relations Center in Nashville. As of this writing one or two more work- shops are planned on Reference Net- works for Academic and Public Li- braries and International Intercultural Children's Literature. Other topics which are being considered for the in- definite future are: Microform Tech- nology, Government Documents, Archival Management, and Special Services to Children. This workshop series has not been without its problems, perhaps the most nagging one being the lack of financial support from the institution and the obvious difficulty of asking professors to add this activity to a full teaching load - although it should be said that many of the faculty have cooperated fully and enthusiastically. The appointment of a part-time co- ordinator and the present likelihood of the college assuming some support has brightened the picture consider- ably. Community response has, in gen- eral, been gratifying, although a number of area teachers and school li- brarians/media specialists have prob- ably attended more out of concern for acquiring profession development points than out of pure love of learn- ing or self -improvement. Still, the best 227
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP response by far has come from the school community and from public libraries. Academic librarians, with some notable exceptions, have not re- sponded as well as we had hoped. Such workshops as "Puppets on Parade" and "Cable Television and Libraries" drew very well, as we ex- pected, but "Public and Community Relations for Librarians," for which we had received many requests (if not demands) over the years, was not attended. Getting the notices to the appropriate people on all of these workshops has not been an easy mat- ter, because one mailing list has never sufficed to reach the variety of persons for whom these various workshops are designed. One thing has become obvious to us in planning such offerings in con- tinuing education: the cooperation of practitioners is essential. Thus, from the advisory committee itself to the leaders of the various workshops, we have relied heavily upon the willing- ness of persons in the community to share their experiences with their col- leagues. The guidance of practitioners in planning for the workshop series has been, of course, indispensable. Al- though most offerings thus far have been on-campus, we foresee more off- campus offerings in the future, as well as a greater variety of formats, al- though the format of two evening sessions per month has worked out quite well. Special efforts will also be made to attract more members of the academic community. The column editor invites other comments from library schools, pro- fessional organizations, and libraries as to programs of continuing educa- tion or related information which will be of value to others involved with such efforts. Comments should be sent directly to Pratt Institute, Graduate School of Library and Information Science, Brooklyn, New York 11205. 228