THE QUAKER COLLECTION IN THE HAVERFORD COLLEGE LIBRARY Diana Franzusoff Peterson2 In 1830, twenty-three Quaker men met in Philadelphia to discuss the establishment of the first Quaker institution of higher learning in America. At the end of their deliberations, they concluded that it should provide Quaker males with a "guarded [religious] education, combin- 2. Manuscripts cataloger, Special Collections, Haverford College, Haverford, Pennsylva- nia 1904 1.
150 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY ing the requisite literary instruction with a religious care over the morals and manners of the scholars, enforcing plainness and simplicity of dress and deportment, training up the children in a knowledge of the testimonies of our religious society, and carefully preserving them from the influence of corrupt principles and evil communications" [1, pp. 5-6]. The school they thus envisioned, based solidly on Orthodox principles that strove to preserve the faith while supporting higher education, opened in 1833 with twenty-one students in attendance. The board of managers had already purchased one thousand books to support the curriculum. The library was located in the one and only building on campus, Founders Hall, which still stands today. In addition to the purchased books, which included Latin and Greek classics and works on mathematical topics as well as philology, mental and moral publica- tions, astronomy, chemistry, and some general literature, was a gift of seven books including the Select Works of William Penn (London, 1771). The Library Building In 1863, the cornerstone was laid for a library building. Over the next one hundred years, the library evolved through eight additions or changes. At first, Quaker books were placed with other books on reli- gion, but later a section called the "Quaker Alcove" was created. By 1867, the board of managers had recorded their decision to provide "an important reference library, especially for works and manuscripts relat- ing to our own Religious Society" [2, p. 2]. In the mid-twentieth century a stack wing of the library was made over into the Treasure Room where Quaker and rare books and manuscripts could be kept. In 1968, the Borton Wing, which essentially doubled the space for the housing of Quaker Collection materials as well as non- Quaker rare books and manuscripts was added. Part of an overall enlargement and renovation of the James P. Magill Library, it contains the Harvey Peace Research Room on the balcony level as well as an addition to the open stacks, offices, space for some two hundred pe- riodical titles and a computer-monitored, climate-controlled vault which houses the rare books and manuscripts. The original area of the Trea- sure Room contains open stacks on the balcony level along with a microforms room, pamphlets and serials area, while on the lower level are card catalogs, locked collections, and published proceedings of yearly meetings.
RESEARCH NOTES 151 Published Works The philosophy of book acquisition employed in the Quaker Collection is to provide as close to comprehensive a collection as is possible. As far as American imprints are concerned, there is over a 90 percent rate of success, somewhat less for English imprints and below that for foreign imprints. As do other large Friends libraries, Haverford owns the stan- dard Quaker published writings from the seventeenth-century begin- nings to the most recent pamphlet from the English Quaker press, Pendle Hill in Philadelphia, and Friends United Press in Richmond, Indiana. Haverford's uniqueness lies in special areas of concentration, the rare Quaker books, tracts, broadsides, pamphlets, and periodicals. In 1909, Hannah M. Jenks gave 1,400 calf- or morocco-bound Quaker tracts to the library; in 1918, through the Henry Goddard Leaches, the Quaker Collection received 1,000 rare Quaker books and pamphlets originally in the Charles Roberts library; and in 1927 Haverford was allowed to select 1,750 books and pamphlets from the defunct Friends Library in Philadelphia. Grants from the Shoemaker Fund and Grundy Foundation have enabled the collection to enlarge and to be able to process new holdings. While we heed William Penn's words, "Good instruction is better than riches," the richness of the collection's resources would have appealed to Penn. In addition to the Jenks gift there are more than two thousand other seventeenth-century printed works, many as rare as those in Jenks. At least one, Excellent Priviledge of Liberty and Property (Philadelphia, 1687), a compilation of English charters of liberty, including the Magna Charta, printed by William Bradford at the behest of Willam Penn, is the only extant complete copy in the world. Several of Penn's pamphlets promoting Pennsylvania are in the collection, such as Some Account of the Province of Pennsylvania (London, 1681) and Letter [to] ... The Free Society of Traders (London, 1683). In fact, the largest number of Penn's pub- lished works in the United States is in the Quaker Collection; these works have been analyzed in volume 5 of The Papers of William Penn: William Penn's Published Writings, 1660-1726 by Edwin B. Bronner and David Fraser (Philadelphia, 1986). There are other promotional pam- phlets as well: Letter by Thomas Paschall (London, 1683), An Historical and Geographical Account . . . of Pennsylvania and of West-New-Jersey by Gabriel Thomas (London, 1698), and Umstandige Geographische Beschrei- bung. . . Pennsylvaniae by Francis Daniel Pastorius (Franckfurt and Leip- zig, 1700). Thirty-two thousand printed titles are in the collection in addition to pamphlets, clippings, and offprints. Of unique interest are about eight
152 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY hundred works of Quaker fiction; a number of eighteenth-century plays, generally in the anti-Quakeriana genre; a sizeable collection of rare anti-Quakeriana cartoons; and number of "Dime Novels" featuring a character named "Old Broadbrim." The most popular topic for scorn in anti-Quaker works was the peace testimony of Friends during war- time. There are complete runs of several periodical titles, including The Friend (Philadelphia) and The Friend (London), The British Friend, Friends' Intelligencer, Friends' Review, The Friends' Quarterly, Quaker Life, and Evangelical Friend. There are also foreign language periodicals in Ger- man, French, Dutch, Norwegian, and Japanese, as well as titles in En- glish from foreign countries, and some in Esperanto. The printed proceedings of most yearly meetings of Friends, both national and international, are also available. Manuscripts, Maps, and Pictures Just as the first gift of books to the college included one by William Penn, so too the first manscripts donated in 1834 were letters and papers of William Penn. The collection of Penn and Penn-related manuscript materials now amounts to over three hundred items. Among other early Quakers, there are letters written by George Fox, Margaret Fell, Robert Barclay, Elizabeth Haddon Estaugh, James Logan, Peter Collinson, John and Samuel Fothergill, John Woolman, John Dickinson, Anthony Be- nezet, Rebecca Jones, William Savery, Elizabeth and Henry Drinker. Some are contained within their own named collections, others are grouped with "Letters of American Friends" or "Letters of English Friends." One of the major assets of the collection is the nearly seven hundred journals: the earliest is Elizabeth Webb's from the seventeenth century; the longest, in 113 volumes, is of the two Jacob Elfreths; and the latest is Elizabeth Marsh Jensen's, kept from 1928 to 1986. These journals re- cord historical events, such as the Revolutionary War diary (1776-78) of Margaret Hill Morris which has been published, or William Allinson's (1766-1841) eye-witness account of events during the great schism of Friends in 1827-28 into Hicksite and Orthodox branches, or the diaries of Julia Wilbur (ca. 1814-90) on her work for the Rochester Ladies Anti-Slavery Society. Although the majority of Quaker manuscript materials is topically related to events and places in the Philadelphia Yearly Meeting area, a variety of collections or items represents many other areas in America and abroad, such as the papers of Hannah Kilham (1774-1832) on her
RESEARCH NOTES 153 work with Indian and African languages; the archives of Baltimore Yearly Meeting (1673-1955); and papers of Robert and Sarah Lindsey (1847-61) as they traveled west in the United States. The core of many collections is in family correspondence. Fanning out from this core are connections through letters, deeds, or other docu- ments with nonfamily members or business associates. An example of such a collection is the papers of architect Addison Hutton (1834-1916), who maintained a personal correspondence with his family. Hutton's business diaries detailing some of his work and the architectural plans he drew up are here as well. Other such collections include Morris-Sansom (ca. 1715-1925), reflecting two centuries of cultural and religious life, and particularly informative on social and economic developments; Al- linson (1698-1939), with its strong emphasis on the work of abolitionists and the women's peace movement; Baily (1818-1917), dealing chiefly with humanitarian activities, temperance, peace efforts, and penology; and Cope (1795-1896), concerned primarily with the business and civic interests of Thomas Pym Cope (1768-1854) and providing information about his transatlantic business carried out via the Cope Packet Ships. The papers of the Evans family (1707-1958) shed light on the religious, doctrinal controversies and differences arising among the members of the Society of Friends because of the preaching of Elisha Bates and Elias Hicks. The Hartshorne family (1797-1908) papers spotlight the medical papers, articles, and literary works of Dr. Joseph Hartshorne and his son, Dr. Henry Hartshorne, while the interfamily correspondence delves into the issue of religious doctrines. The Howland papers (ca. 1700-1867) contribute important data on Quaker history; while the Sharpless papers (1748-1920) provide many accounts of travel for reli- gious visits. The papers of the Smith family (1660-1967) contain items as varied as manuscripts of George Fox and material oIn the education of Black Americans, as well as information on the 1793 outbreak of yellow fever in Philadelphia. The TIaylor (1755-1930) papers give a picture of the social, business, religious, and emotional relationships of two closely related families, Shoemaker and Taylor, as some members migrated west while others were involved in the service of abolition especially through the Contraband Relief Commission and the American Freed- man's Aid Commission, as well as the experiences of physician Edward Taylor at Friends Hospital, 1823-32. The Bacon papers (ca. 1897- 1987) pertain especially to Francis Bacon's work for the American Friends Service Committee in 1919-21 and as dean of the school of architecture at Case Western Reserve. Quaker institutions have also deposited records at Haverford College. A short list includes the archives of Friends Hospital (1812-1942) and William Penn Charter School (1685-1988), the latter including the
154 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY charter of 1701 signed by William Penn, and the Student's Gazette, the oldest student newspaper in the English-speaking world, issued in 1777- 78; Emlen Institution, 1838-92 (education of "free, male orphan chil- dren of African or Indian descent"); New York Colored Mission ("reli- gious, moral and social elevation of the colored people"), 1865-1952; Daniel and Emily Oliver Orphanage (founded in Syria), 1907-51; Fe- male Association of Philadelphia for the Relief of Woman and Children in Reduced Circumstances (time and labor were donated by members to provide food and clothing and to open a home for widows and orphans), 1800-1972. The holdings in the Quaker Collection also contain the papers of more contemporary Friends. These include the papers of Rufus M. Jones (1863-1948), a professor of philosophy at Haverford College for forty years, considered by many to be the most important Quaker of the twentieth century. During his lifetime, he gave the college his personal collection of nearly one thousand volumes on mysticism, which had a strong correlation with his own scholarly work. A collection of Jones's writings-over fifty monographs in various editions, plus pamphlets and extracts-also has a special place in the collection. In 1980, Jones's daughter, Mary Hoxie Jones, turned her father's papers over to the college. These consist of some seventy-five linear feet of correspon- dence, lecture notes, speeches, manuscripts of books, and diaries. Henry J. Cadbury (1883-1974) was one of the most remarkable Quakers of the twentieth century. Cadbury was a biblical scholar, noted sleuth of Quaker historical facts about which he wrote extensively, social activist, founder and chair of the American Friends Service Committee, and teacher. Cadbury left a collection of some fifteen thousand manu- script items to Haverford, which includes correspondence, lecture notes, published and unpublished scholarly writing, microform materials, and tapes. The John Greenleaf Whittier (1807-92) collection is active and grow- ing, for we steadily acquire new letters which increase the scope of our understanding of his activities and personality. James E. Rhoads (1828- 95) was a founder and president of Bryn Mawr College and was also involved in work for Freedmen and for the Indians. Haverford College holds over one hundred pieces of Rhoads's correspondence. While most aspects of Quaker history are represented by primary source materials, there are certain topics that have burgeoned and evolved as areas of concentration. Among these are Friends and In- dians, including the archives of the Indian Committee of Philadelphia Yearly Meeting, dating from 1795; the archives of Lake Mohonk Con- ference of Friends of the Indians and Other Dependent Peoples (1883- 1929); and the records of the Associated Executive Committee of
RESEARCH NOTES 155 Friends on Indian Affairs (1758-1929). These collections are buttressed by papers of Friends who were active in work with Native Americans such as John B. Garrett (1836-1924), Lawrie Tatum (1822-1900), Henry Simmons (fl. 1796-1800), Joshua Sharpless (1746-1825), Jonathan Richards (1812-82), and Enoch Hoag (1811-84). In addition, there is a sizeable number of Friends' journals describing their visits to the Indians. In analyzing research trends over the last twenty-five years, it is clear that the subject of women's roles or connections within the Society of Friends is one of the most popular fronts. There are many collections based on the wide spectrum of work by Quaker women, such as Sarah Moore and Angelina Grimke, abolitionists (1792-1873 and 1805-79); Eliza P. Gurney, minister (1801-81); Daisy Newman, author (1904-); Elizabeth Haddon Estaugh, founder of Haddonfield, New Jersey (1682- 1762); Elizabeth Marsh Jensen, social activist (1900-); Elizabeth Fry, prison reformer (1780-1845); and Julia Wilbur, abolitionist (ca. 1814- 9?). The collection contains extensive materials on the antislavery move- ment, Quaker education, the care of the mentally ill, the peace move- ment, race relations, temperance campaigns, and the rights of women. The largest single archival holding at Haverford College, over one hundred thousand items, is that of Philadelphia Yearly Meeting, be- ginning in 1681 to the present. In 1975, the meeting archives were deposited at Swarthmore and Haverford Colleges. Microfilm of a large portion of these records-minutes, births and deaths, memberships, marriage certificates, and the like-is available at both locations. A printed guide to the records of Philadelphia Yearly meeting is scheduled for publication this year. Quakerism in Asia has evolved as a major focus of interest for re- searchers. In the last fifteen years, Haverford College has become the repository for numerous Asian-related collections: the papers of Elizabeth Gray Vining (1902-) centering on her experience as tutor from 1946 to 1950 to the Japanese Crown Prince, now Emperor Akihito, and discussions with General Douglas MacArthur, 1947-59; the papers of Esther Biddle Rhoads (1896-1979) which recount her years in Japan as a teacher and principal of Friends Girls School and include letters of other Quakers in Japan, American Friends Service Committee-related materials, diaries, and the like; Bowles Family Papers (1900-1971) de- tailing forty years of missionary and educational activities of Gilbert and Minnie Pickett Bowles in Japan, Hawaii, Korea, and the Philippines. Closely related are records of Japan Committee, a committee of Phila- delphia Yearly Meeting, 1882-1974, dealing with such topics as Friends Girl School, Japanese-American Evacuation and Relocation Centers, the
156 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY peace movement in Japan, minutes of the committee, and the corre- spondence of various individual missionaries serving for the committee. A selected source list on the Society of Friends in Asia is available at the Quaker Collection. The Quaker Collection maintains a group of historical maps of ap- proximately three hundred items. A large percentage depict early Penn- sylvania, and within this group the largest portion is of Philadelphia, but also included are some of New England and other areas where Quakers have been active. There are also many Quaker marriage certificates, deeds, and other legal documents in the collection. There are hundreds of photograhs, pictures, silhouettes, and some paintings of Friends, their homes and meeting houses, this in spite of the early disinclination of Friends toward art. Haverford College offers several courses which are specifically served by the holdings in the Quaker Collection. These now include a seminar for history majors in which a document is chosen for editing by a student. This unique class, begun in 1973, has been extremely well received by students and has produced such high-caliber papers that perhaps a dozen have been published in scholarly journals. All papers are kept for future reference. The history of photography class exercises a like option when it views original photography from our collections, comparing the difference between reproductions in textbooks and ac- tual photographs which show off techniques of production and mount- ing. In fall 1989, a new course entitled "Topics in East Asian History" was introduced. It made extensive use of materials relating to Quakers in East Asia. Research Ironically, one of the most popular areas of research that takes place in the Quaker Collection today is in the contributions of women through- out the history of Quakerism. Despite Quakerism's positive attitude toward gender equality, Haverford College was established as a school of higher education for males only. The question then becomes whether a similar need for women's education was being met elsewhere. According to George Fox, girls were to be educated in useful, productive matters. In a history of Westtown School (located near Philadelphia) the author maintains that its "girls studies" were "extraordinarily advanced for the age" [3, p. 100]. However, in terms of Haverford College, "since young men, rather than their sisters, were sent to college at this time, no justification for the exclusion of women was offered in the minutes of the Board of Managers establishing Haverford" [4, p. 98]. It is likely that
RESEARCH NOTES 157 the lack of response to a faculty minute recommending coeducation in 1870 led to the founding of Bryn Mawr College. An analysis of research interests in the last twenty-five years shows high use of materials on the following topics: missionary work, especially in Japan; Quaker education; mysticism, religion, and schisms, especially the Separation of 1827-28; westward migration of Quakers; Friends and Indians; Quaker-specific attitudes, behavior, and dress; Quakerism in the sphere of social concerns; and Quaker history-both as a concern itself and within the wider scope of events current within a particular time. Reference Resources Reference resources to the Quaker Collection include the "Dictionary of Quaker Biography," a 104-volume set in typescript. Begun by William Bacon Evans (1875-1964), with contributions from Friends House, Lon- don, researchers, it contains over twenty thousand bibliographical sketches of prominent Friends and is one of only two copies in the world (the other one is in Friends House). These biographies continue to be produced today. Other unique resources include a necrology care file which draws its information from seven Quaker periodicals (notices from 1828 to 1960 were published by G. K. Hall in 1961); and card files for ephemeral materials, microforms, subscriptions to periodicals, cur- rent and ceased, manuscripts, historical maps, graphics, chronological listing of events for manuscripts, Friends Historical Library (Swarth- more College) holdings, and information on articles extracted from Quaker journals. Other activities include cooperative efforts with our immediate neigh- bor institutions, Bryn Mawr College and Swarthmore College. One example of such cooperation between Haverford College Quaker Col- lection and the Friends Historical Library at Swarthmore is the comple- tion of an inventory of Philadelphia Yearly Meeting records and the near completion of a published guide to these jointly held records which will be an enormous aid to researchers. Another major cooperative effort is the preparation by all three colleges to input information on nonprint materials into a tri-college online catalog scheduled to supplant the card catalog by 1991. Publications envisioned in the future include bibliographies of impor- tant Quaker works, a guide to manuscript collections, Dictionaty of Quaker Biography, and exhibit catalogs. Operations in the Quaker Collection are being streamlined. Informa- tion on new holdings is input into the national utility OCLC, and find-
158 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY ing aids are being produced using the database management software dBase IV. Fellowships For more than two decades, a "mature" scholar (that is, generally one who holds a Ph.D.) has been chosen by a selection committee for the T. Wistar Brown Fellowship to engage in scholarly work with a basis in Quakerism. Fellows are in residence for one or two semesters at Haver- ford College. Resources are so ample, often no other materials are required; however, the proximity and complementary nature of Swarthmore's collections provide additional resources as do the Historical Society of Pennsylvania and the Library Company. This research has often resulted in book-length publications. Services The Quaker Collection provides a variety of services which includes reference and some research when required, interlibrary loan, photo- copying, photography, and microfilming; the latter three are done on a fee basis. The Quaker Collection is open Monday through Friday, 9:00 A.M.- 12:30 P.M. and 1:30-4:30 P.M; 9:00 A.M.-12:30 P.M. and 1:30-4:00 P.M. during college holidays. It is staffed by three professionals, including the curator and two additional staff members. Inquiries are invited. REFERENCES 1. "An Account of Haverford School . . ." Published by direction of the Board of Managers. Philadelphia: William Brown, 1835. 2. Report of the Board of Managers of Haverford Colkge. Philadelphia: E. Ketterlinus, 1867, p. 7, quoted in Edwin B. Bronner, The Quaker Collection and Other Special Colkctions. Haverford, Pa.: Haverford College, 1989. 3. Hole, Helen G. Westtown through the Years. Westtown, Pa.: Westtown Alumni Associa- tion, 1942. 4. Bacon, Margaret H. Mothers of Feminism, the Story of Quaker Women in America. San Francisco: Harper & Row, 1986.