MANUSCRIPTS IN MICROFILM PROBLEMS OF CATALOGER AND BIBLIOGRAPHER WILLIAM JEROME WILSON SUBJECT CATALOGER AND RESEARCH SCHOLAR N K O AoMERICAN librarian, it has been said, can see a hundred books together and not be seized with an irresistible desire to make a card catalog of them. Historically, however, *the card catalog seems to be not an American but a French invention. The first record of its use is apparently in I775, when the Abbe Rozier em- ployed it in indexing the publications of the Paris Academy of Sciences." About a century later, in the I890's, several American libraries began to print their entry cards. This, more perhaps than any other one thing, made possible the enormous expansion of modern catalogs. Printing supplied any desired number of duplicates at a very slight cost and thus facilitated the use of the "added entry," one of the most important devices in the whole of library science. Normally, the main entry for a book occurs under the name of the author, which therefore ap- pears on the first line of the printed card. But some books have two or more au- thors, and many books treat of several subjects. For each of these, by means, of added entries, a copy of the printed card can be inserted at the proper alphabeti- cal point in the catalog. At the top of the card, above the first line of print, one merely typewrites the desired name, title, or subject, which then becomes the controlling element in the alphabeti- zation of that card. The beauty of this device is that it puts the complete infor- mation in at every point at which the item will presumably be looked up. The added entry is to the card catalog what an index is to a printed book. It is generally felt that the films as- sembled by the War Emergency Pro- gram require some kind of card-cata- loging. Shall we view this indulgently as a mere library fetish in the good American tradition, or is there some logical need for it? There is a need, but it may not be immediately apparent. It would seem at first sight that such check lists as the one recently issued, giving merely the designating numbers of the manuscripts, should meet all the real needs of scholars. For those who al- ready know of the existence and the gen- eral nature of the works, who have seen descriptions of them in bibliographies or in printed catalogs, and who have, in fact, made request for the films on the basis of such knowledge, the check lists are enough. In other words, the ex- pert who already knows the field, who knows the titles of the significant books and the location of the pertinent manu- scripts, needs merely to be informed that film copies are available. And some, to conclude the argument, will doubtless add that these are recondite and difficult areas of research in which no one but the expert has any business to be at large. 1 Cf. M. S. R. James, "The Progress of the Mod- em Card Catalog Principle," in The Library and Its Contents, ed. Harriet Price Sawyer ("Classics of American Librarianship," ed. A. E. Bostwick) (New York: H. W. Wilson Co., 1925), pp. 33I-38; also Richard B. Prosser, "The Origin of the Card Catalogue," Library Association Record, II (Igoo), 65Ir. 293
294 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Such an argument goes at once to the fundamentals of the cataloger's art and its interrelations with scholarship. A card catalog is a sort of perennial guessing game. At one end of the tray of cards stands the producer-the cataloger- earnestly wondering under what heading the scholar will be likely to look various things up. At the other end stands the consumer-the scholar-racking his brain to imagine how the cataloger may have classified what he wants. Often, luckily, their guesses coincide. Also, by frequent contact they tend to educate each other and to become used to each other's terminology and ways of think- ing. As a matter of fact, research schol- arship and subject cataloging are largely complementary professions. The gener- alizations of the historian or other inter- pretive scholar provide library science with its most important subject head- ings; and the cataloger, if he hopes to keep up, must read constantly and ex- tensively in the literature of the field in which he specializes. The scholar, on the other hand, depends on the library, and more specifically on its catalog, to guide him to the material which he needs. But there is a qualification to be made here. It is not for his own specialty, for the field in which he is already an expert, that the scholar commonly consults the subject entries of a library catalog. In his own field he depends on classified bibliographies and on periodical litera- ture to keep himself up to date. In fact, by these means he is usually able to stay a few jumps ahead of the catalog and so criticize its shortcomings. This en- dears him to catalogers! But any in- terpretive scholar, if he has proper curiosity and originality, constantly finds his investigations leading off into fields in which he is not an expert. Here he is pretty much at the mercy of his library's subject catalogers. From their cards, if they have prepared them well, he can, with a little acumen, see what the leading works in this new field are and what he had better read first. These are just the beginning. In scholarship, as in sin, one thing leads to another, and presently he has read or skimmed enough works in the new field to graduate from the subject catalog. From this point onward he demands of his library chiefly author-and-title serv- ice. He knows what books in this special field he would like to see and consults the catalog only to find if they are. available. That is why the Union Cata- log at the Library of Congress, which gives main entries only, is still one of the greatest instruments of research ever put together. It is almost the ulti- mate recourse of scholars who know their subjects and wish only to learn if and where certain works may be had. MICROFILM ENTREES FOR THE UNION CATALOG The check lists that are being issued for the films in the Emergency Program have no subject entries at all, and even for author-and-title service they cannot be permanently satisfactory. For a time, and particularly for the scholars who requested the items in the first place, they will serve; but long before they have attained ten thousand entries it will become irksome to go through one list after another in the search for a partic- ular book or manuscript. And, even if the lists are periodically cumulated, they will show only whether a work is in this particular collection. If one desires to know also whether it is in the repro- ductions of the Modern Language Asso- ciation, in Project A, or in some other collection of the library, it will be neces- sary to look elsewhere. And the natural
MANUSCRIPTS IN MICROFILM 295 place to look would be in the Union Catalog. Remember, magnificent as it certainly is, the Union Catalog itself is fundamentally a finding-list. It is planned on a national scale and aspires to completeness, but it is still only an author-and-title arrangement in alpha- betical order. If the items in the check lists of the Emergency Program are ever to be introduced into the system of catalogs at the Library of Congress, the Union Catalog might well be the first point of contact. As far as the printed books are con- cerned, the transition from the check list to the Union Catalog would be simple. The lists will presumably give merely the name of the author (if known), the title, and the imprint. If desired, the items could be cut from the published check list and pasted on cards, which would then be rubber- stamped to show location in the Library of Congress. Such cards would not be un- usual im the Union Catalog. They would be similar to thousands that have been clipped from the Surgeon General's Cata- logue and similar sources.2 The manuscripts are a different mat- ter. The check lists for these, if the one already issued is to serve as a model, will not give authors and titles at all but merely the location and name of the owning library and that library's desig- nation and number for the manuscript. These are manifestly not authors' names, nor are they subjects. Can they be re- garded as titles and so be included among the entries in the Union Catalog? This seems at first sight to be stretching a point. Such a designation as "British Museum, Sloane Manuscript 2593" is certainly not a title in the literary sense of the term. In fact, that particular manuscript, being a collection of lyrics, has no comprehensive title except as one has been made up for it by the cata- logers. But may not the designation "British Museum, Sloane Manuscript 2593" be regarded as the title of the film? After all, if the contents had been pub- lished in facsimile in book form, the book might conceivably have carried just such a title as that. As titles of the films, then, these designations may per- haps be taken over from the check lists of films of manuscripts and inserted, naturally with some adjustment as to form, among the entries of the Union Catalog. Here, with similar entries from other sources, they would take their place in the master finding-list of the country. MICROFILM ENTRIES FOR THEF LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOG The check lists for the films of the Emergency Program will not compile themselves as if by magic, nor can they be converted into Union Catalog entries without a considerable amount of expert editing. These undertakings are as noth- ing, however, compared with the diffi- culty of preparing adequate entries for the regular public catalogs of the Library of Congress. The difficulty will arise out of the nature of the materials-out of their being old books and manuscripts- more than out of the fact that they are on films. Their being on films may even simplify one matter-namely, the colla- tion. This is a detailed statement which catalogers are accustomed to make re- garding the order and numbering of the pages and also, especially for the older 2 Cf. George A. Schwegmann, Jr., "The National Union Catalog in the Library of Congress," in Union Catogs in the United States, ed. Robert B. Downs (Chicago: American Library Association, 1942), pp. 229-63. On pp. 237-44 are enumerated 177 book catalogs and published check lists that have been in- corporated in the Union Catalog by clipping and mounting on cards. More than one and one-third million entries have been obtained by this method.
296 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY books, regarding the signatures or quires into which the pages are grouped. But the collation is a time-consuming thing to make, and in many cases it cannot properly be determined on the basis of the film alone. Hence, at least one uni- versity has directed its catalogers of microfilm to omit the point, and they are reported as much relieved by the omission.3 Since the collation is properly an attribute of the original book, it is perfectly logical to omit it in cataloging a film copy. After all, it is the film, not the book, that is the actual subject of the entry, and the film as such has no collation. Or ought we perhaps to consider the collation of a film as consisting of a statement of its width, the number of "frames" (i.e., of separate photographic exposures), and the "position"? These would indicate its physical makeup to anyone used to such terminology. "Po- sition" is a technical term for the rela- tion of the direction of the writing on the one-page or two-page exposure to the lengthwise direction of the film. There is as yet no international agreement as to the numbering or other designation to be used for the four possible positions, but in this country it is customary to speak of Placements I, II, II S, and III. Placements II and III have two pages to each frame, while I and II S have only one.4 By and large, the films of printed books should not present serious diffi- culty to skilled catalogers used to han- dling early imprints. The subject classi- fication is already in existence, and many of the authors who will be encountered have, as the term goes, been established both as to date and as to the form (often variable) of the name. The chief drawback to such cataloging will be the time it requires; and time means money. The excessive costs of cataloging are already under fire,5 and the sudden in- troduction of perhaps ten thousand films of rare books and manuscripts into the Library of Congress will do nothing to lower the average expense per item. Two general observations at this point are perhaps pertinent. One is that in 3 Cf. Margaret F. Parmelee, "Cataloging Micro- films at the University of Michigan Library," Journal of Doctm.entary Reproduction, III (I940), 232-37, with a facsimile of one of the catalog cards. They "do not usually note imperfections, missing title pages, cite authority for supplied titles, indi- cate the length of the film in frames, as is sometimes done in descriptions of films, mention illustrations, or give either the size of the original or the width of the film." For the most part the films are kept in the form of hundred-foot rolls. "Arrangement of the titles in the series according to classification would require cutting up the films so that there would be a single title on a strip of film. The films would be easier to use in this form, but the division would make a great deal of extra work and require much more storage space. Although the films are not arranged by class, a number in the Library of Con- gress Classification is assigned to each title and a card for it is placed in our shelf list, which is some- times used as a classed catalog. The call number is not placed on the rest of the set of cards, instead the word 'Film' appears in the upper left hand corner." Toward the end of this valuable record of experience the author observes: "Aside from the fact that we do not give collation, the films are as difficult to catalog as' the original old books would be, and since we have had no additional help in 'doing the work, it has been impossible to keep up to date in cata- loging the collection." 4 For an illustration see Jouirnal of Documnentary Reproduction, IV (I94I), 247, Fig. r. An earlier dis- cussion was given by Robert C. Binkley in his Manu- al on Methods of Reproducing Research Materials (Ann Arbor, Mich.: Edwards Bros., Inc., I936), p. I45. The designation "II S" is sometimes written out as "II Single." H. H. Fussler, Photographic Reproduction for Libraries (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1942), p. 75 and P1. II, uses for place- ment the simple numbers I,,2, 3, 4. 5 Cf. A. D. Osborn, "The Crisis in Cataloging," Library Qiuarterly, XI (94I), 393-4II. Mr. William A. Jackson, of the Harvard Library, in a letter of August 36, I943, summarizes thiis matter as it ap- plies to microfilms in one well-chosen sentence: "It is very hard for administrators of foundations to re- alize that the cost of making the microfilms is really the smallest part of the cost, if they are to be prop- erly handled once they are made."
MANUSCRIPTS IN MICROFILM 297 some sense or other the value of money has changed since, let us say, the turn of the century. Whether this change is gen- uinely inflationary or represents simply an increase in average cash iiicome and scale of living is hard to say. In either case it is probably necessary, in com- paring costs now and a quarter of a century ago, to make allowance for a virtual doubling of cash charges. This affects profoundly the comparative stud- ies of the cost of cataloging. The other observation looks in some- what the same direction. A large cata- log is like a telephone system-the more it expands, the higher is the unit cost. The telephone companies a few years ago carried on campaigns of public educa- tion to drive home the point that their business is not like others-that, as their business expands, costs do not drop but rise, and that the subscriber, while forced to pay m-lore, receives a pro- gressively larger, more comprehensive, and better-integrated service. The sim- ilarity between this and a catalog is obvious. As the catalog grows, the bur- den of adjustment increases. There are more things to look up, more possible points of contact, but also a greatly in- creased usefulness. For example, in a library of a thousand books there may be only one author to file under the name Smith, and there is no need to deter- mine whether a title-page mentioning "J. Smith" really means John Smith, Jared Smith, Jehosaphat Smith, or some other. In a large library, on the other hand, there may be entries for a hundred John Smiths or a thousand Smiths. Cultural institutions have in recent years become quite wary of accepting collections of material unless the gifts carry endowment for upkeep. The pos- session of the material imnplies an obliga- tion to care for it, organize it, and make it available for use; and within an already preoccupied budget this may be im- possible. Some such difficulty would con- front the Library of (Congress in accept- ing the films of the Emergency Program if the Rockefeller Foundation had not recently sanctioned the use of part of the fund for the purpose of cataloging the material. This still leaves the question open, however, as to what form of catalog is desirable and as to what degree of re- finement in the cataloging is feasible. MANNUSCRIPT CATALOGING IN AMERICA American libraries have done much in the calendaring or other listing of archival manuscripts, epistolary mate- rials, personal papers, and the like, but have had relatively little occasion to deal with book manuscripts. The former are a native product, but the latter almost wholly an importation. The dominant civilization of the New World developed after the invention of printing. The book trade went over rather promptly to the form of print, whereas archival and epis- tolary materials lolng continued to be written chiefly by hand. As early as the Colonial period a few book manuscripts were brought from Europe to America, and about the beginining of the present century considerable collections began to be built up; but not before I935 was a systematic listing of the items published. Even then they were not cataloged in any proper sense of the term. The publication was deliberately called a "Census" in rec- ognition of its provisional character.6 It 6 Seymour de Ricci (ed.), with the assistance of W. J. Wilson, Census of Afedieval and Renaissanlce Manuscripts ini thC United States and Canada (3 vols.; New York: H. W. Wilson Co., 1935-40). For a lbrief survey of the early infiltration of Euro- pean book manuscripts into America anid a list of some of the special catalogs of American-owned
298 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY was hoped that it would lead, and in several instances it did lead, to a more complete cataloging of the manuscripts by the institutions owning them. The results, however, were usually put out in book form, not on cards. Since each manuscript was unique, the possession of a single library, there was little incentive to make a co-oper- ative enterprise of the cataloging and to spread the results abroad by means of printed cards. But now, with microfilm negatives of some six hundred book man- uscripts already received from Britain and hundreds of others on the way, all of them expressly intended to be copied and sold to any purchaser, the usefulness of printed cards is much enhanced, and the cataloging might become in some sense a co-operative undertaking. If well constructed by careful catalogers at the Library of Congress or some other center of manuscript studies, the cards should be of value wherever a copy of any of the films is sent. In fact, many li- braries would be likely to subscnrbe for complete sets of the cards simply as a bibliographical tool.7 These, at a cost of a few cents each, would be much cheaper than a full duplicate run of the films and would also be more valuable to research scholars, unless the local library set to work and cataloged the films itself. It would always be known that the films, even if not available at the local library on five or six minutes' notice, could be secured from the Library of Congress within five or six days. A system of in- terlibrary loans of positive copies might even be instituted, or possibly an ar- rangement to rent them at a stated fraction of the cost of printing the positive. Although its Catalog Division has never dealt directly with manuscripts, the Library of Congress is not wholly without experience in the field. Between 1927 and I938, chiefly through its Card Division and its Manuscript Division, it prepared cards for some 330 of the roto- graphs of the Modern Language Asso- ciation of America. The items were fully cataloged according to Library of Con- gress procedure except that no classifica- tion number was assigned. The collation of the original manuscripts is usually given but is warily stated to be "based on the facsimile." Subject entries are added, some of the commoner ones being "Manuscripts, Latin-Facsimiles" and "Manuscripts. Gt. Brit.-Facsimiles." Whether these could profitably be con- tinued for a series of filmed facsimiles that threatens to run into the thousands is problematical. No cards were pre- pared for Modern Language Association items on film. Soon after the films began to arrive in large quantities, the Library of Congress undertook to renegotiate its contract with the Association, but the new agreement has not yet been announced. Another pioneer in this general field is the University of Chicago. In I912 it published a descriptive catalog of its manuscripts-the first American institu- tion to perform such a service.8 It has become an important center for such studies, particularly in the New Testa- ment field, and is now issuing printed manuscripts subsequent to the Census, see W. J. Wilson, "Medieval and Renaissance Manuscripts in America," Catholic Bookman, IV (I941), 257-59. 7 If the present plan for multilith publication of the entire card catalog of the Library of Congress is continued, the cards for films of manuscripts, pro- vided they are ultimately admitted to that catalog, would, of course, appear in successive supplements to the publication. 8 Edgar J. Goodspeed (ed.), with the assistance of Martin Sprengling, A Descriptive Catalogue of Manuscripts in the Libraries of the University of Chi- cago (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1912). Pp. Xi+ 128.
MANUSCRIPTS IN MICROFILM 299 cards for its manuscripts. Thus far 862 of its 96I numbered items have been cataloged by this method.9 The cards fol- low closely the Library of Congress rules. Regular call numbers are assigned, and to each is appended the indication "Mss room." Subject entries are added. THE VATICAN RULES FOR INDEXING MANUSCRIPTS A third and most important source of experience in this field is the Vatican Library, which adopted the Library of Congress classification for its printed books in 1928 and began to issue printed catalog cards at that time. The under- taking was due largely to the inspiration of Dr. W. W. Bishop, then librarian of the University of Michigan.I, In recog- nition of the Vatican's eminence as a center of international relations, the work was subsidized by the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. In I93I a set of specific rules for the con- struction of the new catalog was pub- lished, and in I a revised edition appeared.", An English translation of this is nearly ready for publication. Meanwhile, also under the influence of Dr. Bishop, a beginning has been made toward a card catalog of the Vatican's vastly important collection of more than sixty thousand manuscripts. The cards, however, are not multiplied by printing or by any of the near-printing methods. They are typewritten, and, if an extra copy is desired, that too must be type- written. Much of the advantage, there- fore, which American library procedure has gained from its multiplication of cards and its use of added entries is lacking. There are no added entries on these cards. Instead, there are added cards. After dealing with several thousand of the manuscripts, particularly among those not already described in printed catalogs, the authorities were ready in I938 to put out a set of rules.'2 These were the result of patient experiment, frequent revision, and constant collabo- ration with specialists in various disci- plines, such as canon law, civil law, clas- sical philology, hagiography, patristics, etc. Certain disciplines, such as philoso- phy, liturgics, and others, are not repre- sented in the special rules, because the expenence thus far obtained has not seemed adequate. An English translation of the work would be a major service to the research libraries of America. They might find in it more really new material than in the volume of rules for printed books. THE NUMERICAL AND THE CLASSIFIED CATALOGS Partial precedents for the card catalog of manuscripts may also be found in the catalogs that have appeared in book form. These are of two main types, which for lack of a better terminology may be called the numerical and the classified, respectively. The former is the simpler and more elementary. It takes up the manuscripts of a given library or a given collection in order, one after another, as they happen to be numbered, and describes each in turn. The parts of 9So Mr. Maurice F. Tauber writes me under date of December i8, 1942, explaining that the ninety-nine manuscripts described in the Good- speed-Sprengling catalog have not been recataloged on cards. I' Cf. Eugene, Cardinal Tisserant, "The Prepara- tion of a Main Index for the Vatican Library Manu- scripts," in Wiliam Warner Bishop: A Tribute, ed. H. M. Lydenberg and Andrew Keogh (New Haven: Yale University Press, 194I), pp. I76-85. "x Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana, Norme per it catologo degli stampati (Vatican City, 1931). PP. Vii+400. 2d ed. (I939). Pp. xii+490. I2 Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana, Norme per l'indice alfabectko dei manoscrilti (Cittk del Vaticano: Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana,i 938). Pp. vii+2o6.
300 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY any miscellaneous manuscript, com- prising works by various authors, or of any composite manuscript, consisting of fragments derived from several earlier volumes but now bound together, are also described in order as they happen to occur. Whatever groupings by author, title, subject, or other category seem necessary are supplied in the index, not in the body of the work. Other printed catalogs have been ar- ranged on some sort of logical or histor- ical classification. One of the earliest of these was published by Samuel Ayscough in 1782 for the Sloane Manuscripts in the British Museum.'3 Everything here is arranged by subject, e.g., medicine, astronomy, husbandry, etc., and then alphabetically by author under each subject. At the back of the second vol- ume there is a table of manuscript num- bers with references to the pages on which each is mentioned. In other words, this catalog, as compared with the or- dinary numerical type, has put the in- dex into the body of the work and the call numbers into the index. It is not an entirely happy arrangement. Since a high proportion of the Sloane Manu- scripts contains more than one treatise, a student must frequently look up several page references before getting a com- prehensive view of the nature and con- tents of a given volume. The Ayscough catalog, however, was a monument of erudition in its day; and, since that was before the day of the card catalog, its value as an index of contents must have been high. By a strange fatality, Scott, when he undertook to re-examine the Sloane Collection, decided to put his own results into the form of an alphabetical index.14 Many of his observations are new and important, but it is hard to locate them if one starts only with a certain Sloane number. The Ayscough catalog is an excep- tional case. Usually the first effort to de- scribe a set of manuscripts follows the numerical plan. Later, some kind of sys- tematic arrangement may be attempted, often covering the manuscripts of sev- eral libraries or even those of a whole country or of an entire discipline. For example, Mrs. Singer's Catlogue of Al- chemical Manuscripts groups the various treatises topically and aims to list for each treatise all the manuscripts in Great Britain and Ireland in which it occurs.'5 Dr. Kuttner's Repertorium der Kanonis- tik presents a conspectus of the existing manuscript materials on canon law, wherever found, in so far as these have yet become known.'6 Another and out- standing example is the universal Cata- logue of Latin Manuscripts of Aristotle, begun by the late Georges Lacombe. Such catalogs, as compared with the simple numerical type, have a sophis- ticated quality. They are, in fact, im- portant instruments of research. They assemble, for textual or historical pur- poses, the information that is often to be found in a multitude of earlier, numer- 13 Samuel Ayscough, A Catalogue of the Manu- scripts Preserved in the British Museum .... Includ- ing the Collections of Sir Hans Sloane, Bart., the Rev. Thomas Birch, D.D., and about Five Hundred Vol- umes Bequeathed, Presented, or Purchased at Various Times (2 vols.; London, 1782). '4 Edward J. L. Scott, Index to the Sloane Manu- scripts in the British Museum (London, 1904). Pp. viii+583. I5 Dorothea W. Singer (ed.), assisted by Annie Anderson and Robina Addis, Catalogue of Latin and Vernacular Alchemical Manuscripts in Great Britain and Irdand Dating from before the XVI Century (3 vols.; Brussels: Union Acad6mique Intemation- ale, 1928-3I). '6 Stephan Kuttner, Repertorium der Kanonistik (1140-I234): Prodromus corporis glossarum, Vol. I ("Studi e testi," Vol. 7I [Vatican City, '9371). Pp. xx+536. For the Aristotle catalog I regret to be unable to give an exact description. Apparently there is no copy in this country, but Dr. Kuttner remembers seeing and using at the Vatican Library in x940 a copy of the first volume or fascicle, edited by A. Birkenmajer, formerly a resident of Kharkov
MANUSCRIPTS IN MICROFILM 30I ically arranged catalogs, and valuable comparisons become possible. A work that is anonymous and difficult to date in one manuscript may be ascribed in another to a definite author and year. From existing precedents, some of them on cards and some in book form, any card catalog that may be construct- ed for the Emergency Program's films of manuscripts may draw many lessons. This is not the place for the consideration of minute details, but certain fundamen- tal choices require to be made. Shall the catalog tend toward the numerical or toward the classified type? Shall the films for all manuscripts, the simple as well as the composite or miscellaneous, receive their main entry under the name of the owning library and that library's designating number? Can the catalog attain its maximum usefulness as a separate entity, auxiliary to, but distinct from, the Library of Congress catalog? Must the incipit at times be admitted as an identity-determining element when both author and title fail? How much shall be done on the cards in the way of references to previous descriptions of the manuscripts? THE PROBLEM OF THE MAIN ENTRY As for the choice between a numerical and a classified arrangement, the card catalog largely by-passes that whole problem. In a printed book the chosen arrangement dominates the body of the work. There the information is set out for the reader once and for all. If he wishes to have it arranged on some different plan, say by author or subject or date or number, his only recourse is to consult the index, look up the refer- ences, and rearrange the material for himself. What the catalog in book form does by means of its index, the catalog on cards does through its added entries- and in some respects does it better. That is to say, the added entry does not give a mere set of page references where- by the information may be looked up; it supplies a duplicate copy of the entire entry at the new point. In this way it brings together all the works of a given author; all manuscript copies, editions, translations, adaptations, abridgments, etc., of a given work; and also such sub- ject groupings as prove desirable and manageable. In fact, a comprehensive dictionary catalog with a skilfully con- structed set of added entries is the answer to the scholar's prayer. For the most part, therefore, the di- lemma of the numerical versus the clas- sified arrangement is avoided when a catalog of manuscripts is constructed on cards; and yet one trace of it may per- haps be seen in the problem of the main entry. Shall this be by author or by the owning library's designating num- ber? If it is by author, then the number becomes an added entry. If it is by num- ber, then the author's name becomes an added entry. Which is better? The Vatican, it may be observed, avoids this problem by having no printed duplicates or added entries. In- stead, it simply typewrites a whole new card. For the simple manuscript con- sisting of one work this is entirely satis- factory, but by such a system there is nowhere a connected view of the con- tents of a composite manuscript made up of fragments of earlier manuscripts now bound together for convenience, or of a miscellaneous manuscript made up of a succession of treatises by one or more authors. Each fragment or treatise appears by itself, with a reference to the folios or pages which it occupies in the volume. No doubt the Vatican has in- ventories or other lists in which the con- tents of such manuscripts are given in connected form, but apparently the Norme per l'indice alfabetico makes no
302 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY provision for assembling this informa- tion on cards. As a result, the Vatican index becomes in this respect as atom- istic as the Ayscough printed catalog. What was done on the Modern Lan- guage Association cards in such cases is interesting. If the manuscript in ques- tion contains a single work, the main entry for the facsimile is under author (if known) and title. If the manuscript is composite in structure or miscellaneous in contents, the facsimile is entered under the name of the owning library and that library's designating number. The separate authors and treatises are then indicated by added entries. This practice seems admirable, and I would offer only one suggestion, namely, that for films of all manuscripts-the simple as well as the composite or miscellaneous- it might be well to make the main entry under the owning library and local num- ber. For this suggestion I can present no precedent and can foresee some objec- tion. I would point out, however, that it involves no extra work. If the main entry is by library and local number, then the author or title is given by added entry. If the main entry is by author or title, then the owning library with its local number is given by added entry. In this respect the two methods are in even balance. Now no one, certainly, would suggest that a library should ar- range a card catalog of its own manu- scripts in the order of the local desig- nating numbers. This would make of the catalog a virtual shelf list. But when a facsimile on film or paper is made and taken away from the owning library, the situation is changed. The local designa- tion then becomes a sort of personal name for the manuscript. By that desig- nation it is known in printed catalogs, in scholarly treatises, in collections of source materials. It would simplify the control of the various cataloging and listing processes if this designation were everywhere made basic-in the arrange- ment of the published check lists, in the possible Union Catalog entries, and in the main entries for the public catalog of the Library of Congress. THE PROBLEM OF THE ISOLATED CATALOG With one important exception to be mentioned hereafter, there is apparently no useful halfway stage between the simple check-list type of entry and the full form suitable for the regular catalog of the Library of Congress. Many of these manuscripts that are coming in on film have been well cataloged, and the printed catalogs are supplied with ex- cellent indexes. It is no real service to transform these printed descriptions into catalog cards and not supply them with at least enough added entnres to take the place of the indexes. Nor is it any great service to draw up cards with all the necessary additions and leave them in an isolated catalog by themselves. Only when inserted in a fully integrated catalog like that of the Library of Congress can they attain their maximum usefulness. An almost tragic example of this is the fate of the cards so carefully drawn up for the earlier rotographs of the Modern Language Association. These have probably been of use to certain outside libraries, and an alphabetical file of them, with the added entries duly inserted, is kept in the Division of Manu- scripts; but apparently few, if any, of the 330 or more cards have ever been filed in the public catalog of the Library of Congress. They are constructed ac- cording to the regular cataloging rules, with added entries and all the rest, right up to the last stage in the process; but there the process breaks off. As we have
MANUSCRIPTS IN MICROFILM 303 seen, there is no established classification and numbering for manuscripts in the Library of Congress system. Therefore, these cards have never received num- bers. Accordingly, having no call num- bers, they are not filed in the public catalog, though in every other respect they are ready for it. A concrete illustration of the situation as it stands is the following. The library possesses a book containing an edition of a part of British Museum Additional Manuscript 37790. The main entry for this work is under the author's name, and by means of an added entry another copy of the card in introduced under "British Museum. Mss. (Additional 37,790)." The Modern Language Asso- ciation has a complete facsimile of this manuscript as No. 316 in its regular series, and the item has been fully cataloged on a printed card. A copy of this card would naturally appear beside the card for the book, but it is not there. Some reader of the book might be much interested to know that a facsimile of the original manuscript is available in the same building, but the public catalog does not help him to that knowledge. If it occurs to him to go to the special file in the Manuscript Division or to look in the Modern Language Association check list, he will find it; otherwise not. This is a concrete illustration of the fact that the process of cataloging on cards cannot stop halfway, or even ninety- nine hundredths of the way, to com- pletion without losing much of its use- fulness. THE PROBLEM OF THE INCIPIT Medieval scribes, it has been re- marked, showed singularly little regard for the convenience of modern catalogers. They were especially careless about authors and titles. A given work may be ascribed in one manuscript to Aristotle, in another to Hermes, in another to Egidius, while in still another it is anon- ymous. It is often difficult and some- times impossible to determine who the real author was. Titles also vary. A work may even have one title prefixed to the text and a somewhat different title in the colophon at the end. Under such circum- stances it has become customary among medievalists to use the opening words, technically called the "incipit," as a fur- ther indication of the identity of the work. In many respects the incipit is more reliable than the assigned author or title. But here, too, there are pitfalls. One must learn to distinguish between the incipit of the prologue (the prologue may be omitted in some copies) and the incipit of the main work. Also, if the first word, say, is "Cum," a later scribe may casually write "Quando" or "Quon- iam" or some other synonym in its place. This is no help in alphabetization, and one must keep such possibilities in mind when consulting indexes of in- cipits. Those indexes are extremely valu- able as cataloging tools but must be used with a waryeye for verbal variants.'7 '7E.g., A. G. Little (ed.), Initia operum latinorum quac sacculis XIII, XIV, XV attribuuntur .... (Manchester: University Press, 1904). Pp. xiii+ 275. Also Marco Vattasso, Initia patrum aliorumque scriptorum ecclesiasticorum latinorum.... (2 VOIS.; Rome, x9o6-8). Incomplete, never published, but of great importance is B. Haur6au, "Initia operum scriptorum latinorum medii aevi," at Paris, Biblio- thdque Nationale, MS Nouv. Acquis. Lat. 2392. In I939 the Library of Congress attempted to secure a film copy of the dozen or so folio volumes comprising Haureau's compilation, but there was an accidental delay and then, by reason of the war, the manu- scripts were evacuated for safety. The Vatican is understood to have a handwritten copy of Haur6au. Very valuable for scientific manuscripts is the work of Lynn Thorndike and Pearl Kibre, A Catogue of Incipits of Mediaeval Scientific Writings in Latin (Cambridge, Mass.: Mediaeval Academy of Ameri- ca, I937). Pp. xvi+463. As Dr. Kuttner suggests, if the Library of Congress would systematically record the incipits of works in all the manuscripts which it receives on film, it would in time have a compilation rivaling that of Hauriau.
304 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY The cataloger of printed books knows something of the problems of pseudon- ymous, untitled, and acephalous works, but in his trade they are the exception. For the cataloger of manuscripts, on the contrary, they might almost be said to be the rule. This makes the going much rougher. There was a sort of convention among scribes to give at the beginning or, more often, in the colophon at the end a set of data more or less corresponding to the title-page of a printed book. Ideally this included, for each treatise in the volume, the author's correct name, the exact title, the scribe's name, and the date and place of copying. This ideal, however, is seldom, if ever, realized. Fortunately for the catalogers of the Emergency Program's films, the manuscripts in question have all been described in print, most of them well, though some of them quite badly. Much of the detec- tive work, therefore, on the anonymous and pseudonymous treatises has been done, but it is always advisable to check with more recent indexes, if any have appeared in the field concerned. This is time-consuming work and really requires the services of a specialist in each of the major branches of manuscript study-liturgy, music, poetry, law, sci- ence, etc. No one scholar can be a master of all the indexes, catalogs, and other tools in all these subjects. How to head a catalog card in some of the harder cases is a problem. Both the Vatican and the University of Chi- cago have at times used the incipit as an entry, and there are cases in which this seems to be inevitable. The Vatican puts the incipit in quotation marks and uses it for identification purposes but em- ploys it only when it is not possible to refer by page and line to a printed edition of the treatise in question. The chief of the Preparations Department at Chicago writes me: I may say generally that the University Libraries follow closely Library of Congress rules in cataloging manuscripts. When the manuscript has no title we have used a form title in brackets and given the incipit in a note. We have used the incipit at times as the entry. In a few instances, an English title has been made up.18 It will be something of an innovation in American library practice to employ the incipit as a heading and alphabetize it as if it were an author or a title. Such use will at times be necessary, but it should be as sparing as possible. It should be a last resort, when author, title, and form title have all proved im- practicable for the case in hand. A useful convention, following the practice of the Vatican, would be to place the incipit always in quotation marks, with three dots following. This will distinguish it at a glance from the other identity-deter- mining elements. NUCLEUS OF A BIBLIOGRAPHY OF MANUSCRIPT STUDIES The proposed check-list cards for the films of manuscripts, together with cards for similar facsimiles elsewhere in the Library of Congress, might be organized into the nucleus of a comprehensive bibliograpy of manuscript studies-a record of the published discussions of each manuscript. For this there is great need, and, while no one living will see the task fully accomplished, a practi- cable beginning might be made now. Fortunately, it is not one of those enter- prises which must be brought to com- pletion before being used at all. It could be added to continually and yet be imme- diately useful at every stage of its development. If the bibliography were sharply lim- ,8 Letter of November I9, 1942, from Mr. Mau- rice F. Tauber.
MANUSCRIPTS IN MICROFILM 305 ited as to content, there would be no need to limit it as to dates covered or even as to languages included, provided an adequate staff could be had. The fun- damental limitation would confine it to literary or book manuscripts, rejecting, archival, epistolary, and other occasional materials. Archival and occasional manu- scripts were produced in staggering quantities in every century of our era, but it was in the early centuries that most of the book manuscripts were pro- duced. It would be possible, therefore, to fix an arbitrary date limit at, say, 1500 or i6oo, excluding from considera- tion any book manuscript written lat- er, and still cover the great bulk of this sort of material. In the more ad- vanced countries the number of books or literary works circulated in manu- script form after i6oo falls off to a mere trickle. In Greece, on the other hand, books and treatises continued to be so circulated down into the seventeenth or even the eighteenth century. The same is true of Muscovite Russia, of China, and particularly of India. It would seem better, therefore, not to set any arbi- trary limit but to include all strictly literary material of whatever date if it circulated in manuscript form. As for geographical range, this ultimately would be set by the number of available per- sons able to work in the various lan- guages. A beginning toward all this may be made with the check-list cards for the Emergency Program's films of book manuscripts. If these are arranged, as suggested above, according to owning library and designating number, they will lend themselves readily to the com- pilation of a card bibliography of manu- script studies. The data thus accumu- lated should be of great assistance in the subsequent cataloging of the films concerned. In fact, this is the one useful halfway stage that can be envisaged between the check list or possible Union Catalog entry, on the one hand, and full Library of Congress catalog cards, on the other. The indexers of the Vatican manu- scripts, since they were dealing chiefly with uncataloged material, had little occasion to refer to previously printed descriptions. When possible, they re- ferred to printed editions in which the treatise in question had been published, but such publication has usually been based on some other manuscript copy. The University of Chicago catalogers of manuscripts, in so far as I have seen their cards, seem not to have given any references to printed descriptions. On the other hand, the catalogers of the Modem Language Association roto- graphs seem to have made a point of giving such references. So also did the Census of Medieval and Renaissance Manuscripts, despite the summary char- acter of many of its entries. The Subject Cataloging Divlision of the Library of Congress sets great store by such refer- ences and will doubtless include the more important of them on its cards if it ever undertakes to deal with manu- script materials systematically. The Library of Congress catalogers who handled the material of the Modem Language Association, back in the days when it used photostats or photographs, were accustomed to do the handsome thing in this particular. They not merely referred to printed descriptions of the manuscript or rare book; they copied them off by typewriter or photostat and placed the copy in the bound vol- ume. For the present program it would be possible to imitate this service by pho- tographing the printed descriptions on pieces of film and splicing these in at the beginning of the strip. But the time, trouble, and expense for this would be
306 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY considerable. It is probably sufficient merely to supply the references. The bibliography that is here being suggested is not to be thought of as con- fined to the obvious references. The films in question have usually been requested on the basis of the obvious references, and any competent investigator will either know those already or know enough to look them up at once. But the description, let us say, of Add. MS 14408 in the I843 Catalogue of Additions to the Manuscripts in the British Museum is not the conclusion of studies on that volume; it is more likely to have been the beginning. In what later special catalogs has the manuscript been de- scribed? What editions of texts have used it as a source? What books, mono- graphs, or periodical articles rely im- portantly on the historical evidence which it supplies? It will be necessary here to exercise some discretion. Not every passing mention of one of these manuscripts, not every casual inclusion of its number in some list, deserves recording in the proposed bibliography. Only treatments which contribute some- thing tangible to our knowledge of its date, circumstances, purpose, history, influence, and the like should be ad- mitted. In order to secure reasonable uniformity of selection, it would be ad- visable, at least at the start, to have all the references submitted to the judg- ment of one person or of a small group working very closely in harmony. Later, as the field widened and the standards of the bibliography became fixed, the responsibility for various sections of it- particularly for certain language groups would need to be delegated. 'While a trained staff for the selection and organization of matenral would be essential, much could doubtless be done by voluntary co-operation. For example, the scholars who have re- quested and will first use the present set of films are in most cases familiar with the previous treatments of the manuscripts in question and could sup- ply bibliographies of them with prob- ably less effort than anyone else. How many would be willing to do so? If the matter were presented to them in the right light as a disinterested effort for the convenience of all students of manu- scripts, the percentage of co-operation should be high. There would be gaps, but these would not destroy the use- fulness of what was recorded. The control staff would, of course, make every effort to fill in such gaps, and no scholar would be allowed to imagine that the coverage was complete. A concise statement of the plans for the bibliog- raphy might be printed with each check list, possibly accompanied by a few 3 X 5 printed slips on which references might be returned. If scholars were asked individually to supply references on the manuscripts which they were actually using or planning to use, the response would be greater than if they were appealed to generally and a bit vaguely for the good of the cause. The productive scholars of the country would doubtless welcome the establishment of a central clearing-house of this sort and would in time become accustomed both to consulting it and to contributing to it. The fundamental arrangement of the cards would naturally be geographical- first by country (or recognized territorial unit), then by city, then by library or other institution. After that, the clas- sification actually used in the owning library would have to be followed, whether it happened to be by collection and number, by subject group and num- ber, by language group and number, or by simple inventory or accession number. It would be necessary, of course, to supply cross-references for the name of
MANUSCRIPTS IN MICROFILM 307 every city, every institution, and every collection, indicating the grouping under which it must be sought. The obvious thing, in all doubtful cases, would be to follow the specifications already estab- lished by the Library of Congress in its cataloging of published facsimiles of manuscripts. METHODS OF EXPANDING THE BIBLIOGRAPHY If such a card bibliography proved feasible for the several thousand films of manuscripts in the Emergency Program, there are several ways in which it could be expanded to give more complete cov- erage. For one thing, there is the exten- sion which may naturally be expected in the copying program itself. At the close of the war the program may pass over to a more or less permanent basis. It might then be possible to abandon the selective principle and take consecutive runs of films for whole collections or even for whole libraries. From the point of view of the photographing, accessioning, listing, cataloging, and administering of the material, it would be an enormous advantage to have, for example, a com- plete reproduction, instead of a scattered representation, of the approximately five thousand Sloane Manuscripts of the British Museum. Under the pressure of the emergency and the sense of haste, this sort of choice was judged undesir- able. The prediction is freely made that in the course of time the library will have more films than it has printed books, and as the numbers increase the need will be increasingly felt for the making of consecutive runs. The day may well come, though not in our lifetime, when all the manuscripts in the British Museum will be represented by some kind of facsimile in the Library of Congress. In fact, the ultimate goal, of course, is the copying of all the million or so of book manuscripts that are con- jectured to exist in the libraries of the world. Aside from the expansion of the copy- ing program, and preferably in advance of it, there is another direction in which the proposed bibliography of manu- script studies might be extended. There are in the United States many other col- lections of copies of manuscripts, some small and scattering, others large and well integrated. One of the outstanding examples is the film collection made with his own camera by Dr. Sigerist, the director of the Institute of the History of Medicine at Johns Hopkins Univer- sity.'9 This aims to cover the ancient and the early medieval writers on medi- cine. Harvard University has a large col- lection of facsimiles-some on paper and some on film-of biblical and patristic manuscripts, assembled under the in- spiration of Professor Kirsopp Lake and to a considerable extent copied with his own camera. It is known as the J. P. Morgan, Jr., Collection, after the name of the original donor. If cards for these and other collections could be added to the proposed card file at the Library of Congress, its usefulness would be much enhanced. Even if the cards for these outside collections remained for a con- siderable time without the addition of bibliographical references, they would still serve as an invaluable check list of material already existing in this country. Much needless duplication might thus be avoided. A word of caution may be offered here. Many scholars, for their own pur- poses, have secured copies of a few pages of various manuscripts. They have been collecting texts, commonly in order '9 Cf. H. E. Sigerist, "The Medical Literature of the Early Middle Ages," Btdllein of the Institute of the History of Medicine, II (I934), 26-50; also a con- tinuation on pp. 559 6I3.
308 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY to prepare an edition, of some specific treatise as found in a number of different places. Such scholars are the best possible source for bibliographical references, and their support and co-operation are to be cultivated at all costs. On the other hand, it is hard to see how their partial facsimiles can profitably be included in the proposed bibliographical list. Prob- ably only complete films, photostats, or other copies ought to be admitted. If the entire volume is not available somewhere in this country, then it will need sooner or later to be filmed; and it will be much simpler and less expensive to have it filmed in its entirety than to attempt to issue instructions to the photographer to copy only certain parts. One foresees endless complications if the proposed bibliography tries to take account of incomplete copies of manuscripts. Here, as elsewhere, the complete volume would seem to be the only feasible unit of operation. Another extension of the list is pos- sible. There are in this country several thousand original manuscripts, and every year the number somewhat increases. That it will increase with great rapidity after the present war, as it did after the previous war, is not certain but probable. Might cards for these also be included in the bibliography of manuscript studies? If so, then the coverage would become really comprehensive. The cards would aim to represent all complete book manuscripts-whether originals, photo- stats, photographs, films, or other sorts of facsimile-in the libraries of the United States and Canada. One stipu- lation might perhaps be made, namely, that the material in question should be available to scholarly investigation, ei- ther by personal visit or by means of some form of copying. This would re- quire correspondence with the institu- tions or with the individual owners, but it would seem best in any case to secure their permission before including their manuscripts in the bibliographical list. A GUIDE TO CATALOGS AND COLLEC- TIONS OF MANUSCRIPTS To crown such an undertaking one thing more would be needed, namely, the sort of bibliographical guide to cata- logs and collections of manuscripts which was proposed by the late Sey- mour de Ricci on June 3, 1939, and laid before the American Council of Learned Societies by Dr. Waldo G. Leland in a communication dated two days later.2o The author observes in the proposal: Strange to say, considering the importance of manuscript evidence in almost every branch of culture, there is not in existence a reliable handbook containing a list of the known collec- tions of manuscripts, with some kind of bib- liography of the catalogues in which they are described. The limitations of the two existing general lists are explained, and two handbooks- one covering the manuscripts of the British Museum and the other those of the Vatican-are mentioned. Gabrieli's valuable survey of the manuscripts in the libraries of Italy2x is not referred to, doubtless because it had not yet come to the writer's attention. Since De Ricci's appended specimen deals with the col- 20 Seymour de Ricci, "Proposals for a Bibliog- raphy of Catalogues of Manuscripts ' (Paris, June 3, 1939), 7 mimeographed pages, with a covering page by Waldo G. Leland (Paris, June 5, I939). 21 Giuseppe Gabrieli, Notizie statistiche storiche bibliografiche delle collezioni di manoscritti oggi con- servati ndle bibliokeche italiane (Milan, 1936). Pp. 227. The most valuable general guide thus far pro- duced, though its emphasis is predominantly on manuscripts of the classical authors, is Wilhelm Weinberger, "Wegweiser durch die Sammlungen altphilologischer Handschrif ten," in Silzungsberichte der Wiener Akademie, Vol. CCIX, Abhandlung 4 (1930). Pp. I36. Reviewed by E. K. Rand in Specu- lum, VI (I93i), 639.
MANUSCRIPTS IN MICROFILM 309 lections of the Biblioteca Nazionale in Florence, it is interesting and instructive to compare his treatment with Gabri- eli's. The latter may have intentionally omitted certain catalogs existing only in manuscript form, but it is hard to understand his failure to mention the Fondo dei Conventi Soppressi, with 2,227 manuscripts, and the Libreria del Conte Luigi Passerini, with 233. De Ricci thus explains his method: Ever since I90I, I have been endeavoring to examine closely as many printed catalogues of manuscripts as I could lay my hands upon and the result is a collection of notes which, al- though still in many places fragmentary, already does much to cover the field. My object has been, for each library, to draft, in a few words, the outline of its historical development, followed by statistics as to its present holdings in manuscripts and a list of the printed (and not infrequently manuscript) catalogues which have been compiled at any time. The order in which my notes are classified is geographical, by countries, and in each country, alphabetical. I have attempted to eliminate all repositories containing only archive material, although the line is often difficult to draw. My notes aim only to include publications which actually take the form of a catalogue, although again, in the case of libraries owning only one or a few stray items, the distinction between a catalogue and a monograph is not always easy to draw. What is there proposed is, of course, a publication in book form. It is evident, however, that essentially the same mate- rial might be arranged on cards in the proposed bibliography of manuscript studies. For each country the general catalogs of its manuscripts would first be described succinctly, then those for each institution, then those for each special collection, and finally would come the cards for the separate manuscripts, each with its own references as previously suggested. The total result should be a useful and instructive survey progress- ing always from the general to the par- ticular. As even so learned and indefatigable a scholar as De Ricci observed, the task is too great for any single individual or any single institution. But, if properly directed, it could hope to command the respect and the co-operation of many individuals and many institutions. The Library of Congress already possesses a notable collection of printed catalogs of manuscripts, but the mere assembling of a file of its cards for these works would not suffice. Evaluation and con- cise historical presentation must be add- ed. In America at the present time are several of the greatest living authorities on various parts of the manuscript field, and to their critical judgment the various statements could doubtless be submitted. In some cases they might draw them up. And, for catalogs not available at the Library of Congress, microphotography could be summoned to aid. It has al- ready been arranged to film the hand- written catalog of manuscripts at the British Museum. Copies of other cata- logs in handwritten form could also doubtless be secured from many if not all important libraries, together with films of rare and unusual printed cata- logs. These are long-term goals capable of being attained only in times of peace, but even now it is doubtless well to be lay- ing plans for them. Someone, observing sadly the racial and cultural divisions of Europe, has remarked that only in America has it been possible to develop anything that can properly be termed a European race and a European civili- zation. Perhaps the compilation of a complete bibliographical catalog of the priceless manuscript records of Europe also awaits American execution, with the microfilm copy as the medium.