Are You my Mentor? Identifying Mentors and Their Roles in LIS Doctoral Education Cassidy R. Sugimoto School of Library and Information Science, Indiana University Bloomington, 1320 East 10th Street, LI 013, Bloomington, IN 47405-3907. Email: sugimoto@indiana.edu This study evaluates the assumption of whether or not one can equate mentoring and advising in doctoral education, with a focus on the field of Library and Information Sci ence. Furthermore, this study examines the presence of multiple mentors in doctoral education and their interrelationships and roles. Findings from the study suggest that the advisor serves as the primary and dominant mentor in doctoral education, with dissertation committee members serving in a secondary, yet purposive, role. Evidence is provided that the acknowledged mentoring roles are more attuned to career, over psychosocial, mentoring. Doctoral student colleagues appeared to provide mentoring in the form of role modeling and idea sharing. The implications for doctoral education are discussed. Keywords: doctoral education, mentoring, MPACT, survey, interviews Introduction The MPACT project is "an ongoing project devoted to defining and as sessing mentoring as a scholarly activity" (http://ils.unc.edu/mpact/) that has focused on collecting dissertation data and has used service on a dissertation committee as a proxy for mentoring. As of Decem ber, 2010, the MPACT database contained 6,793 dissertations, 4,595 advisorships, and 11,658 committeeships from 217 dis ciplines and 315 schools. The largest dis cipline represented in the database is LIS, for which the database contains complete information from all doctoral programs at ALA-accredited schools from 1930 to 2009. Research on the project has created metrics to evaluate faculty productivity (Marchionini et al., 2006), examined the correlation between these metrics and oth er productivity metrics (Sugimoto et al., 2008), produced metrics to evaluate the strength of academic family trees (Russell & Sugimoto, 2009), described the growth of doctoral education in LIS (Sugimoto, Russell, & Grant, 2009), examined the re lationship between MPACT indicators and other indicators of scholarly productivity (Sugimoto, et al., 2008), and evaluated topic trends in dissertations diachronically (Sugimoto et al., 2011). However, studies on MPACT have never addressed the as sumption that mentoring and advising in doctoral education could be equated, and previous research has failed to examine the interrelationships and roles of the par ticipants in doctoral education. This proj ect seeks to address this assumption and explore these roles, looking specifically at the LIS domain (the largest population in the MPACT database). This study is guid ed by four sets of research questions: 1. Do advisors perceive themselves as mentors to their doctoral students? Do advisees perceive their advisor as men tors? 2. Do doctoral students identify other indi viduals as mentors in the doctoral pro cess? If so, who are these individuals? 3. If multiple mentors exist in doctoral education, what are the relationships be tween these individuals? 4. What are the dominant activities of the mentors? To what extent do mentors en J. of Education for Library and Information Science, Vol. 53, No. 1—(Winter) January 2012 2 ISSN: 0748-5786 © 2012 Association for Library and Information Science Education
Are You my Mentor? Identifying Mentors and Their Roles in LIS Doctoral Education 3 gage in psychosocial, career, and peda gogical mentoring? This study will be used to provide vali dation for the operationalization of men toring in the MPACT project, will provide insight into the doctoral education pro cess, and will provide data useful to those involved in LIS doctoral education. Literature Review Although many scholars trace the ori gins of mentoring to Homer's The Odyssey (in which Odysseus leaves the care of his son to his friend Mentor) (Allen & Eby, 2007; Heinrich, 1995; Monaghan & Lunt, 1992), scholarly literature on mentoring is largely considered a phenomenon of the late 20th century (Kartje, 1996; Maack & Passet, 1994). The majority of research in this area has concentrated on business (Kartje, 1996), workplace (Allen & Eby, 2007) and adult development/education (Kartje, 1996, Allen & Eby, 2007). The scholar most frequently credited with be ginning this line of research is Levinson, who interviewed 40 successful corporate men regarding their mentors (Levinson & Darrow, 1978). Levinson and Darrow provide a framework for the role of the mentor-protege relationship in terms of adult development theory (Kartje, 1996) and propose that the mentor plays a key role in facilitating the "realization of the Dream" (p. 98), that is, helping the pro tege to "articulate and realize the vision he holds for his life" (Kartje, 1996, p. 116). The Dream "consists essentially of very long-range, deeply held, and sometimes poorly articulated ends-in-view" (Bargar & Duncan, 1982, p. 12). This concept of mentoring has dominated the psychosocial concept of mentoring, typically used in educational and counseling areas. In business literature, there is a trend to examine the organization and career func tions of the mentor, over the psychosocial functions of the "life mentor" (Monaghan & Lunt, 1992, p. 249). In this vein of orga nizational mentoring research, the histori cal origins of mentoring have been linked to the apprenticeship system, regarding the modern mentor-protege as similar in function as the master-apprentice rela tionship of the European trade guilds of the sixteenth through nineteenth centuries (Monaghan & Lunt, 1992). Academic mentoring can be seen to contain elements of both psychosocial mentoring, in which the mentor helps the protege to "articulate and realize . . . very long-range, deeply held and sometimes poorly articulated ends-in-view" (Kartje, 1996, p. 116—see also Bargar & Duncan, 1982, cited above); and career mentoring, in which the mentor instructs the protege on the proper models of the discipline and prepares the student for a career in the field. Kram's (1983) framework was tested on academic mentoring by Tenen baum (2001) and has been widely cited in the literature for its identification of men tor functions, classifying them as either career or psychosocial functions. For ca reer functions, defined as "those aspects of the relationship that primarily enhance ca reer advancement" (p. 614), Kram identi fied: sponsorship, exposure-and-visibility, coaching, protection, and challenging as signments. For psychosocial functions, de fined as "those aspects of the relationship that primarily enhance sense of compe tence, clarity of identity, and effectiveness in the managerial role" (p. 614), Kram identified: role modeling, acceptance-and confirmation, counseling, and friendship. Several reviews of literature on aca demic mentoring provide a foundation for work in this area: Allen and Eby's (2007) review of business, youth, and student mentoring; Jacobi's (1991) review of aca demic mentoring; Merriam's (1983) re view of mentoring in adult development, business, and academic environments; and Pascarella's (1980) review of infor mal student-faculty relationships. There is also considerable specialized literature focusing on particular aspects or issues of academic mentoring: for example, un
4 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE derrepresented groups (Davidson & Fos ter-Johnson, 2001; Dixon-Reeves, 2003; Johnson, 2007; Turban, Dougherty, & Lee, 2002) and gender (Heinrich, 1991, 1995; Johnson, 2007; Turban, Dougherty, & Lee, 2002). However, much of the re search is focused on the undergraduate level. Advisors as Mentors Within the realm of graduate mentoring, the relationship between a doctoral student and his or her dissertation advisor has been cited as the most critical element in doctor al education (Heinrich, 1991, 1995; Heiss, 1970; Zhao, Golde, & McCormick, 2007). Phillips (1979) called this relationship a "comradeship of extraordinary intensity" (p. 339) and noted the power of an advisor, stating that without support from their advi sor "students cannot advance . . . they can not complete their program nor can they enter the profession" (p. 342). Research on doctoral advisors often equates mentoring with advising (Bar gar & Duncan, 1982; Neumark & Gar decki, 1998; Phillips, 1979) and research has noted the similarities between posi tive advising and mentoring relationships (Johnson, 2007; Schlosser & Gelso, 2001, 2005; Zhao, Golde, & McCormick, 2007). Some scholars have commented on the in evitability of the advisor acting as a men tor, calling the advisor "the most obvious candidate to mentor a young scientist" and remarking that "it would be almost impos sible for an advisor to fail to be a mentor" (Ross, 2002, n.p.). However, research is not consistent on whether an advisor is always a mentor. Heinrich (1991) found that while advising was ubiquitous, mentoring relationships were "rare and precious" and did not oc cur in every advising relationship (p. 519). Likewise, Gilbert (1985), in his study of faculty role models, found that the disser tation chair was identified as a role model for only 24% of respondents (cf. Schuck man, 1987). On the other hand, in their study of female library educators, Maack and Passet (1994) found that the majority of the women in their study described their doctoral advisor as their primary mentor. In terms of expectations, Green and Bau er (1995) found that 96% of department heads, faculty members, and doctoral stu dents expected the advisor to serve as a mentor. Value of Mentoring Many studies have noted the value of the advising relationship, finding positive correlations between high advisor quality and doctoral student retention (Girves & Wemmerus, 1988), doctoral student sat isfaction (Andersen, 1986; Carter, 1983; Daniels-Nelson, 1983; Girves & Wem merus, 1988; Heinrich, 1991; Johnson, 2007), positive departmental environment (Hartnett, 1976), successful socialization of the student into the department and dis cipline (Gerholm, 1990; Johnson, 2007; Weiss, 1981), student development (Green & Bauer, 1995), psychological health (Johnson, 2007); doctoral degree prog ress and timely completion of the degree (Girves & Wemmerus, 1988; Johnson, 2007; Long, 1987; Lovitts, 2001), pro fessional development (Green & Bauer, 1995; Jacobi, 1991; Merriam, 1983; Phil lips, 1979); identity development (John son, 2007); productivity, before and fol lowing graduation (Green & Bauer, 1995; Heinrich, 1991; Johnson, 2007), and ca reer success (Johnson, 2007). The graduate student-faculty mentor ing experience is also highlighted for its mutual benefits to mentor and mentee (Busch, 1985; Kartje, 1996). While the benefits to the mentee are the most visible, many also cite the benefits to the mentor, when "the mentor receives a return on his or her investment" (Kartje, 1996, p. 120). The benefits to the doctoral student advi sor include: support they receive by hav ing the student as an assistant, added vis ibility of their research when the student publishes and presents, innovative ideas
Are You my Mentor? Identifying Mentors and Their Roles in LIS Doctoral Education 5 that the mentee may bring to the advisor's work, and growth of the mentor's reputa tion due to the student's success (Busch, 1985; Kartje, 1996). Negative Impacts of Mentoring Positive correlates with mentoring have been fairly well-studied in the literature, but very few studies have addressed the negative effects of mentoring. One nota ble exception to this is Johnson and Huwe (2002) who examined problems between faculty members and their students, such as mentor neglect, relational conflict, and exploitation. Of these, mentor neglect is probably the most highly noted, with studies showing a link between a lack of mentoring from faculty and high levels of attrition (Hesli, Fink, & Duffy, 2003; Jacks, Chubin, Porter, & Connolly, 1983; Lovitts, 2001). In addition, when students are not provided with information such as "what graduate education entails, what is formally and informally required of them to obtain a graduate degree, the academic culture (norms, rules, and values) of their particular discipline, and what accom plishments are necessary in order to be considered successful," they tend to "in teract less effectively with colleagues, to be less committed to their programs, and to be less productive" (Campbell, Fuller, & Patrick, 2005, p. 155). Mentoring Constellations Mentoring research has examined the concept of relationship constellations or developmental networks, that is, the idea that mentoring is not concentrated in a single entity, but spread through a system of different individuals (Higgins & Kram, 2001; de Janasz & Sullivan, 2004; Kram, 1983). This concept could be readily ap plied to the structure of the doctoral dis sertation committee, but very few studies have explicitly included committee mem bers when discussing mentoring (Hein rich, 1991; 1995). The critical function of this constellation idea of mentoring with respect to the doctoral committee was im plied by Girves and Wemmerus (1988) when they remarked: "two or three faculty members can determine whether or not a student graduates, where the student is employed (particularly for doctoral candi dates), and what the specific area of spe cialization will be, even for a student's entire professional career" (p. 170). Other authors have encouraged doctoral students to seek out a network of mentors (Camp bell, Fuller, & Patrick, 2005; Monaghan & Lunt, 1992). Additional "group mentor ing" (Ritchie & Genoni, 2002) situations may also be found in the context of doc toral student colleagues. Mentoring in LIS The majority of the research in academ ic mentoring has identified disciplinary areas by broad categories (humanities, so cial sciences, physical sciences, biological sciences) (Zhao, Golde, & McCormick, 2007) and has shown significant disci plinary differences. However, very few scholars have looked specifically at the discipline of LIS to identify what may be unique characteristics of mentoring within this field. One exception was Maack and Passet's (1994) study of the mentoring re ceived by 100 female library educators in the United States. Although the study did not target the doctoral advisor, the major ity of the women interviewed named their dissertation advisor as the most influential mentor in their careers. In addition, their study highlighted the large degree of con tact that many of the women kept with their doctoral mentors (Maack & Passet, 1994). As Golde and Dore (2004) noted, it is important to think in "discipline-specific ways in all matters related to doctoral education—in this case, the preparation of new faculty ... the nature of doctoral education differs among disciplines, and not surprisingly, the preparation of new faculty also differs among disciplines" (p.
6 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE 41). These findings reinforce the need for LIS to be examined individually. Methods The sampling frame for this study con sisted of all faculty members from ALA accredited schools. This list was com posed by checking the faculty listings on the websites of each school. Only current ly-serving full-time faculty members were included, excluding adjunct professors, doctoral candidates, lecturers, instructors, emeriti professors, and visiting professors. Questionnaires From this initial population, two sub populations, called "advisors" and "ad visees," were chosen for inclusion in the electronic questionnaire. The advisors (« = 354) were defined as those tenured pro fessors (at the rank of associate or full) from doctoral degree-granting schools. It was assumed that these professors had the highest potential for serving as advisors to doctoral students. The advisees (« = 294) comprised all assistant professor faculty members from any of the ALA-accredited schools. It was assumed that these faculty members were most recently in the doctoral process and would be best able to provide accurate reflections on their experiences. Separate, but parallel, questionnaires were created for advisees and advisors. These questionnaires were pilot-tested with several faculty members and built using Qualtrics survey software. The questionnaires were electronically avail able and the link to the questionnaire was emailed individually to all 648 potential faculty members in Spring 2009. Each respondent had at least four weeks to re spond. No reminder emails were sent. The quantitative data from the ques tionnaires were exported to Excel and SPSS for further analysis. The open-ended questions from the questionnaires were exported to NVivo for analysis. These were coded to group similar and identical answers and counts of these answers were reported in the results. The findings pre sented here are a part of a larger study, and only those findings dealing with defining mentorship are presented here. For a full description of the findings and methods, including survey instruments, please see Sugimoto (2010). Interviews The final question on the questionnaires asked individuals if they would be willing to be contacted for a follow-up interview. From that question, contact information for 23 advisees who had received degrees within the field of LIS (as identified in the questionnaire) and 33 advisors was re ceived. These 56 faculty members were emailed individually with a request to par ticipate in a 30-minute interview. The first 30 individuals to respond to the request were selected for the interview phase of the study (although these individuals were split equally between advisors and advi sees, no explicit stratification was done during recruitment/selection). The phone interviews were conducted in Spring 2009, each lasting approximately thirty minutes. Participants were emailed one day before their scheduled interview and given a list of themes that would guide the interview conversation, including the difference between an advisee-driven vs. advisor-driven relationship and managing multiple mentors. All interviews were con ducted over telephone and were recorded. Recordings of the telephone inter views were downloaded and imported into NVivo for transcription and analysis. Coding followed a mixed inductive and deductive approach, in which some top ics were established before the interview and other concepts arose during analysis. As some concepts arose out of the data itself, analysis required iterative listening and (re)coding of the recordings to ensure that each transcript was fully coded across all concepts. As Strauss (1987) describes, coding is used to "fracture data, rear
Are You my Mentor? Identifying Mentors and Their Roles in LIS Doctoral Education 7 range it into categories, and facilitate the comparison of data within and between categories" (c.f. Kelly et al., 2007). This process is complete when "saturation has been reached and all relevant utterances have been classified" (Kelly, et al., 2007, p. 1037). Data were then organized in an Excel spreadsheet in which each column represented a distinct concept, each row represented a distinct participant, and each cell contained an utterance. When writing up the results, all utterances in a column were evaluated in order to provide a bal anced report of the opinions and themes across all participants. Findings A total of 93 complete (32% response rate) and six partial questionnaires were received for the advisee group. A total of 107 complete (30% response rate) and 33 partial questionnaires were received for the advisor group. One of the questions on the advisee questionnaire asked re spondents to indicate whether or not they had received their degree within LIS. In order to focus on LIS, only the 75 advi sees (75%) who stated they had received their degree within the field of LIS were included in the analysis. All respondents of the advisor questionnaire were included (n = 140). Of the interview respondents, the advi sees represented 14 different current and 10 different doctoral (institutions at which they had received their degree). The advi sors represented 9 different current and 12 different doctoral institutions. Across all interviewees, 19 unique current and 19 unique doctoral institutions were repre sented (31 unique institutions across both groups and types). Mentors in the Doctoral Process To understand the relationship be tween advising and mentoring, advisors were asked the following question on the questionnaire: "To how many of your advisee(s) would you consider yourself a mentor?" As seen in Table 1, most advi sors perceived themselves to be mentors to the majority of their students. No respon dent selected "none" in response to this question. As the first question was left to idiosyn cratic interpretation, the following ques tion asked for examples of how they had served as a mentor. The responses primar ily focused on research, career, and teach ing advice. Within the area of research the following areas were most noted by respondents: general research advice (n = 28), publication advice (n = 14), feedback on written work (« = 12), and help specific to the dissertation (n = 12). Career advice was noted by 39 respondents; additionally, networking (« = 16) and "socialization into the profession" (n = 11) were frequently mentioned. Teaching advice was noted by 15 respondents. An additional form of mentoring was collaboration, with respon dents noting publishing together (n = 16), Table 1: Frequency of Responses to Advisor Question About Number of Students to Whom They Considered Themselves Mentors. Question None - - Half -- -- All Total To how many of your advisee(s) would you 0 1 5 20 8 19 54 107 consider yourself a mentor? (0%) (1%) (5%) (19%) (7%) (18%) (50%) Reflecting on your experience as a committee 8 19 14 29 9 10 11 100 member (not chair/advisor), to how many of (8%) (19%) (14%) (29%) (9%) (10%) (11%) these students would you consider yourself a mentor? Note: — denotes that the option was blank on the questionnaire (anchors were left blank between none, half, and ail); shading denotes plurality of responses for each question.
8 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE researching together (n- 11), and present ing together (« = 3) as elements of mentor ing. Psychosocial mentoring was far less represented on the list of mentoring activi ties: Six respondents noted mentoring on personal issues, five respondents indicated they provided general encouragement and support, and four reported mentoring on the time/life/work balance. Advisors were also asked if they con sidered themselves mentors to those stu dents on whose dissertation committees they served as committee member rather than chair (Table 1). The majority of advisors considered themselves mentors to the majority of the students on whose committees they served. Eight respondents indicated that they did not consider themselves a mentor to any of their students. When asked for examples of mentoring for these students, the responses were very similar to those examples given for the advisees. One no ticeable difference in mentoring was that when asked how they mentored on com mittees, many indicated that they were the "methods" person, or the person to whom the student goes to for methodological ad vice. They also indicated help specific to the dissertation more frequently than advi sors (18 respondents, compared to 14). Advisees were similarly asked to iden tify if they were mentored and for exam ples of this mentoring. When asked if they were mentored during the doctoral process (by any individuals or communities), 85% (« = 61I) of the advisees indicated that they had been mentored. Those who answered in the affirmative were asked to select from a list of possible mentors (multiple selec tions permissible). As shown in Table 2, the largest percentage of individuals se lected the faculty advisor, followed close ly by dissertation committee members. Advisees were also asked to provide ex amples of ways they were mentored dur ing their doctoral program. The majority of responses dealt with research including: research advice (mentioned by 13 respon dents), writing and publishing (n = 8), dis sertation advice (n = 5), and researching with their advisor (n = 2). Career advice (n = 8) and general support (« = 8) were also frequently mentioned. In addition, the following ways of mentoring were men tioned by at least five respondents: work/ life/time management advice, networking, advice on "navigating the process" and advice on academic life and acculturation. While the advisor in particular and faculty members more generally were mentioned as mentors, respondents also indicated family members and colleagues as ad ditional sources of mentoring (within the three "other" responses). Dissertation Committee as a Mentoring Constellation Data from the questionnaire (Table 2) Table 2: Frequency of Responses to Advisee Question About Individuals Who They Considered Mentors. Number of Percentage of Respondents Individual Responses Selecting this Choice Faculty advisor 53 87% Dissertation committee member 52 85% Other ILS faculty (not on committee) 29 48% Other ILS students 26 43% Other non-ILS faculty (not on committee) 13 21% Administrative staff 10 16% Other non-ILS students 7 11% Other 3 5%
Are You my Mentor? Identifying Mentors and Their Roles in LIS Doctoral Education 9 provided evidence of a "mentoring con stellation" in doctoral education. As one questionnaire respondent noted: I cannot emphasize the importance of having a team (more than just the major advisor) of faculty to mentor a student. The other people who served on my disserta tion committee have continued to serve as personal and professional advisors and friends. One faculty member does not serve as a village of doctoral study. (ID2) Other respondents emphasized the vari ous roles played by their committee, say ing that "other faculty in the school served as intellectual mentors in various areas, through coursework and research activi ties" (ID 165). One advisee reported having "a team of advisors" (ID217) and another said that he benefitted by seeing all com mittee members as advisors and getting as much feedback as possible (ID116). Roles Many respondents spoke about the role of the committee members. The advisors described the roles they played when they served on committees and the advisees de scribed the roles they expected from their committee members. Advisors described their process of making their roles explicit, by making the students explain why they want them to serve on their committee and what they expect from them (ID497; ID49). One respondent noted this idea of each member playing a particular role, say ing: "You shouldn't be on a doctoral disser tation committee unless you can contribute something—whether it's helping the stu dent with research methods or being a good critic or something or knowing part of the literature really, really well" (ID342). Advisees similarly noted purposeful selection in the composition of their com mittees with comments such as "every per son sort of played a particular role and that was definitely a conscious choice to pur sue them individually that way" (ID74), "Every single one of them served a pur pose, including my outside person" (ID2) and "I picked specific people to do specific things" (ID69). Two areas stood out as major areas in which the committee members played a role: content and methods. Content was paramount for some respondents: "if the content's not my expertise, then I will not agree to serve" (ID575). Methods were an other area that was important with many respondents describing a "methodologist" (ID 153) or "methods person" (ID86) on their committee. Other respondents indi cated a mix of content and methods for committee member roles (ID497). One re spondent remarked: "I'm either there be cause it's the content expertise that I could bring or methodological, but it depends on the nature of the dissertation or... the stu dent and their work . . . unless I can offer something in ... terms of methodology or content, I'm not sure I should be on the committee" (ID49). Relationships The dominance of the advisor role and the way it shaped the relationships in the rest of the committee was noted by many respondents. This hierarchy seemed pres ent from the beginning, where many ad visees noted that the advisor was instru mental in the selection of the rest of the committee (ID 175; ID2; ID 155; ID234). Respondents noted the political nature of the process saying, "some people can work with some people and some people can't" (ID2) and described favoring their advisor in this process. One person was explicitly told by her chair "if she's on the commit tee, I won't be your co-chair" (ID155). The respondent remarked, "making sure that people get along is just as important as subject expertise" (ID155). Advisors reinforced this idea that, while the student was in charge of the committee selection, they like to have input on the decision. As one advisor remarked: "I know who I can work with and who I can't, so I might lead the student" (ID 160).
10 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE Once the committee was established, many respondents noted the continued importance of the chair. One advisor re marked: "the only hierarchy is that the advisor is the manager and the rest of us are the workers, but then the advisor has to do the most work and the rest of us just provide some oversight" (1D497). Some respondents remarked on the way in which an advisor can set the expectations for the dissertation, but the views on this differed. A respondent described a situation where she served on a dissertation committee where she was told by the advisor: 'this student is not the strongest; this disserta tion is not going to be the strongest, but this guy already has a job lined up when he leaves; he's not going to be in academia, so hey, let's just get him through" (1D641). Another respondent noted trying to avoid letting the advisor guide the expecta tions for the dissertation, saying: "I try not to let rank get in the way ... the student has made a case for why I should be on a committee and I feel like 1 need to ... be as forthright in terms of my responses to the dissertation or the proposal as if it was my own student" (ID49). The respondent noted that he had been removed from a dissertation committee before because he did not accept the quality of the student's work. He recalled: "1 was not going to .. . roll over for either the chair or the student and have my name on it ... 1 bring the same standards that I would have with my students, my advisees, to any committee that I'm on as well and hopefully it serves to improve the quality of the end project and it's not like I'm trying to . . . say my way or no way, but I have the best interests of the student at heart, no matter what the other committee members may be think ing" (ID49). The advisor role continued to be impor tant in dealing with conflicting opinions on the committee. One advisee noted that the advisor "was very respected and I don't think that people would want to go around him" (ID86). Another advisee had a com mittee composed almost entirely of cur rent or previous Deans, all of whom were male. She described them as "all really high-powered" saying, "it's like having a bunch of stallions in a pasture" (ID234). However, her chair still managed to lead the committee, in what she called a "quiet leadership style" (1D234). She recalled that all her committee members were al lowed to give input on the products, but her chair retained the "final say" (ID234). Outside Members Outside members also appeared to be in a secondary role. One advisee remarked that she thought if the outside person felt more comfortable, she thinks they would have given her more "trouble", but she sensed that the outside member felt "intim idated" by her chair, an eminent research er in the field (ID246). One of the largest roles that outside members appeared to play is to provide expertise in a particular content area, many times one which was not within the scope of the school or dis cipline. As described by one advisor: "we try to find people outside with an expertise that we don't have" (ID478). This was re inforced by an advisee who acknowledged that the faculty within her department didn't really know the specialty area she was studying and said, "it was important for me to have that person fill a gap that my committee couldn't fill" (ID 175). An other advisee reinforced the importance of choosing someone for subject expertise outside the field, but noted the challenges of disciplinary differences (ID234). Some advisees noted that their selection was based in large part on the discipline in which they were reading (ID86; ID 153). Other advisees mentioned that the choice was to provide expertise in a particular method (ID217; ID42). Another respon dent who was studying a particular com munity recruited a person from within that community: "As my outside committee member 1 had one of the key players in the community that I was studying participat ing .. . that provided some reality checks
Are You my Mentor? Identifying Mentors and Their Roles in LIS Doctoral Education 11 on the methodology again, but then also connections into that community that al lowed for this particular project to actually happen" (ID74). In some cases, the institution mandated a specific person to serve on the defense in an administrative capacity. One re spondent described how the "graduate school representative" came in "to be the procedural watchdog" during a defense (ID622). A similar administrative position was observed at another institution where the committee member was expected to be the person who observes "Roberts Rules of Order" (ID153). One advisee described how she made the most out of her insti tutional policies, describing how a purely administrative role "wasn't good enough for me" so she selected someone who might be able to provide a methodological insight as well as serve in the administra tive capacity (ID2). Some advisors noted that the roles played by external members differed not only by institution, but also by country. The advisor noted her experiences serving as an external committee member for dis sertations outside the U.S. and commented that she felt she had more involvement when she served as an external member within the U.S. The advisor remarked: "In the U.S. . . . most committee members are involved, so they have a chance ... to shape your dissertation at the time of your proposal defense .. . usually they read the manuscript, they are allowed to communi cate with the students" (ID575). The advi sor described an experience serving on a non-U.S. thesis, in which she was asked to review the manuscript and mail back com ments, without any interaction with the student. She noted that in the U.S. she felt she had more direct input (ID575). Peer Mentoring One student noted how she also learned from formal collaborations with other doc toral students: "when I... was first learn ing to do qualitative research, I was work ing not only with a professor ... but also with two other doctoral students who were also learning at the time and I think that was actually kind of key" (ID69). Another respondent noted serving as an editor to her colleagues, helping to edit disserta tions of fellow students for whom English was not a first language (ID42). However, most respondents commented on more in formal collaborations or relationships that served as forms of peer mentoring. One advisee recalled the informal collabora tion between herself and fellow doctoral students all hired on the same grant: "we worked together more like on ideas ... we didn't really work together on projects so much, but we ... constantly got to bounce around ideas about what we were going to do" (ID217). Another respondent also re called setting up meetings for doctoral stu dents to collaborate on "ideas" rather than projects (ID575). Other respondents recalled how infor mal meetings led to peer mentoring: "We have a regular doctoral students' meeting every month to exchange ideas—at least to be sympathetic to everybody's case" (ID 116). Another advisee recalled a spe cific example of peer mentoring, saying: "I think one of the things that helped me was there were a couple ... of senior doc toral students who made it clear to us that we were expected to take the initiative and also that any efforts we took independently, in other words, if we were doing work and just sort of ignoring our advisors and do ing it on our own, they wouldn't really be very interested in that, that we really need ed to keep the relationship going. I think that actually helped more than the faculty members telling us to take the initiative" (ID283). An advisor noted: "a student who is a couple years ahead can tell things that those of us who have been out of being a student for six or eight or ten years can't do as well" (ID234). An advisor also spoke of community and healthy competition among doctoral students saying "I'm very jealous of our students because they have such community here . . . they are very
12 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE close knit as a group and I think that that's probably an extremely important part of the success of our program . . . and that is really peer-mentoring; there is a lot of that here" (ID622). The idea of community was also present in other comments, such as one respondent who reported meeting together for social events with fellow students and faculty members in the department (ID221) and another respondent who commuted to the program with a group of students and described, "we were like a support group and we have stayed close since" (ID 175). Substance of Mentoring As noted above, the respondents gen erally equated research, teaching, and ca reer advice with the concept of mentoring. Psychosocial elements of mentoring were largely absent from the open-ended re sponses provided by the respondents. This was further investigated through question naire responses and interview transcripts. Topics of Conversation Advisors and advisees were asked to in dicate, from a list of conversations topics, both how frequently a topic was discussed and how sufficient that level of frequency was for the given topic. These topics were analyzed and ranked for both frequency and sufficiency as displayed in Figure 1 (light dots represent advisees, dark dots represent advisors; for full tables of re sults, see Sugimoto, 2010). The top left quadrant depicts those items that are frequently discussed, but are still not discussed frequently enough. As can be seen, the only topic that fell into this quadrant from both advisor and ad visee perspectives are the major people, schools, and publications in the field. The top right quadrant depicts those items that are discussed frequently and sufficiently. Both advisors and advisees listed the ad visee's research and advisor's research in this quadrant. The bottom right quadrant are those items that are rarely discussed, but do not need to be discussed more fre quently. The advisor's personal life and administrative tasks fell into this category. The last quadrant comprises those topics that were rarely discussed and the partici pants felt needed more discussion. Uni versity resources available to the student, pedagogy preparation, how to prepare pub lications/presentation, and how to write a grant proposal fell into this category. Psychosocial Although the psychosocial topics did Most fr€«pe»t Advisee's te^e-Mth# I A<h: .« rr^flrcb R««l is ihe field £ v. <» t'f«r field Advisee's classworieJt \i |icisoois ; .,?•! Major people, schools, pufeikatiora # . -, • # Upcoming cmtmm-c* Advisee's jot> opportunities. % 9 Advisee's dti^swoii: AdvtMr'f research 0 Adm^v'y penom! life toufikknt iiaw -*•»*-»—* ■ • • , -»••>—-• i mm. Swffkksi? i&bbmp 9 i Pedagogy preparation # I VMw'» jsr»ei«! life rnisgogv tmpmttm m J How to write ^ ««#%«« i< • re a grant proposal £ University resources ^ tive «»ks # Administrative tasks piMk'3fbt»'?«CK>r??ailoss # Petitgogj. How 10 writs # a gt«nt proposal Least frequent • Administrative tasks # Advisee s penonal life •Advisor's personal life is* frequent Figure 1. Graph depicting frequency and sufficiency of topics of conversation.
Are You my Mentor? Identifying Mentors and Their Roles in LIS Doctoral Education 13 not appear to be the dominant themes of conversation, at least one interview re spondent characterized their mentoring re lationship as "very, very social" recalling that they "went to coffee several times a week, if not eveiy day" (ID217). Anoth er student recalled getting "really close" to their advisor, saying "sometimes it is very formal, but over long conversations there's some sort of connection—if you don't have that connection, I don't think it can work" (ID 160). Another advisee de scribed her own close relationship with her advisor saying, "I knew what was going on in her life and she knew what was going on in mine" (ID155). One advisee recalled the support that her advisor provided for her, stating: "she was a great mentor, I mean, if I had a personal situation come up or a problem or something, she was always there" (ID2). One advisee talked about how much her advisor instilled con fidence in her and how that was critical for her development (ID155). Similarly, an advisor spoke of how all doctoral stu dents go through periods of insecurity and how instilling students with confidence through those "rock bottom semesters" is an important part of mentoring (ID 160). However, although these provide a few examples, the psychosocial aspect was not an acknowledged aspect of the mentoring relationship from either the advisor or ad visee perspective. Pedagogical The element of pedagogical preparation was explored in a question to the advisees, in which they were asked to identify from among various choices of potential peda gogical mentoring activities, which ap plied to them (Table 3). One theme that was prevalent through out the interviews was the lack of peda gogical preparation for doctoral students. Many advisees remarked they were "thrown into teaching" without any prepa ration (ID69). One advisee recalled: "they let you loose on a class and they never come even look at you" (ID175). An ad visor likened pedagogical preparation to parenting, saying: "It's like parenting . . . nobody teaches us to be parents . . . you have to struggle and read your books and figure it out and I think teaching is fairly similar . . . there is never a lot of specific instruction about how to teach and how to teach well" (ID495). The respondent also remarked: "I think training doctoral stu dents to teach ... should be a high priority and I don't think it is; I don't think it is anywhere" (ID954). This was reinforced by another respondent who went as far as to say: "we never do that" (ID415) when asked how their institution teaches doc toral students to teach. However, one respondent noted a great deal of pedagogical preparation that happens at their institution including a "pedagogical component" to the doctoral seminar, a required apprenticeship either taking a course or working in the con tent area in which you intend to teach, "a course in learning" offered outside of the department, an independent study within the department to create a syllabus, and a semester working as a grading assistant Table 3: Frequency of Advisee Responses in Response to Question About Pedagogical Preparation. Number of Percentage of Activity Responses Respondents 1 worked as a teaching assistant for my advisor 27 39% 1 received pedagogical instruction from my advisor 18 26% 1 co-taught with my advisor 12 17% None of these choices apply 35 50%
14 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE before you are allowed to teach indepen dently (ID397). Some respondents commented on the extent to which doctoral students were en couraged or required to take formal peda gogy courses. Most advisees indicated that they "were encouraged but not required" to take pedagogy courses (ID69, ID283). For the most part, it seemed these courses were offered outside of the department (ID641). Some respondents noted learning to teach through watching their advisors, guest lecturing (ID221), teaching assis tantships, and co-teaching opportunities. One advisee noted: "I had excellent teach ers; 1 learned by watching them" and noted that his own advisor was absolutely criti cal in teaching him how to teach (ID415). An advisor commented that pairing "stu dents or groups of students with people who have proven track records of being a good professor" (ID69) would be the ideal way to prepare students for teaching. One advisor suggested, "All doctoral students should co-teach at least one class that their advisor teaches . . . it's a way to expose them to teaching in a controlled environ ment" (1D495). Other advisees mentioned this model of co-teaching at their institu tion, saying: "we taught probably one se mester with somebody or maybe two and then we were set free" (1D42). Teaching practicum was mentioned by many re spondents as part of the curriculum at their schools. However, some advisees remarked that this requirement was not particularly useful. One advisee noted: "I mainly remember being stunned at how little I was asked to do and how low the quality of the experience was" (1D283). Advisees noted different expectations for teaching at their institutions. One stu dent remarked: "students should be given [an] opportunity for teaching, whether it is teaching for the college or for the advisor's course ... [teaching] was not required, but I demanded ... you have to demand if it's not required otherwise people just ignore you" (ID 116). Another advisee recalled a different experience in which "we taught the whole time ... we were expected to teach" (ID42). At another institution, with a large undergraduate population, the doc toral students were expected to carry many of the undergraduate courses (ID575). Career Preparation and Acculturation Many interview respondents comment ed on their own expected career trajecto ries when beginning the doctoral program and the career trajectories their institution expected. Some respondents indicated simply that the objective of their program was to create "future faculty" (ID175; 1D478; ID415). Other respondents empha sized that the objective of the doctoral pro gram was to create strong researchers—re gardless of whether or not they went into an academic position. As one respondent explained: 1 think what we do is train them to be researchers—to be critical and analyti cal. They have to decide whether they are going to be faculty members. You can be critical, analytical, do good work in, outside the academy. You can be a researcher, an institutional re searcher in government, in non-profits, in different sectors of the economy. It's the issue of, 'Are we helping students become creative, good scholars?' (ID397) Another respondent disagreed with the sentiment that there were many career tra jectories for PhD graduates but echoed the sentiment of creating researchers as the primary function of the doctoral program: There really aren't a multitude of careers for which a Ph.D. makes sense ... we are orienting towards researchers rather than practitioners as the outcome for our PhD. ... I think that's where we are best able to educate people ... essentially, we are re ally only training researchers—people who want to research as their primary activity. (ID497)
Are You my Mentor? Identifying Mentors and Their Roles in LIS Doctoral Education 15 Many respondents spoke at length about how their doctoral education trained them for their future life in academe. One advisee recalled a "veiy deliberate effort on the part of the school ... to make the doctoral program have the same kind of benchmarks and feedback mechanisms as junior faculty members have" in order to make the "transition" into an academic po sition "relatively seamless" (ID153). One advisor similarly noted the practice at their institution requiring students to publish as a way in which to prepare them for their future life as a faculty member (ID488). The respondent noted that this accultura tion extended beyond the research area: "I think that part of a doctoral program, a good doctoral program, is socialization and teaching people about what the aca demic life is about and I don't know how much of it is teaching, it's just providing a model in some ways—they see how you behave, they see your responsibilities you have, they see your interactions—and I think that, you know, if they're smart, they're going to model themselves and fol low what you're doing" (ID488). One re spondent noted: "we have to pay as much attention to acculturation into academe as we do to actually inculcating them with knowledge and, you know, it isn't just about theory and methods, it's about un derstanding the role of committee meet ings and how universities work and your place in them" (ID234). In the words of one respondent: "being a faculty member is not a job; it is a way of life" (ID2). Discussion and Conclusions As one student noted: "One faculty member does not serve as a village of doc toral study" (ID2). The findings from this study indicate that, although the advisor is seen as the primary and most dominant mentor in doctoral education, there are many other individuals the advisee con sults, formally and informally. Among those, the dissertation committee members were the most likely mentors after the ad visor. Respondents indicated that committee members were chosen to play a purpose ful role—these individuals were not meant to serve merely an administrative role, but were active members of the advisee's mentoring team, providing both career and psychosocial roles. Among these roles, the most frequently mentioned were method ological assistance, literature familiarity/ subject expertise, and editing. The advisor appeared to be the leader of the dissertation committee. The student selected committee members based on consultation with the advisor and the rest of the committee deferred to the wishes of the advisor. Some respondents indicated that the advisor was the primary determi nant of what was a passable product, while other committee members indicated hold ing the same standards for their students regardless of the advisor. This demon strated the range of differences in doctoral education not only on the program level, but also on the advisor level—two stu dents from the same program may have markedly different expectations of what a dissertation can and should be, depend ing on their individual advisors. This is something which warrants further inves tigation—should programs institute rigid standards for dissertation work, or should the expectations be created by each indi vidual advisor? The most frequently reported infor mal mentoring occurred between doctoral student colleagues. In some cases, these students were working together as part of formalized research collaborations. Most often, however, the students merely met informally to provide each other with sup port and counseling. The nature of these relationships could be seen to provide more of the psychosocial mentoring ele ments than conferred in any of the more formalized doctoral mentoring structures. Many of the respondents commented on the concept of "idea sharing" with their peers. It is possible that these forums al
16 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE lowed the students a safe place in which to experiment with new ideas and gain confidence before presenting the ideas to their mentors. In this way, peer mentoring may provide the critical functions neces sary for each doctoral student's growing sense of competence and identity. In ad dition, many of the students commented on the degree to which role modeling oc curred between students—faculty mem bers were at times unable to provide stu dents with detailed instructions on how to progress through the doctoral process. Senior doctoral students, however, were able to provide (through role modeling and direct instruction) advice on how to navigate through the doctoral process. In this way, the doctoral student community can be seen to provide the missing piece of doctoral mentoring—the advisors and committee members primarily provide the career elements while the doctoral student community provides many of the neces sary psychosocial elements. The critical component of the doctoral student com munity begs further investigation, espe cially in light of the rise of many distance programs. What can programs (both on line and on-campus) do to facilitate the creation of community among doctoral students and encourage "idea sharing"? The results from this study suggest that the career function may weigh more heavily in the doctoral mentoring rela tionship than the psychosocial function. When asked to provide examples of men toring, respondents focused on research and career advice. Topics of conversation similarly focused on research and career preparation, with the items regarding the respondents' personal lives ranking as the least frequent topic of conversation and the most sufficiently discussed. Veiy few individuals spoke of the psychosocial ele ments of the mentoring relationship. Those who mentioned elements of role modeling focused on the ways they sought to emulate the advisor's career path by im itating how their advisor conducted him/ herself as a professor and researcher. The desire to emulate a career path could be seen in terms of career advancement and a growing sense of the scholar's identity and what they desire for their lives. It may be the case that the career elements are more explicit than the psychosocial elements and therefore more recognizable and mea surable to the respondents. Elements such as gaining a sense of competence and iden tity likely occur during the doctoral pro cess but they may be more difficult for the respondents to identify. Attribution may cause an additional complexity, as respon dents may see multiple actors involved in their growing sense of identity as a scholar and be less willing to identify their advisor as the sole provider of this input. Additionally, doctoral education may reflect properties of an intrinsically tran sient social world (Kazmer, 2007), that is, "a social world that is temporary by its definition" (p. 114). A successful mentor ing experience involves graduation and therefore many elements of the relation ship can be seen as functions of career ad vancement. For example, mentoring may include co-authorship or co-presenting research. While strictly contributing to ca reer advancement, this may also contrib ute to the scholar's sense of competence and identity. There is a grey area between these functions in doctoral education, where the creation of independent schol ars depends on their own gained sense of competence and identity. The point of the relationship where the psychosocial elements seemed to emerge was in the redefinition phase of the advi see's career, once they had successfully graduated and thereby made a formal separation from their advisor. More advi sors reported playing a role as colleague and friend rather than mentor in the post graduation phase of the student's life. Similarly, advisees identified advisors as colleagues and friends. The point of re definition seems to sever the hierarchical bounds of the mentoring relationship as the two individuals move into peer status. It is perhaps this "disengagement" (Ka
Are You my Mentor? Identifying Mentors and Their Roles in LIS Doctoral Education 17 zmer, 2007) from the student status that allows the individuals the intimacy nec essary to engage in a more psychosocial relationship. Future Work The findings for this study provide a descriptive account of participants and roles of mentors in LIS doctoral educa tion. However, this study only provided data from those who had successfully completed the degree and had been hired as faculty members in an LIS program. Further research needs to be done to ex amine populations who did not complete the degree and those who obtained careers either outside of academe, in other coun tries, and in other disciplines. This study provides a benchmark against which these other studies can be compared. Acknowledgements As this work was a part of my dis sertation work, I would like to thank my mentors: Diane Kelly, Gary Marchionini, Paul Solomon, Linda Smith, and Barbara Wildemuth. I would also like to thank Philip Edwards and Thomas Sugimoto for their comments on earlier versions of this manuscript and to Songphan Choem prayong for his work on Figure 1. Cited Works Allen, T.D., & Eby, L.T. (2007). Overview and in troduction. In Allen, T.D., & Eby, L.T. (Eds.), The Blackwell handbook of mentoring: A mul tiple perspectives approach (pp. 3-6). Maiden, MA: Blackwell Publishing. Andersen, S.L. (1986). The relationships in orga nizations: Behaviors, personality characteristics, and interpersonal perceptions (Unpublished doc toral dissertation). University of Akron, OH. Bargar, R.R., & Duncan, J.K. (1982). Cultivating creative endeavor in doctoral research. The Jour nal of Higher Education, 55(1), 1-31. Busch, J.W. (1985). Mentoring in graduate schools of education: Mentors' perceptions. American Educational Research Journal, 22(2), 257-265. Campbell, S.P., Fuller, A.K., & Patrick, D.A.G. (2005). Looking beyond research in doctoral education. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environ ment, 5(3), 153-160. Carter, F.J. (1983). Quality of life, adjustment and stress among graduate students (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). George Peabody College of Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN. Crow, G., & Mathews, L.J. (1998). Finding one's way: Flow mentoring can lead to dynamic leader ship. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press. Daniels-Nelson, M.E. (1983). Doctoral candidates and graduates' perceptions of advisor-advisee relationships in selected areas of education (Un published doctoral dissertation). Ohio State Uni versity, Columbus, OH. Davidson, M.N., & Foster-Johnson, L. (2001). Men toring in the preparation of graduate researchers of color. Review of Educational Research, 77(4), 549-574. Dixon-Reeves, R. (2003). Mentoring as a precursor to incorporation: An assessment of the mentoring experience of recently minted Ph.D.s. Journal of Black Studies, 34{\), 12-27. Garvey, B., & Aired, G. (2003). An introduction to the symposium on mentoring: Issues and pros pects. British Journal of Guidance and Counsel ling, 31, 1-9. Gehrke, N. (1988). Towards a definition of mentor ing. Theory into Practice, 27(3), 191-194. Gerholm, T. (1990). On tacit knowledge in aca demia. European Journal of Education, 25(3), 263-271. Gilbert, L.A. (1985). Dimensions of same-gender student-faculty role-model relationships. Sejc Roles, 12, 111-123. Girves, J.E., & Wemmerus, V. (1988). Developing models of graduate student degree progress. The Journal of Higher Education, 59(2), 163-189. Golde, C. M„ & Dore, T. M. (2004). The survey of doctoral education and career preparation. In D. H. Wulff, A. E. Austin, et al. (Eds.), Paths to the professoriate: Strategies for enriching the preparation of future faculty (pp. 19-45). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. Green, S.G., & Bauer, T.N. (1995). Supervisory mentoring by advisers: relationship with doctoral student potential, productivity, and commitment. Personnel Psychology, 48, 537-561. Hall, J. (2003). Mentoring and young people: A lit erature review. Glasgow, Scotland: The SCRE Centre, University of Glasgow. Hartnett, R.T. (1976). Environment for advanced learning. In J. Katz & R.T. Hartnett (Eds.), Schol ars in the making: The development of graduate and professional students (pp. 49-84). Cam bridge: Ballinger Publishing. Heinrich, K.T. (1991). Loving partnerships: Deal
18 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE ing with sexual attraction and power in doctoral advisement relationships. Journal of Higher Edu cation, 62(5), 514-538. Heinrich, K..T. (1995). Doctoral advisement rela tionships between women: On friendship and betrayal. Journal of Higher Education, 66(A), 447-^69. Heiss, A.M. (1970). Challenges to graduate schools. San Francisco: CA: Jossey-Bass. Hesli, V.L., Fink, E.C., & Duffy, D.M. (2003). Mentoring in a positive graduate student experi ence: Survey results from the Midwest Region, Part 1. PS: Political Science and Politics, 36(3), 457-460. Higgins, M.C., & Kram, K.E. (2001). Reconcep tualizing mentoring at work: A developmental network perspective. Academy of Management Review, 26, 264-288. Isaac, P.D., Quinlan, S.V., & Walker, M.M. (1992). Faculty perceptions of the doctoral dissertation. The Journal of Higher Education, 63(3), 241 268. Jacks, P., Chubin, D.E., Porter, A.L., & Connolly, T. (1983). The ABCs of ABDs: A study of in complete doctorates. Improving College and Uni versity Teaching, 31(2), 74-81. Jacobi, M. (1991). Mentoring and undergraduate academic success: A literature review. Review of Educational Research, 61, 505-532. de Janasz, S., & Sullivan, S.E. (2004). Multiple mentoring in academe: Developing the professo rial network. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 64, 263-283. Johnson, W.B. (2007). Student-faculty mentoring outcomes. In Allen, T.D., & Eby, L.T. (Eds.), The Blackwell handbook of mentoring: A midtiple perspectives approach (pp. 189-210). Maiden, MA: Blackwell Publishing. Johnson, W.B., & Huwe, J.M. (2002). Toward a typology of mentorship dysfunction in graduate school. Psychotherapy: Theory/research/prac tice/training, 39, 44-55. Johnson. W.B., Rose, G., & Schlosser, L.Z. (2007). Student-faculty mentoring: Theoretical and meth odological issues. In Allen, T.D., & Eby, L.T. (Eds.), The Blackwell handbook of mentoring: A multiple perspectives approach (pp. 49-70). Mai den. MA: Blackwell Publishing. Kartje, J.V. (1996). O Mentor! My Mentor! Pea body Journal of Education, 7/(1), 114-125. Kelly, D., Wacholder, N., Rittman. R., Sun, Y., Kantor, P., Small, S„ & Strzalkowski, T. (2007). Using interview data to identify evaluation cri teria for interactive, analytical question answer ing systems. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 58(1), 1032-1043. Kram, K..E. (1983). Phases of the mentor relation ship. Academy of Management Journal, 26(4), 608-625. Levinson, D.J., & Darrow, C.N. (1978). The sea sons of a man's life. New York: Knopf. Long, J.B. (1987). Factors related to attrition and success in degree and non-degree doctoral stu dents in education (Unpublished doctoral disserta tion). Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ. Lovitts, B.E. (2001). Leaving the ivory tower: The causes and consequences of departure from doc toral study. New York: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. Lyons, W., Scroggins, D„ & Rule, P.B. (1990). The mentor in graduate education. Studies in Higher Education, 15(3), 277-285. Maack, M.N., & Passet, J. (1994). Aspirations and mentoring in an academic environment: Women faculty in library and information science. West port, CT: Greenwood Press. Marchionini, G„ Solomon, P., Davis, C., & Rus sell, T. (2006). Information and library science MPACT: A preliminary analysis. Library and Information Science Research, 28(4), 480-500. Merriam, S.B. (1983). Mentors and proteges: A critical review of the literature. Adult Education Quarterly, 33, 164—173. Monaghan, J.. & Lunt, N. (1992). Mentoring: Per son, process, practice and problems. British Jour nal of Educational Studies, 40(3), 248-263. Neumark, D., & Gardecki, R. (1998). Women help ing women? Role model and mentoring effects on female Ph.D. students in economics. The Jour nal of Human Resources, 33( 1), 220-246. Pascarella, E.T. (1980). Student-faculty informal contact and college outcomes. Review of Educa tional Research, 50, 545-595. Phillips, G.M. (1979). The peculiar intimacy of graduate study: A conservative view. Communi cation Education, 28, 339-345. Ritchie, A., & Genoni, P. (2002). Group mentoring and professionalism: A programme evaluation. Library Management, 25(1/2), 68-78. Ross, K. (2002). Mentoring: An essential part-time job. Science. Retrieved from http://sciencecareers. sciencemag.org/career_development/previous_ issues/articles/1470/mentoring_an_essential_ parttimejob l/(parent)/158. Russell, T.G., & Sugimoto, C.R. (2009). MPACT Family Trees: Quantifying academic genealogy in library and information science. Journal of Education for Library & Information Science, 50(4), 248-262. Schlosser, L.Z., & Gelso, C.J. (2001). Measuring the working alliance in advisor-advisee relation ships in graduate school. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 48, 157-167.
Are You my Mentor? Identifying Mentors and Their Roles in LIS Doctoral Education 19 Schuckman, H. (1987). PhD recipients in psychol ogy and biology: Do those with dissertation ad visors of the same sex publish scholarly papers more frequently? American Psychologist, 42(11), 987-992. Stein, S.L. (1981). Sex differences in expectations of mentors. Paper presented at the Annual meet ing of the American Educational Research Asso ciation, Los Angeles, CA. Sugimoto, C.R., Russell, T.G., & Grant, S. (2009). Library and Information Science doctoral educa tion: The landscape from 1930-2007. Journal of Education for Library and Information Science, 50(3), 190-202. Sugimoto, C.R., Russell, T.G., Meho, L.I., & MAr chionini, G. (2008). MP ACT and citation impact: Two sides of the same scholarly coin? Library <£ Information Science Research, 30(4), 273-281. Sugimoto, C.R., Li, D., Russell, T.G., Finaly, S.C., & Ding, Y. (2011). The shifting sands of disci plinary development: Analyzing North American Library and Information Science dissertations using latent Dirichlet allocation. Journal of the American Society for Information Science & Technology, 62(1), 185-204. Tenenbaum, H.R., Crosby, F.J., & Gliner, M.D. (2001). Mentoring relationships in graduate school. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 59, 326-341. Turban, D.B., Dougherty, T.W., & Lee, F.K. (2002). Gender, race, and perceived similarity effects in developmental relationships: The mod erating role of relationship duration. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 61, 240-262. Weiss, C.S. (1981). The development of profession al role commitment among graduate students. Human Relations, 34(1), 13-31. Zhao, C.M., Golde, C.M., & McCormick, A.C. (2007). More than a signature: How advisor choice and advisor behaviour affect doctoral stu dent satisfaction. Journal of Further and Higher Education, 31(3), 263-281.