COLLEGE LITERARY SOCIETIES IN THE FIFTIES I T IS the second anniversary of the Star Society. The early morning hours were spent in the cordial greetings of old friends whom the occasion has brought together. The an- nouncement of the orators, some weeks before, is undoubtedly part of the attraction. At 10:30 the exercises open with prayer, followed by an oration on "Conservatism and reform." The subject is a little tedious, perhaps a trifle heavy for a hot sum- mer's day, but with what volubility and erudition the speaker brings the glow of literary rapture to the countenances of his admiring audience! At a later date his eloquence might have inspired the great Delsarte. But let us judge for ourselves from his concluding words: Our faces may turn with hope and courage toward the future, and yet, in our hearts, shall ever abide a profound thanksgiving for "the days of Auld Lang Syne." Can we have a better rule to guide our conduct, than that given to the world by Aristotle four centuries before Christ; that we should observe the golden mean between the extremes, and let our moderation be known unto all men? In thus keeping the middle way, we shall avoid on the one hand, Scylla, the rock of popular prejudice; on the other hand, Charybdis, the vortex of radicalism.' The remainder of the program consists of an "Essay on work," a dramatic reading ("well read but a trifle low and indis- tinct"), an oration on "The Value of an object in life," and ("last, but not least") a debate: "Resolved, That our liberties are more endangered by democracy than by aristocracy." The exercises are interspersed with music: a duet for piano and violin, Suppe's "Overture to a Poet and peasant"; a solo, Balfe's "Good-night, beloved" ("charmingly sung"), and a duet for cornet and piano, Brepsant's "Troisidme air varie." The old-fashioned literary society, the dominant collegiate activity of the nineteenth century, is now virtually extinct. x Star Society records (1855-68). 487
488 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Nothing has quite taken its place, although the opportunity which it afforded for social life and training in debate is, to a limited extent, retained in the fraternity and public-speaking class. It is true that those who aspired to a public career were its most active supporters, but the student who evinced no in- terest in public concern was a rare exception. Graduates worked up quite a lather over the literary exercise: What boots it thy virtue? What profit thy parts While one thing thou lackest- The art of all arts. The evolution of the early literary clubs forms an interesting chapter in the annals of collegiate history. But to interpret the cultural significance of the literary societies from these records is a difficult task. All too frequently the picture of their programs and activities is buried beneath the debris of biographical de- tail. As a slight contribution to this study I have attempted to reconstruct their performances and exercises from manuscript minute-books and the files of an early student paper. Let us imagine ourselves back in a midwestern college in the fifties. This institution of learning, like so many others in this country, owes its origin to a religious body. In the center of the campus stands a large hall, the main and central building, in the form of a cross. It contains a chapel, lecture-room, recitation rooms, laboratory, society rooms, and a library. Standing back from this are two dormitory buildings, one on the north, containing dining hall, parlors and dormitories for "ladies," and one on the south, occupied as dormitories for "gentlemen." One year after the college was founded, several of the more literary-minded students suggested the establishment of a stu- dent society. To those who complained of lack of time, the en- thusiasts replied, "There is an economy of time as valuable as that of money." At the first meeting called for organizing a society, the chairman girded his loins for battle. He said: "In the classroom we obtain the facts, the raw material; but without the literary exercise this raw material is likely to lie in the
COLLEGE LITERARY SOCIETIES 489 storeroom until it is ruined by the ravages of oblivion. In our textbook we follow the thought of another, but when shall we begin to think for ourselves, to have ideas concerning a thing, and make them known to others?" There remained only the question of faculty approval. This called for much discussion and the appointment of a committee to wait on the powers that be. Permission was finally granted. The society adopted a name it was to be the Alethezethian-and both men and women were permitted to attend the regular Friday-afternoon meetings. Alas! The old bugbear of sex comes up. The faculty cannot quite put aside the fears and prejudices of the day. "Why," they say, "here are young men and women sitting in the class- room, it is true, but considering together, under the ruling of their own officers [not faculty], such questions as are stirring the minds and hearts of people out in the world." It was too much. They withdrew their permission for young men and women to sit together at the meetings of the Alethezethian, much to the disgust of the student body, and the society was disbanded. Out of this condition arose the Star and Crescent societies, the former composed entirely of men, the latter of women. During the year they obtained permission to fit up a room in the college hall, where they held their meetings separately, the Crescents on Friday afternoon, the Stars on Friday evening, with the provi- sion, of course, that the evening meeting break up before ten o'clock. And then the faculty made a monitory gesture which is difficult to explain after the previous year's ruling. They re- quired the Crescent Society to invite members of the newly formed male society to their public meetings. It was not until three decades later that the coeducational experiment was ex- tended to the societies. How frequently and regularly the society meetings were held is evident from the weekly record in the manuscript minutes. Gaps occur only during the summer months. In the fall of the year i8 6 we are introduced to the procedure of a typical soci- ety business meeting. A welcome surprise is in store for the old members. The proceeds from the initiation fee, annual dues,
490 THE LIBRA4RY tUARTERLY fines for absence, tardiness, and non-performance of duty have been spent in refurnishing the society hall with a new carpet, a stove, and a piano. "Four of the ablest men," says the record, "are delegated to move the piano on the platform." The meet- ing opens with the roll call. While many of the old members have not returned, several new faces are present, each "showing in his countenance an eagerness for improvement which made them seem almost like old friends." Following the reading of the minutes, a motion is made to postpone the literary exercises for one week. The members then proceed with the business of the evening, which is conducted strictly according to parlia- mentary practice and the rules contained in Judge Burley's Legislative guide. For we must not forget that the chief function of the business meeting is "to aid its members in becoming rapid in thought and speech," and many an evening developed into a "war of words." In accord with the procedure at the first meet- ing of each term, the officers are elected: president, secretary, critic, librarian, editor, marshal, janitor, and treasurer. The critic's function is "to offer such remarks upon the performance of the reciters as are calculated for their improvement." Before adjourning, the retiring president gives a short address of wel- come to the new members, in which he urges them "to be wide awake to the flight of time, and to the vast importance of im- proving their time, while so many grand opportunities are of- fered them by the literary societies." The same spirit of rivalry which characterizes the modern fraternity rush existed in the student societies. It usually began with the soliciting for new members, each society making claims of excellence which could not always be substantiated. Per- sonal encounters were not uncommon. On the other hand, it was not exceptional for several societies to share the same hall and on special occasions to invite one another to a public meet- ing in which the visiting society might be asked to participate. Public meetings were elaborately prepared. Orators were chosen several weeks in advance and faculty and members of the com- munity were invited to attend. It was customary on such oc- casions to open the meeting with prayer and to confine the eve-
COLLEGE LITERARY SOCIETIES 491 ning's entertainment to literary exercises. On one particular evening the program ran as follows: ORATIoN-The Law of gravitation ESSAY-The Cultivation of the mind and heart ORATION-Action, or No time to be lost POEM-The Bride of the Nile [original] ORATION-Much ado about nothing ESSAY-The Race of the Incas DissERTATION-Conservatism and radicalism ORATION-A Word for Ireland Intellectual, edifying indeed, but really not unusual for the Stars. The secretary makes no comment on the orations, but a jubilant note creeps into his minutes: "The audience, appar- ently in good spirits, dispersed." Debate was taken for granted in the student literary soci- eties. It was the duty of a standing committee to select timely and practical questions for discussion and to record them with the secretary. At least half of each regular meeting was devoted to questions of social and moral welfare. If they did not always settle such questions as "The Life of celibacy is preferable to a married life," "Capital punishment ought to be abolished," "In a republic laws should be obeyed," "Civil authorities should en- force the observance of the Sabbath," "Slavery should be abol- ished by Congress," or that "The Ladies of the college should be subject to the same restrictions as men," the young orators at least tried to think and each had his little hour of glory. No program was more appreciated than the frequent celebra- tions of important dates, such as the "Bryant meeting," the "Longfellow meeting," and others. The program included selec- tions from the author's work, essays and critical papers on his writings, and a consideration of his life. When Oliver Wendell Holmes was the author of the evening, the program read as fol- lows: Sketch of the author's life Reading of his poetry Prose works Declamation-"One Horse-shay" "The Chambered nautilis"
492 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Early in the week the secretary had an inspiration. He would send a copy of the program to the author. It speaks well for the reputation of student literary societies that the secretary was able to present to his delighted audience a letter containing the best wishes of Mr. Holmes with his "hopes that they will not find their evening wholly thrown away on my company." Less entertaining for the audience but more profitable for those who took part in the program were the language meetings, in which songs, orations, and dramatic recitations were given in French, German, and Latin. The anniversary programs were large affairs and it was customary for each society to bear its share of the expense for an outside speaker. Should the address prove disappointing, there were many other attractions to en- liven the program: songs, student orations, piano selections, presentation of diplomas, and dramatic productions. It is possi- ble that we owe a debt to the student literary societies for in- troducing drama into .the colleges. As early as I872 J. K. Hos- mer wrote in the Atlantic monthly that at "Harvard, Yale and probably every considerable college in the country, the drama has for a long time led a clandestine life in secret student soci- eties, persecuted or at best ignored by the college government." The really remarkable thing about the college societies in the mid-nineteenth century is what they did for the cultural life of the student. Strangely enough, there were many things to dampen the enthusiasm of the most ardent members. Their ac- tivities were restricted by a crabbed ascetism; they were blight- ed by the deadliest gentility; dramatic production was regarded as an "unwholesome weed that deserved no tending"; and the expense of furnishing society halls, collecting libraries, and ar- ranging the programs was considerable. And yet, curiously enough, the students often did things in good taste, with vigor, originality, and humor. These societies acquired libraries of character, more often than not superior to the "chance aggrega- tions of the gifts of charity" which cluttered up the college li- brary. Their meetings afforded opportunity for training in parliamentary law and in extemporaneous speaking. Life was
COLLEGE LITERARY SOCIETIES 493 a serious affair to these young people. They knew what they wanted; they thought they had a definite goal. They were not assailed by the dizzy distractions of our collegiate playboys. They read good things ("wholesome" would be their word) and enjoyed them. These youngsters could have done worse things with their time. Guy R. LYLE ANTIOCH COLLEGE LIsDtRY