THE COLLEGE-LIBRARY BUILDING CHARLES M. ADAMS r3-911E College-Library Building" in | relation to "The Function of the Library in the Modern College" is certainly a title plain enough to call for no questioning as to meaning. A good craftsman can do creditable work with- out the latest tools, but he can do best work with good tools. A college librarian can do creditable work without a building of the latest style and plan, but he can do best work with a building well planned and skilfully designed for meeting the special needs of his college. So much, it seems to me, is the sum and substance of such a paper as this. We can, to be sure, look at the philosophy and trends of col- lege-library architecture and the relation of the librarian to the architect, at new building materials and equipment, at varying ideas of arrangements, at chang- ing needs of members of the faculty and students, and at operations and services of the library as they affect the building; we can do all that with profit. The battle cry of the Renaissance, however, should be repeated again and again: Ars una; species mille. The principle behind library planning, like the art of architecture, may be one; the examples have thou- sands of aspects. There is no single way to solve the problem of the library building. The college-library building today is shaped around many of the topics which so far have been discussed at this confer- ence. In some ways this conference may be considered as significant a contribu- tion to the planning of a college-library building as the one which was held here eight years ago and devoted to the spe- cific topic of library buildings. "Trends and Developments in Undergraduate Education," "The Relation between the Library and Collegiate Objectives," and '"The Nature of the Book Collection" are all topics as pertinent for a college-li- brary building as are technical and ad- ministrative operations or as acoustical ceilings, rubber-tile floors, and modem air treatment. This statement is in no way intended to minimize the impor- tance of making adequate provision for those library operations or to minimize the contribution which technology and new materials have made to the modern library building. It is nearly a century since Greenough and Sullivan put into words the age-old principle that "form follows function." That "a library build- ing should be planned for library work" was the first point of agreement in 1891 among librarians as to library architec- ture.' William M. Randall at the 1946 in- stitute said: "First study your needs for building in known functions to be ful- filled."2' The principle of "functionalism" ' John E. Burchard, Charles W. David, and Julian P. Boyd (eds.), Planning the University Library Building: A Summary of Discussions by Librarians, Architects, and Engineers (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1949). On p. 3 are listed nine of the still pertinent "Points of Agreement among Librarians as to Library Architect" original- ly published by Charles C. Soule in the Library Journal in 1891. This volume, based on a meeting of the Cooperative Committee on Library Building Plans, is a source for reference and study of the library. Although essentially concerned with the university library, it is pertinent for the college- library building as well. 2 William Ml. Randall, "The Constitution of the Modern Library Building," in Library Buildings for Library Service: Papers Presented before the Library Inistitute of the University of Chicago, August 5-10, 1946, ed. IHerman H. Fussler (Chicago: American Library Association, 1947). 336
THE COLLEGE-LIBRARY BUILDING 337 expounded by librarians and architects has been the dominating influence on our library buildings. Now we have a confer- ence on "The Functions of the Library in the Modern College." Out of these papers and discussions we should be able to plan and shape the library building of the modem college. It was A. C. Cutter in 1888 who said that the architect is the natural enemy of the librarian.3 As recently as 1952, Ralph Ellsworth wrote: "For over a century ar- chitects have had their way. Perhaps li- brarians can be forgiven for daring to as- sume a belligerent attitude."4 Even in recent years there have been built far too many buildings on our campuses with little awareness of the library functions to be performed not to give some truth to these statements. As one looks back over the literature on library buildings, how- ever, the contributions by architects stand out prominently. The boldness of Labrouste in planning stacks for the Bib- liotheque Nationale in the 1860's and his use of an interior glass partition between the reading-room and stack areas needs only to be mentioned to recall a whole line of architects who have been alert to the working functions of libraries.5 The success of the Cooperative Committee on Library Building Plans, established in 1944, was due as much to the participa- tion of architects as to that of librarians. The formal conferring on mutual prob- lems by architects and libranrans in re- cent years at institute meetings and on other occasions is a step forward in li- brary planning. The tradition of confer- ences set by the Cooperative Committee has been carried on by the ACRL Li- brary Buildings Committee in its annual institutes. The example of inviting archi- tects, as well as administrators and build- ing equipment engineers and manufac- turers, has resulted in continued co-op- eration. The unco-operative architect to- day is about as rare as the untrained li- brarian. Robert Muller, in a recent re- view of Talbot Hamlin's Forms and Functions of Twentieth-Century Architec- ture, said that librarians reading these volumes "will rid themselves of the false notion that a librarian's idea of a library building must necessarily be in conflict with an architect's."6 There may be easier and lighter ways of arriving at this understanding than plowing through these four volumes, but there are other good reasons for perusing these and simi- lar studies in architecture. As librarians, it seems only just that we should under- stand some of the principles and practices of architecture, if we, in turn, expect the architect for the library to read and un- derstand the functions and modern prac- tices of librarianship. The preparation of a written program stating the functions of the library in full is another forward step for a librarian in the planning of a library. Gerould em- phasized this point in his book on The College Library Building in 1932. Mr. Gerould said: Everyone has used libraries, of course, and, in a general way, knows what the building must contain. There must be reading rooms, stack 3 "The Librarian and the Architect," in Planning the University Library Building, p. 138. The whole of chap. viii of this monograph is devoted to this topic and has much sound advice. 4 Ralph E. Ellsworth, "Determining Factors in the Evaluation of the Modular Plan for Libraries," CoUege and Research Libraries, XIV (April, 1953), 125-28, 142. 6 Sigfried Giedion, Space, Time, and Architecture: The Growth of a New Tradition (3d. ed.; Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1954); Helen Margaret Reynolds, "University Library Buildings in United States, 1890-1939," Collge and Research Libraries, XIV (April, 1953), 149-57, 166. " Forms and Functions of Twentieth-Century Architecture, ed. Talbot F. Hamlin, reviewed by Robert H. Muller, College and Researchi Libraries, XV (April, 1954), 240-41.
338 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY rooms, an office for the librarian, a few rooms miscalled "seminars, and possibly, if one is very modern, a browsing room; but the dimen- sion of these rooms, and their relation each to the other, is seldom given proper study. A few notes, together with the limit of cost, are turned over to the architect; and he is expected to produce a proper building.7 Since Gerould's time, and due in part to his sound analytical study of the college library, the written program for a library building has received continued empha- sis. How to draft the program and exact- ly what it should contain are still in the early stages of development. Ernest J. Reece has recently devoted a thorough study to programs, their values and how to draft them, which has been published in College and Research Libraries.8 The program has grown out of the principle of functionalism in architecture and is welcomed by the architect. In fact, there have been occasions when no program was provided by the librarian or the col- lege and the architect has proceeded to have one prepared. As the four-line staff with single notation has been developed by the composer into full orchestration for the musicians, so the program is fast becoming a score with equal potentiali- ties for the librarian. Or, to make the analogy more direct, the program as an instrument of planning may become as significant for the librarian as he turns to the architect for performance, as the blueprint is for the architect as he turns over his work to the builder. The fact that it may not have the exactness of the blueprint (or musical notation) does not lessen the influence which it has as a guide for the architect, who can no longer be expected, im the rush and complexity of our society-even of that in our college communities-to grasp fully and to ana- lyze the library functions of any particu- lar institution. Here is the challenge to the librarian which will require the whole of his training in librarianship, a knowl- edge of his institution, and a creative ability to express the functions of his in- stitution in terms significant to his architect. The program is more than a project to sell the library building to the adminis- tration or to help raise a million dollars. The program should set forth the objec- tives of the library in relation to the teaching program and in terms of student and faculty needs for a library, as well as in details of operations, flow of work, book capacities, and air-conditioning. The key to its success may lie in under- standing the institution, on the one hand, and architecture, on the other. As defi- nitely and as simply as possible the li- brarian must express the purposes and functions of his particular library. He may be aided by figures and charts. Most agree that he should not attempt to draw actual arrangements or design. The style of architecture, however, is a matter for which preference may be indicated. In fact, the program may be used as the basis for selection of the architect trained in a particular style. It is recognized that the so-called "modem" architecture has become a style as pronounced, as defined, as any other style, with all the restric- tions, disciplines, limitations, and bless- ings that we associate with the term.9 Under these circumstances "the pro- gram" becomes essential to an institution which wishes to be assured of a function- ing library rather than a period piece. 7 James Thayer Gerould, Tue College Library Building: Its Planning and Equipment (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1932), p. 15. 8 Ernest J. Reece, "Library Building Programs: How To Draft Them," College and Research Li- braries, XIII (July, 1952), 198-211. I Matthew Nowicki, "Origins and Trends in Modern Architecture," Magazine of Art, XLVI (November, 1951), 273-79.
THE COLLEGE-LIBRARY BUILDING 339 In recent years a number of people, be- cause of interest and experience in library building, have become experts, serving as consultants: library consultants, archi- tect consultants, engineer equipment consultants, and professional planners. These men and women have a valuable role to play in the planning of a library building. Not all of us have the opportu- nity to plan a building or the aptitude to think in terms of spaces or blueprints. It may be that the librarian is living almost too close to his own problems. A survey by an outsider may help formulate the functions of a particular library with a clarity that the librarian at home often cannot command. A consultant may save him from many a false start and, as the program and planning develop, prove a real economy to an institution. Con- sultants have learned through their own errors and successes as well as through those of others. However, they must be selected with as much care as the archi- tect. Neutra, in his new study Survival through Design, devotes a chapter to con- sultants which he heads in explanation as follows: "The 'vested' expert-'witty' or just sour-rises against innovation more often than the common man. On the other side, innovators frequently have one-track minds and cannot comprehend all the doings of their own brain chil- dren."10 The librarian can visit new library buildings and can read descriptive plans and programs of many others. The value of these to the librarian is as real as the use of consultants, but usimg new build- ings as authority also has its dangers. At- tendance at institutes where existing li- brary buildings are criticized for their failures and successes and where new plans are presented for evaluation has many advantages. At these meetings a librarian is helped to think in terms of space relations, architectural styles, and materials, and to look at a plan or a blue- print more intelligently. By such visits and attendance at conferences a librarian can learn about consultants and archi- tects and have the opportunity to discuss his own problems with his colleagues. The descriptive articles on new college libraries," along with some analytical lit- erature on library buildings,'2 give one some down-to-earth views of accomplish- ments and trends in the college-library field. Almost all the articles on new build- ings have mentioned the favorable site which was obtained for the library. This usually was as centrally located as pos- sible, on established lines of student traf- fic, or on lines contemplated for the fu- ture development of the college. Some allowance was usually given for possible expansion, and the description often in- dicated whether this was to be vertical or horizontal. The architect had in some cases actually made plans for such ex- "I Richard Neutra, Survival through Design (New York: Oxford University Press, 1954). The book contains a number of interesting and stimulating observations; thus: "Functionalism can turn into a superficial creed for extroverts, but it can also be guided to honor the functions within our skin and the innermost life"; "Function may itself be a fol- lower" (chap. xv); "Design, never a harmless play with forms and colors, changes outer life as well as our inner balances" (chap. xliv). U Edna Hanley Byers (comp.), "A College and University Library Buildings Bibliography, 1945- 1953," in ACRL Monograph, No. 10 (1953), pp. 81-98. Mrs. Byers is bringing this bibliography up to date in the forthcoming issue of the ACRL Monograph devoted to the proceedings of the 1954 ACRL Buildings Plans Institute held at Madison, Wisconsin. 12Ernest J. Reece, "Building Planning and Equipment," Library Trends, I (July ,1952), 136-55 (with bibliography). For building trends see also Robert H. Muller, "Future Library Building Trends among Colleges and Universities," College and Re- search Libraries, XII (January, 1951), 33-36; and J. F. Vanderheyden, "Contemporary Building Planning as It Appears to a European Librarian," College and Research Libraries, X (October, 1949), 367-78.
340 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY, pansion, erectimg only the first unit of a much larger building. The entrance was usually at street or ground level or with but a few steps. There was one public en- trance or, at most, two. The old monu- mentality, or "heroism, of many former libraries seemed completely absent. This did not mean that the buildings were without dignity and attractiveness. The efficiency of the "warehouse" with its almost perfect "functionalism" had made few gains on the college campus. Prob- lems of landscaping and even of parking were considered. More often than not the library conformed in style of architecture with other buildings of the campus rather than striking out in bold new lines. Even those buildings which were frankly modern in style seemed to make subtle reference in materials or lines to neigh- boring older buildings. Except for the fact that some buildings were labeled "The Library" and were centrally locat- ed and new, it would be necessary still for a visitor to inquire for the library. The building had acquired no especially uni- form features or characteristics which its functions gave to its design. In fact, the variety of fronts, entrancesl lines, and treatments has shown a healthy refusal to copy the designs of other colleges. Al- though several descriptions of new li- braries apologized, so to speak, for the traditional style-or defended their mod- ern lines-few failed to emphasize the successful planning and arrangement of the interiors. Most librarians expressed real satisfaction in what had been accom- plished for the successful operation of library activities through their buildings. The key word in most of the planning today is "flexibility." It has become al- most synonymous with "functionalism." Flexibility usually refers to the ability to make major changes in the building ar- rangement. "Adaptability" is the word used to refer usually to the ability to make minor changes in arrangement of furniture and equipment. "Expansibili- ty" is another element which is charac- teristic of flexibility. The problem for the librarian is to determine as nearly as pos- sible the functions which are most likely to be changed in a building over a period of years or, possibly, seasonally. For ex- ample, during the regular terms the stu- dent body may number a thousand or so undergraduates; but during the summer months the enrolment may drop to four or five hundred or jump to three thou- sand, and use of the library may be much more in the pattern required for confer- ences and institutes. The building should be adaptable to any such changes and the resulting necessary economies. It may be necessary to build only a part of a pro- jected total building, allowing for grow- ing book collections and increased enrol- ment. The greatest need for flexibility lies in the relation of the teaching pro- gram to the library. The changes here re- sult from the introduction of new schools and departments or shifts to new pro- grams. Some consultants in "general edu- cation" have estimated an increase in li- brary use of as much as four or five times in the institutions which have made the change from the traditional liberal arts curriculum. For some the "modular" type of construction seems to answer many of the requirements for flexibility demanded by our libraries. Although in architecture the module is among the most restrictive of forms, as a building principle it has been successfully used in Georgian, French Provincial, and Col- legiate Gothic, as well as in "Modern." It lends itself to the development of our "&open" arrangements of books and read- ers, emphasizing the horizontal develop- ment of interiors. It appears to have economies especially where the needs of
THE COLLEGE-LIBRARY BUILDING 341 readers have become of equal importance with the book collections, or even great- er. The danger may come as a unit size is developed which is economical for shelv- ing books, efficient for chair and table arrangements, and yet fails to meet space requirements for readers. As each module tends to become adaptable for all func- tions, including those new requirements for audio-visual materials and economi- cal storage areas, the cost per unit may become too high and the function for any one purpose never be adequately ful- filled. The crystallizing and resulting standardization of the module may be its own death. Modular planning, however, is an exciting development which may re- move certain rigidity from interior ar- rangements and, used with modification, give some flexibility rather than "exacti- tude" to library areas. Many college li- braries have used this type of construc- tion, and it has many enthusiastic sup- porters. It is well worth visiting several of the buildings which have used this technique, to obtain some idea of its pos- sibilities and its weaknesses. In recent years it has received very careful ana- lytical study.'3 Flexibility, it must be re- membered, may be obtained in various ways m architecture, and "modular" construction does not necessarily guaran- tee flexibility for all functions. Management engineers have contrib- uted much to the efficiency of our build- ings and have made careful studies from which many good standards have been developed.'4 Costs are being analyzed in square feet of space available for library functions rather than in cubic feet of a building. Lines of traffic, controls, loca- tion of offices, stairs, elevators, book storage, ventilation, maintenance, light- ing, and a whole list of other details have received and are continuing to receive careful study. There is little excuse for those with a new building to have ineffi- cient or poor operational facilities. New materials, such as glass, acoustical tile, cinder blocks, and rubber-tile floors, have been used with success in the improve- ment of buildings. Obsolescence of many of our college libraries has been due as much to improper study of relations of areas and offices as to lack of space for books and readers. The interior of the college-library building has become more "open" in re- cent years not only physically but also in relation to readers' use of material and their freedom to move about. Controls and services have been centralized, usually by an entrance, and, instead of rooms, there are areas which tend to be without exact limits as they flow into each other. Most stacks, if there are stacks in the old sense at all, are of open access, although in a few descriptions of new buildings it is timidly implied that these stacks can be closed if necessary. More often stacks and reading areas are together, with no permanent physical barriers of any kind between the books and the readers. The arrangement, al- though open for the libraries, tends to re- tain central areas for reference, circula- 1J Ralph E. Ellsworth, "Determining Factors in the Evaluation of the Modular Plan for Libraries," College and Research Libraries, XIV (April, 1953), 125-28, 142. Angus MacDonald has promised, I understand, a monograph on this subject. A check through Library Litera4tre will turn up a nurnber of other studies on modular construction. 1" Angus MacDonald, "Building Design for Library Management," Library Trends, II (Janu- ary, 1954), 463-69. Some other recent articles on management are: Donald Coney, "Management in College and University Libraries," Library Trends, I (July, 1952), 74-83 (with bibliography); and Maurice F. Tauber, T. D. Morris, and Robert E. Kingery, "Management Improvements in Li- braries," College and Research Libraries, XV (April, 1954), 188-204; see also Keyes D. Metcalf, "Spatial Problems in University Libraries," Library Trends, II (April, 1954), 554-61.
342 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY tion, serials, order, and cataloging, in the traditional pattern for operations. This includes an area for reserve. A few have dared to put the reserves along with each subject field throughout the library; but, on the whole, the reserve-room, or its equivalent, is still present in most of the new college libraries, despite the lamenta- tions of some librarians.'5 A variation of the "open" develop- ment is to divide the library into three or more large subject divisions or areas of knowledge.'6 Each of these, such as the humanities, the social sciences, or the natural sciences, has its own open ar- rangement for reference, periodicals, re- serves, and stacks, with a subject-trained librarian in charge. This development seems particularly successful for the medium-sized university, where much emphasis is given to the undergraduate teaching program, and the practice has grown especially in the Middle and Far West. The divisional type of arrange- ment, although used in part by a few small college libraries, has not become popular among the liberal arts colleges. The subject departmental arrangement in rooms has practically disappeared, ex- cept where a location may call for a serv- ice outside the main building. New build- ings offer many colleges the opportunity to centralize scattered collections and de- partmental libraries. Except for a few dormitory, laboratory, or memorial col- lections, centralization has won approval on most college campuses. Not only is it efficient from a management point of view, but the gathering of all fields of knowledge into one working collection has value as a teaching instrument in the liberal arts or general education of stu- dents. More consideration for the undergrad- uates' library needs is now given by the larger universities in their new build- ings.17 Most have set aside at least a single large room and have provided space for a staff to service undergradu- ates and develop collections of special in- terest to them. The most significant rec- ognition seems to be in providing a com- pletely separate building developed from a program of careful study of the prob- lems of the undergraduates in the uni- versity and the awareness of their needs as distinguished from those of the gradu- ate and research students. Teaching with books, the laboratory workshop, the library as a teaching in- strument, and the library in college in- struction are all ideas as well as titles of publications, which have been influential in the planning of buildings.'8 The inte- gration between library operations and 15 William R. Lansberg, "Current Trends in College Reserve Room," College and Research Libraries, XI (April, 1950), 120-24, 136. 16 There are many articles on "divisional" libraries, a few of which are: Patricia Marvin, "Circulation in the Divisional Library: The New Plan of Service," CoUege and Research Libraries, XII (July, 1951), 241-44, 265; Percy D. Morrison, "Variation of the Subject Divisional Plan at Ore- gon," College and Research Libraries, XIV (April, 1953), 158-63; J. R. Blanchard, "Departmental Libraries in Divisional Plan University Libraries," CoUege and Research Libraries, XIV (July, 1953), 24348 (see bibliography, p. 248); John D. Chap- man, Ralph H. Hopp, and Arthur J. Vernix,"The Divisional Library at Nebraska: Two Aspects," College and Researchi Libraries, XV (April, 1954), 148-57. 17 Arthur M. McAnally, Stanley E. Gwynn, Philip J. McNiff, William S. Dix, and Wyman S. Parker, "Library Service to Undergraduates: A Symposium," College and Research Libraries, XIV (July, 1953), 266475. 18 Harvie Branscomb, Teaching with Books (Chicago: Association of American Colleges and American Library Association, 1940); Committee on the New Library, A Laboratory-Workshop Library for Princeton (Princeton: The Committee, 1944); University Library Planning Committee, The Library as a Teaching Instrument (Iowa City: The Committee, 1945); Louis R. Wilson el al., The Library in CoUege Instruction (New York: H. W. Wilson Co., 1951).
THE COLLEGE-LIBRARY BUILDING 343 the teaching program has become an ob- jective.'9 It may be easier to talk of these principles than to translate them into blueprints. Also it seems easier to criti- cize blueprints from the point of view of management than of academic objec- tives. It is necessary, however, to look critically at plans to see whether the gen- eral principles sought by librarians are actually incorporated in the building. It may be scanned in two ways: from the point of view of members of the faculty and from that of the student. An awareness of faculty needs has been expressed in a number of ways. Faculty studies are now a part of most college- library buildings, just as they are accept- ed in the university. There is hardly a new college library that does not provide some conference, seminar, or, to be more accurate, classroom space for those facul- ty members who find teaching with books in the library a stimulating experi- ence. Some colleges are providing lounges for faculty as well as for the staff within the library. There may be hope that some of the faculty members may wish to work there for as many hours as does the li- brary staff. At any rate, members of the faculty are now welcomed with facilities which have been especially planned for them. The library collection itself has become more useful for faculty research needs. Microfilm, photostat, microphotogra- phy, photoreproductions, and other de- velopments have made it possible for the scholar now to conduct much of his work in the limited collection of the college library. The development of interlibrary loan and tools for bibliographical control within the means of a college library has tended to bring the college professor into the library. He no longer needs a holiday or vacation to get the opportunity to dash to a metropolitan or university collection. Another development in faculty-li- brary relations is the status of the library staff.20 In most of our buildings there is little question of the administrative im- portance of the librarian. His office is usually furnished with all the requisites of an executive. I know of one college li- brarian who did not want such an office for hinmself but was overruled. He now has a most beautiful office; but, I under- stand, seldom uses it except to show to visitors. He did not wish to work in the isolation of an executive. As the library staff takes its position alongside the teaching faculty, the new buildings are recognizing the academic functions of the librarian as distinct from administrative or from clerical and semiprofessional, so- called "housekeeping," operations. Mem- bers of college faculties are human, in often failing to see anything but clerical routines or administrative duties in li- brary work. If I remember correctly, one library deliberately provided a glass wall for the office of each librarian, so that faculty members could see the librarians actually working with books just as they themselves might do. Desks are replac- ing counters in public areas, and ade- quate office space for cataloging, bibliog- raphy, and book selecting on the part of the library staff is being provided. In some instances the space is the envy of "classroom" faculty members, who some- times wistfully recall that they once had thought of becoming librarians! A number of developments have sharpened the librarian's awareness and ability to control problems of the ever "'W. L. Williamson, "Relating the Library to the Classroom: Some Specific Suggestions," College and Research Libraries, XLV (April, 1953), 167-71. 20 Frank A. Lundy, "Faculty Rank of Profes- sional Librarians," CoUege and Research Libraries, XII (January, April, 1951), 11-19, 109-22.
344 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY increasing size of the book collection.2' Weeding the collection of little-used ma- terials and actual removal of dead wood is now an established practice. The col- lege library is no longer fearful of unlim- ited growth. It may now give up many things which its faculty would never have permitted ten or twenty years ago. Economical areas for storage and for compact shelving now make possible the holding of materials for a period to test their usefulness without sacrificing the openness and freedom of the general col- lections. The co-operative development of economical storage areas for a com- munity or region is helping the college library to meet many of the specialized demands of faculty or honor students and to free space for undergraduate needs. The most striking recognition of read- ers in the new libraries is the care and taste with which the building is now fur- nished. A generous use of color in all shades has become a common practice. We read of such colors as "Silver Birch, "Royal Violet," "Yellow Leaf," "Byzan- tine Blue," "Bittersweet," "Dew Mix- ture," "Pinkie" and slate gray or "Thun- derbolt."22 The students like these new colors, and some faculty members give approval. The furniture is carefully se- lected for comfort. Even in reserve-rooms there are occasional pieces inviting infor- mality and suitable for long periods of reading. The arrangement has been con- sidered for its attractiveness as well as for its efficiency. Green plants, framed pic- tures, and window draperies are part of the decoration. The librarian, with the help of the library equipment houses, has given beauty and smartness, as well as utility, to the furnishings. An institution- al designer has been consulted for a num- ber of new buildings. Some architects have accepted this responsibility early in the planning stage, recognizing that the success of a new building will depend as much on the interior furnishings as on the design and style of the building. There have been some studies on the re- lation between environment and work in libraries which may give more than just artistic reasons for use of color, quiet floors, translucent or clear partitions, and lighting arrangements. From the point of view of the students, it has been recognized that too large col- lections, such as those in many of the major universities, can actually be a han- dicap to undergraduates. The college li- brary no longer wants its shelves filled with little-used or obsolescent materials. Moreover, with "open" arrangement, these somewhat "dead" materials be- come very conspicuous and are usually not too attractive to undergraduates as they are encouraged to work among the collections. College libraries are becom- ing larger, but the emphasis is directed more to the working needs of students in use of library materials rather than to ever increasing collections which crowd out the reader. The percentage of the stu- dent body to be served at any one time has been increased. Students are also provided with carrels, typing areas, "talking" or group working-rooms, smoking privileges, and other amenities. Frank Lloyd Wright, in speaking of pub- lic library buildings recently, said that they should be "unpretentious in human scale, designed for comfort and enjoy- 21Blanche P. McCrum, Helmer Webb, and Rutherford D. Rogers, "Optimum Size of Libraries: A Symposium," College and Research Libraries, XI (April, 1950), 137-50. 22 These colors have been quoted from Price Gilbert Library, Georgia Institute of Technology, Dedication Program, November 21, 1953, Atlanta, Georgia. Many other striking and original colors and combinations are referred to frequently in articles on new library buildings for colleges as well as universities.
THE COLLEGE-LIBRARY BUILDING 345 ment of people who love books-a happy place with music and a pleasant home- likeness."23 Man as a physiological meas- ure in architecture has been receiving continued emphasis. Since the library has freed its books from medieval chains, it has learned to handle many new media and other forms of communications. Some of the func- tions of these new media are to be dis- cussed later at this conference. Although the library may not be designated as the "Communications Center" for the col- lege, it is often able to help with uses of new materials for teaching, such as music and language disks, films and film strips, tapes, as well as maps, prints, and other audio-visual teaching aids. Some libraries have admitted what is called the "living" book, by providing areas for lectures and group programs. This may be following the footsteps of the public libraries and their branches in providing such services for the community. All such programs offer a number of problems in library administration. The library in the modem college is accepting slowly the need for additional areas for students and faculty who wish to work in groups with many new media of communications, as well as for space for the individual to work in quiet with a single volume. The small lecture hall or auditorium has appeared in many college libraries. It is often associated with areas for projecting films and a center for pho- toelectric communication equipment. How educational television is to be brought into the college library is still a question, but I should not be surprised to see some college libraries already provid- ing space for this. I only hope that trans- lating machines will not get so small or cheap that the library will be asked to plug some of these into the shelf for the foreign-language dictionaries! There is another area of activity which is becoming more important to the col- lege library and for which college build- ings are providing space. This is in the field of exhibitions, public relations, and publications. The strategic location of the library gives it an opportunity to operate an exhibition program which can have real value for the library and com- munity. A separate gallery on an upper floor by a special collection is not the usual treatment and is seldom found in the college library. Space for this activity is right up in front and located at points of heavy traffic. In fact, by the use of glass the whole front is sometimes used to advantage for a continual live exhibit of the whole library, or an attractive part of it, in action for all who pass by. Unfor- tunately, most exhibition equipment is rather formal and heavy or built into cor- ridors or walls so as to be rigid and not easily adaptable to changing programs of varying size. The exhibition areas are like the Procrustean bed in which each victim is killed because it is too large or too small. Moreover, most exhibition equip- ment is too expensive. The college library needs to control its naterials, but it does not specialize in illuminated manu- scripts, incunabula, or other rarities re- quiring the dignity or security of heavy bronze cases. George Nelson, in the com- ments and Introduction to his new book Display, has some ideas which are quite applicable to college libraries.24 With ex- "3S. Janice Kee, "Let's Have Good Libraries, Not Big Ones, Says Frank Lloyd Wright," ALA Bulktin, XLVI (October, 1952), 293. 24 George Nelson (ed.), Display (New York: Whitney Publications, 1953). The following intro- ductory note seems pertinent: "It is not easy to express these feelings in permanent buildings today: there is the conservation of owners, of building codes, of the FHA, of banks, of trade unions. But in temporary exposition-why not? The need to be practical does not exist, the necessity to build in- expensively does. The designer can ease up a bit and
346 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY hibitions one is not tied down to a con- servative long-term building style, but one does have a problem of expense. In exhibition areas one can afford to experi- ment with space and to use more tempo- rary equipment with virtues of adapta- bility and expansibility. Along with exhibitions should go an area for preparation of these exhibits. It will save much of the staff time and make it possible to use others in this work with- out upsetting one's office. The exhibi- tions often call for publicity; this leads into the related areas of special services. There should be space for preparation of booklets, handbooks, annual reports, and other publications which the college li- brary can issue with profit. Instruction in library use has its program, for which the lecture hall, a leaflet on library use, and tours are all important. Do not forget, when you get that new library building, that you will have many visitors for years. There were plenty even in the old building. Some have a space to sit and visit. "Meet me at the library" should not be discouraged. William Warner Bishop, in his paper on "The Historical Development of Li- brary Buildings" at the Graduate Li- brary School Conference of 1946, con- cluded with a section on "American Trends." "The model," he said, "is frankly the modern department store."25 Many of those predicted influences may now be seen. The library is given a loca- tion right on lines of traffic, and readers are entering directly at street level. The libraries' "wares" are housed in the "open" manner and are attractively dis- played. Although restraint is present, the trend may still be, as one of our col- leagues said, "with appearance as mod- dern as the best store in town"126 or, as an architect put it, "form follows sale." The question raised by Wyllis Wright in his recent paper, "fHow Little Catalog- ing CanBe Effective?"27 is characteristic of many other shifts in emphasis. It may be that we are becoming more compli- cated in our functions; but it is hearten- ing to note that in some areas the process is quite the reverse. As the college library accepts additional responsibility for new media of communication, community services, open shelves, and bibliographi- cal control, it may at the same time eval- uate and simplify its book resources, its storage responsibilities, its cataloging, and its circulation procedures in such ways as to compensate for added func- tions. I predict only that the college li- brary will survive. The librarian may well wonder, as did Mr. Fussler in 1946 in his Introduction to the published proceedings of that confer- ence, "whether our imperfect buildings do not grow in part out of our imperfect knowledge of what goes on within li- braries."28 The librarian today has been given a key position in the partnership of planning his building. The answer to the question of what constitutes a good li- brarv building may come from the li- enjoy himself. The result can be fun. It is surprising how often it is significant fun." He illustrates and comments on a number of trends in modern book- display work. It is simply described as "a cage within a shell" in which modern Italian designers are now at the top of the field. 2f William Warner Bishop, "The Historic De- velopment of Library Buildings," in Library Build- ings for Library Service. The section on "American Trends" occurs on pp. 10-11. 2 Ralph E. Ellsworth, "Appearance as Modern as the Best Store in Town," Library Journal, LXXIV (December 15, 1949), 1851. 27 Wyllis E. Wright, "How Little Cataloging Can Be Effective?" CoUege and Research Libraries XV (April, 1954), 167-70, 175. 28 Herman HT. Fussier, "Introduction," Library Buildings for Librairy Service, 1). vi.
THE COLLEGE-LIBRARY BUILDING 347 brarian's knowledge of what goes on within and without the walls of his own library. This implies more than ever be- fore a knowledge and appreciation of books. It also includes the ability to un- derstand the needs of the college commu- nity as a whole and of the individuals struggling to learn and to communicate the best which has survived in society. Although the college librarian with a new building to plan has many a headache (and heartache) in. store for him, he also has a much envied opportunity of pro- viding a resource which, in the long run, will improve the quality of work that goes on inside the building and out from it to members of the faculty and the stu- dent body.