By any criteria, The Thomas Jefferson Building of the Library of Congress (1888–97) is one of the more significant public structures in all of American architecture, a distinction due more to its wealth and quality of decoration than to any architectural preeminence.3 Adopting aesthetic principles espoused by the French Ecole des Beaux‐Arts, the builders and decorators of the Congressional Library created one of the most ambitious and sophisticated decorative programs of the American Renaissance (1876–1917), articulating for the first time a coordinated national iconography symbolic of America’s emerging role in the advancement of Western culture. This study will briefly examine a significant component of the library’s extensive decoration, its sculptural program, and discuss the aesthetic and functional meanings of select sculptures both in relation to the overall decorative program of the building and within a larger cultural context. In June 1880, Congress had appointed a Joint Select Committee, Senator Daniel W. Vorhees of Indiana, chair, to resolve the decade‐long controversy regarding additional accommodations for the Congressional Library [3, p. 165].4 Six years later Congress approved an act providing for the construction of a new library building [10, p. 12]. The act stipulated that the building be erected according to the Renaissance‐style plans submitted by John L. Smithmeyer (1832–1908) and that a commission composed of the Secretary of the Interior, the Architect of the Capitol Extension, and the Librarian of Congress superintend the work. The commission appointed Smithmeyer as architect, his partner, Paul J. Pelz (1841–1918), as assistant architect, and Bernard R. Green (1843–1914) as superintendent and engineer. Apparently motivated by a desire to economize, Congress approved a second act in October 1888, repealing the provision that the building be constructed according to Smithmeyer’s plans and disbanding the commission [11, p. 523]. Instead, the new act placed the work under the sole control of the Chief of Engineers of the Army, Brig. General Thomas Lincoln Casey (1831–96) and required him to prepare new plans, subject to the approval of the Secretary of War and the Secretary of the Interior, that would keep the total cost of the building’s construction under $4,000,000 exclusive of previous appropriations. Within a few months of his appointment, Casey presented to Congress a modification of Smithmeyer’s original designs, revising the ground plan and various other architectural features but maintaining the full dimensions of the building.5 Based on Casey’s report the act under whose authority the library would be constructed was finally passed by Congress on March 2, 1889. It directed that Casey’s modified plan be adopted and that the building be erected at a total cost not to exceed $5,500,000 exclusive of any appropriations already made [12, p. 966].6 There were no provisions for sculptural or mural decoration. Following Casey’s appointment in October 1888, he placed Green in charge of the Office of Building for Library of Congress located at 145 East Capitol Street, making him responsible, under the general’s authority, for the design and construction of the building [4, pp. 6–7]. In the fall of 1892, with the construction of the library nearly half completed, General Casey’s son, Edward Pearce Casey (1864–1940) of New York, was appointed to design most of the important interior architecture and to coordinate the building’s decoration.7 The majority of the figurative sculpture for the Congressional Library would be modeled, approved, executed, and installed between 1894 and 1897. Without question, the sculptural decoration of the Library of Congress is indebted to General Casey, who, on his own authority, chose to absorb the costs of the program within the original monies allotted for the construction of the building, a decision not without some risk given the century‐long disinclination of Congress to allow funds appropriated for federal building projects to be used for decorative purposes.8 But General Casey and the supervising architects he appointed sincerely believed that special sculptures and mural paintings were essential “to fully and consistently carry out the monumental design and purpose of the building” [4, p. 8]. Casey also believed that the decorative programs, being essential to the functional success of the building, required no further appropriations or approval from Congress other than that already given in the original appropriation. In fact, Casey entered into the contracts for the statuary of the main reading room without even the prior knowledge of Congress [1, p. 230]. General Casey and his son entrusted the execution of the extensive sculptural program of the Library of Congress to a committee of three prominent American sculptors—John Quincy Adams Ward (1830–1910), Olin Levi Warner (1844–96), and Augustus Saint‐Gaudens (1848–1907). The committee advised the architects on the selection and assignment of each sculptor, approved sketch models and final designs, and generally assumed aesthetic responsibility for the building’s sculptural decoration [18].9 While questions of aesthetic quality were usually left to the art jury, it was Edward Casey’s responsibility as coordinator of a veritable “army” of sculptors and painters to insure a consistency of handling from one sculpture to the next and between sculptures and paintings in close proximity to one another. In practical terms, Casey’s task was to maintain a uniform scale, style, degree of relief, and patina or coloration between related sculptures, often needing to reconcile differences of opinion and temperament between one artist and another. When disputes arose, the prestige and diplomatic skills of the general were usually brought to bear. Both Caseys held veto power over the appointment of sculptors and the details of the program, but only rarely did they overrule the sculpture jury or make an important decision without their informed consent. The sculptural commissions awarded in connection with the Library of Congress and the appointment of a jury of artists to help insure the aesthetic integrity of the work assumed considerable significance for the members of the newly formed National Sculpture Society (NSS) in 1893. One of the main purposes for organizing the NSS in the first place had been to establish in the United States, as already existed in Europe, a competent authority with regard to public art matters. Thus, the society was excited and much encouraged by General Casey’s request for a committee of sculptors to oversee the decorations for the new National Library.10 On January 26, 1894, the first official meeting between General Casey and the advisory panel of sculptors was held at the Office of Building for the Library of Congress in Washington. Also in attendance was Superintendent of Construction Green. Casey informed the artists that approximately $200,000 was available to cover that part of the work to be furnished by sculptors. The group then laid out the sculptural requirements for the building. The more significant commissions included three pairs of bronze doors for the building’s main west entrance; for the main reading room, a great clock; eight plaster female personifications to surmount the piers; and, for the balustrades of the gallery level, sixteen bronze historical portraits. The specific orders for sculpture to decorate the Library of Congress were sent out between February 1894 and July 1895. Nearly one hundred individual reliefs, busts, statues, and assorted figures in bronze, plaster, and wood were commissioned from over thirty sculptors. In the case of the marble relief sculptures for the Great Hall designed by Philip Martiny and Olin Levi Warner, the sculptors would supply the models, and the actual marbles would be carved in place by government stone carvers. On the other hand, each sculptor of a statue for the main reading room was responsible personally for having the final figure cast in bronze (historical portraits) or plaster (female personifications) and delivered to the building in Washington. Upon delivery each statue would be hoisted into place by the government. With only a few exceptions, all of the works were completed and in place when the building officially opened on November 1, 1897.11 The sculpture of the Library of Congress, as part of the overall decoration of the building, affirms the fundamental Jeffersonian belief, inherited from the Enlightenment, that public access to accumulated knowledge is essential to the integrity of a free and democratic society.12 Also central to the building’s iconography is the idea, ultimately Platonic in origin, that the acquisition of knowledge and wisdom is in and of itself an essentially moral endeavor. Common themes, formally expressed through myth, allegory, and historical portraiture, include the diversity of nations and cultures contributing to human progress (Philip Martiny’s The Four Continents), the lifelong pursuit and practical application of knowledge (Olin Warner’s The Students), the cultivation of wisdom as a civilizing influence (Elihu Vedder’s Minerva), the transmission of knowledge from one generation to the next (Olin Warner’s Oral Tradition), and individual exemplary achievement in law, government, science, and the arts (the historical portrait statuary of the main reading room). Perhaps most significantly, the complex iconography of the library’s extensive sculpture and painting also addressed an apparent cultural need to position America’s post–Civil War maturation within a meaningful international and historical context. Generally speaking, the decorators of the Library of Congress operated under the tenets of the American Renaissance, that cultural episode in the nation’s history spanning the period from the centennial (1876) to America’s entry into World War I (1917). Essentially conservative and didactic in nature, confident and often intensely nationalistic, the art and architecture of the American Renaissance reflected the growing social and political stature of the United States throughout the late nineteenth century. In the wake of unprecedented material growth and an increasingly rapid social expansion, American Renaissance ideology, while professing optimism in the future, preferred to emphasize a sense of continuity with the past, seeking out examples of reasonable and progressive change from the history of human development to serve as societal models for future cultural advancement. Key stylistic and thematic traits of American Renaissance art and architecture include a reliance on art historical sources from antiquity and the Italian Renaissance; a belief in the social usefulness of art, a concept that can be traced through French Beaux‐Arts theory to the early eighteenth century when leading Enlightenment figures such as Voltaire, Diderot, and others sought to reestablish the prestige of the fine arts by arguing for their effectiveness as “indispensable social instruments” [25, p. 54];13 and the unity of the primary arts (painting, sculpture, and architecture), another French Beaux‐Arts principle and a legacy of seventeenth‐century European architectural design. Many of the sculptors employed to decorate the Library of Congress made deliberate use of antique models. Herbert Adams’s plaster Minervas, for the consoles of the vestibule of the main entrance, for example, are inspired by ancient personifications of Victory, especially the Hellenistic Nike of Samothrace (ca. 190 BCE) at the Louvre. A more imaginative use of sources can be seen in John Flanagan’s statuary for the reading room clock. Here, Flanagan draws his general composition and iconography from Renaissance and Baroque funerary chapel decorations, such as Michelangelo’s Medici tombs for the New Sacristy of San Lorenzo in Florence (1519–34) and Gian Lorenzo Bernini’s tombs of Urban VIII (1627–47) and Alexander VII (1672–78), for Saint Peter’s in Rome. But the American Renaissance sculptor, in keeping with the conceptual demands of his commission, inventively transforms the traditional funerary themes of temporal existence and the human struggle for the divine into a more rational discourse on the benefit of accumulated knowledge over time. One of the building’s most eloquent expressions of American Renaissance methods and sensibilities is Olin Warner’s Oral Tradition (fig. 1), a bronze lunette for the north doors of the library’s original main entrance. A seated “mother and child” group, personifying the transmission of knowledge from one generation to the next and stylistically reflecting the influence of Michelangelo, occupies the center of the composition. It is flanked on either side by representatives of four premodern races who kept their lore alive through oral tradition: a Stone Age man, a Norseman, a shepherd, and a Native American. Fig. 1.— Olin Levi Warner, Oral Tradition, ca. 1897. Bronze, lunette over one of the main entrance doors, Thomas Jefferson Building, Library of Congress, Washington, DC. Courtesy of Library of Congress. In theme and composition, Oral Tradition is a late nineteenth‐century American, secularized version of the Italian Renaissance sacra conversazione (holy conversation). Giovanni Bellini’s San Giobbe Altarpiece (ca. 1487) is a good example of this type, which brings together saints from different epochs in the history of the church, who, in relaxed company with the enthroned Virgin and Child, interact with each other and with the audience.14 While no longer Christian in context, Warner’s Oral Tradition nevertheless retains the ethical character of its antecedent by affirming a belief in the brotherhood of all races and the dignity of human endeavor. And the social meanings invested in the image resonate that much deeper as a result of the format’s inclusive nature, which extends the fictive boundaries of the work of art in order to encourage the viewer to engage more directly with the seemingly worldlike community of “sacred” beings. Thus, Warner’s use of sources, like Flanagan’s, is neither superficial nor simply structural but instead denotes a pattern of visual reference that is linked organically to the artist’s intentions. This kind of “imitation” or emulation, a stylistic legacy of the Italian Renaissance and typical of American Renaissance art, reflects the sculptor’s admiration, even reverence, for the past but also embodies a competitive component; that is, the desire to overreach his predecessors in an evolutionary sense by reinterpreting traditional formulas in light of the new cultural imperatives of modern American experience [26, pp. 231–32]. Most interestingly, perhaps, Warner’s relief, as a depiction of race, reveals a moral progression when compared to similar American sculptures from earlier in the century, such as Thomas Crawford’s The Progress of Civilization (1853–63), the pediment for the north (Senate) wing of the U.S. Capitol Building. Crawford’s pediment illustrates the progress of civilization on the North American continent from a primitive, savage state (viewer’s right), represented by the taming of the wilderness and the extinction of the American Indian, to a more advanced condition of cultivation and material progress (viewer’s left). It is a bold statement of the doctrine of manifest destiny, an idea central to American thought at midcentury [17, p. 19]. One of Crawford’s pedimental figures, Dying Indian Chief, in particular, reflects the prevailing American belief at the time that Native American peoples contributed nothing to the advancement of human knowledge or technology and, therefore, existed outside the progress of Western culture; the subsequent demise of Native Americans, therefore, was tragic but inevitable. Warner’s lunette, in strong contrast to Crawford’s figure, promotes the common American Renaissance notion that modern “civilized” institutions are actually rooted in aboriginal cultures and that the entire human family has contributed to the general progress of civilization.15 Locating Oral Tradition in a lunette over one of the main entrance doors to the building recalls the similar placement of sculptural reliefs (typically Last Judgment scenes) in Romanesque and Gothic cathedrals. In fact, the original alignment of the interior of the Thomas Jefferson Building beginning at the three western doors and extending eastward along a strong central axis clearly reflects the traditional axial or basilican plan of Western Christian churches (today the library is no longer entered through the main doors but from a visitor’s center one floor below the Great Hall). The library’s axis directs the visitor from the vestibule into the Great Hall, through a commemorative arch, patterned after the Arch of Titus in Rome (ca. 80 CE) and into the main reading room, or rotunda, which replaces the Christian choir and altar as the sacred/secular focus of the building. The scheme even features the requisite “altarpiece,” the heroic mosaic of Minerva by Elihu Vedder, located along the axis at the upper‐story gallery level entrance to the rotunda. Derived from earlier Greek sources such as the celebrated statue of Athena Lemnia by Phidias (mid‐fifth century BCE), the Roman Minerva, guardian of wisdom and protector of civilization, celebrates, in its new American Renaissance context, rationality, the rule of law, and the unfettered access to accumulated human knowledge, intellectual cornerstones of a modern enlightened republic. Returning to the Great Hall, the visitor, entering the room from the vestibule, is flanked to the north and south by grand staircases leading to the upper story decorated with multiple figures and figural groups designed by Philip Martiny. On the newel posts at the base of each railing are two bronze Lampbearers. Distant cousins of the Statue of Liberty (Liberty Enlightening the World, 1886), by Frédéric Auguste Bartholdi, Martiny’s Lampbearers illuminate the library visitor’s personal journey along the path toward truth and enlightenment. Most of the spaces on the ascending railings are occupied by cherublike marble figures in high relief representing various careers or occupations that late nineteenth‐century Americans would be likely to pursue, including, among others, a mechanic, hunter, farmer, fisherman, printer, musician, physician, and astronomer (fig. 2). Images typical of the populism of the Progressive Era, Martiny’s “cherubs” draw attention to the populist notion that the educated American worker is the true source of the nation’s power and wealth. A similar theme is picked up again in Edwin H. Blashfield’s allegorical figure of America from his Evolution of Civilization, the collar painting for the ceiling of the main reading room (fig. 3). Dressed as a mechanic and endowed with the facial features of Abraham Lincoln, Blashfield’s figure evokes the “cult of the self‐made man,” the fundamentally American idea that through hard work and initiative material success is within reach of any American regardless of the potentially limiting conditions into which he or she was born. Fig. 2.— View of the Great Hall showing a bronze Lampbearer and some of the marble figures decorating the rail of the Great Staircase, all designed by Philip Martiny. Thomas Jefferson Building, Library of Congress, Washington, DC. Courtesy of Library of Congress. Fig. 3.— Edwin H. Blashfield, America, detail from The Evolution of Civilization, 1895–96. Oil on canvas. Collar mural, interior of dome, reading room, Library of Congress, Washington, DC. Courtesy of Library of Congress. On the buttress caps halfway up the railings on either side of the Great Hall sit Martiny’s youthful marble figures representing the Four Continents: on the north side, Europe and Asia, and on the south side, America and Africa (fig. 4). A world globe separates each pair, and each figure with the exception of America rests a hand on its respective continent. In contrast, America, sporting a Native American headdress, shields his eyes with his left hand and looks directly at the spot along the central axis of the building where the visitor would enter the Great Hall from the vestibule. In other words, with the original entrance to the library in mind, Martiny designed America so that it would offer a visual “greeting” as it were to the national and international “guests” arriving at the building. Fig. 4.— Philip Martiny, America and Africa from Four Continents, ca. 1897. Marble, south ascending rail, Great Hall, Thomas Jefferson Building, Library of Congress, Washington, DC. Courtesy of Library of Congress. The library’s sculptural program reaches its apex in the main reading room, the functional and symbolic center of the building. The program is composed of eight plaster personifications for the main piers, each representing a prominent feature in the intellectual or material life of the West (Art, History, Commerce, Religion, Science, Law, Poetry, and Philosophy), with sixteen corresponding bronze historical portraits at the gallery level (two for each allegorical statue) celebrating exemplary individual achievements within each symbolic category. For example, statues of Homer and Shakespeare flank Poetry, statues of Columbus and Robert Fulton flank Commerce, and so on. The task of selecting the subjects for the statuary of the main reading room fell to the Librarian of Congress, Ainsworth Rand Spofford: Mr. Spofford, the Librarian, who, it is said, can tell what is inside a volume by looking at its covers, was authorized to settle the momentous question [subjects for the Rotunda’s statuary], and has been reflecting over it for more than three years. He realizes that there will be a great deal of criticism of his choice. … The subjects for these Mr. Spofford has selected as follows: Poetry, Homer and Shakespeare; art, Michelangelo and Beethoven; science, Newton and Henry; history, Herodotus and Gibbon; philosophy, Plato and Bacon; commerce, Columbus and Fulton; law, Solon and Blackstone; religion, Moses and St. Paul. [18] The final statues were executed as described except that the Blackstone was replaced by Chancellor Kent. Spofford also chose the “famous authors” to be represented by the nine granite busts filling the exterior niches on the west facade of the building—Franklin, Demosthenes, Dante, Irving, Macaulay, Sir Walter Scott, Emerson, Hawthorne, and Goethe [18]. The rotunda statuary and their respective sculptors are as follows: Art: François Michel Louis Tonetti‐Dozzi; after sketches by Augustus Saint‐Gaudens Michelangelo: Paul Wayland Bartlett Beethoven: Theodore Baur History: Daniel Chester French Herodotus: Daniel Chester French Gibbon: Charles Henry Niehaus Commerce: John Flanagan Columbus: Paul Wayland Bartlett Robert Fulton: Edward C. Potter Religion: Theodore Baur Moses: Charles Henry Niehaus Saint Paul: John Donoghue Science: John Donoghue Sir Isaac Newton: Cyrus E. Dallin Joseph Henry: Herbert Adams Law: Paul Wayland Bartlett Solon: F. Wellington Ruckstuhl Chancellor Kent: George W. Bissell Poetry: John Quincy Adams Ward Homer: Louis Saint‐Gaudens Shakespeare: Frederick MacMonnies Philosophy: Bela L. Pratt Plato: John J. Boyle Bacon: John J. Boyle The rotunda’s statuary enhances the room’s significance as the primary site for the transfer of knowledge, the active point of intersection between past, present, and future historical time. It is here that the modern visitor obtains direct access to the printed record of human civilization, the intellectual raw material necessary to fuel the steady progress of Western culture. But the space also assumes a commemorative monumentality that transcends its literal function as a reading room. With its Pantheon‐like circular dome and its gallery of honorific sculpture, a secular equivalent to the saints portrayed on the facades of gothic cathedrals, the rotunda aspires to be, in metaphorical terms, a national “temple” dedicated to the history of ideas and to the memory of those individuals whose exceptional intellect or genius contributed to the lasting benefit of humankind. Domed structures are commonly memorial and pedagogic in character since they are meant to instruct posterity regarding what is worth remembering from the past. Still, the Pantheon idea has persisted throughout Western architectural history largely because of the universality of its symbolism: “It is a monumental form, on any scale, because of its bold and simple geometry … permanence is expressed by the centered dome, the shape most suggestive of fixed and immutable rules because its unbroken, encircling sphericity evokes the stability of the firmament itself … a domed rotunda is a place where one can partake, symbolically, of the immutable laws and hoped‐for tranquility of the universe. … A Pantheon is neither sacred nor secular, but a place of man and nature, of man and the forces the ancients called the gods” [30, p. 132].16 But domed libraries, as a specific building type, are rare before the nineteenth century, and the earliest clear precedent for them is found in eighteenth‐century English Baroque architecture [32, pp. 116, 121; 33, p. 103]. Sir Christopher Wren first introduced the freestanding circular library with his preliminary design for Trinity College, Cambridge. Although Wren’s design was never built, it inspired the Radcliffe Camera, Oxford (1737–49), a circular domed library conceived by Nicholas Hawksmoor and built by James Gibbs [32, pp. 121–22; 33, pp. 99, 102]. Other eighteenth‐century library designs that incorporated a central rotunda are Etienne‐Louis Boullée’s design for the Bibliothèque du Roi on the site of the Capuchins, 1784 (also never built), and J.‐N.‐L. Durand’s only slightly more credible design for a library from his Précis des leçons d’architecture (vol. 2, 1802–9).17 The closest American precedent for the domed reading room of the Library of Congress is Thomas Jefferson’s own rotunda for the University of Virginia, Charlottesville (1817–26), itself inspired by the Boullée‐Durand model. Additional early nineteenth‐century examples of the domed rotunda type include Karl Friedrich Schinkel’s design for the Berlin Staatsbibliothek (1835) and Sydney Smirke’s Library for the British Museum (1854–56) [33, pp. 106–8; 30, p. 125]. The primary distinction between the main reading room of the Library of Congress and these earlier domed designs is the extent to which painting and sculpture have been effectively integrated into the overall architectural composition, a Beaux‐Arts inspired unification of the arts that is unprecedented in American architectural history. Although ultimately Baroque in origin, the most direct precursor to the rotunda’s sculptural program, particularly the bronze historical portrait statuary that graces the room’s gallery, is the eighteenth‐century European Cult of Great Men. Erecting monuments to venerate exceptional poets, scholars, and philosophers was common practice during ancient times and an important component in the antique revivals of the late Medieval and Renaissance periods. The post‐Renaissance tradition of honorific sculpture begins in the early Enlightenment and is closely linked with the developing concept of “the genius” in the modern sense as an “individual endowed with native and transcendent intellectual or artistic power” and with the growing belief at the time in the potential social value of public sculpture [34, p. 1]. Diderot and the Encyclopedists had credited the fine arts with morally redemptive qualities, especially portrait sculpture of great men whose actions were the result of enlightened thought: “the value of sculpture lay in the moral influence which it could exercise. Like history, sculpture was a durable record of what men had done. … Considering sculpture from a moral viewpoint, its worthy objective was to perpetuate the memory of illustrious men, and thus provide models of virtue for mankind” [25, p. 56].18 The eighteenth‐century emphasis on individual accomplishment over religious piety or the privileges of birth as the basis for recognizing moral or social virtue further reinforced the acceptance of the portrait statue as a legitimate artistic expression. As the century progressed, ambitious civic programs featuring honorific statuary placed within grand architectural settings—important precedents for the Library of Congress—became an increasingly prominent species of monument. An early English example is William Kent’s Temple of British Worthies (1731–35) for Lord Cobham’s garden at Stowe, Buckinghamshire. An exedra‐style structure, the temple incorporates sixteen busts of famous Englishmen. As a group, the “Worthies” gaze toward the nearby Temple of Ancient Virtue, also designed by Kent, a domed building originally containing the statues of Homer, Socrates, Epaminondas, and Lycurgus, four famous Greeks who represented “the ultimate achievement in the fields of poetry, philosophy, military science and Law.” The juxtaposition of the two buildings symbolized the hope that history would one day admit the favored Britains into the honored company of the Ancients [35, p. 210].19 In France, late century egalitarian and revolutionary ideologies confirmed a nearly universal faith in the Cult of Great Men. The most sweeping sculptural program commissioned in the eighteenth century to honor the Great Men of France is the series of twenty‐seven statues ordered by Count d’Angiviller, beginning in 1775, to adorn the Grand Gallery of the Louvre. Choosing subjects from French history since the Middle Ages, d’Angiviller sought to arouse patriotic feelings and promote interest in the origins of modern France by extolling past French genius [37, p. 22]. Later proposals dedicated specifically to French heroes of the Revolution include Charles de Wailly’s projected design for the alteration of Sainte Geneviève—transformed into the Panthéon in 1791—which replaced the church’s dome with a circular colonnade crowned with statues, and the Boullée‐inspired design for a Temple Décadaire by Durand and Thibault, likewise topped by a row of statue‐bearing columns [37, p. 33]. Reflecting the post‐Enlightenment intellectualization of morality, such monuments define a modern tradition of commemorative public sculpture to which the Library of Congress rotunda statues also belong. Sharing rational, moral, and patriotic impulses regarding the possibilities of sculpture, each program enlists historical portraiture in the cause of national and cultural progress, hypostatizing the ultimate perfectibility of human nature through education and the application of the mind. Where the American program diverges from the eighteenth‐century formula is in its conception of national identity. In other words, while the English and French models celebrate the genius of a single nation, the statuary for the Congressional Library in Washington, in keeping with the more expansive multicultural heritage embraced by the American Renaissance, draws its subjects from the entire history of human civilization. Most turn‐of‐the‐century American critics agreed that Paul Wayland Bartlett’s two bronze historical portraits for the main reading room, Columbus and Michelangelo (fig. 5), were among the finest works of art created for the National Library, especially the Michelangelo, which many hailed as a genuine American masterpiece.20 Regarding his commissions for the Library of Congress, Bartlett had decided from the outset to produce the best work possible rather than simply conform to the restrictive deadlines and standardized specifications imposed by the federal officials in charge of the building’s construction. This was particularly true for the Michelangelo, which he clearly considered one of the more significant commissions of the entire decorative program. Bartlett’s careful, methodical approach to his work led to considerable delays. And, when the library’s main reading room officially opened to readers on the first of November 1897, neither of his bronze statues had yet been completed, much to the chagrin of Superintendent Green. Michelangelo, in fact, the last of the reading room statuary to be installed, was not hoisted into position until Christmas Day 1898. Fig. 5.— Paul Wayland Bartlett, Michelangelo, 1894–98. Bronze, main reading room, Library of Congress, Washington, DC. Courtesy of Library of Congress. Bartlett designed Michelangelo in light of the fact that the dominant view of the statue would be frontal and from the floor of the rotunda some 100 feet below. Thus, Bartlett modeled the statue so as to be visually accessible at a distance. The head, for example, is enlarged in relation to the torso, lengthened vertically by the beard, and made more massive horizontally by the eared cap that the sculptor wears. Also, the eyebrows are exaggerated, creating deep shadows out from which piercing eyes gleam effectively. In modeling the clothed figure, Bartlett left singularly plain those parts less important in revealing the body’s construction, while such points of articulation as knees, shoulders, elbows, and waist are clearly delineated through distinct angular folds within the clothing [39, pp. 381–82]. But while Bartlett carefully considered the particular conditions under which Michelangelo would be viewed, he refused to allow those conditions—or the stipulations of his contract, for that matter—to determine his conception of the subject. So, in contrast to the majority of rotunda statuary, Bartlett neither inclined Michelangelo’s head downward toward the rotunda floor nor moved the statue forward on the plinth. In fact, Michelangelo stands back and to the left so that one foot is actually moving off the rear of the plinth. And, in direct abnegation of his contract, Bartlett made both Michelangelo and Columbus larger than specified, clearly intending that his figures dominate in size as well as spirit the other portrait statues in the room.21 Faithfully following the best historical evidence regarding the Renaissance master’s less than heroic appearance, Bartlett represented Michelangelo as neither of great stature nor particularly handsome, having been disfigured by a broken nose that had never properly healed. Nevertheless, the statue transcends the merely descriptive to evoke with remarkable immediacy Michelangelo’s restless creative intensity. Most of the other bronze portrait statues in the rotunda are competent but conservative variations on ancient Greek and Roman prototypes, individualized or modernized by the addition of traditional attributes and costume. By contrast, Bartlett achieved a monumental effect with Michelangelo by adopting a more progressive romantic naturalism and bolder surface treatment, innovations originally introduced into bronze historical portrait statuary earlier in the century by the French sculptor Pierre‐Jean David d’Angers (1788–1856). David’s Thomas Jefferson (1832–33; fig. 6), from the rotunda of the U.S. Capitol Building, initiated a modern tradition of portrait statuary, to which Bartlett’s Michelangelo belongs, in its clean break with the international classicism that still dominated French sculpture during the first quarter of the nineteenth century. A daring departure from the aloof classical guise typical of Enlightenment‐era portraiture, Jefferson characterizes a historical portrait type invented by David in which traditional allegory is rejected in favor of naturalism; modern dress; and readable, commonsense attributes. Furthermore, the relaxed, open distribution of limbs, more vigorous modeling, and flickering surface textures of Jefferson, David’s first statue planned from the start for bronze rather than marble [42, pp. 41–42], reveals that the sculptor had learned how to take advantage of the new medium to render a fresher, more engaging image of a contemporary statesman. Fig. 6.— Pierre‐Jean David d’Angers, Thomas Jefferson, 1832–33. Bronze, rotunda, U.S. Capitol Building, Gift of Uriah P. Levy, USN, 1834. But the significance of David’s Thomas Jefferson for Bartlett’s Michelangelo goes well beyond a general stylistic inheritance; the American sculptor consciously emulated the stance, pose, and gestures of the Jefferson—laterally reversed—thereby directly linking the two figures. Indulging in a kind of reverse historical appropriation, Bartlett apparently intended a conceptualization of Michelangelo as a Renaissance “prefigurement” of Jefferson, or, more to the point, of certain Jeffersonian or American Enlightenment ideals such as a belief in the intellect as the source of inspiration and the conversion of the ideal into the practical. The stylistically progressive character of Michelangelo, which holds its own even when measured against the latest trends in contemporary French sculpture, helps to explain the statue’s success among late nineteenth‐century American critics. However, another and perhaps more compelling reason for the broad positive response to Bartlett’s statue is its decidedly democratic, working‐class character. That is, Bartlett depicts Michelangelo not as a powerful figure sought after by popes and men of wealth but rather as a common laborer, chisel in hand, informally dressed in studio cap and apron, pausing to reflect on some work in progress. The entrepreneurial, somewhat lowbrow, just‐another‐working‐day characterization of the great Renaissance sculptor was immediately recognized as one of the statue’s most salient features. In Famous Sculptors of America (1924), J. Walker McSpadden explains that the statue “aroused much discussion when first put in place, because it showed the great master as an ordinary workman rather than some lofty and remote personage. It made him human, a toiler with chisel and mallet, as he undoubtedly was” [43, p. 163]. And Charles DeKay remarked at the time of its installation that Bartlett’s Michelangelo “is the figure of the Workman first of all, and only secondary that of the sculptor,” further noting that he “seems to have had no greater satisfaction within the bounds of all his vast horizons than the satisfaction in work” [40]. This kind of acclaim accorded Bartlett’s Michelangelo, immediate and nearly unanimous, invites an examination of the statue within a larger cultural context. For example, Bartlett’s work‐oriented, progressive‐minded characterization of Michelangelo easily attached itself to the broadly popular contemporary Arts and Crafts movement, which, in response to the growing threats of industrialization and machine production to the security and well being of the common worker, celebrated individual human achievement and the handmade versus the factory‐made object. Inspired by the English Arts and Crafts movement and the ideas of John Ruskin (1819–1900) and William Morris (1834–96), the American movement, centered in the towns of upstate New York, also championed enjoyable, purposeful, and dignified manual labor as the basis for a new, more humanistic social order. Charles Eliot Norton, Harvard’s first professor of fine arts and a close friend of William Morris, preached a similar Victorian moral aesthetic to his primarily New England audience. Writing in 1902 that “doggedness in the doing of work” was the hallmark of Arts and Crafts societies, Norton, like Ruskin and Morris, associated honest labor with moral worth, insisting that the artistic style of a given period was linked to social and moral character [44].22 The first to promote William Morris’s ideas on a national level in the United States and one of the principal founders of the Arts and Crafts movement in America was Elbert Hubbard (1856–1915), nationally prominent publisher and founder of the Community of the Roycrofters in East Aurora, New York. Hubbard had visited Morris’s crafts center at Hammersmith, England in 1894 and, inspired by what he had seen there, hoped to establish a similar community in East Aurora. Part utopian, part entrepreneurial, his Roycroft community quickly became well known for its high quality products, its popular publications, and its handsome profits. Deriving his ideas from Ruskin, Morris, and the English evolutionist Herbert Spencer (1820–1903), Hubbard gave them a particularly American slant, grafting them onto the strong individualist tradition in American thought, the self‐help doctrine, and the profit motive. Hubbard, like Ruskin and Morris, also believed “that work should have meaning, and that people should learn from and enjoy their labor” [47, p. 36].23 “Man’s business is to work,” he wrote, “to surmount difficulties, to endure hardship, to solve problems, to overcome the inertia of his own nature” [49, p. 21].24 In late January 1903, Hubbard saw Bartlett’s Michelangelo for the first time and immediately interpreted the figure as a visual embodiment of Arts and Crafts ideology. Much taken with the statue, Hubbard not only wrote and published a short essay on the figure but also quickly sent the sculptor a personal request for a copy: “your statue of Michael Angelo is the biggest thing I know of. It is tremendous in its strength and poise. It stands for all that the Roycroft stands for, and I would very much like a copy of it to place in the Roycroft Shop” [54]. Hubbard’s essay entitled “He Faces the East” was published in the form of a four‐page pamphlet and included a color woodcut of Bartlett’s statue. Bartlett personally arranged with the Gorham Manufacturing Company of Providence, Rhode Island, for a full‐scale bronze replica of Michelangelo to be cast and sent to East Aurora for erection on the Roycroft Community grounds, charging Hubbard only the foundry’s cost in producing the statue. The replica was originally erected in May 1909 and stands today on the front lawn of the local high school in East Aurora.25 Any aesthetic evaluation of the sculptural program for the Thomas Jefferson Building of the Library of Congress must finally take note of the fact that the sculptors—like the mural painters—were asked to assume a subordinate role to that of the supervising architects. Vested by Congress with ultimate responsibility for the building and its decoration, the architects not only predetermined with the help of the librarian the subjects for most of the sculptures but also established detailed specifications—often imposed by the architecture itself—governing the conduct of the commissions. The sculptors’ lack of complete control over their own work was most evident with respect to the rotunda statuary, where, owing to the need for a uniform treatment throughout, strict instructions were given regarding the height, stance, pose, characterization, and material composition of the figures. The dominant position of the architect ran counter to the sculptors’ belief in the autonomy of the artist and the integrity of the creative process. Still, most of them were willing to accept such a role, believing their participation in the program would impact positively on their careers and on the future development of American sculpture. In fact, the mural and sculptural programs of the Library of Congress, once established, did influence the decorative schemes of numerous public buildings constructed in America during the early twentieth century, including notably the New York State Appellate Court Building (1896–1900) and the Pennsylvania State Capitol Building (1906). However, by the end of World War I, American Renaissance ideology had been quickly and decisively undercut by the modernist agenda that effectively severed the majority of American artists from traditional cultural and art historical influences. Ultimately, the only sculptor to benefit substantially from his involvement with the decoration of the Congressional Library was Bartlett, whose Michelangelo provided a springboard for an incredibly successful career as a producer of major public monuments throughout the early decades of the twentieth century. Key works include Integrity Protecting the Works of Man (1901–4), the sculpture for the pediment of the New York Stock Exchange, produced in collaboration with John Quincy Adams Ward; The Apotheosis of Democracy (1908–16), the sculpture for the House pediment of the U.S. Capitol Building; the six attic figures for the Fifth Avenue facade of the New York Public Library (1908–16); his Seated Statue of Benjamin Franklin (1911–21), for Waterbury, Connecticut; and, especially, his Equestrian Statue of Lafayette (1898–1908), which was presented by America to France as a reciprocal gift for Bartholdi’s Statue of Liberty (1886).26 Not coincidentally, the maker of the Michelangelo was among those few sculptors least concerned with conforming to the many restrictions imposed upon them by their Library of Congress commissions. Most of the sculptors took a more conscientious if less ambitious approach to their assignments, choosing to satisfy the collaborative demands of the program rather than explore its idiosyncratic possibilities. By creating pieces of sculpture whose real value should be measured in terms of their incremental impact within the entire decorative ensemble, thereby suppressing the uniqueness of their own work in favor of the harmony and enhancement of the whole, they helped to construct one of the most exceptionally decorated buildings in the history of American architecture. 3.  For more information on this important point, see [1, p. 228; 2]. For the basic literature on the Library’s sculptural program, which is not extensive, see [1, pp. 309–10, n. 3]. 4.  The committee was to consider the possibility of extending the Capitol Building so as to accommodate a new Congressional Library or, if this were not practicable, to secure plans for a library outside the Capitol but adjoining its grounds. Congress first attempted to procure plans for a new Congressional Library by authorizing a design competition in 1873. For the complete construction history of the building, see [4, 5]; see also 6–9]. 5.  See Casey’s first annual report to Congress dated December 1, 1888, 50th Cong., 2nd sess., Misc. Doc. no. 12. 6.  Previous appropriations amounted to $1,000,000, with a balance of $745,567.94, fixing the limit of the building’s cost by law at $6,245,567.94. See [4, p. 4]. See also [13]. In his letter to Morrill, a senator from Vermont and a leading advocate for the national library, General Casey supplied the following information: Authorized by Congress, March 2, 1889 Not to exceed $5,500,000 And former appropriations April 15, 1886—$245,567.94 October 2, 1888—$500,000.00 Total authorized $6,245,567.94 7.  For Smithmeyer and Pelz’s conflict with Edward Casey and the United States regarding architectural responsibility for the building, see [14]; Report, submitted by Justin S. Morrill, 55th Cong., 1st sess., Senate Report no. 105 [15, pp. 27–29; 16]. 8.  For background on Congress’s unwillingness to use building appropriations for the decoration of federal buildings, see [17, pp. 17–46]. 9.  See also [13; 19, pp. 249–50]. 10.  In fact, many artists and interested parties believed, with justification, that the large number of sculptural commissions resulting from the library’s construction was directly related to the creation of the NSS. For more information on the NSS and its relationship to large decorative projects such as the Library of Congress, see [20–21]. Unfortunately, the society’s euphoria over the Library of Congress commissions was short lived, quickly changing to disillusionment in the wake of the Sherman Monument Competition in Washington, DC (1895–96). Somma’s death in May 2007 prevented the publication by the U.S. Capitol Historical Society of his paper, “Unbuilt Washington: Paul Wayland Bartlett's Designs for the William T. Sherman Monument, 1895–1896” [22]. 11.  For a complete list of all the sculptures ordered for the building, including the date of each order, sculptor, description, subject, order price, carver (if applicable), and date delivered to the building, see [23]. 12.  For Jefferson’s role in the creation of a national library, see [24]. 13.  For the views espoused by the National Sculpture Society regarding the social utility of art, see [20, pp. 163–64]. 14.  For more information on the sacra conversazione, see [26, pp. 98–99; 27, pp. 77–79]. The secular transmutation of Venetian Renaissance themes and motifs is a relatively common tactic in American Renaissance painting. See [28, pp. 7–13]. 15.  For an anthropological background to this theme, see [29]. 16.  For a brief discussion of commemorative architecture and domed structures in Washington, DC, see [31]. 17.  For Boullée’s and Durand’s designs, see [33, p. 103]. 18.  Leith’s quote refers specifically to an article entitled “Sculpture” written for Diderot’s Encyclopédie by Falconet. 19.  See also [36, pp. 51–53]. 20.  For the most in‐depth study of the statue, see [38]. 21.  See [40]. Regarding the size of Bartlett’s two statues, Adeline Adams recalled that the sculptor had said, “Yes, I made my figures larger than the others. I wanted them to dominate” [41]. 22.  See [45, pp. 34, 44]. For more information on Norton, see [46]. 23.  See also [48]. 24.  For more information on Hubbard and the Roycrofters, see [50–53]. 25.  Original copies of the pamphlet are in the Paul Wayland Bartlett Papers, Manuscripts Division, Library of Congress; and the Records of the Architect of the Capitol. See the appendix for the text of Hubbard’s essay. 26.  Bartlett’s Lafayette, the centerpiece of his career, stood in the gardens of the Louvre until July 1984, when it was removed to allow for the archaeological excavations that preceded the construction of I. M. Pei’s glass pyramid. For a brief discussion of Bartlett’s career as a maker of public monuments, see [17, pp. 51–53; 128, nn. 12–18].