THE ETHICAL PRESUPPOSITIONS BEHIND THE LIBRARY BILL OF RIGHTS Martin Fricke,' Kay Mathiesen,2 and Don Fallis' The American Library Association's (ALA's) Library Bill of Rights is based on a foundation of ethical presuppositions. In this article, these presupposi- tions are spelled out and critically examined in light of several ethical theo- ries (for example, utilitarianism, natural rights theory, and social contract theory). We suggest that social contract theory provides the strongest ar- gument for a right to access to information (and to have that information provided by public libraries). We argue, however, that the right to access to information is not unlimited. Limiting access (including censorship) is appropriate, for example, when such a limitation is necessary to protect a more fundamental right. Finally, we argue that the ALA's advocacy of an un- limited right to access is based on a mistaken understanding of what follows from the fact that all of our judgments are fallible. Introduction The Library Bill of Rights (LBR) [1, 2] is well known, as are many of its shortcomings [3].4 It has been argued that the LBR is ambiguous, utopian, political, self-important, lacking in suitable ethical justifica- tion, and unbalanced in content with too much emphasis on censor- ship and access and not enough on intellectual property and patron 1. Associate professor, School of Information Resources and Library Science, University of Arizona, 1515 East First Street, Tucson, Arizona 85719. Telephone 520-621-3491; Fax 520- 621-3279; E-mail mfricke@u.arizona.edu. 2. Assistant professor, Department of Philosophy, Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts, North Adams, Massachusetts 01247. Telephone 413-662-5316; Fax 413-662-5368; E-mail kmathies@mcla.mass.edu. 3. Assistant professor, School of Information Resources and Library Science, University of Arizona, 1515 East First Street, Tucson, Arizona 85719. Telephone 520-621-5223; Fax 520- 621-3279; E-mail fallis@u.arizona.edu. 4. See the appendix on p. 489 for additional information about discussions of the LBR in the library science literature. [Library Quarterly, vol. 70, no. 4, pp. 468-491] K) 2000 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-2519/2000/7004-0002$02.00 468
LIBRARY BILL OF RIGHTS 469 privacy [3, 4, 5]. Arguably, the LBR should be replaced by a statement with a better form and a better foundation. (There are good candidates already on display such as the ALA's own "Libraries: An American Value" [6], the Australian Library and Information Association's "Statement on Freedom to Read" [7], or several others listed on the "Free Access to Information and Freedom of Expression site" [8].) Any document purporting to be an acceptable "bill of rights" or "code of professional ethics" or "statement of philosophical princi- ples" should have the appropriate form and the correct foundation. Appropriate form includes being consistent, complete, and unambigu- ous (that is, it should be clear which kind of actions would count as following the rules in a particular case). A code may well aspire to be both a theoretical foundation and a practical guide. Yet, it may fall short in these roles, if it is lacking suitable form. But form is not enough. It is quite possible to have two codes, addressing the same domain, that have perfect form and yet contradict each other. Thus, there is a need to consider also justification, evidence, principled argu- ment, and reason: in brief, foundation. The current LBR is based on a foundation or collection of philosoph- ical presuppositions. The purpose of this article is to discuss these pre- suppositions to see what is of merit in them and, thus, to see whether or not they should be incorporated into any new version of the LBR. One conclusion that will be argued for is that several of the presupposi- tions have deficiencies that stem from the same root cause (namely, failure to deal appropriately with fallibilism). Fallibilism is the view that there is no certain knowledge; all of our theories, beliefs, and opinions are always subject to the possibility of mistake and revision [9]. The article concludes with suggestions on librarianship and fallibilism. Ethical Theory This essay is certainly not the forum to discourse at length on ethics. But at least some of the basic ethical concepts discussed in this article need to be placed in view. A rights-based ethic is the ethical tool of choice for the ALA. The LBR itself mentions rights only once, but the supporting interpretation [2, 10] uses rights freely, perhaps too freely. The following is a typical passage: "freedom of expression is an inalienable human right and the foundation for self-government. Freedom of expression encompasses the freedom of speech and the corollary right to receive information. These rights extend to minors as well as adults. Libraries and librarians
470 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY exist to facilitate the exercise of these rights ... users have the right to be free of unreasonable limitations or conditions ... users have a right to information, training and assistance ... users have both the right of confidentiality and the right of privacy ... rights of users who are minors shall in no way be abridged" [10; emphasis added]. In order to under- stand and evaluate such claims we need to be clear on what rights are. Rights are trump cards held primarily by individuals. Their holders can play them to achieve certain effects or outcomes. They are justified claims or entitlements against others. There are negative or "liberty rights," requiring other people to refrain from interfering, and there are positive or "welfare rights," making it a duty or responsibility for some other person or institution to satisfy or meet the right [11, 12]. This distinction is important in library settings. For example, if free- dom of speech is a liberty right, then it simply requires that others do not interfere with a person's speech; if it is a welfare right, then it may require that others report that speech or that libraries carry documents describing it. Similarly, if freedom to read is simply a liberty right, then it only imposes on others the duty of minding their own business and not actively preventing a person from reading a document; if it is a welfare right, then it might require that others, libraries perhaps, pro- vide the books for the reading. Another important distinction is that between natural (or moral) and legal rights. "Natural rights" pertain to all humans, independent of the legal framework of the societies in which they live. "Legal rights," on the other hand, are brought into being by laws and govern- ments. Legal rights have a distinctly lesser standing than natural rights because laws can be unethical or wrong, as they were with slavery in America and with the Holocaust in Nazi Germany. Some countries, the United States being a notable one, have a constitution that, in part, purports to be a written statement of at least some of the natural rights. And if a constitution is able to impinge on legal cases, as it can in the United States, this can lead to a mixing of natural and legal rights [ 13]. In addition to natural and legal rights, there is a third form of rights-"contractual rights." Such rights may be based on actual con- tract or hypothetical contract (that is, what we would agree to if we were asked under fair conditions-no force or fraud). Rights of citizens are frequently seen to be the result of such a hypothetical contract. According to such social contract theories, we have natural rights as human beings. When we come together to form societies, we enter into a hypothetical contract that spells out the terms of our association [14; 15, section 2:6; 16; 17]. So, for instance, a person may have a natural right to "life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness," but as a member of society that person might also have a right to political representation, a
LIBRARY BILL OF RIGHTS 471 free press, and so on. In short, a person might have certain social or political rights that protect natural rights within a civil society. Further rights then arise with the formation of laws. As noted above, rights may also derive from actual contracts. Within existing societies some constituents may form themselves into a group and apparently grant rights among the members by explicit contract. For example, the joining of a golf club may give a golfer, in the golf club's terms, the "right" to use the course and the club's facilities. Whether these are rights or not, it is clear that the association granting the rights cannot extend those rights beyond what is strictly within their purview. The golf club cannot of itself give a member the right to use the golf courses of other clubs or, most definitely, the right to play golf on city streets. Rights granted by explicit contract are limited, in what they require or forbid of others, to those that have contracted into the group or have been subcontracted by the group, and they are also constrained by wider natural or legal rights. Attention needs to be paid to how far any justified claims extend. Just what particular rights there are is a matter of debate. Knowledge of legal rights is reasonably definite, because the law is there, and knowledge of it is just a matter of seeing what it says. To be fair, there are questions of interpretation, precedents, case law, and the like, but still this is the easier of the two cases. Knowledge of natural rights is highly uncertain. Long-standing rational debate here has suggested certain candidates such as life, liberty, and so forth. But decent, serious- minded, and well-intentioned folk can disagree, and even when there is agreement, the parties might be wrong. That the constitution has been changed and that there are debates about changing it further indicates that our identification of natural rights is fallible. However, as we will argue (in the penultimate section to the article), fallibility is not a reason to abandon the attempt to identify these rights, even if we will never come up with the complete and perfect list. (Further- more, even though our knowledge of rights is fallible, we do seem to have knowledge of at least some rights. It seems highly unlikely that we will discover, for instance, that we were wrong about a person's right to be free from involuntary servitude.) Even if we were infallible in our ability to identify what our rights are, we would still have a problem with what to do when rights conflict. For example, your right to free speech might conflict with my right not to be injured by false and unsubstantiated public statements about me. The participants in conflict, shouting about their rights in ever louder voices, would not achieve what everyone, including the partici- pants, want, namely, some equitable or moral solution to accommodate all parties. We may resolve such conflicts in two ways. First, few, if any,
472 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY rights are absolute, unconditional, and universal, and trump every- thing. Most rights have limits or boundaries, and we need to pay atten- tion to what these limits are. There may also be a priority or ranking among some rights. Second, when rights are in conflict, there may need to be an appeal to principles over and above those particular rights in order to reach a compromise or resolution. Rights focus on individuals, to the exclusion of society, and where there is apparently irresolvable conflict of rights, it may be that an appeal to the interests or benefits of society can open a way forward. For example, lawyers before the Supreme Court appeal to "compelling state interest" as a way to modulate the occasionally antisocial consequences of unfettered individual rights claims. Such a concern with the common good is better expressed in the language of utilitarianism than in the language of rights. According to utilitarian moral theory, one ought to perform those actions or adopt those policies that produce the greatest good (or "utility") for the greatest number of persons. However, just as an ethical theory that concerns itself only with rights may focus too much on the individual at the expense of society, an ethical theory that concerns itself only with utility may focus too much on society at the expense of the individ- ual. Thus, in this article, a pluralistic approach to ethical theory is adopted; both utilitarian and rights-based arguments are given. It will be shown that on many issues both an appeal to rights and an appeal to utility will yield the same recommendation. In fact, rights themselves can be justified on the grounds that granting persons certain rights increases overall utility. As we have seen, rights can arise in a variety of ways and with a variety of strengths of justification. A rights-based code needs to tie appropri- ately into natural, legal, and conventional rights and possibly also to other ethical arguments. For instance, the ALA tries in part to base the LBR on the Universal Declaration of Human Rights adopted by the United Nations General Assembly [18]. This declaration has no legal or consti- tutional standing, however, and it is doubtful that the many and varied rights that it invokes are all natural rights; in short, it itself is in need ofjustification. Below we evaluate the ethical justification for the rights claims made in four of the LBR's presuppositions. Presupposition 1: The Dissenting Opinion Should Be Presented.-Article II of the LBR reads: "libraries should provide materials and information presenting all points of view on current and historical issues. Materials should not be proscribed or removed because of partisan or doctrinal disapproval." The value of providing the dissenting opinion has been known from antiquity. John Milton wrote of this value in 1644 [19], it
LIBRARY BILL OF RIGHTS 473 is subscribed to in the U.S. Constitution's First Amendment, and it is most famously expressed and coherently argued for in John Stuart Mill's On Liberty [20]. A point worth noting is that Mill's argument for free expression of unpopular ideas is to some degree in tension with a rights-based approach. The expression of views that offend, upset, or even hurt some people is defended on the grounds of the utility to society as a whole of having a free marketplace of ideas. As a result, Mill's justification for protecting unpopular speech depends on the claim that society is better off overall if such speech is not suppressed. Mill's argument offers a compelling justification of this presupposition. Expression of unpopular opinion is essential for a free public debate in a democracy, and facilitating such debate is an important role for libraries. (See [21, pp. 14-15] and [22] for other appeals to Mill's argu- ment in the library science literature.) However, as we will argue below, this presupposition does not commit us to the view that all censorship is wrong. Presupposition 2: We Ought Not Censor.-Article III reads: "libraries should challenge censorship in the fulfillment of their responsibility to provide information and enlightenment." This presupposition seems almost a corollary of Presupposition 1, but actually it is not, and it needs to be qualified. In order to do this, we need to look more carefully at the possible ethical concerns with censorship. The ALA characterizes censorship as being "the suppression of ideas and information that certain persons ... find objectionable or danger- ous" [23]. In the context of libraries, censorship means either the ex- clusion or removal of objectionable or dangerous materials from a li- brary's collection or, if the library has a role as an access portal, the restriction of access to such materials. Censorship is different from the application of selection policies. Selection policies determine which items should be added to a library's collection when it is not possible to include all available items in the collection, perhaps due to budget and shelf space limitations. Even so, the application of certain selection policies might result in de facto censorship. This is all the more true with electronic documents. Access to items using the Internet is cheap or free, and it does not run into shelf space limitations. The default selection policy for access using the Internet yields all items; any other selection policy will be a close companion to censorship. There are two ethical concerns with censorship: one connected with free speech and the other with autonomy. First, censorship suppresses free speech, and free speech for the most part is good [24, 25]. The value of free speech is primarily that it promotes a battle among ideas in which the fittest ideas may survive to the benefit of all in society;
474 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY further, even the most widely accepted and seemingly obvious truths benefit from continuous exposure to opposing viewpoints [20]. In ad- dition, for social contract theorists, free speech may be required for the proper functioning of voting in a democracy [24, p. 321; 26]. Both these lines apply most to views that can be true or false, or right or wrong (to science or to social or political theories, for example). They apply less to fiction or literature and to what might be called products, or acts, of free expression (such as flag burning), as opposed to free speech. Second, censorship stands against the autonomy and freedom of the individual; persons ought to be able to make up their own minds on what they want to read or see [24]. The free choice argument does not stand without qualification, however. If you do not know the content of what you are about to read or see, then you cannot make a choice about whether or not you want to read or see it. So people should know what sort of thing they are going to see before they see it and thus be in a position to choose not to see it if that is their wish. As a result, labeling, perhaps similar to that used in the film industry, would be appropriate in some circumstances. Also, if you cannot avoid some- thing, then in no sense are you being given a choice. Freedom requires the ability to opt out. It is often assumed that we can opt out in practice; the common advice is, "if you do not want to read that kind of material, don't read it (and don't be a busybody about other people reading it)." But this advice is based on a false assumption in the modern age. For, example, in public libraries, there is an issue relating to unattended public access Internet computers displaying sex sites (which have been selected earlier by patrons). Working librarians have grounds for com- plaint that such displays constitute a hostile work environment for them [27]. Furthermore, (and arguably worse), bona fide members of the public may face such displays without choice, and, as a result, they may decide to avoid the public library. In other words, their only way to choose not to see pornography is to choose not to go to the library at all. These two arguments against censorship, while they cover many cases, do not encompass all types of documents or potential censors. They clearly apply to what we will call "macrocensorship" but not necessarily to "microcensorship." "Macrocensorship" is an all- encompassing, society-wide censorship perhaps imposed by govern- ment. "Microcensorship" is a localized censorship that is imposed by an institution, such as a library or bookshop, or by a group of people. Microcensorship largely escapes, or can escape, the above arguments against censorship. If a bookshop, Borders, say, refuses on principle to carry any books by James Joyce, little harm results, provided there are
LIBRARY BILL OF RIGHTS 475 other book sources-such as Barnes and Noble, Amazon.com, and oth- ers-who have a ready supply of Joyce fiction. In such a case Joyce's point of view is still widely disseminated, and we still have a choice to read his books if we like. In addition, if a library has a certain purpose or aim, surely it should hold documents conducive to that aim and not hold documents not conducive to the aim (especially if any holding of nonconducive documents has to be done at the expense of conducive ones). No harm results from this, provided there are other libraries with different aims or other sources altogether. In other words, while there may be a slight loss of convenience or efficiency, microcensorship is perfectly consistent with an entire absence of macrocensorship. Furthermore, neither of the above arguments against macrocensor- ship-free speech and autonomy-applies to such items as child por- nography. If we accept Mill's arguments for free speech, we should not censor arguments in favor of child pornography, but child pornogra- phy itself does not present an argument for a point of view. While the autonomy argument seems to offer some support for an individual's right to read or see whatever he wants (including child pornography), this right conflicts with more important rights of children and the obli- gation of society to protect children. We must take into account the fact that children were abused in the production of these items, that these items do not accord children the respect and dignity they de- serve, and that these items might encourage further abuse of children. In this case, there is a conflict in rights, and a weaker right gives way to a stronger one. American law is in almost perfect harmony with these ethical conclu- sions. The First Amendment and resulting case law debars macrocen- sorship by governments but not microcensorship by libraries, clubs, bookshops, and so on [4]. Furthermore, it allows exceptions, such as obscenity, as well as defamation, exhortations to imminent lawlessness, and protection of the national interest. One standard objection to a pro-censorship line is that librarians do not know the uses to which items will be put, and for any document whatsoever there is conceivably an enlightening use. In the case of child pornography, for instance, conceivably the patron might be a researcher who, after working with the materials, might produce a the- ory to explain this social ill and provide a remedy for it. This "what if the patron is doing research" argument is common, but it can be ar- gued that it is not sound. An analogy is to say that Wal-Mart should be able to sell drugs, fake green cards, property stolen from others, counterfeit money, and the like,just in case the shopper who purchases any of these items is doing research on them. Psychologists, perhaps forensic psychologists, may indeed need access to examples of child
476 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY pornography, but this is not to say that libraries, especially public librar- ies, should be the institutions to provide these examples as part and parcel of their standard public offerings. Legal authorities should con- trol and have sanction over the issue of items such as these, just in exactly the same way as they do for marijuana, for example, when medi- cal researchers are investigating the effects of illegal drugs. Some librar- ies, even public libraries, support research as one of their central func- tions; for example, the Reading Room of the British Museum or the New York Public Library. For institutions like these, if the legal authori- ties delegate them to be custodians of some objectionable material, then presumably they would, and should, limit access to the objection- able items to researchers entitled to them. An argument can be made that even some items that might inform or enlighten should be censored. For example, there is some informa- tion that should be kept out of libraries, not because the information itself is objectionable, but because merely disseminating it, or facilitat- ing access to it, would violate rights or have bad consequences. In par- ticular, we might not want to disseminate some information that is sub- ject to intellectual property or privacy restrictions. Suppose our entire future behavior, including our health and our abilities as workers, was largely determined by our genetic makeup. Suppose further, that this genetic code could be determined for each individual and, thus, be- come part of an individual's medical record (as is shown in the science- fiction film Gattaca). It may be that we would want to, and should, for- bid publication of this information. Of course, in this case, we do not want to forbid publication because the information is deemed to be objectionable but, rather, because disseminating this information would be dangerous (in particular, it would have negative social utility). As a result, forbidding publication would still count as censorship by the ALA's definition. Even so, we would again be (legitimately) re- stricting the dissemination of information on the basis of content.5 There are even examples not involving either privacy or ownership. The horrific medical experiments carried out on some inmates by prison doctors in concentration camps in Nazi Germany might possibly lead to theories or documents that inform or enlighten; nevertheless, such documents perhaps should be censored. (We say "perhaps" here because the appropriate action is by no means clear.) We might decide not to disseminate this information out of a desire to show respect for 5. What we claim here (and elsewhere in this article) is that there are cases in which it is legitimate to restrict access to information. There is, however, the epistemic problem of determining exactly when, in actual practice, we have such a case. We address this particular issue later in the section on fallibilism.
LIBRARY BILL OF RIGHTS 477 the victims and total abhorrence for the means of acquisition of the information. Such a decision would not be based on concerns about privacy or ownership of the information. Admittedly, some of the examples that we have used in this section (for example, child pornography and concentration camp experi- ments) are rather extreme. As a result, these examples cannot establish that it is always, or even often, appropriate to censor. However, our goal has not been to show that it is always, or even often, appropriate to censor. Our contention is that there are limitations on the uncondi- tional principle (endorsed in the LBR) that we should not censor. We have done so by giving examples where there is good evidence that the materials in question really are dangerous. Such examples indicate that there are competing values that at least sometimes override this uncon- ditional principle. As a result, it seems that the ALA should adopt a more moderate position that recognizes the exceptions to Article III. In fact, the First Amendment provides an analogous example. The First Amendment seems to guarantee unconditionally freedom of speech. And indeed, in most circumstances, anyone can say anything that he wants to say. However, there are exceptions. For example, one is not allowed to yell "fire!" in a crowded theater if there is no fire. In other words, there are competing values (for example, public safety) that (at least in extreme cases) override this principle. As a result, the legislative and judicial branches of government have attempted to cod- ify the legitimate exceptions to the First Amendment. Finally, it might be objected that the fact that the LBR suffers from a few exceptions (especially in such extreme cases) is not a serious problem. After all, there are bound to be at least a few exceptions to almost any statement of principle. Even so, it would certainly be better to have a statement of principles that better matches the intent of li- brarians. And even though all knowledgeable people may know that child pornography is clearly a legitimate exception to the LBR's prohi- bition of censorship, it is not clear how one would ever reach this con- clusion merely by reading the explicit statement of the LBR. In the following sections, we argue that a statement of principles for librarian- ship that better matches the intent (and, in most cases, the actual prac- tice) of librarians can be based on social contract theory. Presupposition 3: Access Should Not Be Restricted for Certain Reasons (Most Notably Age).-LBR's Article VI reads: "a person's right to use a library should not be denied or abridged because of origin, age, background, or views." Interestingly, this statement does not say that access cannot be denied. Indeed, it allows the denial of access to lots of patrons on lots of occasions (and so it should-occasions that spring to mind in-
478 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY clude when the library is closed, when a patron regularly sets fire to the book drop, and so on). The statement concerns reasons, or grounds, for denying access; these reasons should not include origin, age, background, or views. This list seems to be too short, if a compre- hensive list is the aim. It does not contain, for instance, "disabilities." And the list also contains questionable items, most notoriously "age." Much ink has been spilled on the age clause in the LBR (see, for exam- ple, [4, 5]). We will discuss what we take to be the reason behind the inclusion of age on the list later in this section and in the next. While something needs to be said about access, it is difficult to find an adequate phrasing of presupposition 3. Part of the trouble is the diverse nature of libraries. Public libraries are one case, but there are also libraries that are entirely different, for instance, special libraries, like a commercial company's in-house library of information on its in- dustry and its competitors, or archive libraries that preserve records (possibly with little or no access to those records). It is hard to lay down one rule of access, or denial of access, suitable for all libraries. The LBR is, of course, aimed primarily at public libraries, which have a specific purpose to serve (namely, as we argue below, to provide infor- mative and enlightening materials to assist all people to meet their own personal conceptions of the good). With public libraries, it seems ac- cess should be open to all the public, or all constituents, by default. However, two issues need to be clarified: (1) What is the source of a person's "right" to use the library? (2) What are the limitations on this right to access? In attempting to answer these questions, we will also have more to say about which material a person has a right to access. Sources and Boundaries of Access Rights Some see access rights as a corollary of freedom of speech rights on the grounds that, if a person has a right to speak, then others have a right to access that speech. For example, the ALA writes: "freedom of expression encompasses the freedoms of speech, press, religion, assem- bly, and association, and the corollary right to receive information" [18; em- phasis added]. But, as has been pointed out already, the liberty right of free speech does not of itself require the welfare right of free access. However, there is another approach to defending free access to infor- mation. Free speech is attractive, following Mill's reasoning, at least partly because of the utility to society of free discussion; views are not going to be discussed unless people know what they are-unless people have access. So, the utilitarian arguments for free speech simulta- neously support free access.
LIBRARY BILL OF RIGHTS 479 A related argument in support of a welfare right to use public librar- ies might be based on the needs of our form of government. A demo- cratic society needs an informed citizenry for the democratic process to function well. So, the citizens have a welfare right to information about the government, elections, party policies, and so forth; thus, the government has an obligation to provide that information. One vehicle that governments might use to disseminate this information is the pub- lic library; if they did, citizens would have a right to use those libraries. In this vein, the Library and Information Association New Zealand Aotearoa writes, "a basic right of citizens in a democratic society is access to information on matters that affect their lives. At times the interests of the individual have to be subordinated to the interests of the community in such matters as development of energy and mineral resources, industry, town planning, transportation, etc. Citizens have a right to be informed of the facts involved and to participate in the decision-making process, for example, when activities such as massive alterations to the landscape and its use are proposed. The right to be informed, to be consulted, and to intervene is essential and fundamen- tal to the democratic process" [28]. While it does provide some justifi- cation for a right to information, the scope of this argument is rather limited. For a start, it applies only to citizens or, more precisely, voting citizens and so, for example, would not apply to children, who are too young to vote, or to resident aliens. It also applies only to government information. This argument does not require public libraries to carry, as a matter of responsibility or duty, other documents that are not part of the democratic process, such as a Stephen King novel or those docu- ments relaying the latest baseball scores. There is an enhancement to the democracy argument [26, 29, 30]. Alexander Meiklejohn suggests that voters need to be wise as well as informed: "self-government can exist only insofar as the voters acquire the intelligence, integrity, sensitivity, and generous devotion to the gen- eral welfare that, in theory, casting a ballot is assumed to express" [29, p. 248]. This wisdom is, in part, to come from education and exposure to novels, belles lettres, and poetry. Meiklejohn writes, "I believe, as a teacher, that the people do need novels and dramas and paintings and poems, 'because they will be called upon to vote'" [29, p. 256]. In turn, the access to novels (and dramas and paintings and poems) might be provided by public libraries. As a result, the premise that libraries should be involved in the creation of a wise and a well-informed elector- ate justifies access to a wider range of materials. In addition, it justifies access to a wider audience. For example, access is opened up not merely to voters but also to would-be voters (such as children). After
480 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY all, education and wisdom take some time to acquire, so children can and should embark on the acquisition so as to be well equipped when they are old enough to vote. Meiklejohn's argument improves on the previous argument from de- mocracy. The crucial question, however, is whether the best library- related strategy for improving the wisdom of each individual voter is for the library to have extensive holdings and to allow that voter univer- sal access to all materials. It seems that the answer to this is no. Many of the materials held by libraries might well be wisdom producing, but some of the materials clearly only have, for example, entertainment value. If the role of public libraries is to maximize individual wisdom collectively across society, however, then what the libraries should do is provide access to only, or at least predominantly, materials that are likely to make society wiser (compare [31, p. 212]). Thus, Meiklejohn's reasoning only justifies giving both actual and potential voters access to wisdom-producing materials (and to government information), but it does not justify access to many of the documents that libraries often hold. Our hypothetical social contract argument, to be presented shortly, improves on the democracy arguments in two ways. First, it provides a justification for libraries providing access to a much wider range of materials (including pure entertainment). Second, it holds for a wider range of types of society. Both democracyjustifications for libraries rest on the premise that the societies in question are democracies. The hy- pothetical social contract argument is much stronger and holds whether or not the society is democratic. For example, it can justify access to public libraries for societies that are monarchies (and in which no one votes). Another approach to establishing some right to access information in libraries would be to regard the right as derived from an explicit contract, similar to the golf club case. Then the account would be as follows: there are communities of members or patrons formed from such facts as living or paying taxes in a certain country or town, or attending a certain university, or being in a certain professional body, and so forth. These patron groups would establish and have their librar- ies. Which rights patrons would have would depend on the informal or semiformal contracts between them and their libraries. This argument, however, is also limited. If the community of patrons decided to ex- clude persons on the basis of race or disability, for example, they could (if such persons have no noncontractual "right" to access). Unless there is a broader justification of a natural or social right to access, only those fortunate enough to be among the (possibly select) group of library patrons will have a right to access.
LIBRARY BILL OF RIGHTS 481 There is, however, a stronger argument that establishes both the need for libraries and delimits their nature and patrons' rights con- cerning them. It is based on the idea of a hypothetical social contract (which we introduced earlier in the section on ethical theory). We imagine that we are going to form a contract among ourselves to gov- ern aspects of our society, and we conjecture what the terms of that contract might be. In order to ensure that the terms of the contract will be fair, we imagine that the parties to the contract are denied knowledge of their actual place in society. (John Rawls calls this the "veil of ignorance" [17].) So, for example, a rational person who is, in fact, rich would not seek a social contract that favored the rich and harmed the poor because, while considering the contract, she has to allow for the possibility that she might be poor. Similarly, a rational person who is, in fact, in perfect health would seek a social contract that encourages information provision for people with disabilities simply because, for all he knows, he might be a beneficiary of such a provision. (For more details on the style of argument that is used here, see [17] .)6 Our hypothetical social contract argument starts from the assump- tion that each of us has our own "conception of the good," that is, we each have an idea of what the good life is and what is good for us as individuals. Based on this conception of the good, we each have a (more or less well thought out) plan of life. Of course, information is essential to carrying out any plan. The necessary information may be different from person to person, since conceptions of the good may be different (in fact, in a diverse society such as ours, they no doubt will be different). Now, suppose that we have to decide whether and what kind of infor- mation will be available to us as members of a society. In order to en- sure that this decision will be made fairly, we will suppose (following the aforementioned constraint) that none of us knows precisely who we will be in this society. Behind the veil of ignorance, we do not know whether we will be rich or poor, male or female, child or adult. Since none of us knows precisely who we will be in this society, we do not know what conception of the good we will have. Thus, the veil of igno- rance guarantees that the result of the decision will not favor any partic- ular person (or class of persons) or any particular conception of the good. 6. Diana Woodward [21] offers a different sort of deontological argument for intellectual freedom based on Immanuel Kant's categorical imperative. However, Kantian arguments for ethical principles tend to make stronger, and somewhat less plausible, assumptions than does social contract theory. Also, her argument only serves to defend the sort of unconditional ban on censorship that we have been criticizing in this article.
482 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Under these conditions each individual person would recognize and desire that society should provide the means for each to have access to information to attain his or her own conception of the good. We would want to choose a principle for distributing information in society that we could accept no matter what our conception of the good turned out to be. Behind the veil of ignorance the individual would not know what kind of information he or she would need, and he or she would like society to provide all information required for all goods sought by all individuals. Hence, we would want society to provide public librar- ies, which would provide the information that each member of the society needs to achieve his or her own conception of the good. A corol- lary would be that public libraries need to provide almost all informa- tion and near universal access. This argument justifies access to a much wider selection of materials than does either version of the democracy argument. For example, consider a book that is merely entertaining. Reading it is not going to make anyone a wiser voter, and it certainly does not contain any government information. Even so, access to such a book can bejustified on the grounds that reading books that are merely entertaining pro- motes the conception of the good of at least some (and probably many) members of society. It may be that not all conceptions of the good should be accommo- dated by means of the principle chosen for distributing information in society. If we contemplated from behind the veil of ignorance the possibility that we might be placed in society as child pornographers, perhaps we would desire society to supply the means for sympathetic understanding and medical help, rather than public libraries full of child pornography. The hypothetical contract justification for a right to access guaran- tees access to a wider spectrum of information and to a wider audience than any of the precedingjustifications (that is, the utilitarian, the dem- ocratic, and the explicit contract arguments). For example, this justifi- cation guarantees access to children in any society. Behind the veil of ignorance, you do not know what your position in society will be. You may end up being a child (rather than an adult) trying to achieve and develop your own conception of the good. Thus, behind the veil of ignorance, you will decide that children should have access to the infor- mation that they need in order to do so. However, the hypothetical contractjustification does not necessarily guarantee children access to all library materials. Parents have a reason to keep their children from accessing information that is harmful to them (a further discussion of this point and a limited defense of pater- nalism are presented in the next section). Similarly, behind the veil of
LIBRARY BILL OF RIGHTS 483 ignorance, you may (quasi-paternalistically) decide that certain materi- als should not be available to you should you happen to be a child in this society. For example, it is reasonable for you to conclude, behind the veil of ignorance, that it is best for children not to have access to pornography even if you end up being a child who wants such access. Limits of Access Rights So, it seems that in general there is a strong argument for a broad (but not unlimited) right to access. But what exactly are the limits of this right? In other words, under what conditions would it be permissible to restrict access? There seem to be at least five factors to consider in producing a principled system to restrict access: (1) positive inclusions (limited or unlimited) versus negative exclusions (limited or unlim- ited), (2) voluntary versus involuntary features of patrons, (3) the mis- sion of the library, (4) the interests of the intellectual property owners, and (5) the interests of the patrons. The LBR tries to list reasons that cannot be used for denial of access (such as origin, age, and so on); it does not say that only these reasons cannot be used but that limitation seems to be presupposed. This limi- tation is awkward for the reasons mentioned earlier-the list is clearly incomplete (for example, no mention of persons with disabilities) and at the same time possibly overreaching (for example, the inclusion of age). Alternatively, a positive list could be given of reasons that could be used for denial of access, such as actions or behaviors that inhibit or prevent the library from discharging its mission. Generally, a positive list is better than a negative one in that it provides guidance to the librarian, who is the person making the decisions to restrict access. With respect to features of patrons, we might distinguish between "involuntary" features that a patron might have (such as age or gen- der) that are not within the patron's control and "voluntary" features, which are within the patron's power to bring about or avoid. So, for instance, age and gender are involuntary-a patron who is thirty-five years old just is thirty-five and cannot simply choose to be twenty-five years old (no matter how much he would wish it). Being drunk or being aggressive and disruptive are behaviors or conditions that are volun- tary. The distinction can be stated simply as that between what a patron is and how he behaves. There is something odd about denying access to anyone who is genuinely a member of the library's constituency on the basis of an involuntary feature. The reason is that there is nothing that the patron can do about it. In contrast, the use of a voluntary feature to deny access seems entirely in order. If a person can choose to be drunk or not and if patron drunkenness stands in the way of the effective functioning of the library for its other patrons, then it seems
484 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY fine for a library to deny access to drunk patrons. Similarly, the person who sets fire to the book drop of a public library should be barred because success in burning down the library would mean that no one would have access. Another example is that it may sometimes be neces- sary to limit access on the basis of a voluntary feature in order to pre- vent harm to intellectual property owners: a person who enters a library and regularly copies too much might reasonably have access restricted in order to prevent undue harm to the owners of the intellectual prop- erty. The distinction, and its use, can be a bit murky over what is voluntary and what is not. An alcoholic might argue that he simply has to be drunk, and further, since he is a citizen and a voter, he should have access to government information in public libraries. All this means, though, is that there may be disagreement over which features fall on which side of the distinction, not over the distinction itself and its use. Finally, we should note that, while there are prima facie reasons not to deny access on the basis of an involuntary feature, there seem to be at least some cases where access should be denied on the basis of an involuntary feature. For example, if part of a library's collection is un- suitable for children, young people might be excluded from that part on the grounds that access could hurt them. Public libraries are typi- cally a composite of children-suitable and not-children-suitable mate- rial, and, as we argued above, children really only have a right to access one part. In this case, access is denied in order to prevent harm to the patron herself. Presupposition 4: Paternalism Should Be Avoided.-Fear of paternalism lies behind LBR's forbidding age to be used as grounds for excluding ac- cess [32]. Paternalism is one person or a group of people taking it upon him or herself to help, or even compel, another person or group of people to attain a positive end or to avoid a negative one [33]. ("Pa- rentalism" is perhaps a less objectionable word for this concept; how- ever, "paternalism" is the standard term.) Paternalism usually involves the ones that are being paternal deciding what is best on behalf of the others, usually without their consent. Paternalism in general, where the subjects of the paternalism are fully developed citizens, is not desirable. Complete moral agents should be allowed to decide for themselves, especially if they are in a position to make an informed choice. Librari- ans are wise to mind their own business except to provide the informa- tion to form the basis of the informed choices. But where the receiving group is less than fully competent, by virtue of being young, infirm, mentally ill, and so on, then a defense can be made for paternalistic action, both for promoting good and for avoiding harm [34].
LIBRARY BILL OF RIGHTS 485 In the case of information and children, for instance, everyone- including librarians, parents, and the rest of society-agrees that pater- nalistic action is in order; the issue just becomes who it is that should fulfil the paternal role. Librarians say, "not us, let it be the parents." The ALA writes, "librarians and governing bodies should maintain that parents-and only parents-have the right and the responsibility to restrict the access of their children-and only their children-to li- brary resources. Parents or legal guardians who do not want their chil- dren to have access to certain library services, materials, or facilities, should so advise their children. Librarians and governing bodies can- not assume the role of parents or the functions of parental authority in the private relationship between parent and child" [32], and "rec- ognizing that libraries cannot act in loco parentis, ALA acknowledges and supports the exercise by parents of their responsibility to guide their own children's reading and viewing" [32]. In general, parents are the right people to be paternal, or the most paternal, to their children-but not always. As the saying goes, it takes a village to raise a child. And, really, librarians are and should be among the most respected elders of the village. Educating children is, in part, the responsibility of the state and is carried out most obviously through the schools, but public libraries are part of the state's means of provid- ing education for the populace, and, thus, librarians need to play a positive role in deciding and promoting whatever is educationally desir- able. And on the negative side, if the parents are not appropriately paternal, as with those parents who abuse their children, the state can and should step in. If the parents are not present to be paternal, a stranger might even act paternally. For instance, a stranger might- and indeed should-stop a child from sticking a fork in a light socket. To do so is not to usurp the role of the parents but to act as an empa- thetic human being concerned to watch out for children when parents cannot (or do not). It is reasonable to assume that no parents want their child to stick a fork in a light socket. And if the parents did want their child to do so, this would give us reason to think the parents unfit. It is reasonable to assume that parents would not want their child accessing hard-core pornography. Thus, by stopping a child from ac- cessing such material, you are not "taking over" from the parent; you are helping the parent. Librarians should not stand by and watch a child "electrocute" herself, let alone help the child find a fork (which seems to be the present ALA policy [18, 35]). There are many issues here, and the whole area is complex and sub- tle. But there is an ethical role for librarians, and there are parental responsibilities that librarians should try to meet. As John Berry puts it, "nor must we deprive [children] of the nurture, the helping hand,
486 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY the guidance, the tools for seeking truth and knowing when it is discov- ered. We cannot simply turn them loose in our jaded information soci- ety without helping them understand that some of the information is false, is evil, is dangerous, is misleading, or is ambiguous.... That may not be a legal obligation, but it is clearly a moral duty for every librarian, every teacher, every parent and person in a free society" [36]. Fallibilism, Practical Action, and Librarianship One conjecture made here is that inadequacies in the ALA's responses to most ethical issues concerning information stems from a failure to deal adequately with fallibilism. As was stated in the introduction, falli- bilism is the view that there is no certain knowledge; all our theories, beliefs, and opinions are always subject to the possibility of mistake and revision. The ALA (correctly) takes a fallibilist stance, but then it does not deal appropriately with the consequences of this stance. Fallibilism impacts on information ethics in a variety of ways. Take censorship, for instance. If you censor items, then, as a fallibilist, you know full well that some of the items you exclude perhaps should not be censored. Equally, some of the items you do not censor perhaps should be censored. Labeling is another case. If you label a document "true" (or "interesting for adults," "supported by the evidence," or "pure prejudice," and so on), then it may well be that the labels are mistaken and the document should be labeled "false" (or "not inter- esting for adults," "not supported by the evidence," or "mainstream," and so on). The same holds true for access. If you are a fallibilist, you know that you may well exclude some people who should not be ex- cluded and fail to exclude some who should be. Or if you are consider- ing paternal action, it may turn out that a specific act of paternalism, or even a particular paternal policy, is inappropriate. The ALA's response to fallibilism is to propose that we not make any judgments or choices or decisions at all. They wish not to censor anything, not to label anything, not to deny anyone access, and never to act paternally [2]. Presumably this is because they believe that this strategy will allow them to avoid error (and a number of practical head- aches). This response is a mistake. Consider, as an analogy, the criminal offense of murder and the tri- als, convictions, and sentences of murderers. We all know there are wrongful convictions for murder and also that there are failures to con- vict people who have committed murder. The legal process is fallible. What is the conclusion to be drawn here and the strategy to be adopted? It is not to do away with trials and the laws against murder
LIBRARY BILL OF RIGHTS 487 altogether. Rather, it is to institute a system of checks and balances suitable to the consequences of the decisions. The reason for continu- ing to have a law against murder and to prosecute suspected murderers is, to put it bluntly, that it is better to incarcerate the occasional inno- cent man-or to let the occasional murderer go free-than it is to have a society in which murders can be committed without sanction. The same goes for libraries and librarianship. It is better to make the occasional mistake in censoring, labeling, excluding, or acting pater- nally, than it is to have a system of anything goes (which is what the LBR seems to commit us to with respect to, for example, access to the Internet). The hard part is to design a system of checks and balances that accommodates decision making in a fallible world. Mill had something to say about fallibilism and censorship. He noted that fallibilists have to give all decisions their best shot; they just make their decisions under uncertainty and move on [20, p. 20]. So, he con- sidered, why could not censors just give the decision as to which books needed burning their best shot, and then strike the matches? He re- jected this possibility because the notion of a good decision, or the best attempt under uncertainty, assumes that all information or opinion is available to be factored into the decision. Once books start to be burned, that assumption no longer holds. Best shots rapidly would cease to be best shots. Hence, a fallibilist cannot be a censor. But, (and here is the crucial "but") Mill was assuming that the books that might be burned contained true or false views, or information, or criticisms of views, or explanations, or ascriptions of causality-in short, content that might bear cognitively or epistemologically on the fallible deci- sions. But artifacts like child pornography are just not of this kind. So Mill's argument cannot be used for a sweeping rejection of censorship. Thus, we can revert to a censorship of items, with no potential to in- form or enlighten, based on fallible decisions (see also [37]). The vivid metaphor, and occasional actual practice, of book burning is unfortu- nate in that it is irreversible, which a reasonable system of censorship would not be. For the most part, decisions in librarianship are not irreversible, and they do not have horrific consequences. This makes decisions easier. A decision made today can be changed, if need be, tomorrow or next year; librarians should not be paralyzed at the possibility of wiping out humankind by making an incorrect decision. Even if there are cases where we should decide to censor, there is the important question of exactly who the authorities are who should be making this decision. A fear about who the authorities are seems to be a real part of the rationale for the ALA's position on censorship [23]. Librarians seem not so much concerned about censorship, per se,
488 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY but more about the need to avoid pressure groups from the community foisting their own views on a library's holdings or selection policy. This is a fear about who should decide coupled with a view that the decision makers should definitely not be a capricious pressure group. The worry about who the censoring authorities should be is analo- gous to a worry that people might have about the crime of murder. That is, who should make the decision as to whether or not a particular person should be convicted of murder? How do we avoid having such decisions made in a capricious manner? The answer to these worries is much the same in both cases. In the case of criminal offenses, we have developed a set of guidelines (for example, trial procedures) that are designed so that the right peo- ple are (usually) convicted. In addition, there is evidence and justifica- tion for the claim that following these guidelines will bring about this goal, within the framework of our constitutional rights. Also, we have a group of trained professionals (principally judges and lawyers) who are able to insure that these guidelines are followed in a consistent manner. Thus, we are usually able to avoid capricious decisions in courts of law. In the case of libraries, we already have the trained professionals with the experience to carry out such a set of guidelines (namely, librari- ans). What is still needed is a codification of a defensible set of guide- lines for the operation of libraries (that is, a new LBR that sits on a firm foundation). That is what this essay calls for. Conclusion In this essay, we have identified four of the presuppositions that lay behind the LBR. Each of these presuppositions is an unconditional rule about how libraries should operate. For three of these presupposi- tions, we have argued that there are actually exceptions to these rules. Contrary to presupposition 2, we have argued that there are materials that should be excluded from libraries because they are objectionable and/or dangerous. Contrary to presupposition 3, we have argued that there are cases where access should be denied on the basis of involun- tary features such as age. Contrary to presupposition 4, we have argued that there are cases where libraries and librarians should be paternalis- tic. As a result, these presuppositions seem to need qualification and the admission of exceptions or shades of gray. In addition, we have hypothesized that the reason that ALA members have adopted unconditional rules is that they are worried about mak- ing mistakes. With respect to presupposition 2, they seem to be worried
LIBRARY BILL OF RIGHTS 489 about excluding the wrong materials. With respect to presupposition 3, they seem to be worried about denying access to the wrong people. With respect to presupposition 4, they seem to be worried about inap- propriately usurping the role of a parent. We have argued, however, that these unconditional rules are an inappropriate response to our fallibility. Instead, the library community should be endeavoring to de- velop a more subtle set of guidelines. Toward this end, we have sug- gested that a more adequate LBR might be founded on social contract theory. Some argue that librarians are already acting in accordance with a more subtle set of guidelines than is currently codified in the LBR [38]. In our modest opinion, what librarians currently do by way of selection policies and day-to-day procedures is to a large extent fine and would be supported by the arguments offered here. The objection of this es- say is to what the librarians say they do, or say they ought to do, as codified in the LBR and its interpretation. Appendix The precursor of the Library Bill of Rights is the "Original Library Bill of Rights" of the Public Library of Des Moines. http: / / www.pldminfo.org/ (last accessed January 25, 2000), and http:// www.pldminfo.org/rights.htm (last accessed January 25, 2000). The Summer 1996 issue of Library Trends is devoted to the Library Bill of Rights. Several of the articles in this issue are cited here, and the articles [39-41] were used as background. There is a summary of this issue at http:/ /edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/catalog/trends/ 459 .html (last accessedJanuary 25, 2000). The issue contains a five- hundred-item bibliography on the LBR from Chris Schladweiler [42]. There is an account of how the LBR affects the day-to-day work of librarians at "The Nebraska Library Commission: A Fresh Look at the Library Bill of Rights" (html file) http://www.nlc.state.ne.us/ freedom/freshlook.html (last accessed January 25, 2000). REFERENCES 1. American Library Association. "Library Bill of Rights." http://www.ala.org/work/ freedom/ lbr.html (last accessed January 25, 2000). 2. American Library Association. "Interpretations of the Library Bill of Rights." (HTML file) URL: http://www.ala.org/work/freedom/interprt.html (last accessed January 25, 2000). 3. "The Library Bill of Rights." Library Trends 45 (Summer 1996): 1-126.
490 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 4. Baldwin, Gordon B. "The Library Bill of Rights-a Critique." Library Trends 45 (Summer 1996): 7-27. 5. Wiegand, Shirley A. "Reality Bites: The Collision of Rhetoric, Rights, and Reality and the Library Bill of Rights." Library Trends 45 (Summer 1996): 75-86. 6. American Library Association. "Libraries: An American Value." (HTML file) http:// www.ala.org/alaorg/oif/lib_val.html (last accessed January 25, 2000). 7. Australian Library and Information Association. "Statement on Freedom to Read." (HTML file) http://www.faife.dk/ifstat/aliastat.htm (last accessed January 25, 2000). 8. International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions (IFLA). "Free Access to Information and Freedom of Expression Site." (HTML file) http:/ /www.faife.dk (last accessed June 6, 2000). 9. Musgrave, Alan E. Common-ense, Science and Scepticism: A Historical Introduction to the Theory of Knowledge. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993. 10. American LibraryAssociation. "Access to Electronic Information, Services, and Networks: An Interpretation of the Library Bill of Rights." (HTML file) http://www.ala.org/ alaorg/oif/electacc.html (last accessed January 25, 2000). 11. Cranston, Maurice W. What Are Human Rights? London: Bodley Head, 1973. 12. Nagel, Thomas. Mortal QWstions. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1979. 13. Dworkin, Ronald M. Taking Rights Seriously. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1977. 14. Hobbes, Thomas. Leuiathan. 1651. Reprint, New York: Macmillan, 1962. 15. Locke, John. "Second Treatise of Government." In Locke's Two Treatises of Government, edited by Peter Laslett. 2d ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988. 16. Declaration of Independence. 1776. (HTML file) http://www.usconstitution.net/de- clar.html (last accessed January 25, 2000). 17. Rawls, John. A Theory ofJustice. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1972. 18. American Library Association. "The Universal Right to Free Expression: An Interpreta- tion of the Library Bill of Rights." (HTML file) URL: http://www.ala.org/alaorg/oif/ univ_exp.html (last accessed January 25, 2000). 19. Milton, John. Areopagitica. London: n.p., 1644. (HTML file reprint) http:/ / darkwing.uoregon.edu/-rbear/areopagitica.html (last accessed January 25, 2000). 20. Mill, John S. On Liberty. Harvard Classics. Vol. 25. London: P. F. Collier & Son, 1909. 21. Woodward, Diana. "A Framework for Deciding Issues in Ethics." Library Trends 39 (Sum- mer 1990): 8-17. 22. Doyle, Tony. "A Millian Critique of Library Censorship."Journal of Academic Librarianship 24 (May 1998): 241-43. 23. American Library Association. "Censorship and Challenges." http:/ /www.ala.org/ alaorg/oif/censors.html (last accessed January 25, 2000). 24. Brison, Susan J. "The Autonomy Defense of Free Speech." Ethics 108 (January 1998): 312-39. 25. Greenawalt, Kent. "Free SpeechJustifications." Columbia Law Review 119 (January 1989): 119-55. 26. Meiklejohn, Alexander. Free Speech and Its Relation to Self-Government. New York: Harper, 1948. 27. National Law Center (website). "NLC Memorandum of Law on Legal Issues Involving Use of Filtering Software by Libraries, Schools, and Businesses." Section 9 (HTML file) http://www.nationallawcenter.org/Filtering.htm. 28. Library and Information Association New Zealand Aotearoa. "Access to Information." (HTML file) http://www.faife.dk/ifstat/nzacc.htm (last accessedJanuary 25, 2000). 29. Meiklejohn, Alexander. "The First Amendment Is an Absolute." In Akxander Meiklejohn:
LIBRARY BILL OF RIGHTS 491 Teacher of Freedom, edited by C. S. Brown, pp. 246-61. Berkeley: Meiklejohn Civil Liberties Institute, 1981. 30. Meiklejohn, Alexander. Political Freedom: The Constitutional Powers of the People. New York: Harper, 1960. 31. Goldman, Alvin I. Knowledge in a Social World. New York: Oxford University Press, 1999. 32. American Library Association. "Free Access to Libraries for Minors: An Interpretation of the Library Bill of Rights." (HTML file) http://www.ala.org/alaorg/oif/ free_min.html (last accessed January 25, 2000). 33. Suber, Peter. "Paternalism." In Philosophy of Law: An Encyclopedia, edited by C. B. Gray. New York: Garland, 1999. http://www.earlham.edu/-peters/writing/paternal.htm (last accessedJanuary 25, 2000). 34. Buchanan, Allen, and Brock, Dan. Deciding for Others: The Ethics of Surrogate Decision-Mak- ing. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990. 35. American Library Association. "Access for Children and Young People to Videotapes and Other Nonprint Formats: An Interpretation of the Library Bill of Rights." (HTML file) http:/ /www.ala.org/alaorg/oif/acc-chil.html (last accessed January 25, 2000). 36. Berry, John N. "Choosing Sides: The Impasse between Prudes and Purists Has Forced the Issue." Library Journal 123 (March 1, 1998): 6-7. 37. Vernon, Richard. "John Stuart Mill and Pornography: Beyond the Harm Principle." Eth- ics 106 (April 1996): 621-32. 38. Sheerin, William E. "Absolutism on Access and Confidentiality: Principled or Irresponsi- ble?" American Libraries 22 (May 1991): 440-42, 444. 39. Robbins, Louise S. "Champions of a Cause: American Libraries and the Library Bill of Rights in the 1950s." Library Trends 45 (Summer 1996): 28-49. 40. Samek, Toni. "The Library Bill of Rights in the 1960s: One Profession, One Ethic." Li- brary Trends 45 (Summer 1996): 50-60. 41. Wolkoff, Kathleen N. "The Problem of Holocaust Denial Literature in Libraries." Library Trends 45 (Summer 1996): 87-96. 42. Schladweiler, Chris. "The Library Bill of Rights and Intellectual Freedom: A Selective Bibliography." Library Trends 45 (Summer 1996): 97-125.