Conceptual Strategies for Operationalizing Multicultural Curricula GETINET BELAY This paper discusses the challenges and opportunities that multiculturalism presents to library and information science education. Multiculturalism here is synonymous with cultural diversity and denotes the recent critical concepts that are counterposed to ethnocentrism, cultural monolithicism, and the assumption of epistemological universality. The aim of this essay is to develop conceptual strate- gies that will contribute to the operationalization of a multicultural curriculum. To provide that framework, the discussions draw upon concepts and literature from a variety of research fields that deal with the role of culture in human cognitive processes and informational behaviors. These include anthropology, cross-cultural psychology, ethnocognitivism, and intercultural communication. Multiculturalism One of the major problems in conceptualizing multiculturalism is the ambiguity of the term as it is presently used in both public and scholarly discourse. First, the term, depending on the context in which it is used, refers to two different dimensions of cultural diversity. In an administra- tive and political context, multiculturalism refers specifically to policy issues regarding the institutional and social inclusion of individuals or groups that belong to cultural minorities. These policy issues include affirmative action, equal opportunity employment, recruitment and re- tention of minorities, and secondary discrimination (Cohen 1991; Foxman and Polsky 1989; Johnston and Packer 1987; Loden and Rosener 1991; Madrid 1990; Smith 1990; Solomon 1989; Thiedermann 1991). In the context of curriculum development and scholarship, however, the issues that multiculturalism raises go far beyond minoritarianism. In this latter case, multiculturalism refers to the need to recognize and to address the cultural diversity of human cognitive styles (Kaplan Getinet Belay is an Assistant Professor in the School of Communication, Information and Library Studies at Rutgers University, New Brunswick, New Jersey. Fall 1992 295
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 1966; Lesser 1976; Lieberman 1991), contextual interpretive perspec- tives (Folb 1991; Freiré 1973; Triandis 1976), and behavioral modes (Eastman 1980; Hall 1959, 1966; Jensen 1970; Osgood and Tzeng 1990). Issues pertaining to multiculturalism in curriculum develop- ment and instruction should therefore be conceptualized separately from the related but not identical issues of minority accommodation by institutions. Second, multiculturalism, even when it is used strictly in the context of curriculum development and scholarship, fails to serve as a tangible conceptual guideline for developing operational strategies. This is because cultural and intercultural studies, in spite of the enormous body of research they have produced during the last fifteen years, have not yet established comprehensive and consistent criteria for defining the parameters of cultural communities. In other words, the role of culture in human informational and communication behavior has so far been studied on the basis of random parameters, depending on arbitrary criteria that various scholars employ for identifying and studying various types of human communities as relevant cultural communities. These parameters include nationality (Barnlund 1989; Brislin, Lonner, and Thorndike 1973; Chu 1976; Gudykunst and Ting-Toomey 1988; Hofstede 1984), ethnicity (Albert 1986; Giles and Johnson 1986; Gudy- kunst 1986; Kim 1977, 1986; Koenig 1975; Nwankwo 1975; Sanda 1979; Sitaram and Cogdell 1976; Starosta and Coleman 1986), race (Alderton 1979; Asante and Davis 1989; Blubaugh and Pennington 1976; Kochman 1981; Rich 1974), gender (Eakins and Eakins 1978; Kramarae 1981, 1982; Staley and Cohen 1988; Tannen 1990;), age (Carmichael 1988; Carmichael and Knapp 1988), class (Philipsen 1972, 1973; Daniel 1974), subculturalism (Braithwaite 1991; Grahn 1984; Shein 1989; Warren 1974), and organizational systems (Cheney 1983; Pacanowsky and O'Donnell-Trujillo 1982, 1983; Smircich 1985; Van Maanen and Barley 1985). While the many parameters that various scholars have identified and introduced into the study of cultures and interculturalism have enriched knowledge about the role of culture in human informational and com- munication behavior, the absence of a typology and taxonomy of cultural communities has also made the research both eclectic and fragmentary. The current discourse on multiculturalism reflects this conceptual gap, particularly in that the parameters of culture that the term multiculturalism refers to are either not explicit or arbitrarily selective. Of course, the solution to this conceptual problem can only come from cultural and intercultural studies. In operationalizing a multicultural curriculum, however, this problem can be mitigated by designing strategies that are based on a broad definition oí cultural diversity, i.e., one that takes into account all the previously mentioned parameters of culture. 296 Volume 33, Number 4
Conceptual Strategies for Operationalizing Multicultural Curricula Why Multicultural Curricula? Richardson and King (1984) have characterized the ability to recog- nize, accept, and deal with the various elements of cultural diversity as one of the key survival skills that will be needed in the twenty-first century. The growing interest in a multicultural curriculum reflects new educa- tional needs that have arisen as a result of the challenges posed by pro- found changes that are taking place both at the international and national levels. For students of library and information science, as future scholars and professionals in a highly interconnected and interdependent global environment, several factors make it imperative to have grounding in the role of culture in human informational and communication behavior. The internationalization of the information industry, along with the transnational nature of the new information technologies, have contrib- uted to a growing linkage between national and international informa- tion issues and processes (Dosa 1989; Hudson 1990; Jussawalla and Cheah 1987; Lukyen 1986; O'Brien and Helleiner 1982). Of particular relevance for understanding the significance that factors of cultural di- versity have acquired as a result of this linkage in contemporary informa- tional processes is that nations constitute not just politico-economic and jurisdictional entities, as traditional economistic and sociological ap- proaches imply, but also cultural systems (Barnlund 1989; Chu 1976; Gudykunst and Ting-Toomey 1988; Hofstede 1984). This means that information exchange and data transfer between any two nations, for example between the United States and Japan or between France and Kenya, is not only communication between countries with different sociological and/or politico-economic structures and interests but also one involving people that operate in accord with different cognitive styles and informational behaviors. Moreover, the end of the Cold War has meant that the traditional ideological paradigms can no longer serve as frames for interpreting and predicting national behaviors and global information processes. The shift from socio-political ideological constructs to cultural identity, including ethnicity, as the prime dynamic forces in post-Cold War international affairs (Boulding 1988; Casmir 1991), has brought into focus the significance of cultural factors to conceptualizing information policies and processes in the contemporary world. Equally significant are two separate, but in their impact highly inter- related, changes that are taking place at the domestic level. In a sociologi- cal sense, one major new demographic development in the United States today is that the majority of the work force is no longer engaged in the manufacturing industry but rather in the information industry (Schement 1990; Katz 1988; Hudson and Leung 1988). This change in the sectoral demography of the work force has occurred parallel with changes in the cultural demography of the labor force. Already today Fall 1992 297
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science more than half the U.S. work force consists of women, African- Americans, Hispanics, Asian Americans, and other cultural minorities. According to Thomas (1990), white males will make up only 15 percent of the increase in the work force over the next ten years. Before the year 2000, the majority of the population of California, the most populous state, will no longer be white nor necessarily English-speaking. The challenges that these two simultaneous structural changes pose to the society at large, and specifically to information policymakers and service providers, are evident: While the new sociological and economic roles of information mean that the efficient production and distribution of information have become the primary preoccupations of the labor force, the growing cultural diversity of the work force implies that effec- tiveness and efficiency in the production and distribution of information require not only solutions to technical and technological problems but also to problems of multiculturalism. According to Yousef (1988) many personnel problems in U.S. corporations today have to do with the lack of skills to handle behavioral ambiguities that are associated with the growing cultural diversity at the workplace, not professional expertise or technical competence. The development and adoption of multicultural curricula are there- fore not just ethical or moral questions but also questions of enlightened self-interest. Besides, multicultural curricula could help not only to over- come the increasing decline of minority enrollment in library and infor- mation science programs (Josey 1989, 1990, 1991) but also to make library and information science education more relevant to international students who, despite the consistent increase of their enrollment (Car- novsky 1971; deOlivera 1990; Sineath 1989), are strongly critical about the relevance of the training they receive to their specific cultural con- texts and home-country informational environments (Carnovsky 1971; Chen 1982; Lundu 1982; Tallman 1990). Finally, the need to overcome ethnocentric confines in information theory building presents yet another compelling reason for developing multicultural curricula. Koester and Lustig (1991) have argued that present-day information and communication theories hardly account for non- Anglo or non-European cognitive styles, interpretive frames, and behavioral modes. This limitation contributes to the flawed assump- tion that theories developed on and applied to members of the European or Anglo-U.S. culture have universal validity. Exposure to basic re- search on the cultural diversity of human informational behavior would help sensitize students to the kinds of adaptations and changes necessary to generalize theories beyond individual cultural communities. Dimensions of Operationalization Operationalizing a multicultural curriculum requires conceptualiza- tion of two dimensions of library and information science instruction: 298 Volume 33, Number 4
Conceptual Strategies for Operationalizing Multicultural Curricula pedagogical and content-related. The pedagogical dimension relates to the need to develop methods of instruction that take into account the affective, behavioral, and cognitive problems that arise in a culturally diverse classroom. The content-related dimension concerns the cross- cultural applicability of the skills and theories taught in various library and information science courses. In regard to pedagogical methodology, instructors often are either unaware or lack strategies for facilitating the traumatic process of situa- tional and contextual adjustment that students go through in an educa- tional environment that operates counter to their cultural expectations. For example, in many library and information science programs, as in an increasing number of fields such as communication, female students constitute the majority. Assuming that in any given course the instructor too is female, male students are generally confronted with the problem of adjusting to the shift in their traditional status. Often they display not only the same anxieties and ego-defensive prejudices that minorities tend to develop toward majorities but also, in situations of power asymmetry, those characteristic minority behaviors that Folb (1991) has described as invisibility. Another example is the adjustment that students from various cultural backgrounds make to the roles and behaviors used by instructors and students in the U.S. educational system. For students from South and Southeast Asia, where extrovert communication behavior is culturally constrained and where asking questions in class is considered a threat to the instructor's authority (Andersen and Powell 1988), the U.S. edu- cational system, which encourages students to actively participate in class discussions and even to challenge their instructor, requires tremen- dous behavioral adjustment. Far more complex is the problem of adjustment connected with the cultural diversity of learning behavior. Research has shown that most students from certain cultures, such as Hispanics (Albert 1986; Ramirez and Castañeda 1974) and African- Americans (Hale 1982), have a strong field-dependent or field-sensitive cognitive style. For these students the dominant educational system that, according to Ramirez and Castañeda (1974), relies almost exclusively on the use of methods geared toward persons whose perceptual style is field-independent, presents serious problems of adjustment. Moreover, cognitivist research has suggested a relationship between culture, brain hemisphericity, and education. Lieberman (1991) claims that the teacher usually teaches in the style in which he or she has been trained (traditionally left-hemisphere in the United States) and that the student tries to match his or her learning style to that of the teacher, which often leads to learning some material, missing some material, and tuning out. Numerous educators suggest that teachers learn to understand the duality of their students' minds. (p.232). Fall 1992 299
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Studies on the cultural patterns of thought and problem-solving are far from establishing the essential cognitive differences between cultures. Moreover, ethnocognitivist studies do not offer clarity as to the patterns and styles that are universally human, influenced by cultural transmis- sion, or idiosyncratic to the individual. However, a growing body of research suggests several differences between cultures in cognitive pro- cessing and problem solving (Cole 1985; Collins and Dedre 1987; Felder and Silverman 1988; Freedle 1981; Helgesen 1988; Kaplan 1966; Par- edes and Hepburn 1976; Tsunoda 1978). Stressing the significance of these differences to developing effective instructional methods, Lesser (1976) argues that we will not have a successful multicultural educational system until we first examine the cultural diversity in the U.S. classroom and address the thinking pat- terns and problem- solving styles of these cultures. Of course, the culturally other students should also master the cognitive styles, as well as the roles and behaviors that are appropriate in their new educational environment, because the problem of intercultural in- teraction can be solved only through the interactant's acquisition of a new cultural competence. However, in order that this competence can be developed successfully and efficiently by the culturally other students, the interaction between instructor and student should be conducted as one of mutual adaptation, rather than a one-sided acculturation. Besides instructional methods, a multicultural approach to library and information science education should also consider the content of instruction. The central issue here is the need to examine whether the skills and theories taught in various courses have culture- specific or cross-cultural applicability. The flawed assumptions to which ethnocen- tric confines in information theory building contribute have already been mentioned. The pragmatic question as to how multiculturalism should be infused into library and information science curricula will be the next focus. Emphasis here is on the effect that the parameters of validity of various skills and theories taught in the classroom have on students. Students generally are motivated to learn three types of skills and/or theories: those that are common to universal human and social experi- ence, those that are based on and applicable to their own specific experi- ence and cultural context, and those that are unique to the experience and context of another culture or other cultures. While students' interest in the first two types of skills and/or theories is self-evident, the latter ones are also relevant because they serve students both as competencies for understanding and dealing with the otherness of others and as compar- ative frames for reflecting upon their culturally unique experiences and conditions. However, students find it difficult to handle skills and theo- ries that imply them but do not include them. Skills and theories that are developed on, and are applicable to, a given culture, but explicitly 300 Volume 33, Number 4
Conceptual Strategies for Operationalizing Multicultural Curricula or implicitly claim universal validity, belong to a fourth category. One of the damaging consequences of an instructional content geared toward this fourth type of skills and theories is that it makes the culturally other students insecure, lethargic, and even cynical. Examples of this are skills and theories taught with regard to successful and efficient dyadic interaction, an area of inquiry common to library and information science and several behavioral and cognitive studies such as communication and psychology. Research has shown that the instructional content of courses dealing with dyadic interac- tional behavior are grounded in the European-American cultural patterns of individuality, openness, and directness, including anxiety- reductionist message design and linear organization of speeches (Elliot and others 1982; Kaplan 1987; Koester and Lustig 1991; Purves 1988). These patterns are, however, not necessarily consistent with those preferred by other cultural groups such as African-Americans or Asian Americans (Foeman and Pressley 1987; Kochman 1981; Ogawa 1979). Moreover, those patterns have little relevance to a variety of international students, for whom ambiguity and indirectness are either culturally appropriate interactional strategies or consistent with the structures of their native languages (Ishii and Bruneau 1988; Koester and Lustig 1991; Purves 1988). This is by no means to suggest that the content of library and informa- tion science courses should reflect the perspectives of every culture repre- sented in the classroom. Neither the competence of a single instructor nor the time constraints of classroom instruction would allow such an approach to multicultural education. However, instructors should verify whether the skills and theories that constitute the instructional content of their respective courses are multicultural in their conceptualization and whether they have been tested with culturally diverse subject popula- tions. In the case of theories developed and tested in one or a limited number of cultural contexts, the parameters of validity should be speci- fied. In this latter case, the culturally other students could be utilized as resources for discussing or even researching the applicability of the respective skills and concepts beyond the cultural boundaries within which they have been tested. Operationalization Strategies Like in many other forums, at this year's annual conference of the Association of Library and Information Science Educators in San Anto- nio, the discussions on multicultural curricula revolved around one central question. It concerns whether multiculturalism should be in- jected into library and information science programs at the curriculum or individual course level. In other words, should the relationship be- tween culture and human informational behavior be taught within ex- isting courses or in new and separate courses developed specifically to Fall 1992 301
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science discuss the relationship? By addressing this question, I will attempt to suggest strategies that, in my view, would contribute to effective multicultural education. The dichotomy that the prior question constructs implies a distinction between standard course topics and multicultural course topics. To put it another way, developing new courses as the only strategy to accommo- date cultural diversity would mean that existing courses do not require multicultural perspectives. In designing strategies to operationalize multicultural curricula, an important point to consider is that multicul- turalism does not introduce new topics but rather new approaches to teaching old topics. Clearly, some skills courses (e.g., courses dealing with indexing and abstracting, cataloging) are hardly influenced by cultural variables. But most skills and theory courses (e.g., courses dealing with information and communication technology, management of information services, information needs and research) address topics that are strongly influ- enced by cultural factors. Topics such as effectiveness of service policy or technology, including user-friendliness, should be taught and discussed from multicultural perspectives. Multiculturalism should be infused to problematize topics connected with the assessment of information needs, information-seeking behavior, etc. In this sense, a multicultural curricu- lum means first and foremost infusing cultural diversity into the topics that are treated in existing courses. It does not necessarily require the development and adoption of separate or new courses. This does not negate, however, developing a course or courses specifi- cally geared toward the international and cultural dimensions of infor- mation exchange. Such entry-level courses would not only help to pro- mote general intercultural and transnational awareness among students but also provide them with basic knowledge that they can take into various library and information courses. In the Ph.D. program of the School of Communication, Information, and Library Studies at Rutgers University, for example, a unique course titled " Cross- National Com- munication' ' was developed to introduce graduate students from a vari- ety of specialization areas to basic research on the role of information exchange and data transfer in transnational and cross-cultural processes. However, the extent to which new courses should be developed to imple- ment multiculturalism effectively is a decision that library and informa- tion science programs will make differently, depending, among other things, on the size and specific focus of the program, budgetary con- straints, and the availability of trained staff. Conclusion Educating in a multicultural context is certainly a challenge in that it involves rethinking the fundamental assumptions about knowledge and about how we teach. However, multiculturalism, beyond its prag- 302 Volume 33, Number 4
Conceptual Strategies for Operationalizing Multicultural Curricula matic value for managing cultural differences, should also be seen as an opportunity for the revitalization of education. A multicultural curricu- lum as an approach to education not only links learning to the totality of the human experience but also provides a new impetus for creative and dynamic instructor- student interaction in the classroom. The strategies that this essay has developed with regard to the pedagogical method and course content in library and information science education could serve instructors as a conceptual guide for contributing to such an innovative endeavor. Reference List Albert, R. D. 1986. Communication and attributional differences between Hispanics and Anglo-Americans. In Interethnic communication: Current research, ed. Y. Y. Kim, 42-59. Newbury Park, Calif.: Sage. Alderton, S. M. 1979. Five dimensions of racial-based communication stereotypes. In Handbook of intercultural communication, ed. M. K. Asante, E. Newmark, and C. A. Blake, 189-202. Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage. Anderson, J. F., and Powell, R. 1988. Cultural influences on educational processes. In Intercul- tural communication: A reader, 5th ed., ed. L. A. Samovar and R. E. Porter, 207-212. Belmont, Calif.: Wadsworth. Asante, M. K., and Davis, A. 1989. Encounters in the interracial workplace. In Handbook of international and intercultural communication, ed. M. K. Asante andW. B. Gudykunst. Newbury Park, Calif.: Sage. Barnlund, D. C. 1989. Communicative styles of Japanese and Americans: Images and realities. Belmont, Calif.: Wadsworth. Blubaugh, J. A., and Pennington, D. L. 1976. Crossing difference: Interracial communication. Colum- bus, Ohio: Bell and Howell. Boulding, E. 1988. Building a global civic culture: Education for an interdependent world. New York: Columbia Univ. Pr. Braithwaite, D. O. 1991 . Viewing persons with disabilities as a culture. In Intercultural communica- tion: A reader. 6th ed., ed. L.A. Samovar and R. E. Porter, 136-142. Belmont, Calif.: Wadsworth. Brislin, R. W., Lonner, W. J., and Thorndike, R. M. 1973. Cross-cultural research methods . New York: Wiley. Carmichael, C. W. 1988. Interpersonal communication and aging. In Human communication and the aging process, ed. C. W. Carmichael, C. H. Botan, and R. Hawkins, 31-44. Prospect Heights, 111.: Waveland Pr. Carmichael, C. W., and Knapp, M. L. 1988. Nonverbal aspects of communication and aging. In Human communication and the aging process , ed. C. W. Carmichael, C. H. Botan, andR. Hawkins, 111-28. Prospect Heights, 111.: Waveland Pr. Carnovsky, L. 1971. The foreign student in the American library school. Final report, p. 20-27 (ERIC ED 058 918). Casmir, F. L. 1991. Culture, communication, and education. Communication Education 40:229- 34. Chen, C. 1982. Difficulties faced by international students in the U.S. information science program. In Proceedings of the 45th ASIS Annual Meeting, 357. American Society for Information Science. Cheney, G. 1983. On the versions and changing meanings of organizational membership: A field study of organizational identification. Communication Monographs 50:342-62. Chu, G. C. 1976. Problems of cross-cultural communication research. In International and Intercul- tural Communication, ed. H. D. Fischer and J. C. Merrill, 435-42. New York: Hastings. Cohen, J. A. 1991. Managing tomorrow's workforce today. Management Review, 80:17-21. Cole, M. 1985. The zone of proximal development: Where culture and cognition create each other. In Culture, communication and cognition: Vygotskian perspectives, ed. J. Wersch. Cambridge, Mass.: Univ. of Cambridge Pr. Collins, A., and Dedre, G. 1987. How people construct mental models. In Cultural models in language and thought, ed D. Halloran and N. Quinn. New York: Cambridge Univ. Pr. Fall 1992 303
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Daniel, J., ed. 1974. Culture, class and language variety . Urbana, 111.: National Council of Teachers on English. Dosa, M. 1989. The international environment of information education. The Bookmark 48:40- 44. Eakins, B. W., and Eakins, R. G. 1978. Differences in human communication. New York: Harper. Eastman, C. M. 1980. Aspects of language and culture. Novato, Calif.: Chandler and Sharp. Elliot, S., and others. 1982. Perceptions of reticence: A cross-cultural investigation. In Communi- cation yearbook 5, ed. M. Bureoon, 591-602. New Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction Books. Felder, R., and Silverman, L. 1988. Learning and teaching styles in engineering education. Engineering Education 78:674-81. Foeman, A. K. , and Pressley, G. 1987. Ethnic cultures and corporate culture: Using black styles in organizations. Communication Quarterly 35:293-307. Folb, E. A. 1991. Who's got the room at the top?: Issues of dominance and nondominance in intercultural communication. In Intercultural communication: A reader. 6th ed., ed. L. A. Samovar and R. E. Porter, 119-127. Belmont, Calif.: Wadsworth. Foxman, L. D., andPolsky, W. L. 1989. Cross-cultural understanding. Personnel Journal 68:12- 14. Freedle, R. 1981. The need for a cross-cultural perspective. In Cognition, social behavior and the environment, ed. J. Harvey. Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum. Freiré, P. 1973. Education for critical consciousness . New York: Continuum. Giles, H., and Johnson, P. 1986. Perceived threat, ethnic commitment. In Interethnic communica- tion: Current research, ed. Y. Y. Kim, 91-116. Newbury Park, Calif.: Sage, 1986. Grahn, J. 1984. Another mother tongue. Boston: Beacon. Gudykunst, W. B. 1986. Ethnicity, types of relationship, and intraethnic and interethnic uncer- tainty reduction. In Interethnic communication: Current research, ed. Y. Y. Kim, 201-224. Newbury Park, Calif.: Sage. Gudykunst, W. B., and Ting- Toomey, S. 1988. Culture and interpersonal communication. Newbury Park, Calif.: Sage. Hale, J. E. 1982. Black children: Their roots, culture, and learning styles . Provo, Utah: Brigham Young Univ. Pr. Hall, E. T. 1959. The silent language. New York: Doubleday. Hall, E. T. 1966. The hidden dimension. New York: Doubleday. Hegelsen, M. 1988. National style and learning style preferences: Their effect on teaching and learning. Urbana-Champaign, 111.: Univ. of Illinois Pr. Hofstede, G. 1984. Culture's consequences: International differences in work-related values. Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage. Hudson, H. E. 1990. Communication satellites: Their development and impact. New York: Free Pr. Hudson, H. E., and Leung, L. 1988. The growth of information sector. In Measuring the informa- tion society, ed. F. Williams, 35-55. Newbury Park, Calif.: Sage. Ishii, S., and Bruneau, T. 1988. Silence and silences in cross-cultural perspective: Japan and the United States. In Intercultural communication: A reader. 5th ed., ed L. A. Samovar and R. E. Porter, 310-18. Belmont, Calif.: Wadsworth. Jensen, V. J. 1970. Perspectives on oral communication Boston: Holbrook Pr. Johnston, W. B., and Packer, A. H. 1987. Workforce 2000: Work and workers for the 21st Century. Indianapolis, Ind.: Hudson Institute. Josey, E. J. 1989. Educating library and information professionals for the 21st century. The Bookmark 48:4-7. Josey, E. J. 1990. Meeting the challenge: Educating for universal library and information service. In Translating an international education to a national environment, ed. J. I. Tallnan and J. B. Ojiambo. Metuchen, N.J.: Scarecrow. Josey, E. J. 1991. Education for library services to cultural minorities. Journal of Multicultural Librarianship 5 : 1 04- 1 1 . Jussawalla, M., and Cheah, C.W. 1987. The calculus of international communications. Littleton, Colo.: Libraries Unlimited. Kaplan, R. B. 1966. Cultural thought patterns in inter-cultural education. Language Learning 16: 1-20. Kaplan, R. B. 1987. Cultural thought patterns revisited. In Writing across languages: Analysis of L2 texts, ed. U. Connor and R.B. Kaplan, 9-21. Reading, Mass.: Addison- Wesley. Katz, R. L. 1988. The information society. New York: Praeger. Kim, Y. Y. 1977. Inter-ethnic and intra-ethnic communication: A study of Korean immigrants 304 Volume 33, Number 4
Conceptual Strategies for Operationalizing Multicultural Curricula in Chicago. International and Intercultural Communication Annual 4, ed. N. G.Jain, 53-68. Phoenix, Ariz.: Tackson Graphic Services, Inc. Kim, Y. Y. 1986. A communication approach to interethnic relations. In Interethnic communication: Current research, ed. Y. Y. Kim, 9-18. Newbury Park, Calif.: Sage. Kochman, T. 1981. Black and white styles in conflict. Chicago: Univ. of Chicaero Pr. Koenig, E. L. 1975. Language and ethnicity in intergroup communication. International and Intercultural Communication Annual 2, 20-29. Falls Church, Va.: Speech Communication Assn. Koester, J. , and Lustig, M. W. 1991 . Communication curricula in the multicultural university. Communication Education 40:250-54. Kramarae, C. 1981. Women and men speaking. Rowley, Mass.: Newbury. Kramarae, G. 1982. Gender: How she speaks. In Attitudes towards language variation, ed. E. B. Ryan, 84-98. London: Edward Arnold. Lesser, G. 1976. Cultural differences in learning and thinking styles. Individuality in Learning. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. Lieberman, D. A. 1991. Ethnocognitivism and problem-solving. In Intercultural communication: A reader. 6th ed., ed. L.A. Samovar and R. E. Porter, 229-34. Belmont, Calif.: Wadsworth. Loden, M., and Rosener, J. B. 1991. Workforce America!: Managing employee diversity as a vital resource. Homewood, 111.: Irwin. Lundu, M. C. 1982. Library education and training: At home or abroad?: A personal assessment and impressions. International Library Review 14:376. Luyken, G. M. 1986. Direct broadcasting satellites: A concept for the future? Media, Culture and Society 8:183-98. Madrid, A. 1990. Diversity and its discontents. Black Issues in Higher Education 5:10-11,16. Nwankwo, R. L. 1975. Minoritarianism and ethnic groups communication. In International and Intercultural Communication Annual 2, 86-97. O'Brien, R. C, and Helleiner, G. K. 1982. The political economy of information in a changing international economic order. In Communication economics and development, ed. M. Jussawalla and D. M. Lamberton, 100-132. New York: Pergamon. Ogawa, D. 1979. Communication characteristics of Asian Americans in urban settings: The case of Honolulu Japanese. \n Handbook of intercultural communication, ed. M. K. Asante, E. Newmark, and C. A. Blake, 321-37. Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage. Oliveira, S. M. de, 1990. Foreign students in American LIS schools: A historical and statistical survey. Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 31:34-35. Osgood, C. E., and Tzeng, O. C. S., 1990. Language, meaning and culture . New York: Praeger. Pacanowsky, M. E., and O'Donnell-Trujillo, N. 1982. Communication and organizational cultures. Western Journal of Speech Communication 46:115-30. Pacanowsky, M. E., and O'Donnell-Trujillo, N., 1983. Organizational communication as cultural performance. Communication Monographs 50:126-47. Paredes, J., and Hepburn, K. 1976. The spirit brain and the culture-and-cognition paradox. Current A nthropology 17:121-27. Philipsen, G. F. 1972. Communication in Teamsterville: A sociolinguistic study of speech behavior. Ph.D. diss., Northwestern Univ. Philipsen, G. F. 1973. Speaking "like a man" in Teamsterville: Culture patterns of role enact- ment in an urban neighborhood. Quarterly Journal of Speech 61:13-22. Purves, A. C. 1988. Writing across languages and cultures: Issues in contrastive rhetoric. Newbury Park, Calif.: Sage. Ramirez, M., and Castañeda, A. 1974. Cultural democracy, bicognitive development, and education. New York: Academic. Rich, A. L. 1974. Interracial communication. New York: Harper. Richardson, J., Jr., and King, D. C. 1984. U.S. images of other cultures: The need for education. In Word communications, ed. G. Gerbner and M. Siefert, 174-81. New York: Longman. Sanda, A. O. 1979. Cultural self-comprehension in ethnically plural societies: The case of Sub- Saharan Africa. In Handbook of intercultural communication, ed. M. K. Asante, E. Newmark, and C. A. Blake, 357-72. Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage. Schement, J. R. 1990. Porat, Bell, and the information society reconsidered: The growth of information work in the early twentieth century. Information Processing and Management 26:449-65. Shein, J. D. 1989. At home among strangers. Washington, D.C.: Gallaudet Univ. Pr. Sineath, T. W., ed., 1989. Library and information science education statistical report 1989. Sarasota, Fia.: Assn. for Library and Information Science Education. Fall 1992 305
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Sitaram, K. S., and Cogdell, R. T. 1976. Foundations of intercultural communication. Columbus, Ohio: Merrill. Smircich, L. 1985. Is the concept of culture a paradigm for understanding organizations and ourselves? In Organizational Culture, ed. P. T. Frost et al., 55-71. Beverly Hills, Calif.: Saere. Smith, D. G. 1990. Embracing diversity as a central campus goal. Academe: Bulletin of the American Assn. of Univ. Professors 76:29-33. Solomon, CM. 1989. The corporate response to work force diversity. Personnel Journal 68:43- 53. Staley, C. C, and Cohen, J. L. 1988. Communicator style and social style: Similarities and differences between the sexes. Communication Quarterly 36:192-202. Starosta, W. J., and Coleman, L. 1986. Jesse Jackson's "Hymietown" apology: A case study of interethnic rhetorical analysis. In Interethnic communication: Current research, ed. Y. Y. Kim, 117- 35. Newbury Park, Calif.: Sage. Tallman, J. I. 1990. Library and information science programs in the United States: Interna- tional student perceptions of their academic adaptation process. Ph.D. diss., Univ. of Pittsburgh. Tannen, D. 1990. You just don't understand: Women and men in conversation. New York: Morrow. Thiedermann, S. 1991. Bridging cultural barriers for corporate success: How to manage the multicultural workforce. Lexington, Mass.: Lexington Bks. Thomas, R. R.,Jr. 1990. From affirmative action to affirming diversity. Harvard Business Review Mar./Apr., 107-17. Triandis, H. C. 1976. Variations of black and white perceptions of the social environment. Champaign, 111.: Univ. of Illinois Pr. Tsunoda, T. 1978. The Japanese brain function [cited in Sibatani, A., 1980. It may turn out that the language we learn alters the physical operation of our brains] Science, 196:24-26. Van Maanen, J., and Barley, S. R. 1985. Cultural organization: Fragments of a theory. In Organizational Culture, ed. P. J. Frost et al., 31-54. Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage. Warren, C. 1974. Identity and community in the gay world. New York: Wiley. Yousef, F. S. 1988. Human resource management: Aspects of intercultural relations in U.S. organizations. In Intercultural communication: A reader, 5th ed., ed. L. A. Samovar and R. E. Porter, 175-82. Belmont, Calif.: Wadsworth. 306 Volume 33, Number 4