Planning LIS Doctoral Education Around a Focused Theme: A Report on the B2A Program Renee Bennett-Kapusniak School of Information Studies, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee. Email: kapusni2@uwm.edu Jeannette Glover School of Information Studies, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee. Email: jrr4@uwm.edu Adriana McCleer School of Information Studies, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee. Email: amccleer@uwm.edu Jennifer Thiele School of Information Studies, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee. Email: jhaase@uwm.edu Dietmar Wolfram School of Information Studies, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee. Email: dwolfram@uwm.edu This report discusses the Overcoming Barriers to Information Access (B2A) program. This is a doctoral cohort program at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee funded by the Institute for Museum and Library Services. The program has focused on educat- ing the next generation of doctoral graduates in library and information science with an emphasis on the theme of overcoming barriers to information access. Fellows were provided resources to support their educational activities, research and instructional experiences. In this paper the principal investigator for the program and the B2A Fel- lows reflect on the challenges and the rewards of their experiences in the program. Key findings that emerged include the importance of building community throughout the program and exposure to diverse perspectives. This initiative shows that although fund- ing packages provide important resources to students, they do not buy extra time. The reflections in this paper provide insights into the doctoral student experience that can benefit other library and information science doctoral programs. Keywords: Doctoral Education; Information Studies PhD Programs; Information Access Barriers; Student Support; Mentoring Introduction University of Chicago Graduate Library School, a pioneer in advanced education Doctoral education in library and in- in library science. Within a few years of formation science (LIS), like the field its inception, the school produced its first itself, is relatively new in comparison to doctoral graduate in 1930 (Richardson, other established disciplines in the natural 2010). By the end of the 1950s, the num- sciences and social sciences. It is also an ber of doctoral programs had increased to area that has not received as much atten- six, but the number of doctoral graduates tion in the literature as masters level pro- remained small. This number increased grams in the field (Druin et al., 2009). The dramatically in the 1970s, with more mod- first doctoral program in library science est increases since then (Sugimoto, Russell in North America was developed at the & Grant, 2009). The most recent Associa- J. of Education for Library and Information Science, Vol. 57, No. 1—(Winter) January 2016 ISSN: 0748-5786 © 2016 Association for Library and Information Science Education 69 doi:10.12783/issn.2328-2967/57/1/6
70 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE tion for Library and Information Science The program has focused on educating the Education (ALISE) statistical report from next generation of doctoral graduates in 2012 indicates that there were more than library and information science by guid- 1,400 doctoral students in North America ing the students’ studies around a defined at 30 schools/departments/colleges with theme of overcoming barriers to informa- American Library Association (ALA)- tion access. accredited masters programs (Wallace, 2012). Doctoral Program Success Factors Despite the large numbers of existing and Challenges doctoral students in LIS, there continues to be concerns over a shortage of qualified The success factors for the completion doctoral graduates to occupy academic of LIS doctoral program milestones— positions at post-secondary institutions from initial coursework to dissertation (Seavey, 2005). The 2012 ALISE Sta- defense—have not been extensively stud- tistical Report reported that 55% of LIS ied, although aspects of the doctoral ex- faculty members were at least 50 years perience and their impact on future suc- old and 27% were 60 or older (Wallace, cess have been investigated. Challenges 2012). A competing factor that reduces or barriers that exist arise from a number the pool of qualified graduates for careers of sources including socioeconomic and in the professoriate is that graduates may program specific factors. In perhaps the pursue careers in library administration or earliest comprehensive examination of other settings (Whitbeck, 1991a). Sugi- LIS doctoral programs, Danton (1959) moto, Russell and Grant (2009) observed pointed to the high attrition rates in the that only 22% of LIS doctoral graduates few LIS doctoral programs that existed at from 1998–2007 held full time positions the time. He noted, “Without exception, at ALA-accredited schools. Also reduc- the major problem cited is the inadequate ing the pool of potential academics is the number and amount of research grants, fact that completion rates for doctoral pro- fellowships, and teaching assistantships grams in a number of fields in the United for doctoral students; or its corollary, the States are not encouraging. Research con- difficulty of attracting sufficient numbers ducted by the Council of Graduate Schools of very good students” (Danton, 1959, PhD Completion Project revealed that, for p. 439). More than 30 years later, Whit- the social sciences, only 11.5% of the stu- beck (1991b) echoed this sentiment in his dents in the programs studied were able to survey of North American LIS doctoral complete their PhD after four years, and programs when he indicated that the most only 55.9% had completed the degree after frequently reported problem by doctoral ten years (Council of Graduate Schools, students was lack of financial support. 2008). Although no recent data on mean Other factors also play a positive or completion time for LIS PhD programs negative role in doctoral student success could be found, Whitbeck (1991b) report- and perceptions, including socialization ed that for students who did complete their (Gardner, 2010) and the role of faculty degree, the mean completion time was 5.9 in creating a positive experience for stu- years for students who graduated in the dents (Klingler, 2006). The literature has late 1980s. also addressed experiences in individual This Work in Progress reports on the doctoral programs. Hernon and Schwartz Overcoming Barriers to Information Ac- (2008) reflected on features believed to cess (B2A) program. This is a doctoral be important in the recently developed cohort program at the University of Wis- PhD program at Simmons College in consin-Milwaukee funded by the Institute managerial leadership in the information for Museum and Library Services (IMLS). professions. They found several areas of
Planning LIS Doctoral Education Around a Focused Theme 71 emphasis to be critical in their students’ Overview of the B2A Program education. These included integral cover- age of issues of diversity throughout the The B2A program was funded by IMLS curriculum and completion of research for the period 2010–2014 (with a one year projects of publishable quality prior to un- no cost extension to 2015) at the Univer- dertaking dissertation research. Druin et sity of Wisconsin-Milwaukee School of al. (2009), in outlining the University of Information Studies (SOIS). The primary Maryland’s iSchool modular method for goals of the program were to recruit a co- doctoral education, emphasized the impor- hort of qualified PhD candidates, accul- tance of broad perspectives to allow stu- turate them into the LIS field and SOIS dents to view problems through multiple academic research environment and men- lenses. tor them during their studies and research. Issues of diversity and representation in Then, ultimately, the program would pre- LIS doctoral programs and the academy pare them to take on post-graduate lead- have been addressed in several studies. ership positions in the field and build a Adkins (2004) investigated barriers and network of support to sustain their pro- challenges to the recruitment of Latino fessional development throughout their LIS faculty and identified four themes re- careers. In keeping with IMLS priorities, ported by the participants: isolation from emphasis was placed on the recruitment academe, ethnocentrism within LIS edu- of individuals from under-represented cation, financial concerns, and personal groups and first generation college attend- and family concerns. In a similar vein, ees, although all qualified applicants with Franklin and Jaeger (2007) drew attention an expressed interest in the focus of the to the dearth of representation in the LIS program were considered. professoriate in North America by African The program theme of overcoming bar- Americans and Latinos, in particular. Gen- riers to information access was selected to der issues have also influenced the LIS allow the grant beneficiaries, referred to academy. Maack and Passet (1994) exam- as B2A Fellows, to pursue their research ined female faculty career paths in LIS, interests under a common umbrella. The challenges encountered and the impor- theme was broad enough to encompass tance of mentoring-and being mentored. many aspects of information studies and The importance of effective mentoring has areas of need in the LIS academy based on been reflected in two more recent publica- advertised faculty openings. The selected tions (Sugimoto, 2012a, 2012b). In these, theme was also a natural fit for the areas full time LIS faculty members at schools of emphasis in the SOIS PhD program and with ALA-accredited programs were sur- the research interests of the SOIS faculty. veyed and interviewed. Although advisors Information access barriers may be broad- and advisees believed that their work was ly defined. They can be intellectual, stem- sufficiently discussed, both felt that some ming from bias or lack of user knowledge, topics needed more consideration such as or physical, based on a lack of access or university resources, pedagogy prepara- service availability. tion, preparing for presentations/publica- As examples, information access may tions, and writing grant proposals. be limited through bias in classifica- The B2A program addresses several of tion and indexing that stems from issues the issues outlined in the literature regard- of race, sexuality, gender, religion, and ing challenges in LIS doctoral education ethnicity. Glover (2014), for instance, (e.g., lack of financial support, exposure espouses that some of these biases are a to research, mentoring, promotion of di- result of the worldview and underlying versity) and may serve as a model for LIS philosophical background in which West- doctoral education elsewhere. ern classification systems were founded,
72 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE which differ from the worldviews of peo- ment, and travel support for conference at- ple of other races and ethnic backgrounds. tendance. Fellows undertook coursework In the same way, the complexities of in- at a full-time rate of nine credits per se- formation policy that help negotiate barri- mester during their first two years in the ers to access touch on issues of the Digital doctoral program. All doctoral students Divide. For example, rural public librar- at this time were expected to complete a ies that do provide access to the Internet minimum of 12 credits of coursework in continue to struggle with poor broadband their major area (information organiza- infrastructure, outdated equipment, old tion, information policy, information re- Carnegie buildings, elimination of feder- trieval), 9 credits in a minor area (any rel- ated library systems and inadequate local evant topical area from within the school funding structures (Thiele, 2013). or elsewhere on campus) and 12 credits in In spite of ongoing access limitations, research methods, with an expectation of many sources of information are increas- completed coursework in both quantitative ingly available online only. This could and qualitative methods. present challenges for older (50+) adults Fellows were paired each semester with who may have limited technological one or more faculty members to engage in skills. More public library technological research activities during this time. Prod- programming and services aimed specifi- ucts arising from collaborations with fac- cally at this age group need to be provided ulty members or self-initiated research ef- (Bennett-Kapusniak, 2013). Policy deci- forts began to appear in the second year of sions may also impact intellectual free- the program. To stimulate a dialogue relat- dom. Public libraries and library boards ed to research issues relevant to the B2A make decisions about their collections that program themes, B2A Brown Bag presen- balance LIS principles and community tations were organized for the 2011–12 interests that impact intellectual freedom academic year. Six presentations were and access to information (Zimmer & Mc- made by SOIS faculty addressing research Cleer, 2014). These are issues that have topics related to information access barri- been investigated by the B2A Fellows. ers. During the following academic year, An extensive promotion and recruit- the Fellows provided the B2A Brown Bag ment effort was undertaken in 2010 after presentations by highlighting the relevant notification of receipt of the grant in the research projects they had been conduct- summer of 2010. Six qualified applicants ing. The Fellows were encouraged to sub- were extended admission. All were non- mit their work for presentation to relevant traditional students, and all but one had professional and research meetings. In ad- received a graduate degree at least two dition to the Fellows’ own presentations years earlier and had been working in the of their work, two panel sessions were field or in allied areas prior to entering the organized at selected conferences to high- doctoral program. Because recruitment ef- light the B2A program and the Fellows’ forts began after admissions had already research on information access barriers. been made for Fall 2010, most of the B2A The first panel was presented at the 2012 Fellows were admitted for the 2011–12 Joint Conference of Librarians of Color academic year. Once admitted, Fellows (JCLC), with the second panel presented followed the same curriculum as all SOIS at the 2015 ALISE conference. doctoral students, but with added expecta- The third year of the program was used tions and opportunities. to prepare for and complete preparatory Funding through the B2A grant pro- essays. These were a required part of the vided Fellows with additional financial doctoral program and were equivalent to support for stipends, education-related preliminary examinations. The prepara- supplies and expenses, computing equip- tory essays required doctoral students
Planning LIS Doctoral Education Around a Focused Theme 73 to develop extensive papers over a two- to contribute to professional and scholarly month period on topics related to their endeavors. major area, minor area and research meth- The initial impact of the program can be ods. Assistantships were shifted from a seen in the scholarly and professional ac- research focus to teaching assistantships tivities of the Fellows. Products of schol- to begin providing experience in instruc- arship produced by the Fellows during tion and pedagogy. The intent was to pro- their studies have included: eight journal vide self-standing teaching experiences articles receiving 12 citations according for the Fellows by graduation. Once doc- to Google Scholar, three conference pro- toral students successfully defended their ceeding publications receiving two cita- preparatory essays, they became doctoral tions, 10 poster presentations receiving candidates who could then focus on their 14 citations, 32 conference presentations dissertation research topics. This repre- (local, regional, national and internation- sents an important time of transition, when al) and seven invited presentations. Some students’ academic schedules, which have of the Fellows have occupied leadership been dictated by course calendars and roles in professional societies. Each of the deadlines, become less structured and the four Fellows has served as a teaching as- focus of the students’ efforts narrows to sistant for multiple courses and each has the more self-directed aspects of the dis- been approved to serve as the instructor of sertation proposal and research. record for one or more courses. To date, Ongoing mentoring by multiple individ- two Fellows have had the opportunity to uals is an important aspect of the doctoral serve as instructors for one or two SOIS experience (Sugimoto, 2010). To continue courses. Several of the Fellows have also regular contact among the B2A Fellows received competitive academic or profes- and the grant principal investigator (PI), sional awards, including post-B2A fund- the PI organized monthly informal lunch ing awarded through the UWM Graduate sessions to discuss the Fellows’ progress School to continue full-time study, at- and life in the academe. These monthly tendance at the Oxford Internet Institute opportunities to meet continued into the Summer Doctoral Programme and two fourth year of the students’ program. Doctoral Students to ALISE Grants. Monthly doctoral workshops were also organized for all doctoral students in the Reflections on the B2A Program Information Studies program. Although not specifically part of the B2A program, The B2A program, with the support of the topics covered by the workshops were IMLS, has allowed SOIS to recruit a group of direct relevance to the Fellows’ studies of motivated doctoral students who have and career goals, covering research, teach- brought a range of professional experi- ing and career development. ences in LIS and allied areas. The funding At the end of the funding period for the package has made it possible for the B2A B2A program, four Fellows have contin- Fellows to focus on their studies, engage ued with the program and have been fo- in research and instructional activities, and cusing on their dissertations. Four years of to present their work at conferences. federal funding have allowed the Fellows The cohort approach, where students to advance to their dissertation research, have been admitted under a common but, as noted by the Council of Graduate theme, also helped in motivating B2A Fel- Schools (2008) and Whitbeck (1991b), lows and provided a sense of community. additional time is needed by most doc- Although the Fellows have each pursued toral students to complete their degrees. their own areas of research interest, the Still, the funding provided by the project B2A theme has provided an umbrella un- grant has made it possible for the Fellows der which all Fellows may identify com-
74 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE monalities. Far from limiting the doctoral similar goals at varying paces, so we had experience, the theme of access barriers opportunities to champion each other along has allowed the Fellows to be exposed to a the way. We leveraged our strong relation- broad array of research topics and method- ships to collaborate on academic research ological approaches through their studies and classroom instruction.” and interactions with faculty members and fellow students. and Successful completion of the mile- “I also gained so much from my relation- stones of the program has required more ships with my cohort.” than adequate access to resources. Doctor- al student attrition is a perennial issue that The unifying theme of information ac- was noted in LIS even as early as Danton’s cess barriers along with the exposure to a (1959) pioneering work. Although factors variety of research areas and approaches such as financial resources have been iden- was also noted as a benefit of the program tified as a key cause by Danton and Whit- in helping Fellows to identify research ar- beck (1991a), some factors independent of eas for study: the doctoral program can play a role in the “My focus has been clear since I entered completion time and continuation of doc- the B2A program since the guidelines toral students. These cannot be predicted. under the B2A grant specifically had me Significant life events and difficult personal looking at Barriers to Access. This was situations affected several of the Fellows beneficial when deciding on my major area during the grant period. Two of the B2A of research interest since there are many Fellows ultimately decided to withdraw topics to research within the LIS field and from the program for personal reasons. I could have taken a longer time decid- The Fellows were asked to reflect on ing with the many choices available to the most rewarding aspects of the B2A pursue.” program. Two themes emerged from this reflection: camaraderie and the exposure The areas of research focus initial- to different research areas that helped to ly identified by several of the Fellows shape the Fellows’ research focus. One changed with exposure to different topics: Fellow remarked: “The research topic I decided on was not in my original vision for my doctoral “As Gardner (2010) discussed, social ca- research. Through coursework and faculty maraderie and clarity regarding the guide- mentorship, I found a way to develop a lines were an integral part and rewarding research agenda that connected my experi- experience for me in the B2A program. ence as a Tucson, Arizona public librarian Right from the beginning, I felt close to ev- with my passion for community engage- eryone involved in B2A. The camaraderie ment and improving information access for provided support when I needed a boost of and with Latinas/os. This personal connec- confidence as well as fostering collabora- tion has provided fuel for my intellectual tions in broader areas beyond my primary pursuits.” focus.” Furthermore, Similarly, other Fellows noted: “Having a research stream that was slightly “The relationships I formed with my co- out of the comfort zone and realm of my hort of B2A Fellows are rooted in personal cohort was beneficial to me in that they and professional connections. My peers were able to give me outside perspectives provided support and encouragement of my research. Also, I realize that even through personal and academic challenges though we all research different things, and triumphs. We all worked toward in the end all of our research is bound so
Planning LIS Doctoral Education Around a Focused Theme 75 closely together that there were endless so adding classes along with research and opportunities for collaboration. Being able other responsibilities added to my list to not just talk to members of the cohort of adjustments. I had to figure out what as well as other colleagues and professors worked for me at any given time so I really helped me develop my own research placed everything that I had to do during stream and niche in the profession. Anoth- that time in a list of priorities. With an er thing for me is that prior to this program infant at the beginning of the program I I was always being pushed into leadership learned to squeeze in reading and research positions because of the potential that oth- during naps, etc. As my infant grew into a ers saw in me, and now I have finally come toddler I was able to devote more time to to realize that I am indeed a leader and this research and scholarly activities, so I didn’t program has really brought out the leader start off wanting to conquer the research in me.” world, but now I am ready and more able Another observed, to.” “My original research agenda grew “My biggest challenge has been real- dramatically from when I entered the izing balance in my work, particularly as program. As our relationships developed responsibilities have changed throughout within our cohort, it led us to have mean- the course of my scholarship. I enjoy col- ingful discussions about information laborative work and socializing with my access in several different contexts. These peers, which had the potential to interfere discussions led to other conversations with with my time to engage in deep thought mentoring professors about their own simi- and intellectual exploration in my inde- lar research. My perspective coming into pendent work. Early on, one of my faculty this program was very limited, working as mentors reminded me how important it a professional library director for several was to slow down and really focus on my years. Having the ability to engage in these doctoral research. I found that the slower, conversations gave me an opportunity to focused process of research and knowledge back up and look at major historical and creation produced higher quality results. philosophical issues that have impacted As my responsibilities increased in the pro- practice. This larger perspective informs gram, I sought out strategies to make my everything I do, and will make me a better independent research a priority among col- practitioner and advocate overall.” laborative research, teaching, and service.” In addition to the rewards derived from the B2A program, Fellows were asked to “Creating a work-life balance was one reflect on the biggest challenges they en- of the most challenging issues for me countered in completing the PhD program throughout this program. Scholarship in requirements and how they have been able general is not a 9–5 endeavor, but I found to address them. The most frequently re- that I had to be vigilant at carving out time ported challenge related to finding a work- to complete my research and reading. This life balance, where outside obligations can be difficult to explain to family mem- also competed for the Fellows’ time: bers who might view this time as indul-gent. Neither of my parents graduated from “The biggest challenge that I have faced high school, much less attended college, so during this program is developing a bal- it was not easy to explain the importance ance between work, life, family, and all of what I was doing. In addition to that, the other commitments that I made prior to having three small children was not always the program. I started the program already conducive to concentration within my adjusting to the change that had occurred living environment. Recognizing this and in my family before joining the program organizing my time were critical to work-
76 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE ing with research deadlines and personal • The value of diverse perspectives—In- deadlines I set for myself.” teractions with multiple faculty mem- bers exposed students to a range of This reflection of the PhD program be- instructional methods, research ideas ing like a full time job was also shared by and methodological approaches. These another Fellow: broadened the Fellows’ perspectives on “My biggest challenge I encountered in topics relevant to the field and helped the program concurred also with Gardner to inform how they approached their (2010) who mentioned how self-direction own research and instruction. was important. Self-direction, to me, meant • Funding packages can provide re- I was in charge of what I needed to ac- sources, but do not buy time—Adequate complish and where I wanted to take my funding may provide the opportunity to research. This was challenging as I moved attend a doctoral program full time so through the different stages of the PhD that recipients don’t need to worry as program and also dealing with the outside much about making ends meet, but the realities of daily life. It was easy to want funding does not create additional time. to work 24/7 on a given project or when Obligations independent of the doctoral life interfered, not want to work at all on program remain during the program. my research. I overcame this obstacle by One coping strategy, especially for a treating the program as a “job” out in the returning student, is to view the PhD workforce. Creating a schedule for myself program as a full time job, with suffi- and working a normal workday kept me cient time allocated for program-related focused and directed on the given objec- activities, but also time for outside tives I had created for the day as well as obligations. giving me time away at home to focus on other areas of my life outside of the PhD environment so I would not burn out.” Next Steps In summary, these reflections echo is- At this time, the four B2A Fellows are sues noted in earlier studies of doctoral post-proposal and focusing on their disser- education, but also provide additional in- tations. One of the Fellows completed the sights. The key points arising from the re- program at the end of 2015, with another flections include: anticipating completion in spring of 2016. The remaining Fellows are anticipated to • The importance of community—The complete the program within six years of unifying theme of the B2A program admission, which would still be faster than provided a common learning experi- the mean completion time for students in ence that brought the Fellows together. the social sciences. The long term impact Given that each of the Fellows had of the B2A program on the careers of the been working prior to returning for a Fellows is something that can only be fully PhD, the cohort reduced a feeling of assessed in the future. isolation in the program. A sense of community doesn’t just extend to other Conclusions doctoral students, but also with faculty members who serve as instructors and The need for doctorally-educated LIS mentors. Ongoing interaction opportu- graduates continues to be high, particu- nities throughout the program are vital, larly in the academe where vacancies by particularly once students have reached an aging professoriate will need to be re- dissertator status and are focused on placed by a new generation of academics their dissertation research. (Seavey, 2005). The study of LIS doctoral
Planning LIS Doctoral Education Around a Focused Theme 77 education is also an area that has not re- motivated students to reach the milestones ceived as much attention in the research needed to complete the doctoral degree. literature as Master’s level program in Additional investigations of LIS doctoral the field (Druin et al., 2009). The present experiences undertaken on a larger scale Work in Progress has reported on the B2A are needed to confirm the present findings. program, an IMLS funded initiative that has focused on a cohort approach around Acknowledgements a specified theme. The focus of the pro- gram has allowed the Fellows to progress This project was made possible in part through their studies as a cohort under the by the Institute of Museum and Library broadly defined theme of overcoming bar- Services (Grant #: RE-02-10-0007-10). riers to information access. The program The views, findings, conclusions or rec- has addressed success factors reported by ommendations expressed in this article do earlier literature, including adequate fund- not necessarily represent those of the Insti- ing, diversity of educational experience tute of Museum and Library Services. We and exposure to research and mentoring would also like to acknowledge the faculty while pursuing doctoral studies in a shared and staff of SOIS for their support of the learning environment. B2A Fellows. The limited scope of the B2A program does not allow the authors to generalize the References findings. Nevertheless, the insights gained may be helpful to other doctoral programs Adkins, D. (2004). Latino librarians on becoming and students for planning doctoral studies LIS educators: An exploratory investigation of and identifying factors that lead to suc- the barriers in recruiting Latino faculty. Journal of Education for Library and Information Sci- cessful and rewarding educational experi- ence, 45(2), 149–161. ences. The camaraderie and focus afforded Bennett-Kapusniak, R. (2013). Older adults and the by the themed cohort approach of the B2A public library: The impact of the boomer genera- program allowed the Fellows to engage tion. Public Library Quarterly, 32(3), 204–222. in a shared learning experience. It also Council of Graduate Schools (2008). Ph.D. Com- decreased a sense of isolation for the Fel- pletion Project. Program Completion Data. Table lows, who were returning, non-traditional 1. Cumulative Ten-Year Completion Rates by Program, Broad Field, STEM vs. SSH, and Over- students. all. Available: http://www.phdcompletion.org/ Although doctoral education may be quantitative/book1_quant.asp. perceived as narrow or specialized (i.e., Danton, J. P. (1959). Doctoral study in librarian- learning “more and more about less and ship in the United States. College and Research less”) and even more so under a specific Libraries, 20(6), 435–453. theme, the exposure to diverse perspec- Druin, A., Jaeger, P. T., Golbeck, J., Fleischmann, K. R., Lin, J., Qu, Y., Wang, P., & Xie, B. (2009). tives was identified as an important benefit The Maryland modular method: An approach to of the program. The breadth of research doctoral education in information studies. Jour- and instructional perspectives helped to nal of Education for Library and Information Sci- inform how the Fellows identified their ence, 50(4), 293–301. own research topics, methodological per- Franklin, R. E., & Jaeger, P. T. (2007). A decade spectives and approaches to instruction. of doctorates: An examination of dissertations written by African American women in library Work-life balance was identified as a key and information studies, 1993–2003. Journal of challenge, as familial and other obliga- Education for Library and Information Science, tions remain during the doctoral program, 48(3), 187–201. even with sufficient funding. Money does Gardner, S. K. (2010). Contrasting the socialization not necessarily resolve the issue of time, experiences of doctoral students in high-and low- although a sustained period of funding that completing departments: A qualitative analysis of disciplinary contexts at one institution. The Jour- goes beyond subsistence levels can help nal of Higher Education, 81(1), 61–81.
78 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE Glover, J. (2014). The way we see it: A critical anal- Kram’s mentoring framework to doctoral educa- ysis of classification systems using Tribal Crit. tion in information and library science. Journal of Unpublished manuscript. Education for Library and Information Science, Hernon, P., & Schwartz, C. (2008). Reflections on 53(2), 98–114. a new Ph.D. program: Thoughts of interest to the Sugimoto, C. R., Russell, T. G., & Grant, S. (2009). profession. The Journal of Academic Librarian- Library and information science doctoral educa- ship, 34(1), 1–2. tion: The landscape from 1930–2007. Journal of Klingler, S. L. (2006). What makes a quality Ph.D. Education for Library and Information Science, program in library and information sciences?. 50(3), 190–202. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. University of Thiele, J. (2013, September). The Digital Divide: A North Texas, Denton, Texas. UNT Digital Li- case study of the impact of low (or no) broadband brary. http://digital.library.unt.edu/ark:/67531/ in rural areas. Presented at the 2nd International metadc5499/. Symposium on Information Management In the Maack, M. N., & Passet, J. E. (1994). Aspirations Changing World. Limerick, Ireland. and mentoring in an academic environment. Wallace, D. (Ed.). (2012). ALISE Library and In- Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. formation Science Education Statistical Report Richardson, J. V. (2010). History of American li- 2012. Chicago: Association for Library and In- brary science: Its origins and early development. formation Science Education. In M. J. Bates & M. N. Maack (Ed.), Encyclope- Whitbeck, G. W. (1991a). Doctoral programs in dia of library and information sciences. (3rd ed., library and information science: A descriptive pp. 1–9). study. Journal of Education for Library and In- Seavey, C. A. (2005). The coming crisis in educa- formation Science, 31(4), 314–328. tion for librarianship, American Libraries, 36(9), Whitbeck, G. W. (1991b). Doctoral programs in li- 54–6. brary and information science: An update. Jour- Sugimoto, C. R. (2012a). Are you my mentor? Iden- nal of Education for Library and Information Sci- tifying mentors and their roles in LIS doctoral ence, 32(3/4), 178–187. education. Journal of Education for Library and Zimmer, M., & McCleer, A. (2014). The 2009 West Information Science, 53(1), 2–19. Bend Community Memorial Library controversy: Sugimoto, C. R. (2012b). Initiation, cultivation, Understanding the challenge, the reactions, and separation and redefinition: Application of the aftermath. Library Trends, 62(4), 721–729.