WAR MEASURES: PAST AND FUTURE DAN LACY I EARLIER papers have demonstrated the singular sensitivity of the re- search library to its social environ- ment. Every significant change in the patterns of human thought and action is recorded not only in the books that are added to its collections but in the de- mands made upon its services and in the social responsibilities assumed for it by its directors. It is therefore not surprising that war, that most imperative of all so- cial experiences, should have deeply marked all research libraries in this cen- tury of war. II Upon at least one research library of this country even the now remote wars of the nineteenth century had a distinct and often dramatic effect. One of history's quirks in the War of 1812 saw collections of the Library of Congress reduced to ashes in the burning of the Capitol, a for- tunate catastrophe by which Jefferson's library was enabled to serve as a remark- ably improved phoenix of the national literary hopes. The dramatic events of 1848, both in Mexico and in Europe, led the Joint Committee on the Library to authorize the librarian to "purchase all the constitutions and laws of Mexico, and also to subscribe for a newspaper published in Vera Cruz and for one pub- lished in the City of Mexico"1 and to or- der him "to purchase immediately all works of any reputation touching the modern history, existing conditions, and prospects of Hungary and Germany."2 In the Civil War we see the staff de- pleted by the almost continuous (and, be it admitted, fortunate) absence of the li- brarian in his capacity as a military sur- geon with the Union army. We see the act of the Joint Committee in directing the librarian to expend the hardly stag- gering sum of "up to $100" in the pro- curement of pamphlets relating to the war and the statute of 1864 appropriat- ing $4,000 for the purchase of European journals of the war period.3 And we see the remarkable series of laws enacted in the dosing months of the war and the im- mediate postwar period which, by estab- lishing the regular receipt of material through copyright deposit and both offi- cial and unofficial international ex- changes, laid the basis for the present character of the Library. A consequence of the Spanish war was an awareness of enlarged American re- sponsibilities expressed within the Li- brary of Congress by Librarian Young's emphasis on Latin America in his acqui- sitions program and by an intensive pre- occupation with the new American pos- sessions in the work of the division of bib- liography. In these events in the history of one li- brary, we see foreshadowed most of the varied forms of impact which the wars of 1 Minutes of the Joint Committee on the Library, August 4, 1848, quoted in William Dawson John- ston, History of the Library of Congress, Vol. I: 1800-1864 (Washington: Government Printing Of- fice, 1904), p. 247. 2 Ibid., citing Minutes of the Joint Committee on the Library, February 13, 1850. 'Ibid. 238
WAR MEASURES: PAST AND FUTURE 239 the twentieth century were to have upon American research libranres. We see the threat to the physical existence of their holdings; the awareness of the necessity of adding to the collections material needed in discharging war-enlarged na- tional responsibilities; the draining-away of staff to war service; the role of libraries in preserving the documentation of the war period; the recognition that out of war come broader horizons of national experience which require enlarged con- cepts of the collections and services of re- search libraries; and the burgeoning of libraries in the general accelerations of national growth. But it is not until World Wars I and II and our measures against a third that we see these patterns elaborated under the impact of total war upon a fully devel- oped libraxy system. III Libraries of all kinds in the United States saw as their principal responsibili- ty in World War I the provision of iI- brary service to men in uniform, and they united in a truly remarkable effort to that end. The American Library Asso- ciation established a war service under the leadership of Herbert Putnam with headquarters in the Library of Congress. This service raised and expended more than $5,000,000 in setting up libraries with over 7,000,000 books for the use of some 4,500,000 men. As an entirely vol- untary operation, this was surely one of the greatest achievements of American librarianship, uniting the efforts of li- brarians from the greatest research insti- tutions as well as the smallest public li- braries.4 But it was a personal effort on the part of the librarians themselves, having little permanent effect upon the collections or services of research li- braries. There was also among librarians a clear recognition of the function of their institutions as centers of information. They sought to serve the many users who turned to the library for technical books and journals to aid them in preparing for wartime jobs they had or hoped to get or in converting their businesses to wartime purposes. Even more emphasis was laid on the library as a center of information about the war itself and the issues in- volved, and special efforts were made to build up the collections to this end. As Allied sympathies grew more intense, this information service of libraries be- came increasingly a matter of presenting Allied points of view, a result in part of the scarcity of popular works in English sympathetic to the Central Powers and of the skill of British propaganda serv- ices. After American entry into the war, libraries enthusiastically joined in the task of the patriotic indoctrination of their users and accumulated material with that purpose in view." But the informational services were not all at the popular level. E. E. Rich- ardson, librarian of Princeton Universi- ty, in his presidential address before the American Library Institute in 1918, pointed out reference and bibliographical aid to research as the principal war re- sponsibility of libraries of learning. Rich- ardson and other librarians saw these re- search needs as lying in the fields of sci- ence and technology, particularly chem- istry, and there was for the brief period of the war a quick intensification of tech- 4 Theodore Wesley Koch, Books in the War: The Romance of Library War Seriice (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1919), gives the fullest account of this enterprise. ' An interesting summary is given in Ralph T. Esterquest, "War Attitudes and Activities of Ameri- can Libraries, 1914-19," Wilson Library Bulletin, XV (April, 1941), 621-36.
240 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY nical research that must have laid ex- traordinary demands upon certain seg- ments of the collections of a few libraries. But even in World War I, it was begin- ning to appear that perhaps the most valuable wartime function of research li- braries was as a source of information about other countries, and the American Library Institute undertook as its major wartime project the preparation of a union list of foreign newspapers. The Li- brary of Congress and the New York Public Library engaged in the intensive preparation of bibliographies on war subjects, largely for the National Board on Historical Service, and the institute sponsored a union list of war literature for the same purposes.6 Libraries also felt a keen sense of the historic significance of the war years and of the importance of their contemporary documentation. They were regularly ad- monished in their professional literature to gather up and preserve the ephemera of the war, and librarians were prominent in the state and community war-history committees that were created over most of the country. Their enthusiastic, if un- wisely directed, efforts led to the collec- tion of ill-digested masses of personalia, rosters, clippings, posters, photographs, and other "war records," which general- ly lay unorganized and forgotten a few years after the war. Quite different was the effort of a few major institutions to build up really com- prehensive research collections docu- menting the war in its global character. The Library of Congress was enabled to create perhaps the largest of these, but the New York Public Library and the li- braries of Harvard and Yale universities were close behind. Histories and per- sonal accounts, official documents, prop- aganda leaflets and posters, diaries and letters, and newspaper files and clippings composed the core of these collections. They were very strong for the United States and reasonably so for the major Allies and for Germany, but they were likely to be weak for Russia and non- existent for the minor Central Powers. Of far greater interest, however, than these collections gathered into existing institutions was the creation of a new in- stitution-the Hoover Library, as it came to be called, of War, Peace, and Revolution. The establishment and growth of this remarkable library are well known and have been ably recount- ed by Nathan van Patten and Philip MacLean.7 What is of interest to us is the clear recognition from the beginning that the events the Library sought to docu- ment were of no mere historical concern but were part of a new and dynamic so- cial continuum which American scholars must master, and that they could not be adequately understood solely through conventional library materials conven- tionally acquired. The intensive effort through special agents, themselves often leaders in the events of the period, to ac- cumulate every form of evidence that would contribute to the understanding of the vast and slowly emerging character of a new and unfamiliar world was a de- velopment of major importance in Amer- ican librarianship. Not only in the development of war collections but in their normal acquisi- tions, libraries were hindered by wartime impediments to the flow of books. Ex- changes with German institutions and purchases from German dealers were dis- rupted, and shipments, even from the Al- sAmerican Library Institute, Papers and Pro- ceedings, 1918 (Chicago, 1919). 7 Nathan van Patten, "Herbert Hoover and His Library Relations," Library Journal, LIV (1929), 187-90; Philip T. MacLean, "Hoover Institute and Library," Library Quarterly, XIX (1949), 235-49.
WAR MEASURES: PAST AND FUTURE 241 lied Powers, were slow and uncertain. Prior to American entry in the war, spe- cal efforts, in part successful, were made to obtain a relaxation of the British em- bargo on German shipments, and Theo- dore Koch, chief of the order division of the Library of Congress, made an ex- tended visit to England in the early months of 1917 to work out improved procurement procedures on behalf of a number of research libraries. After the American declaration of war shut off commerce with Germany completely, in- direct channels were established for a trickle of materials through Sweden and Switzerland. Though arrangements for wartime procurement were far less elabo- rate than those in World War II, they met urgent contemporary needs; and the relatively slight disruption of the Ger- man book trade made possible the prompt filling of gaps at the war's end. Throughout the war, American li- brarians had followed with anxious con- cern the fate of important European li- braries in combat areas. Even during the war, measures were discussed to aid in the restoration of war-damaged collec- tions. On a somewhat ill-planned basis, various library and relief groups sent large quantities of books to European li- braries after the war, notably to those of Belgium. American contributions to the reconstruction of the library of the Uni- versity of Louvain were especially gen- erous. IV For all the manifold activities of li- braries during World War I, one is on the whole astonished not at how great but at how little was the war's permanent effect upon the scholarly library. I think it is just to say that in general there remained from the war no enlarged concept of the responsibility of the research library, of the proper scope of its holdings, or of the dependence of the national interest upon instruments of learning. That this is true is no peculiar fault of librarians. America itself, as though frightened by its sudden emergence from the isolation of the new world, fled pre- cipitately from every recognition of the new realities that came into being from the war. It lay open to be seen by 1919 and 1920 that the order of society that had organized the world under the hege- mony of Europe in the nineteenth cen- tury was dying. Bolshevism had already won control of Russia and was swirling about Central Europe as an alternative and a menacing organization of society. Fascist totalitarianism was nascent in Germany and nearly ready to achieve power in Italy. The ponderous agony of Asian awakening had begun. In a world where all the certitudes of yesterday had become unsure, where the raveled bonds of common purpose that had united Western society were all but snapped, where the confused shiftings of distant societies were like hidden rumblings along the earth fault that underlay all our security, it was painfully, indeed, desperately, apparent that the United States must assume a new dimension of responsibility. It was apparent that its instruments of learning must extend to areas and subjects far beyond their ac- customed ambit and must achieve a hitherto unattained service of public aims in the discharge of that responsi- bility. It was apparent, but it was not seen. American scholarship, like America gen- erally, turned from its war experience with a revulsion that appeared all but ready to obliterate the fact of our par- ticipation. Interest in the history of the war and the collections relating thereto almost vanished after a very brief inter-
242 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY val. The responsibilities deriving from the war were denied in action and in thought. The conviction arose, sustained by the special pleading of a group of his- torians, that the United States had been duped into participation. A cynical moral neutralism came to characterize Ameri- can attitudes toward the war, and the ex- traordinarily fine war record of American librarians became to some of their suc- cessors a matter of reproach and embar- rassment. Surely this act of rejection of a whole area of national expenrence is one of the most remarkable manifestations of its sort in history and one hardly to be comprehended in other than psychiatric terms. Like such acts of suppression in individuals, it required the reorganiza- tion and distortion of concepts in many related areas of experience, with the con- sequence that America came to World War II unprepared, in terms of its schol- arly and intellectual organization, to deal with many of the realities it must con- front. V These realities were very different from those of 1917, and the measures taken by libraries to confront them, though falling into the earlier general patterns, assumed a materially different character. In the first place, the organiza- tion of the war effort was far more sys- tematic and professional, a result of the earlier and more nearly total mobiliza- tion and the greater experience of the federal establishment in administering operations of enormous magnitude. The volunteer drives that so commanded the enthusiasm of librarians in World War I were now likely to be handled by gov- ernment agencies. Library service to the armed forces, for example, in conse- quence of the earlier work of the Amen- can Library Association, was now a regu- lar service of the government and no longer demanded the volunteer effort of the library profession. Somewhat similarly, libraries, espe- cially public libraries, served very effi- ciently as centers of information, just as they had done in the earlier war; but their effort could now be fitted into a rather well-organized plan developed by the Office of Education, the Office of War Information, and the Office of Civilian Defense. Again, the documentation of the war period, the object of spontaneous enthu- siasms in World War I, was organized within the federal govemment on a sys- tematic and highly professional basis by the Committee on Records of War Ad- ministration within the Executive Office of the President. Careful planning by the Social Science Research Council and the Committee on Conservation of Cultural Resources encouraged libraries, historical societies, and similar agencies to collect and administer the documentation of the war period as emphases within their reg- ular programs of activity, with the conse- quence that the subsequently orphaned collections of World War I were generally avoided. In the second place, the degree of mo- bilization effected was much higher, and, in consequence, the normal patterns of operation of libraries were disturbed more radically and for a longer period of time. Staff turnover was much greater; shortages in equipment and supplies be- deviled all librarians; and college and university libraries were subjected to sudden vicissitudes as normal enrolment fell off, as training programs of the arned services might be housed on their cam- puses, and as wartime research projects made unfamiliar demands on their collec- tions. Many institutions dependent on
WAR MEASURES: PAST AND FUTURE 243 endowments and tuiton fees suffered sharp curtailments of income. The war disrupted for years the normal activities of libraries of learning, especially in fields not immediately contributing to war power, and even eigl;t years after the war many of them have not been resumed. In particular, advanced bibliographical and related work in the humanities has suf- fered severely. The more nearly complete devotion of national resources to war included the comprehensive harnessing of scientific and technical skills. The few new weapons of World War I represented the ingenious use of familiar principles. In World War II, victory or defeat hung on the success- ful extension of science itself and the util- ization of its newest discoveries in ex- ceedingly complex mechanisms. The ef- fect of this gigantic effort was, of course, felt in all parts of the nation's research resources, including its libraries. The li- brary profession had in some degree an- ticipated the technological and scientific emphasis of the war and in the summer of 1940 had set up a Joint Committee on Li- brary Research Facilities for National Emergency, under the chairmanship of Robert B. Downs and representing the American Library Association, the Spe- cial Libraries Association, the Library of Congress, the Office of Education, and the American Association of Law Li- braries. The committee arranged the speedy preparation of a Guide to Library Facilities for National Defense, under the editorship of Carl L. Cannon. A prelimi- nary edition appeared in 1940 and a re- vised edition in the following year.8 It is indicative of the early conception of the character of research demands produced by the war that the Guide is almost whol- ly confined to scientific and technical col- lections and that there is no reference to materials relating to foreign areas. At the same time, the Special Libraries Association was engaged in its large-scale survey of special library resources and rushed the publication of the first volume in 1941." Though this was intended to provide a more general coverage, it also leaned heavily to science and technology. There was thus available at least some means of organizing in the national serv- ice the total library resources in these broad fields, and libraries served very usefully in the years of feverish investi- gation and development that followed. On the whole, however, the use made of libraries in the course of scientific and technical research probably had little radical or lasting effect upon them. It was for the most part only an intensifica- tion of a familiar use of familiar materi- als. And as the highly confidential re- search projects quickly passed beyond the point of reliance upon the open litera- ture and created their own prolific and secret body of scientific reports, dissemi- nation, organization, recording, and serv- ice of these materials were handled out- side library channels, thus creating a spe- cial problem of the postwar period. Libraries were more decisively affected by the enormous demand for detailed knowledge of foreign countries. World War I had been fought on familiar ter- rain and over the territory of Allied countries which were able to provide de- tailed geographic and other information. World War II was fought over much of the whole face of the globe, in remote and unfamiliar spots with peculiar conditions of climate and topography and among ' Carl L. Cannon (ed.), Guide to Library Facilities for National Defense (Chicago: American Library Association, 1941). Prepared by the Joint Commit- tee on Library Research Facilities for National Emergency. 9 Rose L. Vormelker (ed.), Spewial Library Re- sources, Vol. I (New York: Special Libraries Associa- tion, 1941).
244 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY faraway people following customs and speaking tongues of which we were al- most altogether ignorant. Perhaps be- cause it had ignored the responsibilities about to be thrust upon the United States, American scholarship-so bril- liant in the scientific field-was in this area lamentably unprepared. The re- sources of American learning were inade- quate in geographic, anthropological, economic, sociological, and linguistic knowledge of the areas of Asia and Africa and of many of the areas of Europe in which the war was to be fought. Heavy demands were made upon libraries to fill this deficiency. The organization that later became the Research and Analysis Branch of the Office of Strategic Services was initially established as a part of the Library of Congress. The Army Map Service, the OSS, and other federal agen- cies concerned with intelligence made careful studies and subsequent intensive use of library holdings throughout the country that bore on certain aspects of particular areas. Under this test, American library re- sources stood up poorly indeed, as did the general resources of American scholar- ship. I had occasion last year to charac- terize the collections of the Library of Congress as of 1940 in this regard, in terms that are perhaps relevant to our present purposes: But if the Library's collections were sus- tained by the strength of American scholarship, they were limited by its weaknesses. The pre- dominant interests of American scholars in the prewar period, at least as they were reflected in Library of Congress use, did not yet venture far beyond the central cultural traditions of West- ern civilization; and it was to the demands of a polite, traditional, humanistic learning that the Library's collections primarily responded.... The interests of few American scholars ex- tended to the language or history or culture of countries other than Great Britain, Germany, France, Spain, and those of this hemisphere. Except as special attention had developed them for Russia, China, and Japan and for Hebraic works, the Library's collections were corre- spondingly weak. A survey as late as 1944 indi- cated that the Library had a scant half of the works of such importanqe as to be considered in- dispensable to a reference collection on Scan- dinavia; and its Baltic collections were far weaker. Even for Italian literature it was found to have hardly a quarter of the important texts and treatises. Its holdings of Balkan material were negligible; its Arabic collections very weak; its Iranian collection useless for extensive re- search. India was sparsely represented and Burma, Korea, and Southeast Asia even more so. Even for China, Japan, and Russia, interest remained largely devoted to historical and lit- erary works, and materials relating to current economic and political life were treated with relative neglect. More serious, perhaps, than a limitation in area and subject matter was a limitation upon intensity and detail. Rigorous though the dis- cipline of scholarship was in terms of its self- imposed methodology and internal standards, few scholars in the social sciences and humani- ties regularly faced the necessity of establishing findings with such assurance and in such detail that they could be relied on as the basis for deci- sions of moment in practical life. American scholars had been interested in the classical lit- erature of China, but they had not needed to know the precise capacity, line by line, of its railroads. They were concerned with the com- parative evolution of the industrial economy in Germany and Great Britain but not with the exact number, location, internal arrangement and productive capacity of the Gernan ball- bearing plants. They were more familiar with the ideology of Marx than with the views and background of members of the Politburo. Nor could the collections of the Library, except acci- dentally and imperfectly, have met such needs even if scholars had expressed them.10 And few, if any, American libraries were in a better position at the beginning of the war. Nor was it possible during the war years easily to improve these deficien- cies. The scope and intensity of the war 10 Dan Lacy, "The Library of Congress: A Ses- quicentenary Review," Library Quarterly, XX (1950), 166-67.
WAR MEASURES: PAST AND FUTURE 245 were so much greater than in 1914-18 that the international book trade was al- most completely destroyed. Until the American entry into the war, many American libraries, working through a Joint Committee on Importations, which was particularly effective in dealing with British censorship, managed to obtain reasonably good coverage of European and Japanese journals. But after Pearl Harbor, imports of books for American libraries generally were for practical pur- poses confined to those from the British Commonwealth and the Western Hemi- sphere. The principal libraries and re- search and intelligence units of the feder- al government created an interdepart- mental committee to arrange the pro- curement and assignment of foreign pub- lications. By the use of microfilm and of a number of circuitous channels, this committee and its constituent agencies were able to maintain a restricted flow of materials to meet the most essential needs of the government. Barriers to procurement could be over- come in any general sense, however, only as hostilities were concluded in particular areas. The Library of Congress sent a representative to Portugal and Spain in April, 1943, and was able to arrange to have him follow close behind the troops in North Africa and Italy and later in France. This arrangement, however sat- isfactory for the Library of Congress as a federal agency, did not meet the needs of nongovernmental libraries; but it was obvious that those needs could be met only through some extension of federal action. In consequence, by agreement with the State and War departments, on the one hand, and with American libraries, primarily as represented by the Associa- tion of Research Libraries, on the other, the Library of Congress undertook, in 1945, to act as a procurement agency in Europe for all interested American li- braries, and the State and War depart- ments pledged their full co-operation. The size of the Library of Congress mis- sion was materially increased, specialists were engaged in many fields, and the Li- brary advanced funds for multiple pur- chases. All told, over two million pieces were acquired by the mission through purchase, through the transfer to the mission by the Army of confiscated prop- aganda and collections of military and Nazi organizations, and through the transfer of materials seized by the Office of Censorship. Through the operation of a scheme of priorities carefully worked out by a committee under the chairman- ship of Robert B. Downs, over two-thirds of this material passed into the collec- tions of one hundred and thirty co-oper- ating libraries, at a final net average cost to them, including the cost of the pur- chased material, of 75.5 cents a volume. This Co-operative Acquisition Project was one of the most successful of the war- time undertakings of American libraries. One special enterprise of the project is worth note-the negotiation with Rus- sian occupying authorities of arrange- ments for the release of nearly $200,000 worth of books, principally serials, held in Leipzig for American institutions by German publishers and dealers. This re- markable accomplishment, together with the general work of the project, made the World War II period one of the strong- est, rather than one of the weakest, peri- ods in the holdings of American research libraries." The procurement problem in Japan was even more difficult; but it was sim- pler in that fewer libraries were involved. 11 The best general account is Robert B. Downs, "Wartime Co-operative Acquisitions," Library Quarterly, XIX (1949), 157-65.
246 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Immediately following the war, the Li- brary of Congress had arranged for the ultimate transfer to its custody of the holdings of the Washington Documents Center, an enormous collection of Japa- nese documents administered by the OSS in behalf of the government agencies con- cerned. The occupying forces had Japa- nese co-operation in making this collec- tion as fully representative as possible of Japanese work in all fields of scholarship. Though the Library of Congress under- took to make this collection useful for American libraries generally, its enor- mous size (over three hundred thousand pieces) and the inadequate size of the staff that handles Japanese materials have limited what the Library can do. More than thirty thousand duplicates have, however, been distributed to other libraries, and as rapidly as the collection can be processed it is being made avail- able for loan and photoduplication. Following the war, the Library of Congress sent the acting head of its Japa- nese section to Japan to investigate the possibility of exchanges and other chan- nels of procurement for American li- braries generally. This mission was help- ful in restoring the acquisition of Japa- nese books to more normal patterns. The destruction of library holdings abroad that had so troubled American librarians in 1914-18 now presented a far graver problem, as the development of air power extended by thousands of miles the destructive range of battle and made difficult the distinction between proper and improper military objectives. This concern was heightened by the adoption of looting as an organized prac- tice of German leaders. The first hope was for filming priceless materials in Europe whose texts might otherwise be lost to civilization. A conference on mi- crocopying materials for research in for- eign depositories was convened in June, 1940, by the American Council of Learned Societies and the Library of Congress, and it resolved on a swift and ambitious program. With generous sup- port from the Rockefeller Foundation, operations were begun in England in 1941 and were carried forward energeti- cally throughout the war under the di- rection of the American Council of Learned Societies and with full British co-operation. Though events had moved too rapidly to permit filming on the Continent, the total result was impres- sive.12 Meanwhile, librarians had participat- ed actively in the work of the American Commission for the Protection and Sal- vage of Artistic and Historic Monuments in War Areas. Through that commission, they had aided in the preparation of lists of notable European libraries to be given immunity in American bombing, in the designation of monuments and fine arts officers with American troops, and in planning for the extraordinarily effective program carried out by the American Army in the protection and restitution of library materials in occupied areas.'3 During the course of the war, the Lin- coln Cathedral copy of the Magna Car- ta and some three thousand of the most precious books among the holdings of the National Library at Peiping found pro- tection in the United States, and the lat- ter were microfilmed as an additional measure of safety. In anticipation of the need for restor- 12 The best description of the project, though written in its early stages, is D. H. Daugherty, "Current Microcopying Program in England," Journal of Documentary Reproduction, IV (1941), 207-11. 1" Report of the American Commission for the Pro- tection and Salvage of Artistic and Historic Monu- ments in War Areas (Washington: Government Printing Office, 1946).
WAR MEASURES: PAST AND FUTURE 247 ing libraries in war areas, the American Library Association, with Rockefeller Foundation funds, bought more than $100,000 worth of American scholarly publications for subsequent donation abroad. Library interests generally unit- ed after the war in the American Book Center, which used donations of funds and books in a massive program for the restoration of war-devastated libraries. In total, more than 3,600,000 books and penodical issues, with an aggregate value of over $1,500,000, were shipped, usually after careful screening, to institutions in forty-four countries abroad. In this war, however, the concern for the preservation of books was by no means confined to the foreign theaters of combat. Enemy bombardment of Amen- can coastal cities was, during most of the war, an entirely possible operation, from which only great good fortune spared us. Libraries joined with other cultural in- stitutions and federal agencies in the Committee on Conservation of Cultural Resources, which published a handbook on the Protection of Cultural Resources against the Hazards of War (Washington, 1942) and acted as a center of advice and technical information. Most major li- braries in coastal cities evacuated their more precious holdings to interior towns and made such protective arrangements within their buildings as they could for the remainder of their collections. Per- haps the largest such program was that of the Library of Congress, which evacu- ated nearly five thousand cases of mate- rial; but other institutions removed pro- portionately comparable masses of ma- terial. VI The title of this paper requires not merely the reporting of past, but the con- templation of future, war measures. It seems to me impossible to do this without some digression to consider, in the broad- est possible terms, the character of the situation to which such future measures must respond. The scientific, technological, and po- litical attainments of western Europe in recent centuries enabled it to settle or dominate the rest of the world and, by the end of the nineteenth century, to per- fect an organization of human society. This organization linked the peoples of the whole earth in an exceedingly com- plex economic and commercial collabora- tion controlled by western European and American capital and entrepreneurial leadership and in a political order which, though loosely associated and polynucle- ated, was also clearly under western Eu- ropean and American hegemony. Any country not sharing the advanced West- ern technology had but limited political freedom within this organization, regard- less of its technical sovereignty, and the Western powers exercised direct political dominion over a major part of the entire race. In this pattern of world organiza- tion, the economic governance was even more closely centered in the West, and the activities of the rest of the world in producing requisite raw materials were determined, developed, and controlled for Western purposes. For all its many and iniquitous faults, this organization of human society, reaching its climactic expression in the Pax Britannica of the turn of the cen- tury, was at once the most comprehen- sive, the most successful, and the freest yet achieved by man. The libertarian principles which were the highest formu- lation of its political and economic thought were peculiarly congenial to the growth of free learning; and the institu- tions of scholarship, including libraries, have flourished under its domain.
248 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY But the collapse of this order of socie- ty, which might have been seen as im- pending in 1919, was very nearly com- plete in 1945. There were many reasons for this. The two world wars and, in par- ticular, the destructive campaigns of the second had gravely damaged the physical capacity to produce and had disrupted, if not destroyed, the sense of common pur- pose that had cemented this order of society. But there were other and more fundamental causes. The very success of the old order in providing, for the first time in human history, reasonable com- fort and security for a considerable por- tion of mankind made intolerable its failure to do so for the remainder. Just as its economic success became a cause of failure, the liberal, just, and humane ethos that developed within the domi- nant centers of this society was turned inward to become an instrument of suc- cessful attack on its moral values, at once sustaining rebellion and secession among the subordinated dasses and peoples and palsying the will of the con- trolling groups. The disintegration of this pattern of world organization is marked in the po- litical sphere by the liquidation of the Western empires, the weakening of European and American political influ- ence in the Middle East and Asia, and the disappearance of the old "concert of powers." Internally, it has been marked by the acute civil disorder in the Arab and Asian worlds that has accompanied the withdrawal of Western control and by the acute domestic tensions within most Western states. The same process in the economic field is witnessed by the de- cline in the production of raw materials in the previously subordinated areas as Western technical direction is put aside and by the disruption of familiar pat- terns of trade as those areas endeavor to assert their economic independence. Con- comitantly, there is a marked disturb- ance of economic patterns within the in- dividual metropolitan powers. The cur- rent chaos in Iran is a characteristic manifestation of both the political and the economic aspects of the process of disintegration. We thus confront in our time, in a grander dimension than history has here- tofore provided, one of the classic and tragic situations of the human race-the enfeeblement of the organizing principle that has informed a comprehensive and stable order of society. Such situations in the past history of the race have intro- duced extended periods of disorganiza- tion approaching anarchy, from which in time some novel organizing principle has emerged. But anarchy has become an intolerable state. Under the relatively benign order of the past two centuries, the population of the earth has multiplied so rapidly and distributed itself so asymmetrically that to stay alive it must produce and trans- port food and other goods in a volume possible only to a complex and highly differentiated economy operating under stable conditions. If order and stability cannot be achieved within a framework of voluntary collaboration, it is quite cer- tain that they will be imposed by force within a totalitarian framnework. Society will, in desperation, turn to whatever or- ganizing principle has the vigor to pre- serve it. Such an alternative organizing prin- ciple emerged from the chaos in which Gernany and Russia were left at the close of the last war, has followed close upon the heels of chaos in Asia, and presses against the ineffectually function- ing order of continental Europe. This totalitarian organizing principle substi- tutes imposed conformity for voluntary
WAR MEASURES: PAST AND FUTURE 249 co-operation, rejects the humane indi- vidualism of the old order at its best, en- forces its will with terror and violence, and expunges any notion of objective truth, disinterested inquiry, or free learning. It is not, I think, an exaggeration to say that humanlkind now confronts the gravest question in its recorded history. Will the collapse of the Western order continue to its end, to be followed by a totalitarian order ruling with faceless brutality over the sleet-gray centuries ahead? Or will the remaining healthy centers of the Western order successfully reassert the moral, economic, and physi- cal vigor of freedom as the organizing principle of a human society in which all men can voluntarily participate? This question will not soon be an- swered. For a very long time, probably at least for the rest of all our lives, it seems to me quite certain that we shall live in a time of troubles in which the margin be- tween war and peace will remain indis- tinct or meaningless. When we speak of the future measures of libraries in war, therefore, we necessarily mean the meas- ures they address to this fundamental struggle of our century. And I think the needed measures, at least in their larger forms, can be seen with some clarity. It is obvious that the Western world must rapidly increase its military strength to a point at which it can pro- tect itself and maintain as much control as possible over the situation while a genuinely voluntary world order is de- veloping. It is obvious that it must in- crease it, industrial production to a point that will sustain this military strength and at the same time enable it to include all its participants in the benefits of that production. It is obvious that it must ex- tend its technology to those impover- ished areas of the world hitherto exclud- ed from sharing its fruits. It is obvious that it must be quit of the insularity that has hampered its effective dealing with, and prevented its sympathetic under- standing of, Slavic, Asian, and African peoples. And, finally, it is obvious that these responsibilities rest primarily upon the United States, as the strongest and least harmed of the centers of Western society. VII But what do these responsibilities mean in concrete terms of library opera- tions? It seems to me that the measures they require can be summed up under six headings. 1. Recpgnizing the uncertainty and the probable disorder ahead, we need to take long-range measures for the more ef- fective protection of our essential re- sources. We think first of our holdings of rare books and manuscripts. Certainly their preservation is one of our first re- sponsibilities and should be taken into ac- count in our microfilming programs, in the design of our future buildings, and in those detailed plans for evacuation which every prudent librarian in a major city must hereafter hold in readiness. But perhaps of even greater importance is the protection of the capacity of our national library system taken as a whole to render essential research services. Our basic holdings in Slavic and Asian mate- rials, for example, are dangerously con- centrated in a few unusually vulnerable institutions, and a wider distribution of critical materials must be one of our es- sential measures. But we cannot be content with the protection of American holdings only. We are the sharers of a civilization whose principle cultural treasures are in other and even more vulnerable countnres, and one cannot escape some sense of responsi- bility for their preservation. The obvious
250 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY and attractive proposal is a vast micro- filming program which will at once assure the safekeeping of the texts of materials abroad, enrich and broaden the resources of American scholarship, and facilitate the duplication of materials for use any- where. Unhappily, the grandeur and sim- plicity of such a proposal are surpassed only by its impossibility. I do not, in fact, think that there is any step American li- braries can take which will make measur- able progress toward assuring the preser- vation of the generality of unique and important research materials abroad. We can, of course, help to film selected bits of transcendent importance; for the rest, perhaps our wisest course is to concen- trate our efforts on doing what we can to- ward restoring and maintaining the vigor of institutions abroad dedicated to the continuity of enlightenment, recognizing this as far more important in the long run than the safety or loss of any particular documents. 2. We need to apply all our bibliothe- cal skill to certain critical problems of documentation in the field of science and technology. For a variety of reasons the normal patterns of communication in those fields have broken down or have become inadequate to present needs. The research report, often confidential, al- ways in few copies, and addressed to a supenor or a contracting agency rather than to one's colleagues, is tending to supplant the journal article as the char- acteristic record of scientific and techni- cal discovery. The accessibility of this vast "sub-literature" is of critical and growing importance. In addition, the greatly enlarged and highly organized prosecution of scientific research has set up demands for the bib- liographical control cf scientific literature of quite a new order of intensity and de- tail. Library classification schemes and subject-heading lists, including those of the Library of Congress, have responded inadequately to these demands. A conse- quence is the effort of individual disci- plines, or even individual agencies or projects, to solve their own bibliographic problems individually and without the aid of general competence in the field. The attainment of bibliographic order in the fields of science and technology is an essential in our national defense, to which librarians can make an indispen- sable contribution. 3. A third "war measure" is to improve radically our holdings of foreign materi- als-not only extensively in the sense of developing collections from those coun- tries, such as Thailand or Rumania, now very poorly represented, but intensively, in the sense of acquiring from countries already liberally represented, such as France, those informal and nonacademic publications outside the book trade which are so indispensable to that de- tailed knowledge of other countries which our growing responsibilities re- quire. Again, it is not a matter only of acquiring the sole or few copies necessary for intelligence or related research needs. It is a question also of developing a net- work of research collections capable of sustaining the greatly enlarged teaching and research program which must be de- veloped in the universities to enable us to deal intelligently with the remote areas that have become of such critical impor- tance to the United States. Related to this aim is the necessity of greatly improving the organization and bibliographical control of collections in other languages than those of western Europe. Because we have had few users and fewer catalogers of these materials, they are under deplorable control in most institutions, and the difficulties are com- pounded by the absence or inadequacy of
WAR MEASURES: PAST AND FUTURE 251 bibliographical tools in those languages. We need intensified and co-operative cataloging programs and area accession lists in those languages. 4. A fourth measure, necessary to the execution of the preceding three, is the establishment of more effective machin- ery for realizing the united potentialities of the national library system viewed as a whole. The Board on Resources of American Libraries of the American Li- brary Association, the Board on Catalog- ing Policy and Research of that associa- tion's division of cataloging and classifi- cation, and the Farmington Plan Com- mittee of the Association of Research Li- braries all fill important parts of this need. But we need some more general body, representing government and scholarship as well as librarianship, ca- pable of giving thoughtful and continu- ing attention to the co-operative meas- ures required to make national research resources most fully responsive to nation- al needs. A promising beginning is shown in the creation of the Committee on Na- tional Needs of the Association of Re- search Libraries, which may be a step to- ward the more comprehensive and per- manently staffed body that the situation requires. 5. A fifth measure in response to the times is a fuller participation by Ameri- can libraries in developing and executing programs for assistance to and collabora- tion with foreign libraries and learned and technical institutions. A strong li- brary system can aid those countries friendly to us in all the ways in which it can aid our own. More particularly, one of the most crucial, perhaps the crucial point in our race against chaos, is rapid improvement of the technology of under- developed areas in order to avert collapse and to draw them into more equal par- ticipation in the benefits of Western civi- lization. Even the puny gestures we have hitherto made in the Point Four program have demonstrated how staggeringly in- adequate to this task are our resources of expert manpower and how fully every auxiliary means of technical instruction and training and of self-help must be em- ployed. The nascent library system of those underdeveloped countries, particu- larly the libraries of institutions of tech- nical education, can be a very powerful instrument of technical assistance. One of the most fruitful measures of Ameri- can libraries will be to aid such institu- tions through every possible channel, pri- vate and official, and to press for a far more vigorous and intelligent use of li- brary materials and methods in technical assistance programs. 6. Finally, we come to what I am satis- fied is the most important measure of all that American libraries can take in re- sponse to the demands of our time: that is to continue to be themselves. As I tried on another occasion to express the idea, "Every great library in the discharge of its elemental function of bringing togeth- er in a single collection the products of minds of all countries is not only a sym- bol but an embodiment of a universal commonwealth, a part of the indivisible fabric of knowledge of which civilization is formed and by which it is sustained.""' That voluntary association of human minds toward a common end which must be the basis of any free world order finds no clearer expression than in the work of such a library. In the troubled years ahead, it will almost certainly be a task of great difficulty to maintain in adversi- ty the scope and strength of our major li- braries and to preserve from the attacks of bigotry and hysteria their essential freedom. But as long as we do, the war against darkness will not have been lost. "I Lacy, op. cit., p. 257.