Do We Really Need Cultural Diversity in the Library and Information Science Curriculum? William C. Welburn What should a course in cultural diver- sity or multiculturalism look like in li- brary and information science? Before this question can be answered, it is nec- essary to raise a series of fundamental questions about the place of diversity in the curriculum. Why should any pro- gram in library and information science commit scarce, precious resources to such an endeavor? Is this no more than a fad within the academy, primarily af- fecting undergraduate education? Can any institution really afford to teach about diversity in the educational preparation of professionals? All might be relevant questions if we were academic blacksmiths who forge our curricula in the hot fires of cost benefit. But we come to the acad- emy with a range of scholarly and pro- fessional interests, as do the students we admit to our programs. More impor- tant, however, we are engaged in pro- grams of study that are designed to pre- pare graduate students as professionals mediating between information and people. It is this last point that I wish to focus upon as a basis for the inclusion of diversity as a necessary component of our curricula. Defining Cultural Diversity While our programs have succeeded in merging theory and practice in teaching the technologies of retrieval and man- agement of information service organi- zations, we have done this without a similar level of discussion of the people who seek information. What we mean by "cultural diversity" is not well-de- fined because we are not focused on theoretical and substantive issues that assist us in defining our interpersonal and intercultural relationships with our clientele. In an effort to define what cultural diversity is, I will paraphrase the writer Kamau Brathwaite, who sug- gests from his Caribbean, Rastacentric perspective that we are referring to "a cultural process perceived as taking place within a continuum of space and time. . . one that takes into account the relationships between cultures within a given society or geographic location over time."1 In other words, cultural di- versity is not the mere existence of dif- ferent cultures occupying a single space; it is a dynamic engagement be- tween cultures, their values, beliefs, and ways of knowing. Brathwaite has argued that at least in the Caribbean con- text, such a process has resulted in creo- lization, which can be bifurcated into ac/culturation or the "yoking of one cul- ture to another," and inter/culturation, or the "unplanned, unstructured, but os- motic relationship proceeding from this yoke."2 328 Volume 35, Number 4
Culturol Diversity 329 About the Author William C. Welburn is Assistant Dean for Graduate Studies at the Univer- sity of Iowa, Iowa City. I believe that this is a much stronger argument for the inclusion of cultural diversity in the development of educa- tional objectives for library and infor- mation science than population projec- tions such as those in the Workforce 2000 report. It is a much stronger argu- ment because it takes history and con- text into account to help define present- day needs. It also maintains that such an initiative will not end with the passage of artificially created milestones. Most important of all, an approach to under- standing cultural diversity as a dynamic concept is compatible with our effort to educate professionals who are at the center of an interplay between people and information. I have argued in another paper that "it is imperative that we recognize the role of culture in each of the three ele- ments that compose this relationship: the cultural contexts of information, its origins and uses, of information seek- ers, and of information mediators and providers."3 All of these elements ought to have a major impact on how we teach students entering library and informa- tion science. Cultural Diversity and the Curriculum There are three important considera- tions to teaching a separate course in cultural diversity. First, such a course would have to be considered to be an intermediate or transitional step toward rethinking the curriculum at large. Sec- ond, a separate course should (at least in my view) revolve around the trifold concept of linkages between the mul- ticultural contexts of information, its users, and information providers. Third, distinctions should be drawn be- tween diversity as a workplace issue and diversity as a service issue. In my opinion, workplace concerns are more appropriately presented within the con- text of teaching management. While service and workplace issues do overlap, the literature on human re- sources management is by comparison more clearly focused on intercultural relationships, the law on equality, dis- crimination and affirmative action, and policy affecting employment. There is an important dilemma that we must face when we consider peda- gogical issues in multiculturalism and cultural diversity in library and infor- mation science education. We lack a body of knowledge and a critical mass of scholars engaged in the kind of re- search that can be used in affecting a shift in pedagogy. There is a paucity of scholarship on racial/ethnic perspec- tives in information and library science. Contrast our predicament with law, where a body of literature has emerged in the areas of critical race theory and feminist scholarship. Intellectual free- dom and rights guaranteed under the First Amendment of the Constitution is an example that is dear to us. Two recent books worth our reading are Catharine MacKinnon's Only Words and Mari Mat- suda, Charles Lawrence, Richard Del- gado, and Kimberle Crenshaw's Words that Wound: Critical Race Theory, As- saultive Speech and the First Amend- Fall 1994
330 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science ment.A Both books offer challenges to an absolute protection of free speech based on a critical analysis of discrimination, equal protection, and sexual and racial harassment. Both are also examples of the critical discussions needed in our field. However, in the absence of a similar dialogue on intellectual freedom and cul- tural diversity inside our field, it may be possible that these works can be imported to frame discussion on intellectual free- dom as a conceptual basis for the interac- tion described earlier in the model relat- ing information, its users, and mediators within cultural contexts. Summary I have attempted to create a conceptual framework for the discussion of diver- sity and the curriculum in library and information science. I have sketched what I believe to be the core elements of a transitional course. More than a trite phrase, cultural diversity has an impor- tant role in educating professionals in the 1990s. It is central to understanding the former Yugoslavia, post-Apartheid South Africa, racial formation in Co- lombia, Brazil, and southern Mexico, Haitian refugees in New York or Florida, diversity within the Hispanic popula- tion in the United States, South and Southeast Asian migration to North America, anxiety over hate speech on college campuses, and the resurgence of xenophobia in society at large. As a profession, librarians and other information professionals interact with scholars who are drawn to study such issues affecting these and other cultural groups, retrieve information for policy makers for further analysis and policy formation, and work crosscultu- rally in classrooms and media centers, in libraries and over the Internet to fa- cilitate access. The task for the mediator or provider of information to a multieth- nic, Jiiu/ficultural society is to combine the wealth of our understanding about how access is accomplished with a bet- ter understanding of the people who need, see, and use information. References 1. Edward Kamau Brathwaite, Contradic- tory Omens: Cultural Diversity and Inte- gration in the Caribbean (Kingston, Jamaica: Savacou, 1974), 5-6. 2. Ibid. 3. William Welburn, "Moving Beyond Cli- che: Cultural Diversity and the Curricu- lum in Library and Information Studies" (paper presented at the conference, Li- brary and Information Studies Education and the American Mosaic: Mapping Cur- ricular Reform, Queens College, Queens, New York, October 15, 1993). 4. Cathanne MacKinnon, Only Words (Cam- bridge, Mass: Harvard Univ. Pr., 1993); Maria Matsuda and others, Words that Wound: Critical Race Theory, Assaultive Speech and the First Amendment (Boul- der, Colo.: Westview Press, 1992). MacK- innon's book is based on a series of lectures given by the author that have a much wider audience than the legal com- munity. Matsuda and others is a collec- tion of articles published earlier in law reviews. Volume 35, Number 4