THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Volume XXVIII APRIL 1958 Number 2 THE NATIONAL LIBRARY OF MEDICINE. II DOROTHY M. SCHULLIAN AND FRANK B. ROGERS INTERNATIONAL RECOGNITION, 1880-95 THE plodding years had had their vision which had in turn been real- ized. Volume I, A-Berlinski, of the Index-Catalogue of the Library of the Surgeon-General's Office, United States Army, was published in 1880 in fifteen hundred copies, with authors and subjects arranged in dictionary order in a single alphabet. It immediately elicited congratulatory messages from countless members of the medical profession the world over. In his submittal letter to Surgeon General Barnes, June 1, 1880, Billings acknowledged in particular the valuable assistance which he had re- ceived from Fletcher-assistance which had gone far beyond mere routine or the limits of office-hours-and prudently called attention to a fact even now too often ignored, that the Index-Catalogue is not a complete medical bibliography but a catalog of what is to be found in a single collection. Nor has it ever been a full catalog of that single collection; Billings himself, as year after year went by and volume after volume was pub- lished, acknowledged sins of both omis- sion and commission. He granted also that, in spite of a first rough assortment (his nocturnal hours with the clothes basketsl), much rubbish was perforce included in the collection, "for the pro- portion of what is both new and true is not much greater in medicine than it is in theology," and a great national col- lection could only make the whole ac- cessible to those who wished to use it. In addition, modern classifiers will find much to criticize in the system of sub- ject headings and in the arrangement of books on the shelves. While a single al- phabetical arrangement by some two hundred rubrics ("Liver, Cirrhosis of") dispenses with inconveniences inherent in a system of arbitrary numerals, it does not guarantee quick location of the book itself. The important thing to rec- ognize is that the Library continued to grow, that the Index-Catalogue con- tinued to appear, and that in the year 1895, when Volume XVI, W-Zythus, concluded the First Series (which was not so termed in its course), any medi- cal student writing a dissertation here or abroad on the surgical treatment of epilepsy had under firm control the bulk of the literature which he needed. Billings and Fletcher co-operated in another venture which, though never a government publication, was intimately 95
96 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY connected for over a half-century with the Library of the Surgeon General's Office. They had seen early the need for a monthly serial which would index un- der subject headings current books and articles in medicine, surgery, and the collateral branches, and they shrewdly turned their venture to the Library's ad- vantage. Wrote Billings in the first issue of January 31, 1879: All books, pamphlets, and periodicals sent by their author or publishers to the INDEX MEDI- cus will, after record and analysis for that Journal, be placed in the Library of the Sur- geon-General's Office; and the hope that the contributions to the Library from this source will be large, and thus permit of the application of the limited fund provided by government for its support to the purchase of the many works still required to make it fairly complete, has been my main inducement for undertaking to furnish the necessary data. Beyond the satis- faction in thus contributing to the convenience of medical writers and teachers, and to the com- pleteness of the Library under my charge, I have no personal or pecuniary interest in the enterprise. On the title page he is inscribed simply "Surgeon U.S. Army"; Fletcher, simply "M.R.C.S. Eng." Within the pages of the Index Medicus, it was stated, the practitioner will find the titles of parallels for his anomalous cases, accounts of new reme- dies, and the latest methods in therapeutics. The teacher will observe what is being written or taught by the masters of his art in all coun- tries. The author will be enabled to add the latest views and cases to his forthcoming work, or to discover where he has been anticipated by other writers, and the publishers of medical books and periodicals must necessarily profit by the publicity given to their productions. Such splendor of alliteration cannot have helped when, as deplored in the second issue, foreign journals were ir- regular and late in arriving ("It has been decided that the most practical plan will be to index everything as it is received") or when a long-established house in Paris through which French periodicals were obtained suddenly suspended busi- ness ("Immediate steps have been taken to insure the speedy transmission of the missing journals"). The venture was never practical financially; subscription rates were high, and private publishers can fail and can die. Place of publication shifted from New York to Detroit to Boston and Washington during the first twenty years, and as late as 1891 there were only 482 subscriptions, of which 90 came from the United States Army Medical Department, 224 from the rest of the United States, and 168 from other countries. But it served well those who received it, and it brought to the Library by special entreaty countless reports of hospitals, asylums, dispensaries, and municipal boards of health as well as printed bills or ordinances relating to medical education or public health which had been introduced and/or passed in state and municipal legislative bodies. For Billings comprehended the impor- tance of documents, and, as the Index- Catalogue and the Index Medicus went out "that side the water," so official doc- uments showered in from Liechtenstein and San Marino, Haiti and Greenland, Somaliland and Zanzibar. Later an at- tempt was made to revive the Index Medicus in Paris, and for the long peri- od 1903-27 a solution was found under the patronage of the Carnegie Institu- tion. In 1927 the Index Medicus was merged with the Quarterly Cumulative Index of the American Medical Associa- tion, and in 1931 the Quarterly Cumula- tive Index Medicus was removed entire- ly from the library which had conceived its progenitor. The Library has now a quasi-lineal and thriving descendant in the Current List of Medical Literature. Billings' renown had spread nation- ally and internationally, whether part and parcel of the Library's or vice versa it is sometimes impossible to distinguish.
THE NATIONAL LIBRARY OF MEDICINE 97 To many he seemed to be the Library. In 1878 William A. Hammond, whose court-martial by Stanton had been re- versed by Congress and who had won for himself great professional respect in New York, returned to Washington. Irked by a statement in the Minutes of the Medical Society of the County of New York that Dr. John S. Billings had founded the National Medical Library, he informed the Society that, while he desired in no way to detract from credit due Dr. Billings, he himself had founded the library several years before Dr. Billings was stationed at the city of Washington. Billings, on February 3, 1880, calmly set down a few facts in re- ply which he allowed to speak for them- selves: For many years there was a small collection of medical books and journals in the Surgeon- General's office at Washington, which collection was commenced by Surgeon-General Lovell prior to 1836. At the commencement of the war this collection amounted to between three and four hundred volumes. Dr. Hammond entered on his duties as Surgeon-General April 28, 1862, and left Washington August 30, 1863, after which date he was not on duty in this office. During this interval three hundred and fifty- nine volumes were purchased for the use of the office.... During the years 1864 and 1865 about 1,000 volumes were added to the library, mainly works selected by Drs. Woodward and Otis. When the library came under my charge, in the fall of 1865, it contained, as shown by a catalogue made at the time, about 1,800 vol- umes. At this date it contains about 50,000 volumes and 60,000 pamphlets. This whiplash given, Billings went se- renely on his way. Year by year, appropriations for both Library and Index-Catalogue eventu- ally were made, in spite of the "rhyth- mic spasms," as he once expressed it, "of partial economy with which some of our statesmen are afflicted." Accession figures climbed and were carefully printed for all to see in the Annual Re- port of the Surgeon General and implic- itly, by numbers of titles, in the submit- tal letters to the successive volumes of the Index-Catalogue. The ideal was to obtain as soon as published every new medical work, great or small, in all lan- guages, though the budget and other factors never permitted its full realiza- tion. Dealers learned to admire Billings' sagacity in purchases and to respect his belief that public funds were a trust. From a list of old books sent by Dr. Toner he would offer, for example, $1.50 for No. 7, $1.00 for No. 26, 75 cents for No. 33, and 25 cents for No. 79. "Is No. 32 medical? ... As you know it is some- what difficult to make offers for books without having an opportunity of exam- ining them as so much depends on the condition of the copies, etc." Nor were books in his Library in the category of those "rarely consulted except by one or two species of beetles." Loans went di- rect to physicians on payment of a de- posit fee, which was returned when the book was once again safely on the shelves. In 1884 two thousand letters were written in response to requests for medical information. Serious bibliogra- phers were aided at every turn by this "hod-carrier," as he called himself, who brought together the bricks made by one set of men in order that another set of men might build therewith; but, when he received a letter stating that the writer was about to prepare a paper for his county medical society on tumors of the liver and would be glad to have as complete a list of references as possible to all articles, reports of cases, or statis- tics on this subject and that the paper had to be ready in two weeks, he knew that what the writer wanted was one of the recent encyclopedias of medicine, and he advised accordingly. The cordiality of his relations with in- dividuals and institutions of similar in-
98 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY tent is nowhere better expressed than in his remarks at a dinner of the College of Physicians in Philadelphia on April 14, 1886: I rise to respond with great pleasure, an un- usual thing under such circumstances, as the pleasure usually attends the sitting down. My pleasure is due largely to the fact that it gives me an opportunity to acknowledge the cordial sympathy and valuable aid which the Medical Departments [he was magnanimously including the Navy, for was not his a National Medical Library?] of the Government have always re- ceived from the College of Physicians of Phila- delphia. Their relations have always been inti- mate, as I could easily show you, but this is not the time for a historical essay. I will merely remind you that one of the founders of the College was the first Surgeon General of the Army, namely, Dr. John Morgan. From some of the remarks made this evening you will no doubt have inferred that the College of Phy- sicians has a branch library in Washington.... The nation too went on its way, though not always serenely, and its de- velopment, like that of medicine and science in general, inevitably affected the Library of the Surgeon General's Office. President James A. Garfield, at- tended by Surgeon General Barnes, as Abraham Lincoln had been, died Sep- tember 19, 1881, from the bullet of a disgruntled office-seeker. Public re- action in combination with other cir- cumstances forced the passage a year later of the Pendleton Act, which, in spite of its weaknesses, became the foundation for Federal Civil Service in its present form. All government agen- cies were eventually affected, and "pitchforking" disappeared along with greater evils. Chester A. Arthur suc- ceeded Garfield and retained Robert Todd Lincoln as Secretary of War. In 1879 Edison developed the incandescent light, and in the same year electric cur- rent was first used in arc lamps in Wash- ington. With Lister and Pasteur came a new age in medicine, military and civil. In 1881 George Miller Sternberg iso- lated the pneumococcus and photo- graphed the tubercle bacillus. In 1881, also, Joseph H. Woodward became the first Army officer to be honored with the presidency of the American Medical Association. The Act of June 30, 1882, compelling retirement for officers and soldiers after forty years of active serv- ice or when an officer had reached the age of sixty-four, hit immediately Sur- geon General Barnes, who was already nearly a year beyond that age limit, and Billings lost an active and steady advo- cate. George A. Otis, who had been a moving spirit in the Army Medical Mu- seum and the Medical and Surgical His- tory of the War of the Rebellion, died in 1881, and Joseph H. Woodward, of whom the same can be said, in 1884 aft- er several years of poor health. On De- cember 28, 1883, Surgeon General Mur- ray consolidated the Army Medical Museum and the Library of the Sur- geon General's Office into the Museum and Library Divrision. Billings was put in charge of both units, the second and third floors of the building on Tenth Street were assigned to the Division, and all the clerks engaged in library work were transferred there. He accept- ed the new duty as he had all others since he first received his commission in 1862, familiarized himself with it, and in 1888 made it the subject of a master- ly presidential address before the Con- gress of American Physicians and Sur- geons. Surgeon General Barnes, once publi- cation had been assured for the Index- Catalogue, had begun hammering away at another objective. Suddenly in his Annual Report for the year ending June 30, 1880, appears a caption: "A NEW FIRE-PROOF BUILDING A NECESSITY FOR THE ARMY MEDICAL MUSEUM AND LI- BRARY." It is repeated for 1881, for
THE NATIONAL LIBRARY OF MEDICINE 99 1882, and, by his successor, for 1883. The condition of the building at Nos. 509-11 Tenth Streeth, N.W., was over- crowded and unsafe. Whoever has even a small personal library will wonder how much the weight of the books had con- tributed to this condition. Space was in- adequate not merely for proper display of the collections but even for satisfac- tory storage. The building was sur- rounded by inflammable houses and sheds on private property over which no official control could be exercised. The Smithsonian had already had a sad ex- perience with fire in 1865, the Patent Office in 1877, and a fire which did occur on the private property next door in January, 1875, had been subdued only by the exertions of the employees of the building, fortunately before any dam- age was done. Its walls were both weak and out of plumb; if the roof went, they would fall. The Museum collection on the third floor would already have been involved, and the destruction of the con- tents of the lower floors, including the Library, the Record and Pension Di- vision, and the Division of Surgical Rec- ords, would result. A new building ade- quate for present needs and reasonable future expansion was a necessity. "Such a building," added Barnes, "should be absolutely fire-proof; but no expendi- ture for mere architectural display is re- quired. I find on inquiry that a suitable structure can be erected at a cost not to exceed two hundred and fifty thousand dollars ($250,000)." While ideas on what is fireproof and what is not can change in fifty or sixty or seventy years, these words, apart from the sum involved, ring familiar to denizens of the present Library. It is not clear why something already a neces- sity in 1880 could become "more im- perative" two years later, but so it did in the Annual Report for 1882 after the President in his Message to Congress had given such figures as 51,500 vol- umes, 57,000 pamphlets, 22,000 speci- mens, and 16,000 bound volumes of hos- pital records which "are daily searched for evidence needed in the settlement of large numbers of pension and other claims, for the protection of the Govern- ment against attempted frauds, as well as for the benefit of honest claims." When it was pointed out that no ad- vantage would accrue from merging the Library with any other (specifically the Library of Congress), when phrases like "world-wide celebrity," "extreme jeopardy," "irreparable loss," and "con- stant peril" began to be hurled, and when the members of Congress were bombarded by the verbal missiles of the entire medical profession of the country marshaled by Samuel D. Gross, Austin Flint, and Oliver Wendell Holmes and acting as one man, it was finally enacted by the Senate and House of Representa- tives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, and approved by President Arthur on March 2, 1885, two days before the inauguration of Grover Cleveland, that "a brick and metal fire- proof building, to be used for the safe- keeping of the records, library, and Mu- seum of the Surgeon-General's Office of the United States Army . . . be construct- ed upon the Government reservation in the city of Washington, in the vicinity of the National Museum and the Smith- sonian Institution" at a cost not to ex- ceed $200,000. All jesting aside, the ac- tion was taken none too soon, and Barnes and his successors had been jus- tified in their predictions of calamity, if not of fire. On June 9, 1893, between 9:30 and 10:00 A.M., Mr. Ford's build- ing, already of tragic history, collapsed when a pillar which had been under- mined in connection with electric wiring was left without shoring. The pity is
100 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY that 475 persons remained in the build- ing from the Records and Pension Di- vision and that, of these, 22 were killed and 68 injured. The contract for the new building was awarded to Messrs. Bright & Humphrey of Washington, working under super- vision of the United States Engineer Corps, and in particular Colonels T. L. Casey and J. M. Wilson. The reduction by $50,000 in the sum allowed necessi- tated the omission of a small back build- ing and a number of other changes. These changes inevitably resulted in a very plain and simple building, some- what reduced in size but not impaired in its security, and it was believed that the building could afford space sufficient for all absolute necessities for "some years to come." Estimates submitted on September 10, 1885, included $27,600 for stacks of bookcases in Library Hall, together with iron supports, stairs, and perforated gallery floors; $14,500 for cases for the Museum; $3,000 for car- pets and furniture; $6,500 for construc- tion of a boiler house, including latrines, alcohol still room, and coal vaults; and $1,050 for gas fixtures. By the fall of 1887 the present building at the corner of Seventh Street and B Street (now In- dependence Avenue), S.W., was com- pleted. It was occupied by the Museum on February 15, 1888; the first bookwas accessioned there at 2:00 P.M. on August 31, 1887 ("cool and pleasant"), and on September 20, 1888, the Library cele- brated there, somewhat tardily, its fifti- eth anniversary. Dribbling along in suc- ceeding years come estimates for items not admitted by the original appropria- tions-$280 in 1889 for ceiling screens for Museum and Library halls; $1,500 in the same year for linoleum to cover the floors of the Library, offices, and smaller exhibit rooms; $1,550 in 1890 for laying asphalt pavement between the center of the building and its wings. In October, 1893, the Army Medical School opened in the building its first session, occupying parts of the first and third floors; its faculty included Walter Reed as professor of clinical and sani- tary microscopy and John Shaw Bil- lings as professor of military hygiene. Billings continued to represent the Library at national and international meetings, even when he had to file in the Court of Claims a petition against the United States for the sum of $2,185.92, which he had spent traveling 10,571 miles on the orders of the Sur- geon General and which was then disal- lowed by the Second Comptroller. The money was indeed due him; he had as ordered attended the International Medical Congress in London, conferred with agents there and on the Continent on systems of literary exchange and condition of books, secured exchanges with leading libraries and medical schools, examined hospital and library buildings, and investigated methods of vital statistics. In 1883 and 1890 his friends were active in his behalf for his appointment as Surgeon General. On neither occa- sion did he lift a finger in his own be- half. On the first he informed President Gilman that some lectures which he was scheduled to give at the Hopkins might have to be postponed if he received the appointment. "If rumor is correct," he wrote, "the President is inclined to ap- point me as the best means of settling permanently the scramble, but hesitates to jump so many men and also because it is urged on him that I am merely a scientific and literary man but of little executive or business capacity." On the second occasion he expressed his grati- tude for the efforts of his friends but
THE NATIONAL LIBRARY OF MEDICINE 101 pointed out that this repeated contest for an office was very repugnant to him. His renown resulted from many fields; suffice it to mention here, for a parallel in 1956, that in 1869-74 he had been consulting surgeon to the Secretary of the Treasury to assist in the reorgani- zation of the Marine Hospital Service. But the "labor of love" was the Library, which, as he reported in 1895 in the final volume of the First Series of the In- dex-Catalogue, contained then 116,847 books and 191,598 pamphlets, prac- tically all of which had been obtained in the preceding thirty-five years and one- sixth of which had been presented either in exchange or as direct gifts. Few were the medical writers then living who had not presented at least one pamphlet; he appended a list of contributors, among whom stood high Mr. Thomas Windsor, of Manchester, England. Duplicates re- ceived through the Index Medicus had been useful for exchange purposes. He conceded that this was probably the last volume of the Index-Catalogue which would be issued under his personal supervision and expressed gratitude that he had been allowed to complete the series. At this time appropriations for the Library, exclusive of costs of printing the Index-Catalogue, ran $7,000 or $8,000 in place of the $10,000 allotted for the several years immedi- ately preceding, in one of which, 1891, he had pronounced the condition of the Library as "fairly satisfactory" and its future prospects as "excellent." He may have seen some handwriting on the wall, and he complained in particular of two things. There were, in the first place, difficulties in getting old books, and to check off a catalog of a thousand medi- cal books and find about four which were really desirable a dozen which could be accepted as filling gaps, and about twenty small theses which were not in the collection, involved an amount of clerical work which cost as much as, if not more than, the books thus obtained. In the second place, he would have liked a change in the law to permit the Library to have its binding done in its own building and under its own control. By this time the Hospital Corps had been established and permanently at- tached to the Medical Department of the Army; it participated in its first en- gagement at the Battle of Wounded Knee Creek in South Dakota on De- cember 29, 1890. Bacteriology and hy- giene had been accepted as existing facts. The Interstate Commerce Com- mission had been created, the Sherman Antitrust Act had been passed, and growing economic distress and mass un- employment were soon to result in the march of "Coxey's Army" on Washing- ton. The Library, wrote Billings brave- ly and modestly, is not dependent on the skill or energy, or good- will, of any one man; it is becoming more and more known to, and more and more used by, the members of the medical profession, and so long as they are interested in it, the neces- sary appropriations will be made and the skilled force employed to increase, preserve, and cata- logue it. Meanwhile, on March 14, 1891, Mr. Fielding H. Garrison, later Fielding H. Garrison, M.D., later Colonel Fielding H. Garrison, M.C., U.S.A., was as- signed to duty as clerk in the Library at $1,000 per annum. ON PAST MOMENTUM, 1895-1936 John Shaw Billings departed in 1895, first for the new Department of Hy- giene of the University of Pennsylvania and then on the recommendation of Dr. S. Weir Mitchell, his warm friend since the War of Secession, to consolidate the
102 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Astor, Lenox, and Tilden foundations and build where a reservoir had stood before the New York Public Library. At the Library of the Surgeon General's Office business proceeded much as be- fore. He had already seen the need to commence a Second Series of the Index- Catalogue based on books and articles which had been received too late for in- sertion in the First Series. His cards were up to date; the manuscript for the letter "A," covering all that had ac- cumulated since that letter was pub- lished in 1880, was ready for the press; Congress had voted the appropriation; and the reliable Fletcher was at hand to carry on. In one respect, however, and in a respect which would affect the whole future of the Library, his calcula- tions were incorrect. He foresaw for the Second Series five volumes of the same size and style as those in the First Series. This was in line with his opinion that, although current medical litera- ture was increasing in amount, the rate of increase was becoming slower and that medical writers were not in- creasing in proportion with the popula- tion or even with the physicians among that population. The Second Series ran, on the contrary, not to five volumes but to twenty-one, five more than the First Series had needed; and by its last vol- ume, which issued in 1916, there was again a huge accumulation, for example, of everything received for the letter "A" since its first volume of 1896. But no hint of discouragement, no trace of doubt, is apparent. The Index Medicus was sup- plying current wants, the Index-Cata- logue would eventually reach the letter "Z," and the word "backlog," even when breathed, seems not to have had the power to shame and terrify that it possesses today. Billings knew from abundant battle experience that medicine can make sig- nificant advances in time of war, but he had not foreseen the destruction of the "Maine," much less the sinking of the "Lusitania." The problem of typhoid alone in the Spanish-American War called forth a flood of literature which, with that on the same subject from other countries, swelled greatly the "Fever" section of the Index-Catalogue which appeared in 1900. Yellow fever and malaria were being solved. The Dodge Commission investigated the conduct of the Medical Department, as of the entire War Department, in the war with Spain, and as a result various reforms were instituted. An Army Nurse Corps was created in 1901 and an Army Dental Corps in 1911. The Wal- ter Reed General Hospital was opened in 1909. In addition, advances made elsewhere-the Roentgen ray and Sal- varsan-were adopted by the Medical Department, and, as medicine pro- gressed everywhere, the Library per- force amassed its literature. By 1916 it contained 224,522 volumes and 337,120 pamphlets. Exclusive of transactions of societies, the current periodicals on file numbered 1,895. These, apart from gifts and exchanges, had been obtained on annual appropriations, which rose again by the act approved on March 16, 1896, to $10,000 and continued steadi- ly at that figure, except for a reduction of $1,000 in 1905-6, through 1917. In the annual reports of the Surgeon General over many years the holdings are divided statistically into bound items-medical journals, medical trans- actions, theses, pamphlets, and other medical books-and unbound theses and pamphlets. There were never of course sufficient funds for binding, but bound or unbound, on shelves or in boxes, the items required space, and
THE NATIONAL LIBRARY OF MEDICINE 103 rather early it became clear that the prediction of a sufficiency of space in the new building "for some years to come" had verged considerably on the optimis- tic. Other branches had also made in- roads on what space there was: the cre- ation of the Army Medical School, which held its sessions there until 1910, has already been mentioned, and, in ad- dition, one large room originally de- signed for library purposes had been converted to the use of the Record and Pension Office. In 1896, less than a dec- ade after the completion of the new building, it became evident that avail- able shelf room would soon be exhaust- ed, and an appropriation of $6,000 was requested for the construction of six ad- ditional iron bookstacks. It was not granted. By 1900 there was actual em- barrassment in properly caring for the collections; duplicates were crowded in- accessibly in basement rooms, the large room of the Record and Pension Office was needed for the display and care of the originals, and the Surgeon General requested that the whole of the Mu- seum and Library Building be restored to its legitimate purpose. It was not re- stored. Year after year Congress failed to make an appropriation for book- stacks. Wrote Surgeon General Robert M. O'Reilly in 1904: The amount of money asked for has of neces- sity been increased, not because any more ex- tensive construction is now wanted than when first estimated for, but because the price of both material and workmanship seems to have doubled. Unless the appropriation, now esti- mated at $13,000, is allowed without further delay, the library will be unable to locate its own books without great delay and trouble. New books, for lack of shelf room, are stacked upon the floors and piled on top of the rows as near as possible to the section where they would naturally be placed if there were room enough. This library is recognized as the largest [sic] and most useful medical library in the world. It is in constant use by nearly every American university, medical library, and society, and by hundreds of individual workers. The library force indexes practically all the existent liter- ature of medicine in all its branches. The Index Catalogue of subjects, as well as authors, is a handbook in every great library at home and abroad. The shelves asked for are now abso- lutely necessary to the continuance of the effi- ciency of the library, and will, it is believed, if granted, be sufficient for the present collec- tion and its increase for ten years. The sum of $8,000 was finally appropri- ated, and the six additional bookstacks sufficient to accommodate the regular increase of the library "for several years," as it was estimated in 1906, were completed. Earlier there had been a movement to transfer the Library to the jurisdiction of the Smithsonian, and later there was pronounced agitation in favor of union with the Library of Con- gress; with the addition of the new bookstacks, however, all was seemingly quiet until 1910, when the Army Medi- cal School departed, the rooms which it had vacated were pressed into service in what seems to have been the nick of time, and the sum of $10,000 was ob- tained for the renovation of the entire building, including repainting of the in- terior, extensive repairs to the roof and heating plant, and installation of com- pletely new plumbing. This was the era in which the science of librarianship was coming to the fore. The Library was in constant touch with other libraries and with new methods; the name of Melvil Dewey is numbered among its correspondents. From the very accident of its birth, however, it held itself apart even later from the new movement which emphasized special training for a young man or woman embarking upon a library ca- reer. Granted that it was the National Medical Library, it was first military, and its librarian was an Army officer de-
104 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY tailed to it sometimes for a relatively brief period from duties which usually had little connection with books; he would ordinarily be transferred from it to other duties which were likewise di- vorced from books. With the best will in the world he could scarcely further its interests in the manner which had been vouchsafed to Billings in his thirty years of service. Walter D. McCaw was permitted to remain for ten years, Champe C. McCulloch for five, and their names are honored on the Li- brary's rolls. In other contingencies the librarian would be shifted thrice in a year, and Walter Reed, who once said that it was the highest ambition of his life to be Billings' successor, had only a few days in the office before his sud- den death. Greater continuity prevailed in Fletcher, who was still laboring vali- antly for the Library almost to his death in 1912 at the age of ninty; in Fielding H. Garrison; in Albert Allemann, who edited the Index-Catalogue from 1900 until, much against his will, he was re- tired for age in 1932; and in a number of faithful servants in other positions- the names of Edward Shaw, F. L. Apel, H. 0. Hall, Thomas A. Wise, Felix Neu- mann, Charles G. Toepper, F. W. Stone, and Baruch Israeli come at once to mind. Here were no trained librarians, however; an acquaintance with medi- cine sufficient to determine the subject headings for the Index-Catalogue and an acquaintance with languages suf- ficient to list the foreign books for the Index-Catalogue and to furnish trans- lations as needed were the controlling factors in appointment. In addition, the Library was suffer- ing severely in the first decade of the twentieth century from the loss of old clerical employees who, as stated in the Annual Report of the Surgeon General, had been with the institution from its inception and whose expenrence and special knowledge made possible the conduct of the library with a minimum clerical force. The places of these men have been filled by new clerks from the civil-service list, who, however promising, had not specially qualified for library work, and who must necessarily consume time in familiarizing themselves with their duties. Much time is lost in filling vacancies as about a month is required in each case to obtain certifications to make the selections and to appoint the candidate. The force is also crippled by age and infirmities of several of its members still in service. The work of the library both in its service to the public and in its cataloguing has therefore gradually and inevitably dropped behind. Yet a compari- son recently made of the catalogue work of dif- ferent years shows that, compared with twenty years ago, fully twice as many titles are now carded and indexed. . . . Volume XVII of the index catalogue is in course of preparation and will appear in due time, but, owing to the weak- ness of the clerical force from conditions already mentioned, the appearance of the volume is delayed. Here, then, is admission that there were weaknesses in both the Library and the Federal Civil Service, and year after year the pleas are repeated for more de- pendable and more numerous person- nel. There is scarcely a mention of pre- vious library training. "At present," continued the Surgeon General, "the loss of a qualified clerk of the higher grade, experienced in library work, a graduate in medicine, or a bibliographer results, consequent upon promotions in the Surgeon General's Office, in a va- cancy in the grade of clerk at $1,000, and it is hopeless to expect to obtain a specially trained man at such a low sal- ary." In 1915 the principal assistant li- brarian was receiving $2,2 50, the assist- ant librarian $1,800, and two translators $1,600 each, and here at last we read that these positions, for which increases were requested, "are, with one excep- tion, filled, and must be filled, by grad- uates in medicine who are also linguists
THE NATIONAL LIBRARY OF MEDICINE 105 versed in library methods and in medical literature." This was a very large order. Service of a reference nature con- tinued and must have been adequate if the gifts which poured in from the most eminent physicians-Sir Thomas Lau- der Brunton, Sir William Osler, Karl Sudhoff, Abraham Jacobi, Rudolph Matas, Edouard Nicaise-are any indi- cation. Acquisitions were made as the budget permitted, and special pride was taken in the earlier imprints in the Li- brary's possession. An exhibit of three hundred volumes in 1909 represented "only the smallest fraction of the rari- ties of the library," but it represented "very well the landmarks of medicine from its beginning and throughout its progress." For an understanding of the actual operations of the Library in this period it is helpful to examine some of the answers given by the Library to a ques- tionnaire on the organization and use of government libraries which was distrib- uted by the Keep Commission in 1906. On duplicates, for example, we read: Duplicates are books on medicine now more or less obsolete, pamphlets, and periodicals. They are sometimes given if wanted to other medical libraries, or in the case of pamphlets, etc. are exchanged thousand for thousand. On principal subjects covered by the Library: Medicine in its broadest scope, including not only its ordinary branches but all that relates to the public health and work of scientific labo- ratories. On duties of the staff: While, in the foregoing list, the leading char- acter of work assigned to each clerk is named, it should be said that their duties are varied and interchangeable. Two who are graduated physicians are frequently employed in making reports on special subjects of inquiry from phy- sicians. During the printing of a volume of the Index-Catalogue many are called upon to take part in the proof-reading according to their qualifications from knowledge of languages. An- other who has charge of the check-list of peri- odicals (all [sic] medical periodicals through- out the world are filed in this library) is also an accomplished stenographer. All take part, more or less, in the indexing of medical litera- ture which from its extent and accuracy has made this library invaluable, not only to the Medical Corps of the Army but to the entire profession in the United States. On provisions to accommodate readers: Fairly adequate. Overflow is always taken care of. On average number, daily, of books loaned for outside use: 18. On listing of accessions: Accessions are doubly carded, one card with full collation [sic] being the author-card, the other with full title but condensed collation forms the subject-card. Both are written but are finally printed in the Index-Catalogue. On keeping records of orders outstand- ing: "Order-cards," like accession-cards but writ- ten in red ink, are placed with the latter for ready reference. On methods of shelving: Under general headings with the necessary subdivisions, e.g. Biology, with its divisions of Anthropology, Anatomy, Physiology, Morphol- ogy, etc., and their subdivisions; Pathology, with sub-headings for every form of disease; Bibliography, with its important division of History of Medicine, etc. Theses, addresses, etc. emanating from Universities, if unbound, are arranged under the name of the city in which the institution is situated-cities in alpha- betical order. They are enclosed in drawer- boxes which are numbered, each boxes [sic] contents being in alphabetical order. For other pamphlets the accession-card shows the num- ber of the box containing the one sought for, and as the boxes are all numbered consecutively there is no difficulty in the tracing. The system thus briefly outlined works very satisfactorily.
106 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY On labeling the books: The label is pasted inside the cover of the book. The accession-card shows on its margin the notation of stack, compartment and shelf. The stacks are double, containing books back and front, and are 3 stories in height. Each floor has its letter, thus:-A,1,3,5 means ground floor, stack N? 1, Compartment N? 3, Shelf (from top) N? 5." On how long this system had been em- ployed: Since 1887. On whether a different system would be adopted if the books were reclassified: It is not thought that any very great change would be made. On whether a definite system of catalog- ing rules had been adopted: The system of cataloguing in use in this li- brary was essentially devised by Dr. John S. Billings U.S.A. over 35 years ago. It has been found well suited to a special library. On why printed cards were not used: About 20 languages are represented in the in- dexing work of this library to several of the less known of which translations are appended. The space required can suit each case on a written card. On whether the ALA list of subject head- ings was followed: For a highly specialized collection the subject headings of the A.L.A., though excellent for a general library, would be inadequate. On size of card: The cards are 4k X 6k inches. On advantages of a book over a card catalog: Sets of the printed Index-Catalogue are in the reading-rooms, available for consultation by many readers, when only one could make use of the card-catalogue, and that to the incon- venience of the assistants who need it in their work of finding books called for. Further, if cards were abstracted or lost it would be diffi- cult to replace them. Copies of the printed cata- logue are distributed to most of the important libraries throughout the country, and are thus made available for physicians, health officers, workers in scientific libraries, and others. The picture is very clear. It was still the library of Billings, although he, fully occupied in New York, was ex- ceedingly careful never once to dictate to it. It was still his library after his death in 1913. Then World War I en- compassed it together with the Medical Corps of which it was a part. Said Sur- geon General William Crawford Gorgas in 1918: In the last year the Medical Corps of the Army has had charge of the health of a large part of our male population, with the prospect of even greater responsibilities and of the en- rollment of most of the physicians of the coun- try in this service as the war wears on. The liberal appropriations made by Congress for the library have been doubled for the coming fiscal year. This places our library in position to meet its obligations in connection with the large amount of foreign medical literature which has accumulated in Europe during the war and which could not be transported overseas while the war goes on. Here was one aspect of library practice, the delayed receipt of accessions, which had been met on no such scale in either the War of Secession or the Spanish- American War. War in its course swells accessions, in hand or delayed, war in its course swells the reference work of a military library, war in its course swells appropriations both for these uses and because appropriations rise in war for the entire military organization. But after war there is inevitably retrench- ment, and a military library neglected in time of peace cannot function as it should in time of war. But let us look now only at the swell- ing of accessions. The last extensive renovation of the Museum and Library Building had been carried out in 1910. The Surgeon General in 1916 signalized the need for a modern fireproof building.
THE NATIONAL LIBRARY OF MEDICINE 107 In 1917 the present (then and now) building was termed obsolete, crowded, and non-fireproof. Said the Surgeon General: There should be no delay in erecting in some central spot in our Capital City a modern, fire- proof structure, adequate in every respect to house for all [sic] time in safety what is justly considered to be the most useful as well as the most extensive collection relating to medicine and science ever achieved. Omitted, perhaps deliberately, is any designation of this "central spot." In any case, a request December 5, 1917, for an estimate of $10,000 for plans was dis- approved the following month, and the Library's claim to land to be purchased, by an act of July 2, 1919, contiguous to Walter Reed General Hospital "for the final location of the Army Medical Mu- seum, The Surgeon General's Library, and the Army Medical School" remained in abeyance. The Museum meanwhile had become more and more dissociated from the Library; in 1920 it was func- tioning under the Laboratory Division of the Surgeon General's Office. Adjust- ments in the present (then and now) building included conversion of the room underneath Library Hall, vacated at last by the Adjutant General and his Record and Pension Office, into a com- bined public reading room and reposi- tory for the collections of bound and current periodicals; bookstacks were erected there, a staircase was construct- ed to lead to the upper Library Hall, and the bookstacks on the upper floor were accordingly relieved. For visiting research workers, "who require space and quietude," cubicles and private tables were set apart in Library Hall. Reclassification and "permanent shelf listing along approved modern lines" were undertaken, said the Surgeon Gen- eral, partly because the old shelf classification of many years' standing is now obsolete, and partly in view of the possibility of the acquisition of a new building for the library at the Walter Reed General Hospital. With a modern reclassifica- tion of the alcoves and definite shelf lists, it will be possible to transport the books under any given subject intact in packages and place them in definitely selected positions in the en- larged bookstacks of the prospective building without any change of alphabetical order or loss of material. Six Hospital Corps men were de- tailed by the Surgeon General for this work, which has gone on continuously through the year. The year was 1920, and plans were actu- ally under way for the move across the city which was never consummated. The Third Series of the Index-Cata- logue had been promised in the last vol- ume of the Second Series, and by the co- operation of Herbert Putnam at the Li- brary of Congress all titles of books and pamphlets accessioned in the Library after July 1, 1916, were to be printed by the Library of Congress and kept in Li- brary Hall in special file cabinets. "Du- plicate copies of these cards can be ob- tained from the Library of Congress at small cost," and both libraries and pri- vate collectors were encouraged to pur- chase them. Succeeding volumes do not repeat the invitation. Volume I of the Third Series appeared in 1918, the other nine volumes in succession at one- or two-year intervals. The expectation voiced in Volume I that the new series would be as extensive as the First and Seconfd was soon shattered by the dis- couragement and doubt which a now recognized backlog of titles occasioned. Pamphlet volumes, it was decided, should be omitted even from Volume I under the names of the authors, "for the reason that such reprints, when not rep- resenting a complete set of subject titles under an author's name, have never been given in the classical bibliographies of
108 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY medicine and, under present conditions, would tend to make the amount of print- ing so extensive as to be impracticable." By Volume III (1922) the hope was ex- pressed that all items cataloged and in- dexed could be published within the next seven years and the publication of the Index-Catalogue in series thus com- pleted, so that "each subsequent volume would be an annual catalogue of current medical literature" instead of a catalog of material which had accumulated in the preceding twenty-five years. Happy day had this been done then rather than by surgery three decades later! But tra- dition was too strong, funds for an an- nual volume were not available, and publication went doggedly on, punctu- ated by such admissions of defeat as: "Beginning with Volume VI the materi- al catalogued under subject titles covers only the period prior to January 1, 1926." Yet in Volume X ( 1932 ) Colonel Percy M. Ashburn, actuated by what appears at least in hindsight to have been an extravagance of courage, dared to an- nounce that in response to a very general demand by libraries and research insti- tutions the plans to close the Index- Catalogue had been changed, work on a Fourth Series would be begun at once, and matter from periodicals later than 1926 would appear in the Fourth Series. At this time the Library, which in 1922 became the Army Medical Li- brary, contained, by a count so exact as to be suspect, 333,202 bound volumes, 47,171 unbound volumes, and 509,304 pamphlets, plus 9,187 portraits of phy- sicians, 797 medical engravings and prints, and 444 medical caricatures. The momentum had lasted for more than the number of years during which Billings had supplied the original power. It was, however, slackening noticeably. Indi- vidual representatives still made out- standing contributions which brought much honor to the Library-Percy M. Ashburn, for example, with his History of the Medical Department of the United States Army; Fielding H. Garri- son with his reference services to medi- cal historians and his great handbook of medical history, which was published in four editions beginning in 1913; and Edgar Erskine Hume in the field of pub- lic relations. Loyal workers, their ranks long since infiltrated by the second sex and numbering, in addition to the librar- ian, one chief librarian, one principal as- sistant librarian, one assistant librarian, two junior librarians, and twenty clerks, conducted as best they could the routine operations. Loans after the war in- creased 100 per cent over the prewar period, and in the year 1935-36 a total of 12,919 books were lent to 362 li- braries and institutions, while 5,464 readers were registered in the reading rooms of the Library. But laments on shortage of personnel continued; re- newed attempts for a building at Walter Reed, though backed by the American Medical Association, failed pathetically again in the early thirties; and post bel- lum economy wrought havoc. With the years of the Great Depression the meager funds had to be turned almost entirely to periodicals. Some American books came by the law of copyright through the Library of Congress, but from July 1, 1933, to May 1, 1935, only sixteen books were purchased. The fall in the buying power of the dollar in terms of European currencies was also a serious blow. An appropriation of $20,000 a year was needed, but in 1933- 34 and 1934-35 only $14,300 was granted. Some American publishers, when the sad situation was explained to them, continued their journals on a gift basis; others saw no reason for present-
THE NATIONAL LIBRARY OF MEDICINE 109 ing their property to the government when as taxpayers they had the right to expect purchase, and the number of journals received fell from 2,041 to 1,600. Pleaded Major Hume through Surgeon General Charles R. Reynolds as he ended his service at the Library: At the very least, $7,000 (gold) a year should be available for the purchase of medical books. . . . The librarian estimates that the sum of $28,000 per year is required for the purchase of the periodicals that the library should have. . . The resumption in publication of the Index Catalog will not permit the institution to func- tion efficiently so undermanned as now.... The present building, now half a century old, is be- coming more and more dilapidated and there is great difficulty in housing new material. SELF-EXAMINATION, 193 6-44 It was a somber picture. But on the evening of November 16, 1936, as the portraits of Surgeon General Lovell and John Shaw Billings gazed down benign- ly in Library Hall upon the distin- guished audience gathered there to cele- brate, tardily again, the hundredth an- niversary of the Army Medical Library, the emphasis was rather on past accom- plishments. The celebration did indeed attest to the honor in which the Library was held the world over. Almost six hun- dred guests were assembled. The com- memorative oration was delivered by Sir Humphrey D. Rolleston, Bart., Emeritus Regius Professor of Physic at the University of Cambridge and some- time president of the Royal College of Physicians of London. Greetings in the form of letters and scrolls arrived from numerous institutions. "The Library it- self and its Catalogue," said the New York Academy of Medicine, "are sources of profound pride to members of the profession of Medicine in the United States." "Raised by the genius of John Shaw Billings," asserted the Brit- ish Museum, "to its present unchal- lenged position as the greatest collection of medical literature in existence, the Library has extended its service beyond the United States Army to the medical profession of America, and further to that of the world." "The Army Medical Library," wrote the Royal Society of London, "is a material expression of the untiring devotion of generations of stu- dents in every civilized country; it is an instrument indispensable as an aid to progress." "Nous nous rejouissons," af- firmed the Pasteur Institute of Algiers, "de l'occasion qui nous est offerte de ren- dre hommage au temple du savoir que represente l'Army Medical Library." The University of Leipzig sent wishes for a bright future: "Moge es der Army Medical Library verg6nnt sein, ihre der Welt anerkannten hervorragenden Leistungen auch im zweiten Jahrhun- dert ihres Bestehens zu ihren Ruhme und zum Segen der Wissenschaft er- folgreich fortzusetzen." "Vigile custode della sapienza, fiamma di amore, fede, sacrificio a conforto dell'umano dolore," said the Alma Mater Studiorum at Bo- logna. Oxford's document was carried by its own John F. Fulton and ex- pressed the warm if vain hope that the Library's labors might thereafter bene- fit a world at peace: "Illud tamen sperare licet longissime abesse occa- sionem ubi pugnantibus subvenire necesse sit, labores interea vestros civium saluti pacem agentium pluri- mum profuturos." Nor was it just a great flourish of trumpets. The congratulations and good wishes were sincere, and they were deserved. Garrison was not there to re- ceive them; retired from the Army in 1930, he had accepted the position of librarian at the Welch Medical Library, and he died in Baltimore on April 18,
110 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 1935. Dr. Beatrix Bickel and Dr. Clau- dius F. Mayer were carrying on in 1936 his duties and those of Dr. Allemann. The civilian personnel of the Library, consisting of one principal librarian, one senior librarian, one chief library assistant, two junior librarians, twenty clerks, and two messengers, attended the celebration in full if not numerous force. It is gratifying to note that three former librarians were also able to be present: Colonel James M. Phalen, Colonel Percy M. Ashburn, and Major (later Major General) Edgar Erskine Hume. The librarian of the Army Medical Library at the time of the celebration was newly appointed. Colonel Harold Wellington Jones, who entered on duty September 16, 1936, had seen service in the Philippines, Mexico, and France and from 1933 to 1936 had been com- manding officer at Tripler General Hos- pital in Hawaii. The reader-librarian wil already have comprehended the problems which he faced on his arrival. Personnel was insufficient; in 1937 it totaled thirty. Vacancies were constant- ly occurring, replacement through Civil Service was slow, and the Library was kept chronically short-handed. Even with authorization granted, there could be no material enlargement. Space was at a premium, and the Army Medical Museum was still occupying a substan- tial portion of the Museum and Library Building; any considerable additions in personnel could quite simply not be ac- commodated. The number did rise by 1941 to thirty-seven, and at various times a handful of appointees from the National Youth Administration were temporarily employed on specific proj- ects, each for a maximum of eighty hours per month. It was clearly recog- nized also that the organization of per- sonnel, dictated as it was by tradition and custom, was inadequate and that, in the event of removal to a new build- ing, an entirely different arrangement would be necessary; in 1938, in fact, one timid organizational step was taken by consolidating into a single office the Book Accession Department and the Periodical Accession Department. Again and again the Secreary of War had to be reminded that a regular ap- propriation of $20,000 a year was necessary in order to keep current the collection of medical literature. For 1936-37 this was granted, whereupon, since on it neither rare books nor any technical apparatus could be purchased, $25,000 was requested: "this figure is of course only approximate, but certain- ly is a moderate one and does not err on the side of liberality." It, too, was granted. Accessions increased substan- tially. In 1940, by which time the Euro- pean war was seriously interfering with the flow of material from the Continent, the holdings passed the mark of a mil- lion, and in the following year Colonel Jones acquired by special arrangement an outstanding collection of Arabic medical manuscripts. It is scarcely necessary to point out that, to house the new accessions, repeated and enormous ingenuity was required of the staff. Emergency shelving was inserted here, there, and in every corner where fire regulations and precautions on weight permitted-in 1937-38 to the amount of $1,666.85, after which steel shelving was also purchased to replace makeshift wooden shelves. Nor is it necessary to touch on the problem of binding, which was like the poor; for it funds never sufficed even as regarded current needs, and, in addition, thousands of the Li- brary's books, which had had hard use through the years and/or had suffered
THE NATIONAL LIBRARY OF MEDICINE 111 from Washington's atmosphere, the smoke and dirt of a century, a leaky roof, and ill-fitting clerestory windows, were in dire need of rebinding. One new problem had arisen. In years gone by the Library had depended on the Army Medical Museum to fill with its photographic equipment the few re- quests received for reproduction of a title page or of a specific passage usual- ly from some old classic of medicine. But in the thirties that great wonder microfilm was beginning to revolution- ize the habits of scholars by encourag- ing them to consult in their own studies or laboratories entire books reduced to a few inches or feet of film. The Library saw the wisdom of keeping pace with other libraries in this new development. In 1937 the Annual Report of the Sur- geon General contains its first mention of bibliofilms, when the Bibliofilm Serv- ice of the Department of Agriculture sent a man to the Library two or three times a week to operate a microfilm camera furnished by Dr. Atherton Sei- dell. By the next year the American Documentation Institute was operating in the Library, as in certain other gov- ernment libraries, a microfilm service on a non-profit basis; 1,591 orders were filled in that year to a total of 5,000 pages of material. It was soon apparent that the service would eventually be- come a far more integral part of the Li- brary's activities. In the developing stages it was taken under the wing of an organization specially formed to foster it, the Friends of the Army Medical Li- brary. Thereupon, encouraged by every means within the power of Dr. Seidell, its generous and indefatigable sponsor, it grew by leaps and bounds. In the first ten months, 1940-41, orders to the number of 4,736 were filled on 10,000 feet of film for 950 customers, including 382 individuals, 352 universities, medi- cal schools, hospitals, and research in- stitutions, 129 commercial firms, 64 foreign countries, and 23 government departments. To assist users of the Medicofilm Service, the Friends began in 1941 to publish weekly and private- ly a modest but highly convenient Cur- rent List of Medical Literature, which, under forty-four broad headings, listed current journal articles available for filming. Over the lusty infant, which, like the Index Medicus, could not have been conceived apart from the biblio- graphical resources of the Library, Colonel Jones watched anxiously and fondly. In January, 1942, the child was officially adopted; "Privately published under the auspices of the Friends of the Army Medical Library" reads the title page of Volume II, but below stands solidly the imprint: "The Army Medi- cal Library 7th St. & Independence Ave. S.W. Washington, D.C." In June, Photoduplication Service became a fun- damental part of the Library, and in January, 1943, the decision was made to supply microfilm without cost not only to the Surgeon General's Office and APO addresses %o The Postmaster, whether New York or San Francisco, but also to all government offices and to all individuals connected with ac- credited institutions. It was an unusual experiment in library economy. The statement read: The Library recognizes that microfilm copy- ing is a service which publicly supported refer- ence libraries may well perform on an equal basis with that provided for readers and by in- terlibrary loans. In the pursuance of such a policy, microfilms will be sent without charge in lieu of the loan of books to those who prefer them or where books or journals cannot be loaned. Volume I of the Fourth Series of the Index-Catalogue had almost died
112 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY aborning. Promised by Colonel Ash- burn in 1932, it was actually printed in that year through page 112 only, when the needed appropriation of $33,000 was denied, and not even the proverbial Washington parrot, trained to say to every visitor in his home, "What about the appropriation?" could have helped. It appeared finally in 1936, when Ma- jor Hume was still librarian, but its first 112 pages of course contained no references to the literature of 1933-36. Otherwise the Fourth Series attempted to catch up journal articles which had appeared after January 1, 1926, and had been omitted beginning with Vol- ume VI of the Third Series. Various ef- forts at economy were made, some com- mendable, some productive of con- fusion in interpreting the entries. These changes resulted in a space-saving of one-fifth, so that additional material to that amount could be added, and a thin- ner but tougher paper permitted almost twice the number of pages for a volume of the traditional size. The appearance of the first volume, happily coinciding with the centenary of the Library, was "received with nothing less than en- thusiasm by the medical profession of this and other countries." Congress had -limited the edition to a thousand copies, about eight hundred of which were dis- tributed free to domestic and foreign scientific institutions. The Library con- tinued to be plagued as in the past by re- quests for both free and sale copies which it could not furnish. Volumes ap- peared at one- or two-year intervals through Volume IX (1945), K-Lyxose. Sixty-five copies of Volume VI (1941) shipped to the British Isles were lost by enemy action and were partially and temporarily replaced by microfilm. Meanwhile the difficulties of the Index- Catalogue were being increased by new terminology and classification as medi- cine itself shifted emphasis. Wrote Colonel Jones: To work with all four sets of the Index-Cata- logue as a single bibliographical tool is ... diffi- cult . . . since medical knowledge has changed considerably, with a flow of new scientific terms and new groupings of diseases. These changes and the shifting emphasis on medical research problems necessitate the constant reshaping of the bibliographical classes of the catalog so that even the homonymous terms of the four series are not always equivalent, and for completely recent terms there seems to be nothing analo- gous in the older sets of the catalog. The building problem remained. In 1937 Colonel Jones warned that ad- ditional accommodations would soon have to be obtained elsewhere even if a new building was immediately voted. In 1938 the Seventy-fifth Congress passed bills authorizing a new building for the Library and Museum at a cost not to exceed $3,750,000. In the spring of 1940 a collection of duplicates, bound and unbound, to the weight of approximately fifty-five tons, was packed into boxes and moved by truck to the Army Medical Center for dead storage. In June, 1940, the Seventy- sixth Congress appropriated $130,000 for plans for the new building. In 1941 an amendment authorized an additional million dollars for acquisition of a site, this time on Capitol Hill. Plans, but not details for working drawings, were com- pleted for a fitting structure near the Folger Library and the Library of Con- gress Annex. The National Parks Plan- ning Commission approved; the Fine Arts Commission approved. But the es- sential funds had not been voted. It was a race against time; time and World War II won. Emergency measures were taken. In 1941 the National Archives had offered to store in limited accessibility 20,000
THE NATIONAL LIBRARY OF MEDICINE 113 inactive volumes. After December 7, 1941, Colonel Jones became increasing- ly mindful of the dangers to which the Library's rarest volumes were exposed, not only from improper housing in crowded conditions with more modern books, but also from enemy attack. On July 13, 1942, Lieutenant Thomas E. Keys was sent to set up in rented space at the Allen Memorial Medical Library the Cleveland Branch of the Army Medical Library. This installation, now the History of Medicine Division, was never intended for dead storage; its thousands of books through the year 1800 have been checklisted and then cataloged, physically restored, and con- sulted for reference service from the very beginning, and accessions have been steadily added as the budget allowed. Later the Library moved portions of its collection which had been housed in the Washington Auditorium to the Fish- eries Building and the Fisheries Build- ing Annex, across Seventh Street from the main library (later still, these were moved to Tampa and Escanaba halls, temporary barracks structures across Independence Avenue). Gone for a time was the dream of a building on Capitol Hill. The Library had a war on its hands, and, as before, it was ill prepared. Wartime conditions did permit, however, expansion of per- sonnel (fifty-eight in Washington, nine in Cleveland in 1944), and some prog- ress in departmental organization was made. In the period 1943-45 Colonel Jones was greatly assisted by the pro- fessional acumen of Captain Francis R. St. John. A trained librarian hastily summoned in 1942 from Hennepin County Medical Society Library found a fantastic situation in Library Hall- the place humming with activity, every- one wanting journals, the journals all too often successfully eluding the search- ers; Miss Helen Norris was not one to take the situation casually, and in the reference services efforts at improve- ment came early. With the help of Dr. Archibald Malloch at the New York Academy of Medicine, who called Dr. Alan Gregg, and with the unceasing en- couragement and support of Colonel Jones, who was fully aware of the situ- ation, the National Medical Library during the year beginning June 1, 1943, was made the object of a survey fi- nanced by the Rockefeller Foundation and executed under the auspices of the American Library Association. These pages have already made clear part of what the surveyors-Keyes D. Metcalf, Janet Doe, Thomas P. Fleming, Mary Louise Marshall, L. Quincy Mumford, and Andrew D. Osborn-found. Their report was published in 1944, by which time Colonel Jones had already taken additional steps toward reorganization. These pages have also made clear what some of their recommendations would be. "A new building is an absolute ne- cessity," wrote Mr. Metcalf. It is diffi- cult to give added force to so strong a word as "necessity." While Surgeon General Barnes in 1882 had made a similar necessity "more imperative," Mr. Metcalf set before it the word "ab- solute." Construction, said the survey- ors, should begin as soon as possible af- ter the war and should be completed within two years. Meanwhile, Colonel Jones, bearing the new title of "Direc- tor," should continue the divisional lines which he had already drawn in 1942-43 and should make responsible to a career librarian, as far as technical administration was concerned, the Ac- quisition, Administrative, Catalog, In- dex-Catalogue, Rare Books, and Ref- erence and Circulation divisions. Gone
114 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY the twenty clerks who could serve as jacks-of-all-trades; emphasis in these divisions was to be rather on profession- al library personnel. Gone the preroga- tives of the Index-Catalogue section; it was still to produce the Index-Cata- logue, but in an editorial capacity only; its existing card catalog was to be scrapped, and a new one prepared by a new Catalog Division according to standard library practice. Development of a classification scheme was strongly recommended. The Library was urged to acquire on publication all new publi- cations, in all languages, directl-y re- lating to the science of medicine. When all these recommendations had been acted on, it was thought that the Ref- erence and Circulation Division could function admirably. But, above all, larger and steady appropriations were needed. "The support of the Library," wrote Mr. Metcalf, "is not something to be turned off and on like a faucet." "If the War Department," the report continued, "is not ready to supply that support year in and year out, another sponsor must be found, or the Library cannot remain a great one." So the Library had examined itself and had been examined by qualified con- sultants. The surgery, both major and plastic, had already been initiated. John Shaw Billings, who once performed sur- gery on a faltering Marine Hospital Service, would have approved. NEW RESOLVE, 1944-56 One of the most appalling revelations of the survey committee was that the "acquisition of purely medical mono- graphic and textbook material has by no means been comprehensive ... [and] the situation with regard to periodical holdings is all too often deplorable." It was estimated that only about 55 per cent of the medical-book production of the decade of the thirties was to be found in the Library and that the 1,1 14 current periodical titles received came to about four-fifths of the number being acquired by the next largest American medical library, which in total number of vol- umes was half the size of the Army Med- ical Library. Out of 345 titles added to the list of titles indexed by the Quarterly Cumulative Index Medicus between January, 1941, and June, 1943, only 99 titles were in the Library. Over a period of a decade, under the successive able ministrations of Scott Adams, Joseph Groesbeck, and Samuel Lazerow, a revolution took place, and material poured into the Library. The acquisitions staff was quintupled; the acquisitions budget was trebled; and entries in the current serial record soared to 12,000, of which 5,000 can be de- scribed as periodicals. Month after month and year after year the Library added an average of a hundred new se- rial titles monthly to its holdings. An exchange program was undertaken; soon the number of titles being received in exchange for the Current List alone exceeded the total number of titles cur- rently received during the survey year. A mass disposal of duplicates was be- gun; in the heydey of this program over a hundred shipments per month, aver- aging 150 pieces per shipment, were made. War-devastated libraries through- out the world were aided; the nuclei of newly established medical-school li- braries were formed; and, to a lesser degree, the Library was enabled to fill in some of the dreadful lacunae in its own collection. New methods were tried. Blanket orders were placed world wide; originally effective, this plan was largely superseded in 1951, with the return to something like normalcy in the world
THE NATIONAL LIBRARY OF MEDICINE 115 book trade, by exhaustive searching and selection from over fifty national bibli- ographies and from other sources. Pho- tographic methods were extensively employed to speed the searching process and found increasing usefulness in other areas. In the midst of all this activity the Library was forced to reconsider and redefine its collecting policies. "Every- thing medical" had once been the watch- word; in practice this was not a particu- larly helpful rule. A careful and detailed statement of policy was worked out in 195 1 and revised in 195 5-56. Not only was current collecting policy reshaped by the application of these canons but also the pruning of the old collection in accordance with them was undertaken. Some census material was transferred to the Library of Congress; some basic chemistry went to the John Crerar Li- brary; and military manuals were turned over to the National War Col- lege. Out the window went Arrowsmith and Dr. Serocold and a host of mystery novels in which physicians presumably figured prominently. Also disposed of were a book on diseases of high altitudes, which turned out to be a satire on the political situation in Peru, and a trouble- shooter's handbook on Krankheiten of lead storage batteries, which was found classed under "Electrotherapy." The dust flew thick and fast, and the catalogers were forced to don gloves, masks, and smocks as they went about their work. Ruth MacDonald took hold of the newly organized Catalog Division and set about the task of bringing order out of chaos. Not only did the new stuff pouring in have to be coped with but the survey committee, facing up to stern reality, had recommended recataloging of the entire collection. The state of the old catalog was disquieting; typewritten cards, handwritten cards, Library of Congress cards, cards clipped and pasted from the Index-Catalogue-all were jammed together in what was often a curious and baffling filing arrangement. Entries were sometimes equally curious, as when a publication of the Child Study Association of America was found en- tered under "America." An absolute de- fect of the old catalog was the absence of location symbols; once the catalog was made to reveal the presence of a book, it was frequently a matter of great difficulty to locate its exact whereabouts, and occasional hints scrawled in pencil on the backs of the catalog cards, such as "third shelf behind me to the right," were rarely helpful. With the help of Mary Louise Mar- shall of Tulane, a shelf-classification scheme was drawn up, tested, revised, printed, and put into use. New proce- dures were established; descriptive cata- loging rules were modified. No longer was "Includes bibliographies" to be used as a drop-note, on the assumption that this was a general characteristic of most of the books in the Library. Size was not to be mentioned, whether by fold or by height. Periodicals were to be cata- loged under the title current at the time; when titles changed, the old entry was to be closed and a new entry opened, with a connecting note. Corporate au- thors were to be given in the form preva- lent at the time of publication. As soon as a basic catalog was established, per- sonal authors were to be established on a "no-conflict" basis. In ten years of operation, 216,000 titles were cataloged, of which 40 per cent represented recataloging. The new catalog was divided into name and sub- ject sections, with the subject section limited, with a few exceptions, to entries for works of the preceding twenty-five-
116 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY year period only. In ten years the new name catalog consisted of over five hun- dred trays, the new subject catalog was a little over half that size, and the old catalog had shrunk accordingly. By the end of the same period almost half of the total bound volumes in the collec- tion had been bound, rebound, or repaired, but about 5 per cent of the collection still was badly in need of re- habilitation. The art collection, consist- ing of medical portraits, caricatures, prints, and historical scenes, had quad- rupled in size and had been arranged and listed. The burgeoning collection, and the new keys to it, found a parallel in the growth of reference services. Old per- formance figures are fragmentary or unavailable, but in 1944 the surveyors had found that telephone calls were com- ing in "at the rate of three or four a day.... Bibliographies as now compiled are not satisfactorily done.... The day's routine for most of the staff consists almost entirely of searching for the books requested." Ten years later, un- der Estelle Brodman's management, 600 reference requests per month and 40 long bibliographies per month were being handled; 10,000 volumes per month were being circulated, of which one in seven went out on interlibrary loan; and 7,000 photoduplication orders were processed per month, or five times the rate of the survey period. A series of definitive bibliographies was compiled and printed: The Pituitary-A drenocorti- cal Function (1950); Plasma Substi- tutes ( 19 51 ); Pathology and Physiology of Burns (1952); Gas Gangrene Organ- isms (1953); The Structure, Composi- tion, and Growth of Bone (1955); Can- cer Chemotherapy (1956); and others. In another publications area the age- old biological process of decay and re- newal was becoming strikingly manifest. In 1950 the decision was taken to bring the Index-Catalogue of the Library of the Surgeon General's Office to a close. A committee of experts under the chair- manship, first, of Dr. Lewis Weed and, then, of Dr. Chauncey D. Leake labored for almost three years before arriving at the fateful determination; concur- rently, Dr. Sanford V. Larkey was sur- veying the whole field of medical peri- odicals, subject-heading principles, and utilization of machine methods in medi- cal index publication on behalf of the Li- brary. The old Index-Catalogue, which had served so brilliantly in pre-World War I days, and which will always re- main outstanding as a permanent body of reference covering earlier medical publications, could no longer cope with the bibliographical problems of the mid- twentieth century. Enormous backlogs had accumulated despite the publication of five million references in fifty-eight volumes over seventy-five years; the leisurely progress from one end of the alphabet to the other over a period of twenty years had reached a point where more information was being withheld than was being printed; and the practice of printing subject references once, and once only, resulted in a labyrinth of sub- ject groupings which concealed rather than disclosed information. It had be- come, indeed, Fort Knox bibliography- "the laborious mining of references, to bury them securely again." When the Index-Catalogue was cut down, two new publications sprang up to take its place. Annually the Library began to print, with the great help of the Library of Congress, its Catalog of en- tries for works processed during the year, arranged by author and by subject. The first quinquennial cumulation of the Catalog (1950-54) was published in
THE NATIONAL LIBRARY OF MEDICINE 117 1955 in six volumes and ran to 180,000 entries for books and serial titles. At the same time, the old weekly Cur- rent List of Medical Literature was en- tirely rehabilitated under the editorship of Seymour Taine, was given a new for- mat, and has appeared monthly ever since. The Current List indexes over 100,000 current medical periodical arti- cles every year, to which it furnishes a half million subject and author entries in semiannually cumulated index issues. It enjoys a circulation of about 4,500 copies, predominantly on the basis of paid subscriptions, whereas the Index- Catalogue had a circulation of about 1,000, almost entirely on a free basis. Also in 1950 there appeared A Cata- logue of Incunabula and Manuscripts in the Army Medical Library, by Dorothy M. Schullian and Francis E. Sommer, listing the 490 incunabula, 35 early Western manuscripts, and 137 Arabic, Persian, Turkish, Singhalese, and He- brew manuscripts in the Library's His- tory of Medicine Division. Carried off in 1942 to rented quarters in Cleveland, the Division, under the guidance of Max H. Fisch, William Jerome Wilson, and Harriet C. Jameson, has flourished. Its 32,000 volumes of sixteenth-, seven- teenth-, and eighteenth-century works are being cataloged, auginented, and pre- served. Colonel Jones in 1943 through foresight and good luck had engaged the services of one of the most expert rare-book craftsmen of our time, Jean C. Eschmann, who over a period of twelve years ministered as "personal physician" to 10,000 volumes in the collection- books that over the years had been rav- aged by "fire, water, grime, and book- worms [and] careless bookbinders who trimmed away margins unmercifully and sank false cords too deeply into the spine." Books in every state of disrepair were transformed into handsome and thoroughly utilitarian volumes. To hold the great Galen folio of 1490, to fondle it, and see it now in all its glory, and to remember what it was before restora- tion, is to sense in epitome the story of the Library since the time of the centen- nial celebration. PUBLIC LAW 941 (EIGHTY-FOURTH CONGRESS), 1956 Planning for a new building went ahead by stages throughout the war, and by 1945 the architects' "Scheme K" was in hand for a building to be located on Capitol Hill just east of the Library of Congress. But the cost of the proposed structure had more than doubled, and repeated attempts to have construction funds included in the War Department budget were unavailing. In 1947 Colonel Joseph H. McNinch, who was director of the Library from 1946 to 1949 and largely responsible for the implementa- tion of the Survey Committee's recom- mendations, made the provident sugges- tion that the Library be declared a civil function of the Army, which would have the effect of transferring the cost of its operation from the Military Appropri- ation Act to the Civil Functions Appro- priation Act. In 1948 the Department of Defense Committee on Medical and Hospital Services (Hawley Board) rec- ommended that the name of the Library be changed to Armed Forces Medical Library, that it continue to be operated by the Surgeon General of the Army, and that its responsibility be recognized as serving the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and "other government agencies and civilian medicine generally insofar as its facilities and capabilities will per- mit." In 1949 the Armed Forces Medi- cal Advisory Committee (Cooper Com- mittee) recommended that the Library
118 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY be declared a civil function of the De- partment of the Army and that action be taken forthwith to secure construction of a new building. In 1950 Mr. Louis Johnson, then Secretary of Defense, asked the National Research Council to establish a committee on the Army Med- ical Library to consider the proper lo- cation of the Library in the government structure; the NRC Committee (Corner Committee) reported in May, 1951, to the then Secretary of Defense, General Marshall, that "1) the Army Medical Library should continue to be operated as a National Medical Library under the administration of the Department of Defense. 2) As an alternative, the Army Medical Library should be transferred to the Public Health Service to be oper- ated as a National Medical Library." The Corner Committee went on to urge that specific authorizing legislation be drawn up. After this report had been studied in many sessions of the Armed Forces Medical Policy Council, in May, 1952, the then Secretary of Defense, Robert A. Lovett, signed a directive con- verting the Army Medical Library into the Armed Forces Medical Library, a joint agency of the three military depart- ments. Secretary Lovett's directive spec- ified that the Library would serve "as a central or national library" for "gov- ernment agencies, and the civilian medi- cal and allied professions." During all these years the Honorary Consultants to the Army Medical Library, and later the Friends of the Armed Forces Medi- cal Library, gave aid and encouragement to the Library in many ways. In 1953 Secretary of Defense Charles E. Wilson issued a memorandum desig- nating the Secretary of the Navy as responsible agent for planning, budget- ing, design, and construction of a new building for the Library, and by the end of the year a preliminary estimate of space requirements had been drawn up and submitted. Planning continued throughout 1954; during the latter part of that year the Task Force on Federal Medical Services of the Commission on Organization of the Executive Branch of the Government (Hoover Commis- sion) began hearings on the Library situation. In February, 1955, the Hoover Commission released its report recom- mending the creation of a National Li- brary of Medicine and the transfer of the Armed Forces Medical Library thereto. In July, 1955, the House and Senate voted appropriation of $350,000 planning funds for the Armed Forces Medical Library. In December, 1955, the Department of Defense decided not to include construction funds for the Armed Forces Medical Library building in its budget program to be submitted to the Congress in the spring of 1956; and the building program ground to a halt. On March 13, 1956, Senator Lister Hill and Senator John F. Kennedy sub- mitted to the Congress S.3430, a bill "to promote the progress of medicine and to advance the national health and welfare by creating a National Library of Medi- cine." In a stirring speech introducing the bill, Senator Hill declared his belief that "such is the unanimity of opinion as to the necessity for immediate action on proper housing and support for the library . . . that when our hearings have been held and when all the evidence is in I am confident that we shall come to the floor of the Senate with a bill sup- ported by everyone who is seriously con- cerned with advancing the health of the Nation." Hearings on S.3430 were held by the Senate Committee on Labor and Public Welfare on April 10 and 11, at which many distinguished persons from the
THE NATIONAL LIBRARY OF MEDICINE 119 various medical fields were heard. On May 29, 1956, the Senate Committee reported the bill out favorably, after amending it to provide for operation of the Library by the Public Health Serv- ice (Senate Report 2071 [84th Cong., 2d sess.], May 29, 1956). On June 11, 1956, the Senate passed S.3430, as amended. On the same day hearings on an identical measure (H.R. 11524), introduced by Representative J. Percy Priest on May 29, were held by the House Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce. Meanwhile, on May 16 and there- after, eleven identical alternate bills were introduced in the House and one in the Senate. These bills in tlle House followed the form of the bill originally introduced in the Senate (before amend- ment providing for operation by the Public Health Service), with the addi- tion of a clause which specified that the new library building would be con- structed in the city of Chicago, Illinois. These bills were referred to the Hotuse Committee on Administration. Two hearings before this committee were held, on June 19 and 26, at which times the positions for and against the Chicago location were voiced. On June 27 the House Committee on Administration voted to take no further action on these bills. Nevertheless, feelings on the issue of location continued to run high, and for a time it appeared that the matter was irretrievably deadlocked. All parties to the argument eventually agreed, how- ever, to a compromise solution which would leave the decision as to location of the new building up to the Board of Regents of the National Library of Medicine. On July 19, 1956, the House Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce submitted House Report No. 2826, reporting favorably on S.3430, with an amendment compromising the location question as outlined above. On July 23 the bill as amended was passed by the House, and on July 24, the House version was concurred in by the Senate and sent to the President. (On July 27, the last day on which the Eighty-fourth Congress was in session, both the House and the Senate passed the Second Sup- plemental Appropriations Bill, which included an appropriation of $350,000 for plans for the new building of the National Library of Medicine.) On August 3, 1956, the President signed into law S.3430 as Public Law 941, Eighty-fourth Congress. Under the terms of the law- transfer of the Armed Forces Medical Library would become effective "on the first day, occurring not less than thirty days after the date of enactment of this part, which the Direc- tor of the Bureau of the Budget deter- mines to be practicable." Meetings were called by the Bureau of the Budget, at which representatives of the Bureau, the Army, the Public Health Service, and the Library were present; agreement was reached on making the transfer effective as of October 1, 1956. John Shaw Billings had once prominently written ''NATIONAL MEDICAL LIBRARY"7 across the title page of his Specimen fasciculus; now, eighty years later, it was in being. THE LONG, LONG SUMMER AHEAD 1956- October 1, 1956, dawned clear and cool. At a brief ceremony at the Library, Dr. Leroy E. Burney, Surgeon General of the Public Health Service, and Dr. Lowell T. Coggeshall accepted the trans- fer of the Armed Forces Medical Li- brary on behalf of the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare; Dr.
120 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY E. H. Cushing of the Department of Defense handed to Dr. Burney a small pamphlet on Marine Hospital design, imprinted 1837, as a symbol of the in- termingling of the interests of the two departments in the Library through the years. It was announced that Lieutenant Colonel Frank B. Rogers, M.C., U.S.A., who had been the last director of the Army Medical Library and the only di- rector of the Armed Forces Medical Li- brary, would continue as head of the National Library of Medicine. Thereupon the two hundred staff members who had witnessed the trans- fer ceremony returned to their tasks. There was much to do. Procedural ar- rangements of the new parent agency had to be studied and adopted. Mr. Lazerow set to work on a new and sim- plified method for obligating funds for book purchases which would meet gov- ernmental requirements and the pecul- iar conditions of the book trade with- out hopelessly tangling his own opera- tions. Miss MacDonald continued work on the design of a new bookplate and endpapers and on new provisions to be incorporated in binding contracts; after months of negotiations she was to emerge successful on both scores. Miss Brodman brooded over a reassessment of the Library's interlibrary loan and photoduplication policies; after drafts and redrafts, and proposals and counter- proposals in weekly staff conferences, there eventually issued a new and far- reaching policy of providing free photo- duplicates in lieu of interlibrary loans which would go into effect some months later. Mr. Taine grappled with the new issue of Bibliography of Medical Re- views, now regularized as an annual publication of the Library, and dreamed radical dreams concerning convulsive changes in Current List format, involv- ing the use of strange new machines and exotic new paper-handling methods. The director wrestled with the urgent matter of the fiscal year 1958 budget; the re- quest was for $1,450,000, and it was to pass the House and Senate without dis- sent. All down the line the staff struggled to retain control over the incoming flood of print. Calculations showed that with- in a year the Library's holdings would pass the one million mark-books, seri- als, prints, films, pamphlets, theses; an- nual reports, supply catalogs, academic series, health brochures; learned tomes bound in black or red or purple. The staff was not overly impressed with the figure which, after all, the Library had already once announced as reached in 1940; but wholesale discarding of re- prints, duplicates, and out-of-scope ma- terials, as well as a healthy skepticism concerning earlier record-keeping meth- ods, had long since prompted recounts on a basis which would have more direct relevance to the problem of dealing with disastrously dwindling shelf space. Continued existence in the old build- ing was still the problem that compli- cated every aspect of the Library's economy. Seventy years before, the building must have seemed to offer an endless hospitality to the already great collection which it housed; today it had become a grim opponent, threatening imminent frustration of every shift of materials, now ever more frantically prosecuted, despite the removal in 1955 of the last elements of the Museum, long since become the Armed Forces Insti- tute of Pathology, to a new location. The old cast-iron stacks groaned and buckled under the weight of the years and the books and had to be quickly bolstered stem to stern with channel steel sup- ports before disaster intervened. Driving
THE NATIONAL LIBRARY OF MEDICINE 121 rains poured water through cracks in the sash of the clerestory windows in both wings of the building, and tarpau- lins and buckets and wastebaskets were frequently pressed into use to contain it. The old coal bins in the basement had been cleaned up, painted and stacked, but the plaster continued to flake down over all. Boxes and cartons oozed into the corridors. What the Survey Commit- tee had described as an absolute neces- sity in 1944 was still all too plainly ap- parent in 1957 to anyone with eyes to see. The National Library of Medicine Act provided for a Board of Regents "to advise, consult with, and make recom- mendations to the Surgeon General on important matters of policy in regard to the Library." Seven members of the Board were to serve ex officio: the sur- geons general of the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Public Health Service; the chief medical director of the Veterans Administration; the assist- ant director for biological and medical sciences of the National Science Foun- dation; and the librarian of Congress. On February 18, 19 5 7, President Eisen- hower sent his nominations for the ten appointed members of the board to the Senate, which confirmed them on February 22. The Board met for the first time on March 20, 1957, and elected Dr. Worth B. Daniels, clinical professor of medicine at Georgetown University, as its chairman. On April 29 the Board designated a ten-acre tract in the southeast corner of the National In- stitutes of Health reservation in Bethes- da, Maryland, as the site for the new Library building. At the end of June a contract was signed with the architec- tural firm of R. B. O'Connor and W. H. Kilham, Jr., of New York City, for de- sign of the building and preparation of working drawings. The Library admin- istration had hopes that an appropria- tion for construction funds could be in- cluded in the budget request to the next session of Congress. Seventy-five years before, speaking of the urgency of the task of medical bibliography, Billings had said that "there are not two springs in the year, nor in the life of the nation, and if the spring work is not done in time the fruits of summer and autumn will be corre- spondingly deficient." It had been a long spring, the soil fertile, the workers dili- gent, the rain plentiful, and the occa- sional winds of less than hurricane force. The years 1961-63 will mark the one hundred and twenty-fifth anniversary of the founding of the Library and of the birth of John Shaw Billings. A full- scale history of the Library is planned; a Check-List of Medical Americana is under way; a memoir of Robert Fletch- er will be prepared; the selected papers of Billings will be brought out. Books will come in and be cataloged; period- icals will be indexed; reference requests will be answered; and the staff of the National Library of Medicine will look forward to a long, long summer of culti- vating and growth in which the best ideals of both librarianship and medi- cine may be exemplified.