THE LIBRARIES OF THREE NUREMBERG PATRICIANS, 1491-1568 LEONA ROSTENBERG notable private collections which form the subject of this pa- I per were by no means the first li- braries in Nuremberg. Among the vari- ous bequests made in his last testament of August 23, 1443, Dr. Konrad Kunhof- fer, the Nuremberg jurist, decreed that his one hundred and fifty-one books al- ready in the custody of the magistracy were "forever to remain their property in honor of the Almighty Father and to the advantage of the entire communi- ty."' Kunhoffer's rich legacy of theologi- cal tracts, medical compendiums, and juridical works became the nucleus of a municipal library, the Librei, adminis- tered and maintained by the city. By 1486 the town fathers could refer with pride to an increase of two hundred and twenty volumes, which during the last four decades had been partly purchased and partly donated. Details of the li- brary's administration were carefully re- corded by members of the magistracy. Payments to bookdealers, binders, and rubricators are numerous. On June io, 1488, the syndic, Johann Polras, received from the elder burgomaster, Hans Tu- cher, two florins "for his work at the li- brary which included the illumination of books and the compilation of indexes."2 However, although by I 500 the Librei encompassed a goodly number of books, it was soon to be overshadowed by the new private collections which were to continue the tradition of books in this "golden Corinth" of the north. The three Nuremberg libraries to be discussed have certain common traits, as well as some differences. All were owned by patricians and show the direct influ- ence of Italian and German humanism. The largest-that of Willibald Pirk- heimer-reveals the conscious efforts of a great bibliophile to amass a collection distinctive for its literary and philosophi- cal content. The smallest-that of An- ton Tucher-emphasizes the integration of the Renaissance worlds of art and books. The more varied Behaim collec- tion represents not only the textbooks of the German schoolboy but the literary pursuits of his patrician father. I Reflecting upon the books of his pa- tron Pirkheimer, Johann Cochlaeus, the headmaster of the Nuremberg school, de- clared that "no similar collection in both tongues could ever be found throughout Germany."3 This superb library of phi- losophy, history, theology, science, juris- prudence, Hebraica, grammar, and con- temporary letters filled the shelves of the patrician's study at Neunhof. Begun by his father, the collection was increased by acquisitions during Pirkheimer's univer- I J. Petz, "Urkundliche Beitraige zur Geschichte der Bucherei des nurnberger Rates, 1429-1538," in MiUeilungen des Vereins fur Geschichte der Stadt Nilrnberg (Nllrnberg, i886), VI, 93. 2 Ibid., P. 54. 3 Pomponius Mela, Cosmnographia, parvo quodam compendio Joannis Coclei Norici audacta.... (Nurnberg: Weyssenburger, 1512); see the Preface of Cochlaeus. 21
22 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY sity days at Padua and Pavia and by purchases in later life.4 In May, I491, the young student wrote to his father from Padua that he had just sent him a new book by Mar- silio Ficino but that he had been unable to acquire in that city Ficino's Theology or a Plato. "Suetonius with commentary has been completed but not as yet Quin- tilian. The Catilina of Sallust with Val- la's annotations has been printed. The orations of Cicero with commentaries are on the press."5 This letter, however, fails to mention his recent gift of Cicero's De oratore to his master, Johannes Calphur- nius, or the copy of the works of Horace which he had recently acquired. Two months later he complained that nothing new in theology had been published. At the same time he thanked a friend for sending him the Greek volumes "in which I so exceedingly delight. I beg you if anything new shall be printed at Flor- ence, be sure that I am informed. God willing, I shall travel to Florence for [the purchase of] Greek books."6 Having completed his law course at Pavia, Pirkheimer returned in 1497 to Nuremberg, where he soon drifted into local politics. His reputation as a scholar came to the attention of Emperor Max- imilian, who appointed him his literary adviser. Preoccupied with his career, Pirkheimer now had little time to visit the fairs or search the bookshops and stalls of former days. Not unlike many other famous collectors, he petitioned friends and stationed agents in Italy and Gennany to ferret out ancient codices, to obtain new volumes, and to report to the impatient scholar the latest in the realm of books. Only two years after his return to Nu- remberg, Pirkheimer begged his young friend Anthony Kress, a law student at Pavia, to inform him regarding new pub- lications. In January, I499, he remarked that he had received all the books dis- patched to him by Kress at his order, adding that they were much to his liking, with the exception of the works of Feli- nus, "which have considerable defects." It is quite evident that Pirkheimer had carefully collated this volume of legal tracts by the Italian jurist, Sandeus of Felina, and had discovered the omission of certain parts. Throughout his career Pirkheimer was a ready observer and critic of the fraudulent methods of the bookseller and the increasing carelessness of the printer. I fear these dealers have deceived you, for theirs is a tricky race. They promised to give you the complete works of Felinus and instead have omitted certain titles. The chapters "De rescriptis," "De officio ordinarii," "De officio judicis," "De litis contestatione," and the "Sermo de indulgentia" are lacking. Notwithstanding this duplicity, Pirk- heimer ordered Kress to purchase a work by Paul de Castro, the Investitura of Sancto Georgio, "if printed," and to tell him of whatever had been lately pub- lished, "especially among 'consilia.' "7 The purchases of Kress at the begin- ning of I 50I included copies of the works 4 The collection of books presented by the sixth duke of Arundel to the Royal Society in i68i in- cludes many works from Pirkheimer's library. His grandfather, the duke of Norfolk, had purchased the Pirkheimer library in 1636. See Bibliotheca Norfolci- ana: sive catalogus libb. manuscriptorum &e impres- sorum .... quos .... Henricus Dux Norfolciae Reg- iae Societati Londiniensi .... donavit (London, I68I); see also Emile Offenbacher, "La Bibliothdque de Wilibald Pirckheimer," Bibliofilia, XL (July, 1938). This is but a partial list of the books owned by Pirkheimer, compiled from sales records, and the author does not discuss Pirkheimer's methods of ac- quisition. s Willibald Pirkheimer, Opera, ed. Melchior Gold- ast (Frankfurt a.M., i6io), p. 25I. I Ibid., p. 258. 7 Georg von Kress, "Acht Briefe Willibald Pirck- heimer," in Mitteilungen des Vereinsfur Geschichte der Stadi Nurnberg (Nurnberg, 1879), I, 74.
THE LIBRARIES OF THREE NUREMBERG PATRICIANS 23 of Simplicius and Prudentius. Acknowl- edging their arrival, Pirkheimer wrote: "I am herewith inclosing a list of books which I wish to obtain, along with their prices," adding, however, that he was not really concerned about the cost of the books as long as he could have them.8 From Nuremberg the young counselor chatted about Italian publications: Jerome Imhof purchased for me at foulr mar- celli the Psalter recently printed by Aldus at Venice. They have issued a Greek Psalter at Milan with a Latin commentary in larger for- mat than the Aldine. I should like to have both. Furthermore, I would like you to investigate whether there be any poor Greek scholar at Pavia who could translate for me at a suitable price, word for word, some of the comedies of Aristophanes.9 During the summer of 1501 Pirk- heimer plied Kress with questions about the projected Aldine Bible to be printed in Latin, Greek, and Hebrew and asked to be informed about forthcoming publi- cations.I" It appears that the further purchase of incomplete Greek texts dur- ing the year by Kress incurred some ad- monition: Buy no more Greek books! I have found some defects. I ask you that you demand from the bookseller that he make these good, both in the works of Aristotle and in the De plontis of Theophrastus. An entire quire is missing in the Argonautica of Apollonius-that of letter T. I cannot determine what is wanting in the copy of Euripides, since it does not have a register. I recall having seen at some time several Eurip- idean tragedies in Italy, which I believe were printed, but perhaps the printer deceived you, as is customary." By September, 1502, the young en- thusiast had completely forgotten the trickery of the trade. Again he implored Kress to buy certain new works which he understood had been printed in Greek type at Milan: If this be true, see that I have them, as well as anything new that appears pertaining to the Latin humanities. I have heard also that the complete works of Cicero have been printed at Milan. If this can be obtained, I beg you to purchase it for me. I would that you also in- vestigate whether the fifth volume of Aristotle's works is to be printed. He continued that he owned three vol- umes of the Stagirite's writings but lacked the first and last. After enumerat- ing the contents of both volumes he re- marked that, according to rumor, each could be purchased at two ducats. "If you buy these books at that price, or even for a little more, say five ducats, you would do me a great favor."'" Ac- knowledging the receipt of a book in Chal- dean in I505, Pirkheimer boasted that he owned copies of practically every text printed in Italy.'3 From Venice his close friend Diirer be- moaned his inability to find the books which the scholar wanted. In a letter of I So6 the artist remarked that he had just spoken to a dealer who did not know of anything new in Greek which had ap- peared recently. "There is nothing of significance by the Italians in the field of history pertinent to your studies. It is al- ways one and the same."I4 8Ibid., p. 75. 9 Ibid. Imhoff appears to have been an honorable friend. The price of the Greek Psalter is announced in the first Aldine catalog at four marcelli, the exact amount reported by Imhoff to Pirkheimer (A. A. Renouard, Annales de l'imprimerie des Aide [Paris, I'8031, II, I49). KIO Kress, op. cit., p. 8I. T1 Ibid., p. 83. 12 Ibid., p. 84. The fifth volume of Aristotle's Opera Graeca had been printed in June, 1498; ap- parently Pirkheimer did not know this. He had fair- ly accurate information about the prices of Volumes I and V. The former is listed at one and one-half ducats, the latter at two (Renouard, op. cit., II, 148- 49). '3 Bernhard Hartmann, "Konrad Celtis in Nurn- berg," in Mitteilungen des Vereinsfiir GeschichSe der Stadt Nurnberg (Nilrnberg, I889), VIII, 67. 14 Moriz Thausing (ed. and trans.), "Durers Briefe, Tagebticher und Reime," in Quellenschriften fur Kunstgeschichke (Vienna, I872), III, r4.
24 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY As the years passed and Pirkheimer's library grew, he was repeatedly deceived by the treachery of booksellers. His scathing criticism of the Strassburg Ptolemy, edited by him, brought from its printer protests of indignation to which the scholar retorted: You imagine that if you print a lot of non- sense and old wives' tales in [my] book you have done a good piece of work. Your tricks might go with children and the ignorant, but among the learned I along with you will prove the butt of their ridicule.'s Despite his dissatisfaction with the printers' foibles, Pirkheimer as late as I520 still commissioned agents to procure his books. Cochlaeus, stationed at Frankfurt, purchased for him the works of Seneca, the lives of the Caesars, and "much else according to your instruc- tions." He added that on the sheet in- closed with his letter were titles which his patron perhaps had not seen. In con- clusion he referred to the impending ar- rival of Hutten's Dialogues from a Mainz press.'6 Although Pirkheimer's agents pur- chased his books, their selection depend- ed upon his particular interest, which often had been aroused by the sugges- tions of friends. Beatus Rhenanus wrote in November, 151I: You wish to know, if I read correctly, what is now appearing at Basle. Erasmus is revising and augmenting his annotations on the New Testament. His Adages, greatly increased, are on the press, as well as his Querela pacis and his translation of the Declamatio de morte Luciani. Suetonius, Aelius Spartianus, Lampridius, the two books of Theodore Gaza on the institutes of grammar, his letters, and a work on the best form of government by the Englishman Thomas More (to which he has given the happy title "Utopia") [are all being published]. Erasmus is preparing his commentary on the Pauline Epis- tle.T7 The influence of Rhenanus' letter on Pirkheimer is evident. A month later he wrote to Erasmus, "We wait impatiently for your New Testament and also your commentaries upon the great Paul.",8 Pirkheimer did not rely solely on the services of his agents; when he had the opportunity, he made some purchases himself. With glee he reported to Reuch- lin in I5I2 that while at Treves he had found various old books in both Greek and Latin.'9 Upon the death of his fel- low-citizen, Regiomontanus, he bought a part of his library.20 In I5I4 his manu- script collection was increased by pur- chase from the estate of the great bib- liophile, Mattlhias Corvinus, king of Hungary.2' Frequently the shelves at Neunhof were enhanced by gifts of books sent or dedicated to Master Willibald. In Feb- ruary, I520, Cochlaeus notified Pirk- heimer that he was awaiting Koberger's messenger to bear to Nuremberg his translation of the works of Maxentius.22 From Oecolampadius at Basle arrived in- scribed copies of his study on Greek lit- erature and his treatise De dignitate Eu- charistiae sermones duo. Although not an active participant in the Reformation, Pirkheimer was, nevertheless, the recipi- "SOscar Hase, Die Koberger (Leipzig, I885), p. cxxxix, No. - ii8. x6 Eduard Bocking, Ulricks von Hutten Schrifktn (Leipzig, I859), I, 335. 17 A. Horawitz and K. Hartfelder, Briefwechsel des Beatus Rhenanus (Leipzig, I886), p. 98. I' Percy S. Allen (ed.), Opus epistolarum Des. Erasmi Roterdami (Oxford, i9o6), III, I79. X9 Ludwig Geiger (ed.), "Johann Reuchlins Brief- wechsel," in Bibliothek des literarischen Vereins in Stuttgart (Tiibingen, i875), XXXVI, i83. 20 H. Petz, "Urkundliche Nachrichten uber den literarischen Nachlass Regiomontans und B. Wal- ters, 1478-i522," in Mitteitungen des Vereins fur Geschichte der Stadt NiIrnberg (Nurnberg, I886), VII, 239. 2' Offenbacher, op. Cit., p. 250. 22Bbcking, op. Cit., p. 321.
THE LIBRARIES OF THREE NUREMBERG PATRICIANS 25 ent of tracts written by its leaders. An admirer, visiting the storm center at Wit- tenberg, sent him a copy of the Reform- er's Sermo de virtute excommunicationis.23 Melanchthon himself inscribed a copy of his Epistola de Lipsica disputatione to "the most excellent Willibald Pirkheim- er, ornament of the city of Nuremberg."24 From the fiery Hutten came a copy of his Aula, bearing an autographed note for his "stouthearted and faithful Willi- bald." Two of Diirer's most important treatises-Unterweisung der Messung and Vier Bicher von mnenschlicken Proportion -were dedicated to his "especially dear master and friend, Willibald Pirkheim- er." These were to take their place with the savant's other books, exquisitely il- luminated by "his devoted servant Dtirer. "25 Upon Pirkheimer's death in I530 his famous collection passed to his grand- son, to be dispersed in time on foreign soil far from the beauty and quiet of Neunhof.26 II On January I4, ISI4, Anton Tucher recorded in his diary the purchase of Isocrates' "Advice to the Youth Demoni- cus," which "Master Willibald Pirk- heimer has translated from Greek into German. This cost me five pfundt. "27 As "pater patriae" of Nuremberg, Tu- cher, like Pirkheimer, was an active poli- tician and, to a lesser degree, a patron of arts and letters.28 A friend of Frederick the Wise of Saxony, he likewise favored the Lutheran cause. Although the works of the great friar were prohibited in the city, the Elector sent "his honorable, wise, and especially dear Anton Tucher" Luther's edition of the New Testament.29 The evangelical books dispatched to the Tucher home "Zu der Krone" on the Heumarkt formed part of a small library previously assembled by the chief magis- trate. Unlike his cousin, Hans Tucher, keeper of the municipal library, Anton fondled no splendid copies of the works of Ptolemy or Galen. With the exception of a copy of the Theuerdank and the printed editions of Duirer's Small Passion and Large Passion, Tucher's collection consisted of an array of prayer-books is- sued by Koberger and lesser-known local craftsmen. The contents of these books are of little importance. Of greater sig- nificance is Tucher's employment of rep- resentative artists for their preservation and enhancement. 23 See "Catalogue VII," Incunabula, Humanists, Reformation Tracts from the Library of Willibald Pirckheimer and Other Sources (London: E. P. Gold- schmidt & Co., Ltd., n.d.), No. 252. 24 Ibid., No. 262. 25 For Dlurer's illumination of Pirkheimer's books see Erwin Rosenthal, "Durers Buchmalerein fur Pirkheimers Bibliothek," in Jahrbuch der preus- sische Kunstsammlungen (Berlin, 1928), Beiheft zu Band XLIX, Teil I. 26 For the subsequent history of Pirkheimer's li- brary consult the following: n. 4, above; General Catalogue of Books Offered to the Public at Affixed Prices (London: Quaritch, I874); Henry M. May- hew and R. Farquharson Sharp, Catalogue of a Col- lection of Early Printed Books in the Library of the Royal Society and Catalogue of Valuable Printed Books Sold by Order of the President and Council of the Royal Society (London: Sotheby & Co., 1925). 27 Wilhelm Loose (ed.), "Anton Tuchers Haushalt Buch," in Bibliothek des literarischen Vereins in Stuttgart (Tubingen, I877), CXXXIV, 126. This was undoubtedly a manuscript version of Isocrates' work, since it was not printed until i 6o6, in Theatrum virtutis el honoris (Nuremberg). The currency terms employed on this and the following pages have approximately these equiva- lents: i thaler = I gold gulden, 2 shillings; i gold gulden = 4 florins; i florin = 2 pfundt; i pfundt = 30 shillings. 28 It was Tucher who commissioned Veit Stoss to execute the exquisite Angelic Salutation in the Church of St. Lorenz. 29 J. Kbstlin, "Briefe von Kursachsischen Hofe an A. Tucher in Nurnberg aus den Jahren 5sI8- I523," in Theologische Studien und Kritiken (I882), LV, 700.
26 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY As the busy magistrate entered in his household-book his daily expenditures for a cask of Rhenish wine or a heavy cloak of camlet cloth, so he inscribed, from I507 to I525, the price of a new prayer-book, the details of a binding, or the illumination of a woodcut. Tucher's entry for March 25, I5II, closes with a reference to his library. "Paid Hieronymus Holzel for the bind- ing of the three large and three small Passions of Turer, one florin."30 These two famous works, purchased almost im- mediately after their appearance, had been printed by Durer in his house near the Thiergarten Gate under his own su- pervision, with the assistance of Koberg- er's apprentices. Opposite each cut is a verse by Benedict Chelidonius, known to his friends as "Musophile." Tucher's reference to these items throws some light on the development of the book craft. It appears that binding was not restricted to a specific group of artisans but was undertaken by well-established printers. Holzel had been typographer to the Sodalitas Celtica, an important literary society, and in true humanistic style signed his colophons as "concivis Nurenbergensis." Yet this associate of the learned appears to have accepted any type of work connected with his profes- sion. At an earlier date he had received from the city fathers the payment of some twenty-four florins for binding books at the city hall over a period of a year and a half.3' Following this entry there is scant ref- erence to Tucher's library until Septem- ber, 1514, when its owner ordered for a prayer-book a binding weighing "i2 lot" from the goldsmith Kraft, who lived on the Stopfelgasslein. The amount ex- pended was one florin.32 Undoubtedly this work was done by the goldsmith Hans Kraft, who designed gold chains and "impressed portraits in metal" for the magistrate's patrician friends.33 On September 27, Tucher visited the council chamber and purchased for ten pfundt a ream of Ravensburg paper, which shortly after was probably incorporated, along with additional sheets, into a new ac- count-book consisting of three hundred leaves. The second batch of paper cost four and a half pfundt "plus an addition- al five to Wagner for the binding and ruling of the pages, making a total of nine pfundt, twelve shillings."34 Tucher gives no reason for deserting Holzel and assigning the work to Peter Wagner, who was a comparatively inactive printer, al- though, like his confrere, a man of some learning; he had matriculated at the University of Erfurt and was known to his colleagues as "currifex." Wagner may have been at the time engaged solely in the binding of books, as few publica- tions emerged from his press after I500. Toward the end of the year Tucher pur- chased another manuscript copy of Pirk- heimer's translation of the Advice of Isoc- rates-for which he paid, however, one pfundt less, perhaps because it consisted of nine rather than eleven leaves.35 During the next three years the house- hold-book makes no reference to the growth of the library or to the patri- cian's interest in books. At the end of I517 Tucher mentions the payment of fifteen pfundt, twenty shillings, to Jo- 30 Loose, op. cit., p. 91. 3I Ibid. For Hoizel and works printed by him see Karl Schottenloher, Die Entwickelung der Buch- druckerkunsi in Franken bis I530 (Wtirzburg, I9IO), p. 58. 32 Ibid., p. II4. 33 E. Wernicke, "Zur nurnberger Kunstlerge- schichte," in Mitteilungen des Vereins fur Gesckickte der Stadt Niurnberg (Nurnberg, I893), X, 57. 34 Loose, op. Cit., pp. I 14-15. 3 sIbid., p. i i6.
THE LIBRARIES OF THREE NUREMBERG PATRICIANS 27 hann von dem Peypus for six Gernan prayer-books, which in all probability were distributed to members of the fam- ily as New Year's gifts.36 These neat oc- tavo prayer-books were copies of the pop- ular religious work Hortulus animae, which closely resembled the French Horae issued by Verard and Jean du Pre. In March, IP58, Tucher purchased from a certain Tonlen a "book of poetry" for his nephew at fifty shillings and a "Dona- tus" at twenty.37 Among his other gifts was a prayer-book presented to his cous- in, "long Hans." The work is described as "decorated throughout with beautiful illustrations, having a gilded copper cover closed by gilt copper clasps. With everything included it cost me seven florins." 8 The most important of Tucher's en- tries regarding his library appears on April 3, 5ii8, when he spent twenty-nine pfundt for the purchase of a prayer-book, including complete ornamentation and binding. His itemized account is as fol- lows: One printed prayer-book from Ko- berger ....................... 84 shillings To Guldenmund for the painting of its illustrations and for the appli- cation of wax to all leaves . 4 florns For the binding ................. 3 pfundt For the velvet .................. 3 pfundt To Lindenast for the gilded copper ornamentation. . 12 pfundt39 The production of this volume involved the services of two local craftsmen. Hans Guldenmund, a woodcutter and il- luminist, was to win recognition later for his engravings of Reformation leaders.40 Sebastian Lindenast was a leading cop- persmith. The delicate artistry of his work had attracted the attention of the emperor, who privileged him to apply sil- ver and gold to his copper designs.4' On the very same day Tucher refers to his copy of the Theuerdank, "given to me by the Provost of St. Sebald. For the il- lumination of the i i8 designs I paid Gul- denmund four and a half florins." He appears to have had the work bound the following March, stating that he had paid five pfundt to the binder on the Chappenzipffel "for the book called Tewrdanck."42 This famous poem, cele- brating the exploits of the Emperor Max- imilian, was printed in Nuremberg in I517. Tucher's copy is of exceptional in- terest, having been presented to hiim by the author, Melchior Pfintzing, the "gentle" provost of St. Sebald. It is of special significance that a copy should have been found in Tucher's possession at so early a date. The edition was pri- vately printed and not intended for sale. Very few copies passed out of the emper- or's possession during his lifetime. The main stock lay in six chests at Augsburg until March, I526, when Archduke Fer- dinand decided to distribute the remain- ing volumes as memorials of the late em- peror.43 Hence Tucher's copy appears to have been one of the few allowed to the author. At the end of I5i8 Tucher purchased a vellum copy of the Hortulus from Ko- berger at two florins. Again the addition- 36 Ibid., p. 155. Peypus did much printing for the Koberger office. 37 Ibid., p. I70, n. I. 35Ibid., p. I55. 39 Ibid. 40 Aligemeine deutsche Biographie (Leipzig, I879), X, III ff. 41 G. W. K. Lochner, "Der Johann Neudorffer Schreib und Rechenmeisters zu Nurnberg Nachrich- ten von Kunstlern und Werkleuten daselbst aus dem Jahre 1547," in Quellenschriften fur Kunstgeschichte (Vienna, I875), X, 37. 42 Loose, op. cit., p. 98, n. 2. 43 Richard Muther, Die deutsche Buckerillustra- tion der Gothik und Friahrenaissance (r460-1530) (Munich, 1922), p. 845; Ch. Fairfax Murray Caoa- logue of German Books (London, 1913), II, 329.
28 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY al expenses are enumerated. He now paid the artist Springinklee five florins for the illumination of the sixty-one woodcuts and expended an additional ten pfundt for the binding, including three pfundt for the necessary velvet. Sebas- tian Lindenast executed the metal orna- mentation, while Glockendon painted a "Tucher crest and a skeleton. The whole came to ten florins, four pfundt."44 Hans Springinklee had learned the art of wood- cutting and painting at Duirer's studio. He assisted with the execution of the tri- umphal procession and the triumphal arch of Maximilian. His contemporary, the chronicler Johann Neudorffer, highly esteemed his designs and borders for this edition of the Horttlus.45 Jorg Glock- endon, regarded by Neudorffer as "par- ticularly adept in the execution of flour- ishes," was a dealer in painted coats-of- arms and an illuminist of psalters and prayer-books.46 Tucher's last literary entry is dated March, 15I9, when he paid Guldenmund fourteen pfundt for the illumination of a small Hortulus animae containing eight woodcuts, sixteen border designs, and one hundred small initials. The binder received three pfundt.47 III Unlike the bindings in Tucher's li- brary, those acquired by Paul Behaim the Elder do not display the delicate craftsmanship of the German Renais- sance. Their owner, however, like his predecessors, Pirkheimer and Tucher, was a busy politician and military ad- ministrator of the city defenses. Although Behaim was largely en- grossed with civic concerns, the meticu- lous care with which he daily itemized household expenditures is comparable to Tucher's. 8 From I548 to 1568 he en- tered the cost of such varied items as new iron kitchen pots, a portrait of St. John the Baptist, and a tub of butter. The en- tries frequently afford intimate glimpses into the cultural delights of this active patrician. Although the early years con- tain considerable reference to his acqui- sition of Venetian majolica and Flemish tapestries, his greatest collecting joy lay in books. This interest, somewhat latent prior to the education of his oldest son, developed as the school years of little Paul passed. In the account-book are re- corded the purchase of a "Donatus," a catechism, a new Greek grammar. When the necessary tools for the son's educa- tion came to the attention of the father, his own interest in the world of books seems to have been stimulated. Behaim's journal serves not only as a faithful mir- ror of school texts but as a guide to the bookshelves of a fairly enlightened Ger- man patrician. His preoccupation with current literature marks him as a collec- tor worthy of mention in this period of religious turmoil and internal strife. His library falls into two general categories, evangelical and historical. As an influen- tial Protestant he sought the treatises of Luther and other reformed divines; as a military expert his natural preference was for historical literature. From 1548 to I572 the purchase of forty-odd books is recorded, of which twenty-one were bought for the chil- dren.49 The remaining items, selected by 44 Loose, Op. cit., p. 155. 45Lochner, Op. cit., p. 144; Muther, op. cit., pp. 1532 if. 46Lochner, Op. cit., p. 140. 47 Loose, Op. Cit., p. I55. 48J. Kamann, "Aus niirnberger Haushaltungs- und Rechnungsbuchern des I5. und I6. Jahrhun- derts, " in Mitteilungen des Vereins fur Geschichie der Stadt Nuirnberg (Niirnberg, i886), VII, cf. esp. 66, 86, 89, 93, Ix5, etc. 49 Behaim does not always specify the exact num- ber of books purchased, and therefore no exact de-
THE LIBRARIES OF THREE NUREMBERG PATRICIANS 29 the patrician for himself, were doubtless assembled in the small yellow writing- room overlooking the Zistelgasse. The majority were collected at Nuremberg and at Frankfurt and Prague, distin- guished for their book fairs, from I562 to I568-the period of young Paul's edu- cation. Behaim's earliest reference to a liter- ary purchase occurs in I55I. On Sep- tember I5, at the cost of two florins, four pfundt, he acquired the Basle edition of Sebastian Muinster's Cosmographie. For its binding he paid four pfundt, six shill- ings.50 There is no further record of a purchase until December, I554, when he spent two pfundt, three shillings, for three calendars, probably presented as holiday gifts.5' In the spring of I556 the account-book bears the following entry: "On the eighth of May I bought at the recent Frankfurt Lent Fair one book, the Chronicle of Johann Sleidan, recounting the entire history of the reign of the Em- peror Charles, costing me one and a half florins.' S2 Sleidan's history had ap- peared shortly before in Strassburg from the press of Wendel Rihel. Behaim's quest for historical literature continued during I559, when he acquired for four pfundt, twenty-four shillings, a history of Venice written by a contemporary- either Paul Bembo or Donato Gianotti.53 Earlier in the year the collection had been increased by "an old book bought at the Seumarkt, called the Golden Bull, containing various descriptions in print, at three pfundt, fifteen shillings."54 This purchase was none other than a copy of the famous charter granted by Charles IV, including other Reichstag decrees. That little Paul might eventually match his wits with scholars and divines, his father placed him in 1562 in the school of St. Sebald. Here he no doubt followed the curriculum adopted in 1529, which prescribed the definitions of Dona- tus, the teachings of Cato, the discourses of Erasmus, and the plays of Plautus and Terence; in addition, one day of the week is to be devoted to the fundamental precepts of religion, when the master is to instruct in the Ten Command- ments, the Pater Noster, and a knowledge of the faith. From time to time certain psalms are to be taught, the groundwork of the Faith.ss The majority of the books bought for the Behaim children correspond largely to those suggested in the school curriculum. In 1562 Behaim purchased for his daughter Sabina, at twenty-one shillings, a catechism composed by one of the prominent Lutheran theologians.6 Two years later he presented his son with a schoolbag, which would hold his "Dona- tus," acquired during the previous Jan- uary along with two catechisms at two pfundt, twelve shillings.57 As the year passed, little Paul received a Latin gram- mar, priced at two pfundt, which was purchased by his father in the hope that his son "might learn," while his sister ac- quired an arithmetic costing but half that amount.S8 (Valentin Papst, of Leip- zig, had issued in I554 the Grammatica Latina of Joachim Camerarius, while Sa- bina's textbook was more than likely one of the many editions of the Rechnung auf der Linien und Federn of Adam Riese, termination of the size of the library or the number of books bought can be made. He refers specifically, however, to thirty-seven titles. so Kamann, op. cit., p. 71. 5s Ibid., p. 76. 53 Ibid., p. 103. S' Ibid., p. 71. 54 Ibid., p. I50. ss H. W. Heerwagen, Zur Gesckickhe der nurn- berger Gelehrtenschuken (Nurnberg, i86o), p. 29. s6 Kamann, Op. cit., p. 123. This may have been either Luther's catechism or that of the important Nuremberg divine, Andreas Osiander; possibly that of Urban Rhegius. 7 Ibid.,P. .2 6. SslIbid.
30 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY the most popular German Rechenmeister of the sixteenth century.) Since Paul was now a serious young pupil at the school of St. Sebald, the elder Behaim presented him at Christmas, I 564, with books cost- ing five and a half pfundt.59 To equip the boy with "a knowledge of the faith," Behaim gave him the following Christ- mas a copy of selections from the Gos- pels-probably Johann Bugenhagen's Historia .... Iesu Christi.P0 This gift was followed by the purchase of several arithmetics, including what was appar- ently a parchment to be used by Paul for his problems in computation, totaling seven pfundt, twenty-one shillings."I The school year of 1567 called for five new books: another copy of Bugenhagen's selections from the Gospels, a Greek grammar-probably that of Joachim Camerarius-and three psalters.62 Bu- genhagen's edition of the Psalms had been issued in 1563 and enjoyed much popularity. After the death of the elder Behaim in i568 and Paul's departure for Leipzig in 1572, the books purchased by the widow, Magdalena (who continued the household-book until I576), were intend- ed for the younger son, Christopher. From I572 to 1575 five are mentioned. These include a popular work, probably the Maxims of Plutarch, and another copy of the selections from the Gospels.63 In November, I572, Magdalena obtained for her young son copies of Luther's Josus Syrach and a Protestant catechism, bound together and costing two pfundt, twelve shillings.14 The last book pur- chased for Christopher, who later was to pursue a business career, was Simon Ja- cob's Rechenbuch, a commerical arithme- tic following the general plan of Riese, printed at Frankfurt in I565.b5 While Behaim was busied with the purchase of books for his children he found works of interest to himself as well. Of the sixteen volumes acquired from I562 to 1568, nine indicate his re- ligious convictions; the others for the most part represent his historical prefer- ences. Notable among the former are two works of biblical paraphrases. In I 563 he bought from the Nuremberg printer, Bernhardt Vischer, a bound copy of a "summary of the Old and New Tes- tament," costing over six pfundt.66 This, in all likelihood, was the Biblische Fig- uren des Alten und Neuwen Testaments, with two hundred woodcuts of Virgil Solis, issued by Sigmund Feyerabend at Frankfurt in I562. Vischer was a fre- quent visitor to the Frankfurt fairs. There in i565 he bought from Feyera- bend five copies of this work at one florin for the lot.67 If he bought the books for the same price in I563, when Behaim paid him two florins for a single copy, his profit must have been excep- tionally high. The household-book men- tions in I566 the acquisition of an old parchment volume "with pictures and written in verse," rebound in red leather and costing five pfundt.68 This work may very well have been the Neuwe biblische S9 Ibid. 6'Ibid.,p. 127. 61 "Adi 21 [December, I5661 zalt fur rechenpiu- cher und anders ein eselhaut 7 lbs. 21 Ss" (ibd., p. I28). On November 22, I571, Behaim writes "zalt ich dem Paulus fur ein eselhat [sic] zum rechen i lb. 1 2 ss. " Apparently the ass-hides were intended as tablets for the solution of arithmetical problems. 62 Ibid., pp. I28-29. 63 Ibid., p. I35. 64 Ibid. 65 Ibid., p. 137. 66Ibid., p. IS2. 67 Heinrich Pallmann, "Ein Messregister Sig- mund Feyerabends aus dem Jahre i565," in Archiv fur Gesckichte des deu4schen Buchkandels (Leipzig, I884), IX, 14. 68 Kamann, op. Cit., p. I54.
THE LIBRARIES OF THREE NUREMBERG PATRICIANS 31 Figuren des Alten und Neuwen Testa- ments containing the German and Latin verses of Johann Bocksberg and the one hundred and thirty admirable woodcuts of Jost Amman, printed also by Feyera- bend in 1564. Foremost in Behaim's collection of evangelical literature were three of Luther's works-his translations of the New Testament and the Pentateuch, and his Table Talk, compiled by Johann Auri- faber. Vischer had sold Behaim the New Testament, bound in red leather and im- pressed with gold, for more than three florins.69 The Reformer's translation of the Pentateuch, also bound in red leather, with green silk ties, was more ex- pensive, costing seven pfundt.70 The first edition of the Table Talk had been dispatched to the patrician as a gift from the editor, a former intimate of the Lu- ther household; an entry of September 5, I 566, states: "Master Johann Aurifaber of Eisleben has so honored me by sending Doctor Martin Luther's Tischreden, a thick printed volume. For the binding of the same I paid four pfundt, twenty- four shillings."7' At an earlier date (I557) Behaim had acquired two works by "Johann Prontzi" (apparently the Suabian reformer, Johann Brenz the El- der): a "catechism" and a "Passion."72 In June, I563, Behaim purchased from Vischer a bound copy of the Postilla of the Protestant pedagogue, Johann Span- genberg, for which he paid over three florns. During Vischer's Frankfurt visit two years later he bought five copies of the same work for four flormns; on the basis of a similar price in 1563 he must have reaped a satisfactory profit.73 Shortly prior to his death Behaim ac- quired a life of Christ, selling at six pfundt.74 On March io, I564, Behaim recorded that he had paid more than twelve pfundt for "a large new herbal written by the imperial physician at Prague," which had been dispatched to him from that city.75 The Commentaries upon the Six Books of Dioscorides by Petrus An- dreas Matthiolus, court physician to Em- peror Maximilian II, was a splendid folio volume with eight hundred and one woodcuts of animals, plants, and herbs. Behaim's copy may have been one of the Latin editions or the Czechish version printed at Prague in 1562. The six volumes of history assembled in the yellow study ranged from works of contemporary annalists to the chronicles of Livy and Josephus, purchased at the Frankfurt spring fair at one thaler each, plus an additional thaler for two white leather bindings. 6 In i 56 Behaim, the commissioner of defense, had acquired a copy of Von kayserlichen Kriegsrechten by the military expert and tactician, Leon- hard Fronsperger, while his interest in imperial developments had led him to order through his Frankfurt agent, Chris- toph Schmidhamer, at the 1566 autumn fair, the Reichtagsordnungen, costing two and a half florins, bound.77 Two other 69 Ibid., p. 152. 70 Ibid. 7' Ibid., P-I 54- 72 Ibid., p. 8o. Acknowledgment is here made to Dr. Pierce Butler, who suggested that "Prontzi" might be identified as Brenz, whose works include Cakckhismus Deutsch .... fur die Jugendt zu schwa- bischen Hall (Niirnberg: Newber, 155o) and Passio domini nostri Jecsu Christi . ... tribus homiliis ex- posita (Frankfurt: Brubach, I564). If so, the edi- tion of the latter work purchased by Behaim must have been an earlier one, which has not been identi- fied (see Julius Hartmann, Johannes Brenz fElber- feld, I862], p. 201). 73 Kamann, op. cit., p. 152; Pallmann, op. cit., p. 14. 74 Kamann, op. cit., p. i I 6. 7S Ibid., p. 153. 76 Ibid., p- I S. 77 Ibid., pp. 153, 154.
32 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY acquisitions of historical content treated of the Turks and Muscovites, costing to- gether five pfundt, eighteen shillings.78 The former may be identified with the History of Prince Scanderberg mentioned in the Feyerabend inventory of I568;79 the latter was in all probability the Trav- els of Count Sigismund Herberstain, the Austrian nobleman and diplomat. IV When Behaim died in I568, almost eighty years had passed since Pirkheimer had haunted the bookstalls of Pavia. The three collections assembled during this period suggest certain comparisons and contrasts. In size and scope the li- braries of Tucher and Behaim are hardly to be compared with that of Pirkheimer, whose discrimination and fervor mark him as one of the great book-collectors of all time. His methods of obtaining books have a definite note of modernity. His desiderata were submitted along with his prices; and, as an ardent bookman, he was willing to raise his limits if the item was procurable. His sound knowledge of the condition of a volume, whether com- plete or defective, reveals the careful stu- dent. His extreme delight in books was not altogether shared by Tucher and Behaim. The library of the former is dis- tinctive only for its artistic qualities; that of the latter represents the collec- tion of an average intelligent man of af- fairs. The importance of the Tucher and Behaim collections lies in the unwitting contributions of their owners to the knowledge of sixteenth-century book- craft; in their efforts to balance their budgets they shed new light upon book values and upon the collaboration of the artistic and literary worlds. From a scrutiny of the household- books some insight is afforded into the purchase value of money and the rela- tionship between the cost of books and that of daily essentials. Tucher paid over three florins for a pound of saffronSG and not quite three pfundt for a prayer- book. Five herring, purchased at three pfundt,8" cost Behaim more than little Paul's Latin grammar at a fraction over two. Behaim bought two partridges at over four pfundt ;82 the catechism and copy of Josus Syrach purchased by his wife amounted to a little more than half this amount. Generally, books were less expensive than the necessities of the pa- trician's daily life-his beer, his poultry, his spices. Only in exceptional cases, when a book becomes a work of art, as Tucher's completed Hortulus, illuminat- ed by Springinklee and bound by Linde- nast, can it bear any comparison in price with a handsome silver beaker or a grace- ful girdle of gold.83 The average rise of book prices from 151 I to I575 was not considerable. There was little variance in the cost of religious literature. In i i8 a prayer-book brought three pfundt; a copy of Selections from the Gospels sold during the sixties for around two. Textbooks show little in- crease. A "Donatus" cost Tucher not quite one pfundt. Behaim purchased the same text and two catechisms, as well, in i564 for two and a half pfundt. More expensive is the Greek grammar of I567 (four pfundt, twenty-four shillings). This higher price may be partially ex- plained by the additional expense of Greek type and the comparatively lim- 78 Ibid., P. 54. 79 PaUmann, Op. Cit., p. 137. go Loose, op. cit., p. 37. 8' Kamann, op. cit., p. 89. 82Ibid., p. 66. 83 The completed Hortwdus amounted to fourteen and one-half florins. Tucher paid for a gilt beaker surmounted with the Tucher and Stromer crests twenty-eight florins (Loose, op. cit., p. 56).
THE LIBRARIES OF THREE NUREMBERG PATRICIANS 33 ited edition. On the average, historical literature cost more than religious works and textbooks: Behaim usually paid from four to five pfundt an item. The most expensive single volume, exclusive of decoration and binding, is the Herbal of Matthiolus at twelve pfundt. This was a large folio volume of twelve hundred and twenty-eight pages with eight hun- dred and one woodcuts, serving not only as a botanical compendium but as a household pharmacopoeia. Behaim's en- tries throw some light on wholesale prices. Vischer's profit was considerable, and he appears to have hearkened little to the medieval concept of the just price. Binding costs averaged from three to five pfundt a volume, with a slight tend- ency to rise between I55i and 1575. The cost of illumination was exceptionally high during the first quarter of the cen- tury, but it is to be remembered that Springinklee and Glockendon were rec- ognized artists. Such work still proved expensive during the later period, since Glaser, a second-rate artist, demanded in 1559 four flormns for the illumination of the armorial of the Behaim family.84 Not infrequently the purchase price of a book was a minor item in its ultimate cost. In 5 is8 Tucher purchased from Koberger a prayer-book for not quite three pfundt. His subsequent expenses, including the illumination, the binding, and additional decoration, amounted to twenty-six pfundt. The library of Pirkheimer reveals the education and knowledge of its owner. The care lavished by Tucher upon the enhancement of his books indicates his aesthetic interests. From the midst of his civic duties Behaim emerges as a man of some literary discrimination but pre- eminently a fond father, busied with the purchase of books for his little Paul. Al- though the libraries of Tucher and Be- haim hardly bear comparison with that of the savant Pirkheimer, all three reveal the collecting aspirations of the Nurem- berg patrician. 84 Kamann, op. cit., p. 103.