Service-Learning and LIS Education Elaine Yontz and Kathleen de la Peña McCook Service-learning, which engages students and universities in community building, has strong potential for advancing library and information science (LIS) education. Advan- tages include increased student learning, extended collaboration, decreased isolation, and promotion of the common good. Examples of service learning projects in LIS education of- fer models for imitation. Fieldwork offers opportunities for integrating service learning into the curriculum. LIS professors engaged in teaching which qualifies as service-learning should forge alliances with others involved in service-learning on their own and other campuses. Service-learning, a pedagogical approach which is gaining in recognition in univer- sities across the United States, offers strong potential for increasing student mastery of course materials while cementing the institution's ties to communities outside the campus. Service-learning can help to reestablish "...the civic mission of the re- search university."1 This article includes a definition and explication of service- learning; an argument that the approach offers library and information science (LIS) educators an opportunity to improve student learning and to cement positive inter- disciplinary relationships on campus; and suggestions for faculty who want to explore the possibility of integrating service-learning into their teaching. Service-Learning and Its Antecedents What is service-learning? Jacoby employs the following definition for the volume Service Learning in Higher Education: Service-learning is a form of experiential education in which students engage in activ- ities that address human and community needs together with structured opportunities intentionally designed to promote student learning and development. Reflection and reciprocity are key concepts of service-learning.2 Jacoby, Sigmon, and Kendall are among the writers who have commented upon the variety of terms and definitions used to describe efforts to link learning with serv- ice.3 Kendall reported finding 147 different terms. Some definitions require that the service be integrated into coursework, while others note that service-learning may be either curricular or cocurricular.4 Common threads among the definitions are the centrality of both reciprocity and reflection. The concept of reciprocity requires mutual engagement, participation, and re- spect on the part of students, faculty, and community partners. As Jacoby has stated, "In service-learning, those being served control the service provided. The needs of Journal of Education for Library and Information Science, Vol. 44, No. 1 - Winter 2003 58 ISSN: 0748-5786 ©2003 Association for Library and Information Science Education
Service-Learning and US Education 59 About the Authors Elaine Yontz is Associate Professor, Master of Library and Information Science Program, Valdosta State University, Valdosta, GA (eyontz@valdosta.edu); and Kathleen de la Peña McCook is Distinguished University Professor, School of Li- brary and Information Science, University of South Florida, Tampa (kmccook@chuma.cas.usf.edu). Ms. received 1/01; accepted 3/01; revised 12/01. the community, as determined by its members, define what the service tasks will be. Service-learning avoids placing students into community settings based solely on desired student learning outcomes and providing services that do not meet ac- tual needs or perpetuate a state of need rather than seeking and addressing the causes of need."5 In the words of Kendall, "All parties in service-learning are learners and help determine what is to be learned. Both the server and those served teach, and both learn."6 Reciprocity helps to delineate service-learning from vol- unteerism and other modes of service in which the transfer of knowledge and help is assumed to be one-way. Reflection is necessary to maximize student learning. Several researchers and theorists have made the point that thought must be combined with action in order for learning to take place.7 The reflective component of service-learning asks students to consider, comment upon, and discuss their experiences, their reactions, and the deeper reasons for the situations they find in the community. This reflection may take a variety of forms, including class discussion, one-on-one conversations with classmates or instructors, and journal writing. Ideally the reflective component will include chances for the students to receive feedback on their observations and conclusions from professors, other students, and community members. The current service-learning movement can trace its roots to the Land-Grant Act of 1 862, the writings of philosopher William James, and the educational philosophies of John Dewey. The Land-Grant Act, authored by Justin S. Morrill and signed into law by Abraham Lincoln, changed the face of the United States by harnessing the in- tellectual power of universities for the improvement of agricultural and industrial life. This Act institutionalized the civic mission of universities and inspired commu- nity engagement projects which continue in the Cooperative Extension activities of today's land-grant universities. In 1910, William James contributed one of the first calls for a national-service program for young people.8 Dewey was among the first educational theorists to emphasize the relationship of learning to experience and to advocate the integration of theory and practice in education.9 Dewey also laid groundwork for the service-learning movement by identifying the community as vi- tal to the educational experience and by calling for students to be trained to apply their knowledge for the improvement of society.10 The service-learning concept was embodied during the 1960s and 1970s in the work of such organizations as the Peace Corps, VISTA, and the Southern Regional Educational Board.11 Many projects of the 1960s and 1970s were hampered by a lack of reciprocity and by a weak relationship with the essential missions of their home institutions. However, the educators and
60 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science community leaders who persevered and sought to improve the service-learning ap- proach laid the groundwork for the renewal of interest in recent years.12 Commitment to service-learning has been growing in universities across the na- tion since the early 1990s. One indicator of this burgeoning movement is the estab- lishment and expansion of Campus Compact, a national organization which pro- motes the involvement of college and university students in community service.13 Founded by the presidents of three private universities and the president of the Ed- ucation Commission of the States in 1985, Campus Compact now counts over seven hundred institutions as members. The membership includes two- and four-year in- stitutions, both public and private, in forty-six states and the District of Columbia. The organization has a national office in Providence, Rhode Island and satellite of- fices in twenty-two states. Campus Compact reports that at more than 80 percent of member institutions, students can take service-learning courses "...which link community service with academic content."14 A seminal document is the "Wingspread Declaration on the Civic Responsibili- ties of Research Universities."15 University faculty and administrators met with rep- resentatives of civic and professional organizations and private foundations at the Wingspread conference center in Racine, Wisconsin in December 1998 and again in July 1999, to identify approaches for reuniting the research university with a civic mission. The conferences, coordinated by the University of Michigan Center for Community Service and Learning, were sponsored by numerous organizations in- cluding the Association of American Universities, the American Association for Higher Education, Campus Compact, and the Johnson Foundation.16 The resulting document included the conclusion that "...a core element in the mission of the re- search university is to prepare students for engaged citizenship through multiple op- portunities to do the work of citizenship. Such work involves real projects of impact and relevance, through which students learn the skills, develop the habits and iden- tities, and acquire the knowledge to contribute to the general welfare."17 The report also calls for students to "...help build and sustain genuinely public cultures full of conversation, argument, and discussion about the meaning of their learning, their work, and their institutions as a whole."18 Other evidence of the growing interest in service-learning exists as well. The fi- nal report of the Kellogg Commission on the Future of State and Land-Grant Uni- versities was issued in March 2000. 19 The report calls for a "renewed covenant" in which universities would continue the tradition established by the land-grant move- ment and apply their intellectual resources toward solutions to today's pressing so- cial problems. One method for using university resources to improve community life, according to the Commission, is curricula which prepare students to be active participants in public life.20 The Kellogg Commission has called for reshaping ideas about what publicly- funded universities have called "teaching, research, and service" into a commitment to "learning, discovery, and engagement." The term "learning" moves the emphasis from a teacher-centered, one-way, time-limited activity to a process in which reci- procity between teacher and student is paramount, students accept responsibility for their own learning, and intellectual growth is expected to last a lifetime. "Discovery" is a broad concept which includes varied forms of creative and scholarly activity in
Service-Learning and US Education 61 addition to pure and applied research. "Discovery" endeavors may create new knowl- edge, integrate existing knowledge in new ways, or forge innovative links between disciplines. "Engagement" requires ". . .a redesign of basic university functions so the institution becomes even more productively involved with communities, however community is defined."21 In the same way that the new concept of "Learning" ex- pects reciprocity between teachers and students, "Engagement" expands the concept of public service from a one-way transfer of university expertise to those outside the academy into a partnership arrangement based on mutual participation and respect. Recent publications in the literature of higher education also attest to the wide- spread involvement in service-learning. The July- August 2000 issue of Academe, Bulletin of the American Association of University Professors, devoted its cover and five articles to "Civic Engagement and Higher Education."22 The American Associ- ation for Higher Education (AAHE) published AAHE's Series on Service-Learning in the Disciplines during 1997 and 1998.23 Each of these eighteen monographs offers theoretical, pedagogical, and bibliographic material on service-learning as applied to a specific discipline. Service-learning is strikingly congruent with librarianship's long-standing com- mitment to improving the lives of citizens within communities. As Boyte points out, librarians were among the professionals who viewed their work as "public craft" throughout the twentieth century.24 Recent writings and presentations from LIS edu- cators link current activity to this tradition. Becker, in an article based on a presenta- tion given at the ALISE 2000 annual conference, discusses theoretical and pedagog- ical foundations of service learning and gives examples of the integration of service learning into LIS coursework in collection development and reference at St. John's University.25 Cuban and Hayes offer case studies of library and information science (LIS) students who enrolled in a service learning course on community service and literacy at the University of Wisconsin-Madison.26 At the International Conference on the University as Citizen in 2001, two LIS educators gave contributed papers.27 Loriene Roy described several service-learning initiatives from her teaching at the University of Texas at Austin, including a reading program at reservation schools. Yontz's presentation on "Service Learning Models from Library Science" included synopses of projects at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, the University of Michigan, and the University of South Florida. McCook's article in Library Journal emphasizes the value of service learning to the reconnection of the academy to the community.28 That many more LIS educators are engaged in "service-learning" with- out knowing the term or characterizing their activities in this way seems likely. Link- ing ourselves to this active national movement is an important way to bring greater recognition to our valuable pedagogical and service work. We must make all of our efforts visible by using the current vocabulary to describe what we are doing, by dis- seminating reports of our projects, and by participating in the national dialogue. Advantages of Service-Learning The potential advantages of service-learning to LIS faculty include increased stu- dent learning of important course material, extended collaboration and decreased isolation, and promotion of the common good as a strong value in higher education.
62 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science The potential for increasing student learning is grounded in the benefits of expe- riential education. "Learning by doing" has the potential for resulting in more last- ing change for students. This potential is rooted in two consequences of experien- tial education, motivation, and involvement. A community project in which course content is applied can provide the motivation of making clear the connection be- tween class materials and real-world situations. Such a project requires fuller in- volvement on the part of students. Many teaching situations, including those which are lecture-based, provide the possibility of passivity for students. When students are required to actively apply the knowledge gained in class and to reflect on that activity, their increased participation will result in more meaningful learning for many students. Much of the application of service-learning in higher education to date has been to undergraduate curricula. However, the precepts of adult learning suggest that service-learning approaches may be especially suited to increasing student achieve- ment in graduate education, particularly in programs with large numbers of students who are over traditional age. Adult learners are especially eager to understand the relevance of class material to "real life" and to be convinced that the material they study has practical application. When these students can see the successful use of curricular knowledge in a community setting, their motivation and retention of material will be substantially increased. Service-learning can counteract the negative effects of specialization in the acad- emy. It has become almost an axiom to identify university professors as people who "know more and more about less and less." Service-learning projects are interdisci- plinary by nature. The knowledge needed to help students learn while serving a community is typically grounded in various disciplines. For example, a project to teach Internet searching skills to seniors via a public library would ideally be in- formed by experts in library science, education, computing, and gerontology. Even when the knowledge being shared and gained is rooted in one discipline, the process of making this knowledge useful to a community outside the university requires communication and interaction with a broad range of people whose backgrounds and outlooks are sure to vary from those of the faculty and students. Service-learn- ing projects can be a vehicle for reducing the isolation of individual professors and for facilitating meaningful collaboration across disciplinary lines, thus helping to create more diverse and nurturing communities within a campus. By emphasizing service-learning, faculty can help to balance the impulses which would apply marketplace concepts to all areas of higher education. The Kellogg Commission is among those who have expressed concern about the "privatization" of public institutions of higher education.29 Publicly-supported universities in par- ticular have an obligation to include among their goals the maximization of student access to underserved segments of the citizenry and the encouragement of learning and discovery which promote the common good.30 These endeavors can be jeopard- ized by an overemphasis on "cost effectiveness" and market- sponsored research. In service-learning projects, academic objectives are pursued through the implementa- tion of projects which serve the community. This approach reminds students, pro- fessors, and administrators that the improvement of community life is a university responsibility and that learning can coexist with community engagement.
Service-Learning and US Education 63 Examples of Service-Learning in US Articles by Becker, Cuban and Hayes, and McCook offer specific descriptions of service-learning efforts within LIS coursework.31 These examples may stimulate the thinking of other faculty about possible applications of service-learning within their own teaching. As Jacoby has stated, "Service-learning is not destined to be used in every course, but it is possible to incorporate it in any discipline."32 Appropriate courses and workable projects will vary from school to school, since community needs differ. It seems reasonable to expect that service-learning can find a home in every LIS program. Fieldwork as Service-Learning Fieldwork options offer opportunities for integrating service learning concepts into the curriculum. Fieldwork and practicum courses which are already in place in many programs can qualify as service-learning experiences, provided that the field- work helps meet a community need as defined by the community and provided that a component of reflection is included. Reflection may be practiced by the keeping of a daily log on which the student would receive faculty feedback, through in-person or online discussion with community partners, classmates, and professors, and/or through the writing of a culminating paper. The University of South Florida's (USF) School of Library and Information Sci- ence offers an example of a fieldwork program that is framed as a service-learning opportunity.33 Two recent projects help demonstrate the emphasis on community engagement, interdisciplinarity, and reflective practice. The identification of appro- priate fieldwork projects requires that the faculty member be aware of community engagement opportunities, have meaningful contacts in a variety of communities and with community agencies, and be able to advise in interdisciplinary subject areas. In the cases below these include gerontology, social services, literacy, and rehabilitative counseling. Friends of the Talking Book Library (Clearwater, Florida) There are few "Friends" groups for the Talking Book Libraries administered by the National Library Service for the Blind and Physically Handicapped, Library of Congress. The Pinellas County Talking Book Library in Clearwater Florida agreed to be a fieldwork site for USF student, Paula Robinson. Her project was to develop a Friends Group for the library. Her work included mission development, organiza- tion, visits, and correspondence with traditional friends groups, publicity, and out- reach. In her ongoing "logs of work" with the fieldwork coordinator Ms. Robinson reflected: I am most fascinated by the fact that many of the people that want to do more for the li- brary patrons are people that suffer from the same problems - macular degeneration or a physical handicap - but to a lesser degree. For example, a woman that has lost sight in only one eye wants to know how she can help patrons that are completely blind. It is a group of people that support one another through their knowledge of the restrictions
64 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science placed on them by their disability. In many ways, I think it is so they can prove that the disability does not make them any less of a contributing member of society - a way to show others that you can still live with a disability, you just have to make certain concessions. I learn a great deal from those individuals that are interested in being Friends. Their ex- citement over creating another useful service for the library is contagious. I know that we may not have many people at our first meeting because it is difficult for some to drive here (it requires a great deal of preparation by our patrons) but in time it will grow. I feel very privileged to be a part of this project that really is becoming their project, the Friends, and I am just coordinating their efforts now.34 Literacy Grant for Three Rivers Regional Library System (Mayo, Florida) A $ 76,000 LSTA Family Literacy grant award to the Three Rivers Regional Library System was the result of Irene Sweeney's service learning project crossing two dif- ferent courses, "Research Methods," taught by Anna H. Perrault and Supervised Fieldwork, coordinated by Kathleen de la Peña McCook. The Three Rivers Regional Library System serves approximately 33,000 citizens, and is made up of three public libraries in Dixie, Gilchrist, and Lafayette counties. All three counties rank below state averages in literacy areas, have a high percentage of high-school dropouts, teenage pregnancy, unemployment, and lack of job skills. A large percentage of the population is impoverished, not only socio-economically, but culturally as well. At the time of the LSTA grant cycle Three Rivers had no director and Sweeney, a student and resident of the region, worked with her Research Methods course pro- fessor and fieldwork supervisor to develop a project that could be used as a real grant application for the system. The purpose of the grant was to help promote the public libraries in these communities in a positive, welcoming light, involving chil- dren and parents, making an extra effort to welcome the minority groups that are sometimes ignored as part of these communities. In a paper Sweeney has written on her experience, she noted, "Circle of Learning" was chosen as the application title to reflect and promote the library as all-inclusive - to be used by all citizens, regardless of race, color, socio-economic or religious status. Writing the grant with the help of so many people in the communities - educators, librarians, health care workers, teachers, instructors at the community colleges and with the constant encouragement and feedback from the State Librarians and instructors at USF, it was indeed a collaborative project, engaging the community, and for me as a student, I caught of glimpse of just what "the core values of librarian- ship" can really be. I was able to continue working on this grant, and was part of the search committee the new Library Director formed to hire a Literacy Coordinator, evaluated the collections of the libraries focusing on reference works and New Reader materials. I prepared a bibliography that contained recommendations for their reference collection, literacy
Service-Learning and LIS Education 65 materials and websites that would be helpful to both the library staff and children need- ing reference help. I also explored and recommended websites for the "Homework Help" component of the Family Literacy Grant. As part of my fieldwork, I attended the Florida State Literacy Workshop held in November of 2000, spending two days in intensive workshops on grant management, evaluation and outcomes assessment of Family Literacy programs. There I met many other librarians who were working with their communities, and heard about the successes and difficulties involved with these programs. This was especially interesting to me, because as part of another assignment, I had just completed a paper on outcomes assessment and adult literacy programs, studying current research from around the nation on this topic."35 Reflection as a Component in Fieldwork The act of reflection and developing a set of responses that view the Fieldwork Ex- perience in the context of relevant social issues is a central component of service- learning. The community agencies provide the venue for the student to learn about other organizational structures and missions. By developing library-based projects that provide real service to real communities, curricular boundaries become trans- parent. Thoughtful assessment of the experience provides the means for students to enter the profession with an understanding of the meaning of community engage- ment as a life-long approach to practice. This reflection can be made manifest in many forms. It is essential that evidence of reflection be part of the curricular requirements. It is a fact of life that anything which is not curricular will probably not happen. Therefore, designing requirements which nurture thoughtful assessment must be a part of course design. Several varied possibilities exist for such requirements. A journal can have the effect of stimulating thoughtful consideration on the part of the student. The knowledge that they will be required to show evidence of reflec- tion helps to focus students' daily thinking and awareness, while the intellectual process required to render their thought in writing helps to further develop their un- derstanding. Another advantage to written reflection is that it provides the instructor with a chance to process, then comment upon the students' input, giving the student material for further reflection. In-person discussion is another vehicle for encouraging and developing student reflection. Periodic meetings with the on-site supervisor or the faculty contact can provide a forum for discussion and for "real time" exchange of impressions and con- clusions. Such meetings might be scheduled at regular intervals during the semester. Gatherings of students involved in fieldwork experiences can provide another valuable approach. Such forums can result in comparative reflections and peer in- teraction, which provide a useful counterpoint to the students' interactions with fac- ulty and fieldwork supervisors. It would be interesting and useful for students and faculty alike to invite alumni to return and reflect on previous fieldwork experiences and report on the effects these experiences had on their career development. At San José State University, LIS practicum students participate in a "practicum reflector," a listserv on which a faculty member posts weekly questions which require students to reflect on their internship experiences.36
66 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Avenues for Further Action LIS faculty who find an affinity to the service-learning movement can make sub- stantial contributions. Professors who are already engaged in teaching approaches which qualify as service-learning projects should identify and publicize their efforts and should forge alliances with others who are committed to service-learning in their departments, their home campuses, or other campuses. Teachers can consider how engaged community activity might be incorporated to strengthen their stu- dents' mastery of course content and how the incorporation of engaged reflection can deepen the meaning of student activity outside the classroom. Professors who wish to explore these options are referred to the Campus Compact website and the Kellogg Commission report for discussions of theory and to the works of Jacoby and Crews for an entré into practice.38 LIS educators should contribute their experi- ences with service-learning to the national discussion through writing and confer- ence presentation. Our field can make a substantial contribution to research on the efficacy of service-learning approaches in graduate, professional education. The service-learning movement seems to be a "natural" for library and informa- tion science education. The approach offers a methodology for improving students' learning of course content, a chance to bring LIS unique sensibilities to bear on the solution of community problems, a vehicle for wider communication with other de- partments on campuses, and an opportunity to make solid contributions to a grow- ing national movement. The belief that a university should be a valuable citizen is a good "fit" for librarianship's traditional commitment to public service. We should insure that our voices and our values are included in the service-learning movement. Acknowledgments The authors gratefully acknowledge the work of Rachel Meyer and Elizabeth D. Engel, graduate assistants in the University of South Florida's School of Library and Infor- mation Science, who provided valuable research assistance. References and Notes 1. Harry Boyte and Elizabeth Hollander, "Wingspread Declaration on the Civic Responsibilities of Research Universities," June 1999, Prelude. Available at: http://www.compact.org/civic/ Wingspread/Wingspread.html. Accessed: November 15, 2001. 2. Barbara Jacoby, "Service Learning in Today's Higher Education," in Service Learning in Higher Education: Concepts and Practices (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1996), 5. 3. Ibid; Robert Sigmon, Linking Service with Learning (Washington, D.C.: Council of Independent Colleges, 1994), 1; and Jane Kendall, "Combining Service and Learning: An Introduction" in Combining Service and Learning: A Resource Book for Community and Public Service, Vol. 1 (Raleigh, N.C.: National Society for Experiential Education, 1990), 18. 4. Jacoby, "Service Learning in Today's Higher Education," 6. 5. Ibid., 7. 6. Kendall, "Combining Service and Learning," 22. 7. Jane Kendall, "From Youth Service to Service-Learning" in A.C. Lewis, Facts and Faith: A Status Report on Youth Service (Washington, D.C.: Youth and America's Future: William T. Grant Foundation Commission on Work, Family, and Citizenship, 1988).
Service-Learning and US Education 67 8. William James, The Moral Equivalent of War (New York: American Association for International Conciliation, 1910). 9. John Dewey, Experience and Education (New York: Macmillan, 1938). 10. John Dewey, Democracy and Education (New York: Macmillan, 1916). 11. Jacoby, "Service Learning in Today's Higher Education," 12. 12. Kendall, "Combining Service and Learning," 25. 13. Campus Compact, "About Campus Compact," 2001, Who We Are. Available at: http://www. compact.org/aboutcc/. Accessed: November 15, 2001. 14. Campus Compact, What We Do. 15. Boyte and Hollander, "Wingspread Declaration." 16. Ibid., Prelude. 17. Ibid., The Challenge. 18. Ibid. 19. Kellogg Commission on the Future of State and Land-Grant Universities, "Renewing the Covenant: Learning, Discovery, and Engagement in a New Age and Different World," March 2000. Available at: http^/www.nasulgc.org/publications/Kellogg/covenant.pdf. Accessed: November 15, 2001. 20. Ibid., 22-24. 21. Ibid., 22. 22. Johnnella Butler, "Democracy, Diversity, and Civic Engagement," Academe 88, no. 4 (July/August 2000): 52-55; Barry Checkoway, "Public Service: Our New Mission," Academe 88, no. 4 (July/August 2000): 24-28; Elizabeth L. Hollander and John Saltmarsh, "The Engaged Univer- sity," Academe 88, no. 4 (July/August 2000): 29-32; Gregory Jay, "The Community In the Class- room," Academe 88, no. 4 (July/August 2000): 33-37; and Wendi A. Maloney, "The Community As a Classroom," Academe 88, no. 4 (July/August 2000): 38-42. 23. "AAHE's Series on Service-Learning in the Disciplines." Available at: http://www.aahe.org/ service/series_new.htm. 24. Harry C. Boyte, "Professions as Public Crafts," Center for Democracy and Citizenship Research: Working Papers, January 2000: 6. Available at: http://www.publicwork.org/3_ l_papers.html. Accessed: November 15, 2001. Boyte defines "professionalism as a public craft" in this way: "A form of professional work that is undertaken for public purposes and in public ways. It is also work based on a history, culture, and continuing development of practice wisdom, as well as general theory," 1. 25. Nancy J. Becker, "Service Learning in the Curriculum: Preparing LIS Students for the Next Millennium," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 41, no. 4 (Fall 2000): 285-93. 26. Sondra Cuban and Elizabeth Hayes, "Perspectives of Five Library and Information Studies Students Involved in Service Learning at a Community-Based Literacy Program," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 42, no. 2 (Spring 2001): 86-95. 27. University of South Rorida, "International Conference on the University as Citizen Conference Program," (February 21-24, 2001), 12. 28. Kathleen de la Peña McCook, "Reconnecting Library Education and the Mission of Community," Library Journal 125 (September 1, 2000): 164-65. 29. Kellogg Commission, "Renewing the Covenant," 17. 30. The responsibility of publicly-supported institutions to contribute to the improvement of commu- nities and society is perhaps obvious. Nevertheless, it is interesting to note the leadership role which many privately- supported institutions have played in recent campaigns to renew the civic mission of universities. The founders of Campus Compact included the presidents of Georgetown, Stanford, and Brown (Campus Compact, Who We Are). 31. Becker, "Service Learning in the Curriculum;" Cuban and Hayes, "Perspectives of Five Library and Information Studies Students;" and McCook, "Reconnecting Library Education."
68 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 32. Jacoby, "Service Learning," 159. 33. Kathleen de la Peña McCook, "LIS 6946: Supervised Fieldwork, University of South Florida School of Library and Information Science, October 5, 2001 . Available at: http://nosferatu.cas.usf. edu/lis/fieldwork/index.html. Accessed: November 15, 2001. 34. Paula Robinson, "Fieldwork Log to Kathleen de la Peña McCook," February 1, 2001. 35. Irene Sweeney, "LIS Education as an Opportunity for Reflection," paper in progress, February, 2001; see also Irene Sweeney, "Learning by Doing: Engaged Service and the MLS," American Libraries 33 (February, 2002): 44-46. 36. "Practicum Guidelines," San José State University School of Library and Information Science, February 7, 2001. Available at: httpV/witloof.sjsu.edu/courses/practicums/guide.htm. Accessed: November 15, 2001; and Debra Hansen, dhansen@wahoo.sjsu.edu, "Practicum Reflector," December 1, 2000, personal E-mail. 37. Campus Compact, "Campus Compact," 2001. Available at: http://www.compact.org. Accessed: November 15, 2001; and Kellogg Commission, "Renewing the Covenant." 38. Barbara Jacoby and Associates, Service Learning in Higher Education: Concepts and Practices (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1996); and Robin J. Crews, "Service Learning: The Home of Service- Learning on the World Wide Web," November 1, 2001. Available at: http://csf.colorado.edu/sl/. Accessed: November 15, 2001.