IStigmatizing Disability: Library Classifications and the Marking and Marginalization of Books about People with Disabilities Melissa Adler, Jeffrey T. Huber, and A. Tyler Nix ABSTRACT Libraries have historically organized materials about people with disabilities according to con- ventions created by medical and social scientific communities, thereby reproducing dominant, often pathologizing and marginalizing discourses about disabilities. This paper focuses on librar- ies’ treatment of subjects related to physical disabilities by analyzing the National Library of Med- icine’s Medical Subject Headings, Library of Congress Subject Headings, the Library of Congress Classification, and the Dewey Decimal Classification. We use the lens of stigma as first theorized by Erving Goffman to reveal some of the processes and practices by which materials are relegated to the margins on the shelves and in the catalog.The cultural locations of disability help to begin a phase of historical reconstruction that dem- onstrates that our current approaches to disability are haunted by phantoms of the past— in terms of both literal intellectual lines of descent and reactions to this heritage. —Sharon L. Snyder and David T. Mitchell, Cultural Locations of Disabilityn their book Cultural Locations of Disability, Sharon Snyder and David Mitchell (2006) sug- gest that certain spaces designated for people with disabilities have actually existed at odds with the well-being of the very people they are meant to serve, describe, or treat. In their analysis of sites such as charity institutions, research universities, and popular films, they ex- plain some of the processes by which these locations have naturalized and institutionalized attitudes about, interventions into, and cultural norms surrounding the lives of people with disabilities. They locate early discursive productions of disability in the United States in the eugenics movement, which advanced policies based on the belief that society could be im- proved by identifying, segregating, and sterilizing people determined to be “degenerate,” “de- fective,” and “unfit” for reproduction. Snyder and Mitchell argue that eugenicist discoursesLibrary Quarterly: Information, Community, Policy, vol. 87, no. 2, pp. 117–135. © 2017 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-2519/2017/8702-0004$10.00 117
118 • The Library Quarterlyof the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries continue to influence policy and practices regarding people with disabilities today and suggest that classification and documentation in state and medical agencies were key techniques by which eugenics was rationalized and in- stitutionalized. In this article, we argue that libraries should be viewed as cultural locations that have participated in the marginalization of people with disabilities, even as libraries have striven to serve them, and that historical analysis of bibliographic classifications and subject headings demonstrates how discourses about disabilities have become systemic in our library subject access systems. We do not aim to suggest solutions to the conditions we identify; rather, we wish to show that library classifications for works about disabilities were created in politi- cal and historical moments within social spaces and that the placement of books on the shelves provides important insights about libraries in the history of disability studies. Indeed, there can be no “fix” to the classifications, as preferences for organizing information about disabili- ties and people with disabilities will vary depending on perspective and discipline, and terms and associations will surely continue to change over time. Our analysis begins with the classification of Snyder and Mitchell’s book—the cataloging- in-publication data in the book provides HV1568 as the Library of Congress Classification (LCC), which is the class to which most research libraries that use LCC will assign the book. HV1568 is designated as “People with Disabilities” and is hierarchically arranged within the Social Sci- ences as follows: Social pathology. Social and public welfare. Criminology Protection, assistance and relief Special classes People with disabilities The placement of this book, along with many other texts on disability, in a “special” class within the section reserved for social pathology and welfare is anything but accidental and de- rives from historical associations with eugenics and dependency on the state. As we will show, library classifications mirror and support the classifications in the official and scientific docu- ments of the periods in which they were produced. In this article we examine the Medical Subject Headings (MeSH), the Library of Congress Subject Headings (LCSH), the LCC, and the Dewey Decimal Classification (DDC) to reveal some of the ways in which the organization of disability has relied on medical and sociological frame- works and how, from the inception of these systems through the present, library knowledge organization systems have reproduced normative discourses and assumptions that present peo- ple with disabilities as diseased and/or dependent. We offer a necessarily abridged and selec- tive account of some of the processes by which such frames play out on the shelves. We use the lens of stigma as first theorized by Erving Goffman to reveal some of the processes and prac-
Stigmatizing Disability • 119tices by which materials are pushed to the margins on the shelves and in the catalog. Such an analysis positions libraries as “cultural locations of disability,” as described by Snyder and Mitchell, by revealing the library to be a site in which medical and state discourses have influ- enced the organization of a space where people obtain information about disabilities. Literature Review and Background Setting the Stage We devote a good deal of space to reviewing the literature, as disability studies introduces rel- atively new concepts, theories, and challenges for knowledge organization questions. This sec- tion is divided into three subsections: we set the stage by situating libraries in a broader field of cultural locations that depict and serve people with disabilities; next, we focus specifically on the development of disabilities studies as an interdisciplinary field of inquiry and provide an overview of the concept of stigma; then we review the literature on library services for peo- ple with disabilities. The category of people with disabilities is extremely diverse. Disabilities can be highly vis- ible or hidden, and conceptions and degrees of impairment vary significantly across bodily, so- cial, and cultural contexts. Knowledge and experiences of disability are historically, socially, and politically contingent. Library classifications, however, rely on and produce stability in ways that do not readily accommodate changing conceptualizations of disability. The organization of subjects related to disability is embedded in a history of eugenicist ideals of the late nine- teenth and early twentieth centuries that organized bodies along lines of degeneracy, depen- dency, defect, and monstrosity in contrast to an able-bodied norm. This division continues to structure our categories, as we continue to organize disability along lines of normal and ab- normal in the twenty-first century. Library classifications are constructed on the basis of uni- versalized norms, and subjects that deviate from certain assumed norms are marked as “special” or “other.” In many cases, these were originally defined as abnormal, deviant, or defective. We understand the social spaces in which library classifications have been produced to be part of a network of American cultural locations in which a normal/abnormal divide has been naturalized over time. Film is a cultural production that illustrates our thesis, as it visibly por- trays related structural and discursive elements that can be tracked over time. For example, the movie Freaks (1932) and the fourth season of the FX television series American Horror Story (2014–15) provide a point of comparison that shows how lines between normal and abnormal extend through time.1 Freaks featured individuals with a variety of physical abnormalities and disabilities specifically selected to portray a set of “deformed” sideshow performers. Al- though one of the director’s stated purposes of the film was to humanize its characters, it effec-1. Tod Browning, Freaks (Beverly Hills: Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, 1932), film; Brad Falchuk, Ryan Murphy, “Freak Show,“ American Horror Story, season 4, aired October 8, 20142January 21, 2015 (Los Angeles: FX, 2015).
120 • The Library Quarterlytively vilified individuals with physical “abnormalities” and disabilities based on a plot of re- venge exacted by the circus freaks against the “normal” Cleopatra. Decades later, in the hugely successful American Horror Story, we witness a continued circulation of sensationalist portray- als of people with physical disabilities that rely on and are supported by a deeply embedded doctrine of abnormality. The FX network’s website provides a brief teaser for a description of the season: “A troupe of curiosities has just arrived to town, coinciding with the strange emer- gence of a dark entity that savagely threatens the lives of townsfolk and freaks alike” (Barcella 2014, par. 4). Fans and producers of American Horror Story have suggested that the show demon- strates progress because it invites viewers to empathize with its characters, who are humanized in comparison with past representations. Like the defense of Freaks, such commentary reveals a lack of awareness of the powerful othering performed in the show and the continued concep- tualization of people with certain disabilities as entertainment and spectacle. Indeed, Snyder and Mitchell identify a range of themes in what they call “disability body genres,” with tropes that display the disabled body as monstrous; mutant; or, on the other spectrum, positively ex- ceptional or victorious. Citing films produced from 1927 through the present, including familiar titles such as The Miracle Worker (1962), Hannibal (2001), and Dumb and Dumberer (2003), they argue that the films accentuate the demarcations of normal and abnormal and recirculate eugenicist dis- courses about dependency and citizenship. The practice of distinguishing and displaying “abnor- mal” bodies carries tremendous force in the imagination. It also has a long lineage, and while the content and the figures might change, the underlying message and structuring discourse present the abnormal body as a fascinating/horrifying/pitiable spectacle and the condition of being dis- abled as a plight to be conquered. Similarly, although the terms from early versions of library classifications have changed from “Degeneration” and “Defective” to “Disabilities” and “People with disabilities,” many of the struc- turing principles underlying the relationships and associations of these terms are continua- tions of patterns inscribed in the earliest editions. For example, the 1910 edition of the LCC (Library of Congress 1910b) indicated that “general works on the blind, the deaf and dumb, the feeble-minded, and the insane” should be placed in the category “Defectives” under the broader category “Social Pathology. Philanthropy, etc.” (418). While progress has been made inso- far as the terminology has been revised to reflect current usage, the hidden truth is that, struc- turally, these systems have not been significantly altered, and the associations and relationships among subjects remain the same. It is this systemic, structural level to which we draw attention in order to understand how the organization of knowledge about people with disabilities is much the same as it was more than 100 years ago. Reading the classifications and subject headings as narratives that elaborate casts of char- acters and place them in relation to one another according to the ways they deviate from a norm helps to understand the knowledge/power relations at play on library shelves. By looking to the history of how libraries have organized materials about people with disabilities, we gain important
Stigmatizing Disability • 121insights into the ways in which libraries reproduce dominant, often marginalizing discourses about disabilities. Our analysis of each system begins with the earliest appearance of the con- cepts that we presently call “disability” or “people with disabilities.”The Development of Disability Studies and Stigma Disability Studies Disability studies is among the critical interdisciplinary fields of inquiry that draw from the humanities and human experience to inform, challenge, and critique dominant frames of anal- ysis derived from the medical, scientific, and sociological disciplines. The critical interdisci- plinary fields study sexuality, gender, race, ethnicity, class, nation, territory, and indigeneity and foreground the intersectionality of subject positions while recognizing the ways in which these dimensions have been produced through various institutional contexts, mechanisms, and rela- tions of power. The destabilizing contributions of the interdisciplines pose specific challenges to library classifications, which divide the bibliographic universe into discrete categories and hierarchies within the disciplines. Disabilities and people with disabilities have been classed in medicine according to disease or abnormality, or in sociology within broad categories of social pathology or dependency, even when the texts speak against those categorical associations. Li- brary classifications highlight the ways in which categories structure disabilities and disability studies as well as the terms by which access to information by, for, and about people with dis- abilities is afforded. Disability studies and theory provide a theoretical lens through which to understand the role that language and categories play in perpetuating and dispelling dominant myths and attitudes that sometimes do harm. Disability studies works toward finding a way “to turn so- ciety’s gaze back on itself” (Berger 2013, 3). As described by Lennard Davis (2006), “disability” and related terms have been deployed in a variety of contexts by a range of disciplines to a range of effects. In the medical sphere, for example, the concept has long been treated as a way to identify people according to biomedical conditions through the use of diagnosis and cat- egorization. This association contributes to a perception of people with disabilities as being ill and in need of a cure. In the sociological context, people with disabilities are frequently viewed as socially incapacitated and dependent on others or the state. In recent years, however, peo- ple with disabilities have gained definitional control over concepts and issues, and increasingly the term “disability” has come to denote a social/political category, often in resistance to med- icalized perspectives on “able-bodiedness.” Davis (2006) suggests that the reclamation of such designations serves as a basis for unity and identity in political activism. The 2010 US Census reported that 56.7 million people (18.7% of the noninstitutionalized population) have a disability. Brault (2012) reports that 12.3 million people over the age of 6 years need assistance with one or more activities of daily living. As Kathie Snow points out, not only
122 • The Library Quarterlydo people with disabilities constitute the largest minority group in the United States but this is the only group that “any person can join at any time” (Snow 2009, 1, emphasis in the original) through illness, injury, or the aging process. Importantly, Ronald Berger (2013) states that, al- though it is true that many people with disabilities are also ill, one of these conditions does not necessarily follow from the other. Often people with disabilities require no medical care. In 2007 the United Nations adopted the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Dis- abilities, which reflects and aims toward a broad, international shift in our collective under- standing of people with disabilities. Within the extensive list of factors surrounding the rights of people with disabilities is the convention’s recognition that “disability is an evolving concept and that disability results from the interaction between persons with impairments and attitu- dinal and environmental barriers that hinders their full and effective participation in society on an equal basis with others.”2 According to the UN Division for Social Policy and Develop- ment’s website, this emphasis on attitudinal and environmental barriers derived from the un- derstanding that “disability is not something that resides in the individual as the result of some impairment. . . . Disability resides in the society not in the person” (emphasis in the original).3 Stigma In 1908 the anthropologist Arthur MacDonald described intellectually and physically disabled people, as well as “morally depraved” people, such as “sexual perverts,” alcoholics, and gamblers, in terms of stigmata, signaling that people were marked by their degeneration and that offi- cials could, in fact, identify those who were feeble-minded, weak in body, or morally degen- erate. He defined degeneration as “an essence, aptitude or tendency, which hinders develop- ment (mental, moral or physical) favorable to the species and tends toward diseases, which lead to the dissolution of the species or offspring” (MacDonald 1908a, 112). Indeed, precisely the same words appeared in a report to Congress on juvenile crime (MacDonald 1908b, 270), and it was this kind of view that propelled the eugenics movement, as “degenerates” were regarded as weak, immoral, and sometimes dangerous. Driven by a fear of passing hereditary traits to subsequent generations, medical and social professionals identified people by their stigmata and often determined them to be unfit for reproduction. We suggest that the co-occurrence of the inception of similar concepts and terms in library classifications provides important evidence that situates libraries within a network of state and popular cultural dis- courses. Goffman deployed the concept of “stigma” in the 1960s to theorize the production of bod- ily difference. He explains that “stigma” was a term used in ancient Greece to refer to the signs2. United Nations General Assembly, “Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities: Resolution, adopted by the General Assembly,” January 24, 2007, A/RES/61/106, http://www.refworld.org/docid/45f973632.html. 3. “Frequently Asked Questions,” United Nations Division for Social Policy and Development, accessed January 19, 2017, http://www.un.org/esa/socdev/enable/faqs.htm.
Stigmatizing Disability • 123burned or cut into the flesh to mark bodies as criminal, polluted, or deviant. He applied this notion to the twentieth century to show how bodies that deviate from an expected norm ex- perience some of the same effects, being “reduced in our minds from a whole and usual per- son to a tainted, discounted one” (Goffman 1963, 3). When physical abnormalities and disabil- ities are concerned, discrimination and devaluation are often the result. Although Goffman’s frame of stigma has opened up certain analytic possibilities for criti- cal disability studies, it has been challenged by some scholars, as it perpetuates the perception that disability is a personal tragedy. Michael Oliver and Colin Barnes (2012) argue that theories of stigmatization are reactionary and reductionist and tend to ignore the historical/cultural/social variability of disability. We align ourselves with these critics and use Goffman not to suggest that people with disabilities are deviant or tragic but rather to demonstrate how knowledge organization systems operate as mechanisms of stigmatization by marking subjects in ways that conflict with contemporary theories and experiences of disability. Other scholars have revised or extended Goffman’s frame. Paul Longmore (1985) contends that labels applied to people with disabilities have contributed “to the process of stigmati- zation by reinforcing the tendency to ‘see’ persons with disabilities” (419) in reduced terms that obscure other characteristics of a person’s identity. Relatedly, Snow (2009) states, “Old, in- accurate descriptors and the inappropriate use of medical diagnoses perpetuate negative ste- reotypes and reinforce a significant and an incredibly powerful attitudinal barrier. An invis- ible, but potent, force—not the diagnosis itself—is the greatest obstacle facing individuals who have conditions we call disabilities” (1). Tobin Siebers’s (2008) description of critical dis- ability studies draws directly from Goffman, indicating that it is not interested in finding cu- res and treatments but rather “studies the social meanings, symbols, and stigmas attached to disability identity” (4) and inquires into how these participate in systems of exclusion and oppression. Goffman’s theory of stigma, along with recent scholarship that revises and up- dates his theory, is highly relevant to our conceptualization of how libraries treat materials about disabilities. The enactment and application of classifications and subject headings mark and stigmatize the disabled subject. Library Services for People with Disabilities The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) was passed in 1990, at which time library services were required to provide equitable access for persons with disabilities.4 On January 16, 2001, the American Library Association (ALA) Council unanimously approved the Library Services for People with Disabilities Policy, which outlined mandates and recommendations with re- gard to facilities, collections, and assistive technology, among other concerns. The field has since mobilized to improve access to libraries and library resources. Among these initiatives4. Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. Pub. L. No. 101-336, §2, 104 Stat. 327 (1990).
124 • The Library Quarterlywas the ADA Library Kit produced by the Association of Specialized and Cooperative Library Agencies, which draws attention to language use: “Persons with disabilities are working to as- sume control over their own metaphors and find many labels and descriptions offensive.”5 The kit supplies a list of preferred terms and concludes, “No matter how sensitive we believe our language to be, the final arbiter is the person or group we are addressing.” Paul Jaeger, Brian Wentz, and John Carlo Bertot (2015) point out that libraries have been providing resources and services for people with disabilities since the first publicly funded li- braries were opened. In many communities, libraries were the first locations that recognized the needs of people with disabilities, and they continue to do so in the twenty-first century by providing accessible content in various formats as well as assistive technologies and services. While significant strides are constantly being made to improve library accessibility, many as- pects of research about and services for people with disabilities in libraries remain under- developed. For example, Susan Burke (2009) conducted a survey of households that include a member who has a disability and found that two-thirds of participants believed libraries had made physical access easier but that only “half thought public libraries had made access to information easier through having assistive or adaptive devices and collections of materials for people with disabilities” (50). With regard to subject access, Amelia Koford (2014) inter- viewed scholars who work in the area of disability studies, and among her findings is a recur- rent difficulty in “finding materials that treat disability from a social rather than a medical per- spective” (397) in libraries. Koford’s participants reported a variety of limitations in subject access for disability studies, including the contested terminologies among people with disabil- ities and scholars in the field, the disagreement between authorized headings and terms pre- ferred by those seeking information, and problems inherent to interdisciplinarity. The vast majority of current library literature focuses on physical access to resources— especially web accessibility. Heather Hill’s 2013 survey of existing research on library services for people with disabilities shows that the emphasis has been on information technologies, perhaps “overshadowing other forms of access and understanding” (142). Among the areas of research she finds to be lacking are studies that address social issues and the attitudes con- cerning accessibility. We suggest that there is also a critical lack of historical, theoretical ac- counts of the social construction of disabilities and its consequences in libraries. A historical account can bring greater understanding of the processes by which subjects have been autho- rized and organized and how these arrangements and terminologies reproduce normative dominant discourses about disability. Such an analysis opens up a conversation for consider- ing the role of knowledge organization in library services for and about people with disabil-5. “An Excerpt from the ADA Library Kit,” Association of Specialized and Cooperative Library Agencies, accessed Jan- uary 19, 2017, http://www.ala.org/ascla/asclaissues/adalibrarykit.
Stigmatizing Disability • 125ities. It may also, as Emily Drabinski (2013) suggests, provide an opportunity for critical infor- mation literacy practices, which, rather than offering correctives, serve as teaching moments in the construction and location of subjects. Library Classifications for People with Disabilities This study contributes to the growing body of research that investigates negative, positive, and hidden consequences of cataloging and classification. Sanford Berman (1971) brought the biases and limitations of Library of Congress (LC) standards into public view in the 1970s, when he published his treatise on the LCSH and petitioned the LC for change. Although his pathbreak- ing Prejudices and Antipathies only marginally discussed headings for people with disabilities (he explained his preference for “Deaf authors” in a note), in 1984 he devoted a chapter sec- tion to explaining the “insidious labeling processes” (Berman 1984, 161) for works on people with disabilities. More generally, Hope Olson (2002) presents an array of examples of marginalizing practices, citing the effects of biased headings on access and reception and the relations of power asso- ciated with library subjects. Geoffrey Bowker and Susan Star’s (1999) Sorting Things Out is re- garded as a core text for understanding the personal and societal consequences of classifica- tions, as they argue that classificatory infrastructures, such as the International Classification of Diseases, carry political weight and power. Joseph Tennis’s (2012) analysis of the DDC for its changes in the classification of eugenics over time methodologically and substantively informs this project. Melissa Adler (forthcoming) conducts an analysis of racialized subjects in library classifications and argues that historical studies of knowledge organization systems reveal ways in which epistemic violence becomes systemic. And Jeffrey Huber and Mary Gillaspy (1998) ob- serve the significance of controlled vocabularies in the social construction of knowledge and stigma surrounding HIV/AIDS. Libraries reproduced stigmatizing labels, including “defective,” “crippled,” and “handicapped,” mainly by drawing from the medical literature and later from the social science literature on disabilities. Within libraries, such discourses are reinforced by a matrix of techniques at the level of the subject. Subject headings provide the authorized terms by which library users search for information; the LCC organizes materials for Congress and researchers into disciplines, plac- ing works together by subject; the DDC does the same, but in service to a general public. Each of these has reinforced the authority of the dominant discourses regarding disability as well as the authoritative status of the library cultural institution. We provide an account of the first inceptions of some concepts, their placement in hierarchies, and the original terminologies used as well as current usage and arrangements. This is a necessarily abbreviated historical account, and the primary focus is to reveal three ways that library classifications mark difference: the medical sections name and arrange diseased and disordered conditions; the social science sec-
126 • The Library Quarterlytions organize disability as social pathology; and throughout the classifications, in a variety of disciplines, disabilities or people with disabilities are marked as special topics, set against an assumed “normal.” Medical Indexes and Subject Headings First we look at the medical indexes and subject headings to assess terms among the LCSH that have derived from medical terminologies. The Index Medicus of 1879 was the first pub- lished catalog of medical literature. Monthly publications of the index organized articles un- der subject headings and included a subject index for topics not classed specifically by sub- ject headings. In 1954 the National Library of Medicine (NLM) produced a list of headings, and in 1960 a thoroughly revised MeSH appeared with the publication of a “new series” of the Index Medicus. The MeSH was viewed as a breakthrough, in that a single list was adopted to in- dex articles and books while better enabling computerized search and retrieval. In 1960, the MeSH included 4,400 descriptors; in 2015, it included 27,455 (National Library of Medicine 2014). The terms in the various editions of the Index Medicus have resembled catalogs and classi- fications of disabilities in the medical literature within respective time periods. For example, in the earliest versions the subject heading “Monsters” was used to class articles related to anencephaly, conjoined twins, and missing or supernumerary anatomical structures (National Library of Medicine 1879). Very few conditions received dedicated subject headings by name. More commonly, the 1879 Index Medicus used the subject heading “Abnormities” in the broader category of “Anatomy and Physiology” to class articles related to limb hypertrophy, intersex infants, and heart and intestinal malformations (National Library of Medicine 1879). It also used “abnormities” as a modifier, pairing it with numerous other subject terms and mark- ing them as “other,” as in “Nose (abnormities)” (National Library of Medicine 1879, 676) and “Pregnancy (abnormities)” (678). As such, certain disparate conditions were lumped together under the “Abnormities” and “Monsters” headings, whereas other abnormities were scattered throughout the index as subdivided terms. In the early twentieth century the Index Medicus also reflected the perception of disability as being a social pathology. In the 1910 edition, the heading “State Medicine” indexed articles on eugenics; examples included “Asexualization as a remedial measure in the relief of certain forms of mental, moral, and physical degeneration” (National Library of Medicine 1910, 85) and “Vasectomy as a means of preventing procreation in defectives” (327). By 1922 the “State Med- icine” heading contained fewer articles, whereas articles related to degeneracy came to be classed under a new heading, “Defectives” (National Library of Medicine 1922, 55). Although the head- ing “Abnormities” was still in use, more specific headings were provided for some conditions, such as dwarfism, achondroplasia, and spina bifida (National Library of Medicine 1922). The first
Stigmatizing Disability • 127inception of the MeSH (1960; National Library of Medicine 2014) introduced the term “Hand- icapped,” as that was the common usage in the medical community at the time. Looking at the 2015 edition of the MeSH, we find remarkable similarities and differences that reflect the expansion of knowledge and research on disabilities as well as changing atti- tudes toward disabilities. Like its predecessor, it includes the now revised standard subheading “abnormalities,” which can be added to qualify a range of conditions and anatomical structures to indicate deviation from the medical norm. Notably, the heading “Monsters” persisted until 2009 before being replaced with “Abnormalities, Severe Teratoid” (National Library of Medi- cine 2009). However, perhaps not surprisingly, the 2015 MeSH include far more highly specific headings representing particular disabilities and their related biomedical characteristics in multiple locations across its organizational trees. It also includes “Disabled Persons” (National Library of Medicine 2015, M01.150), a successor to “Handicapped,” as well as related headings such as “Health Services for Persons with Disabilities” (N02.421.314), which uses people-first lan- guage. Indeed, the inclusion of people-first terminology is significant, as it signals an aware- ness that people are not defined by a disability. Whereas “disabled people” is viewed as a term that links disability to identity, “people with disabilities” conveys disability as a secondary char- acteristic. Library of Congress Subject Headings The LCSH were first created in 1898, and the first printed volume of headings was published in 1910 (Library of Congress 1910b). It is from that volume that we have gleaned the earliest versions of headings regarding disability. At that time there was a general category designated as “Defective and delinquent classes,” and the conditions named as narrower terms were “Deformities” and “Degeneration.” The LCSH have mapped and continue to map headings to its shelf classification, and the instructions in 1910 indicated that works on “Defective and delinquent classes” were to be shelved in sections for social pathology and marriage of defectives: HV4985 and HQ1036-1043, respectively.6 The following “see also” references were provided: “Blind; Children, Abnormal and backward; Crime and criminals; Deaf and dumb; Epileptics; Feeble-minded; Idiocy; Imbecility; Inefficiency, Intellectual; Insane; Juvenile delin- quency; Reformatories; Vice.” “Deformities” was a more specific term designated for the malformed and monstrous and could also be applied as subdivision for parts of the body. The scope note indicated, “Under this heading are entered works on human monsters as well as on malformations.” Books on this6. It should be noted that there are some inconsistencies between the LCSH and the LCC. The 1910 edition of the H section of the LCC (Library of Congress 1910a) devotes a large range to the topic “Defectives” in HV1551-3008 and states at HV4985 that books on “marriage of degenerates and defectives” should be shelved at HQ1036-1043.
128 • The Library Quarterlytopic were to be shelved in QM691-9 (Human anatomy) or GN68-69.8 (Somatic anthropology). “See also” references for “Deformities” included “Medicine and art ; Monsters ; Phocomelus ; Sia- mese twins: also subdivision Abnormalities and deformities under names of regions and organs of the body (e.g. Brain—Abnormalities and deformities under, Skull—Abnormalities and deformities).” Finally, books with the subject heading “Degeneration” were placed in QH556 (Biology), HV4961-4998 (Criminology), and HM111 (Sociology). “See also” references were “Crime and crim- inals; Defective and delinquent classes; Insanity.” Many of these examples from the early LCSH mirror the terms in the MeSH, and together, medical libraries and general libraries propelled eugenicist discourses about people with disabilities. Presently, the LCSH include the heading “People with disabilities,” which was authorized in 2002. Sources that are cited for literary warrant include the American Heritage Dictionary, the ADA, the Illinois attorney general’s Manual of Style for Depicting People with Disabilities, and the MeSH. When the heading was revised from “Handicapped” to “People with Disabilities,” Bar- bara Tillett (2002) of the LC stated in a report to the ALA that the change was “in accord with terminology used in the Americans with Disabilities Act and approved for use by the govern- ments of major English-speaking countries worldwide, as well as with the principle of ‘putting people first,’ which is advocated by most organizations and individuals with an interest in dis- ability issues” (par. 25). Remarkably, the LC authority database provides more than 100 nar- rower terms within the broad category of “People with disabilities.” Far too numerous to list here, they include headings as precise and diverse as “Middle-aged persons with disabilities,” “Truck drivers with disabilities,” and “Paralytics.” Also among the narrower terms are headings for objects and services as they relate to people with disabilities, such as “Landscape architec- ture for people with disabilities,” “Sex instruction for people with disabilities,” and “Libraries and people with disabilities.” In the case of the LCSH, it is fair to say that libraries have been very attentive to the needs and preferences of people with disabilities in updating their sub- ject terms. Although the LCSH are based on structures that organize broader, narrower, and related terms, the headings are not bound to locations and hierarchical arrangements within disciplines to the extent that bibliographic classifications are. It is to that group of subject tools that we next turn. Library of Congress Classification (LCC) As described in the preceding section, HV4985 and HQ1036-1043 are two ranges in which sub- jects associated with the subject heading “Defective and delinquent classes” appeared in the earliest LCC (Library of Congress 1910a). In fact, HV4985 appears in parentheses and was actually a nonpreferred location, with the directive “Marriage of degenerates and defectives, see HQ 1036- 1043.”Within that section in the HQs, broadly designated for “Social Groups. The Family. Mar- riage,” are subtopics “Blind,” “Deaf,” “Feeble-minded,” and “Other” as well as topics in 1045–1048 concerning legal jurisdiction (see fig. 1).
Stigmatizing Disability • 129Although the LCSH did not explicitly map to the HV1551-3008 section, this is where most works on “defectives” would have been placed. The broad HV class was originally designated for “Social Pathology. Philanthropy, Etc.” That was further subdivided into such sections as “Protection, assistance, and relief.” Most of the terms used as “see also” references for the sub- ject heading “Defective and delinquent classes” actually appeared as narrower classes within HV1551-HV3008. Within this class of “Defectives” was a class for “Blind,” ranging from HV1571 to HV2329. Even in 1910 it included pages of divisions for subtopics such as “Libraries for the Blind,” geographical locations, education, writing machines, and Braille. After “Blind” is a class ranging from HV2350 to HV2990 for “Deaf and dumb,” followed by “The sick and infirm,” which includes the subtopic “Feeble-minded and imbecile.” Wedged between “Defectives” (HV1551- HV3008) and “Degeneration” (HV4961-HV4998) are “Special classes” first by occupation and then by race, followed by “Poor in cities. Slums,” “Pauperism,” and an extensive classification for “Protection of animals.” The classification was created during a time that held a particular zeal for social reform, and libraries participated in a wider American mission to improve society through control (Wiegand 1996; Pawley 2003). The classification reflects this attitude, as these categories of “Defectives” were placed within “Protection, assistance and relief.” The location and associationsFigure 1. Library of Congress Classification at HQ1036-1048, 1910 edition
130 • The Library Quarterlyremain the same, as books about people with disabilities are still within the broader HV cate- gory. Although the terms have changed from “defective” to “people with disabilities,” the lan- guage for the general HV category has changed only slightly, from “Social Pathology. Philan- thropy, Etc.” to “Social pathology. Social and public welfare. Criminology,” and the subdivision “Protection, assistance and relief” remains precisely the same. The approach is still to treat peo- ple with disabilities as subjects in need of care, protection, and assistance. As this quite literally appears within a pathologizing class, the disabled subject remains classed within a group of ill, abnormal, and marginal subjects. The 1950 edition of the LCC retains the language of “de- fectives” and adds a new class located at HV3011 and labeled “Cripples. The disabled.” Interestingly, HV4973 and HV6975 for “Physical degeneration and stigmata” and “Mental degeneration and stigmata” still remain in Classification Web (an online classification tool pro- duced by the LC and used by professional catalogers) under the broader class “Stigmata, also with Social pathology. Social and public welfare. Criminology.” While there are extremely few works in this class in the LC collection, its neighbor “Eugenics” contains a sizable body of lit- erature. This shows with remarkable clarity the attitudes about disability, as the label “stig- mata” indicates the belief that people with mental and physical disabilities wore marks, or evidence of their “degeneration,” on their bodies. The lasting associations across degener- ation, stigmata, and eugenics serve as a reminder of a troubled history and show one way in which normative ideas become systemic and hidden in the present. Dewey Decimal Classification Melvil Dewey’s Decimal Classification and Relative Index for Libraries was first published in 1876 to guide librarians in cataloging, indexing, and arranging books on shelves. Early versions of the DDC arranged works related to disability primarily in the discourses of medicine (610), educa- tion (370), and sociology (360). For example, the fifth edition of the DDC (Dewey 1894) lists “Orthopedic Surgery. Defor- mities” at 617.3 with the annotation “For convenience, the whole subject of deformities is classed here, though many of them have no surgical treatment” (66). The entry includes a “see also” reference to nearby 613.91, “Congenital Defects of Body,” which shares its parent 613.9 class with “Stirpiculture,” another word for “eugenics” (Dewey 1894, 66). In the area of edu- cation, the fifth edition provides the entry at 371.9, “Education of Special Classes,” which in- cludes the following: “Blind; Deaf and Dumb; Feeble-minded; Freedmen. Negro; Indians; Ori- entals; Criminals. Reform Schools; Special Nationalities; and Co-education of Races” (Dewey 1894, 38). The twenty-third edition of the DDC (Online Computer Library Center 2011) defines the same 371.9 class as “Special education” and includes divisions for “Students with physical disabilities; Students with mental disabilities; Delinquent and problem students; Students with emotional disturbances; and Gifted students.”
Stigmatizing Disability • 131The current edition of the DDC has inherited the sections and hierarchies inscribed in the early versions. Several classes related to disabilities are currently located within 362.1 and 362.4, designated for “People with illnesses and disabilities” within the broader class of “Social problems of and services to groups of people” (Online Computer Library Center 2011). This continues to link illness with disability, despite the fact that there is an important dis- tinction between these two concepts. Although the main classes’ captions have been up- dated with people-first terminology, the subclasses have not. We still see “Disabled children,” for instance (Online Computer Library Center 2011). Looking to the origins of these classes reveals that the placement of these categories within the broader class of social problems is historically and culturally embedded in a discourse of pathology, dependence, and charity. These classes were organized for literature on institutions that served people with various illnesses and disabilities, so the hierarchies are based on a logic of treatment. The correspon- dence is remarkable: What is now defined as “People with physical illnesses” was formerly “Sick and Wounded. Incurables. Eye and Ear Infirmaries. Lying-in Hospitals. Dispensaries” (Dewey 1894, 36). The class presently designated for “People with mental illness and disabil- ities” was previously labeled “Insane” (Dewey 1894, 36). The class for “People with mental retardation” was simply “Idiotic” (Dewey 1894, 36). And the class for “People with physical dis- abilities” was for “Blind. Deaf. Dumb” (Dewey 1894, 36). Relevant text from the twenty-third edition of classification is copied below, and figure 2 show an excerpt from the fifth edition.Figure 2. 362.1–362.4, Dewey Decimal Classification, fifth edition (Dewey 1894)
132 • The Library Quarterly362.1–362.4 People with illness and disabilities Class here comprehensive works on people with disabilities, people with physical and mental disabilities 362.1 People with physical illnesses 362.2 yPeople with mental illness and disabilities 362.3 *yPeople with mental retardation 362.4 yPeople with physical disabilities 362.4083 Disabled children—social welfare 362.4084/22 Disabled young women—social welfare 362.4086/64 Disabled gays—social welfare 362.4086/97 Disabled veterans The current DDC (Online Computer Library Center 2011) contains classes and subdivisions that mark disability across a wider range of major subject areas, extending the consideration of disability beyond medicine and social sciences. For example, works on “Libraries for people with disabilities” are located in the section on “Libraries for special groups and organizations” at 027.663, and books about “Workers with disabilities and illnesses” are at 331.59 with works on the labor market. Furthermore, a standard subdivision, “People with disabilities,” which can be used to specify subtopics across the classification, is defined in table 1-087 in the DDC (Online Computer Library Center 2011). The instructions are to add 087 to an existing class. A few examples illustrate how that subdivision is applied: “Museum services to pa- trons—People with disabilities” is at 069.0087; “Disabled juvenile delinquent” is at 364.36087 as a subtopic of “Juvenile delinquents.” As with the LCC, this development is somewhat para- doxical, as greater access is afforded through the subdivision “People with disabilities,” which necessarily marks this subclass as abnormal and places them in a shelf location outside the normal ranges within the disciplines. Conclusion Through selected examples from library classification systems, this article has demonstrated how library knowledge organization systems have participated in the construction of disabil- ity as social or medical pathology. We problematize libraries as a site where access to infor- mation about and for people with disabilities is afforded by a hidden infrastructure built upon the once prevailing belief that the disabled body was a defective, dependent, and sick body. Although libraries have a long history of providing access and services, they are also cultural institutions that reproduce the stigmatization of people with disabilities through bibliographic control techniques that have embedded associations with eugenics. Because these tools mark subjects against an assumed norm, the disabled subject is stigmatized with the continued assignment of headings and classes for materials on disabilities. Further work must be done
Stigmatizing Disability • 133to fully understand the implications for access to resources as well as how these stigmatizing classifications affect and influence the production and dissemination of knowledge about peo- ple with disabilities. Interdisciplinary dialogue involving LIS and disability studies scholars, as well as individuals affected by disabilities, family members, and caregivers, might provide important insights into the lived experience of encountering categories and how to make improvements. Finally, our findings carry implications for other areas of LIS, such as collec- tion development and weeding practices, which require attention to changing understand- ings of disability, and LIS education, which should include research and teaching on services for people with disabilities in diversity and inclusion initiatives.References Adler, Melissa. Forthcoming. “Classification Along the Color Line: Excavating Racism in the Library Stacks.” Journal of Critical Library and Information Studies. Barcella, Laura. 2014. “The American Horror Story: Freak Show Teaser Is Finally upon Us.” Vanity Fair. http:// www.vanityfair.com/hollywood/2014/08/the-american-horror-story-freak-show-teaser-is-finally -upon-us. Berger, Ronald, J. 2013. Introducing Disability Studies. Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner. Berman, Sanford. 1971. Prejudices and Antipathies: A Tract on the LC Subject Heads concerning People. Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow. Berman, Sanford. 1984. Subject Cataloging: Critiques and Innovations. New York: Haworth. Bowker, Geoffrey C., and Susan Leigh Star. 1999. Sorting Things Out: Classification and Its Consequences. Cam- bridge, MA: MIT Press. Brault, Matthew W. 2012. Americans with Disabilities: 2010. Washington, DC: US Department of Commerce, Economics and Statistics Administration, US Census Bureau. http://www.census.gov/prod/2012pubs /p70-131.pdf. Burke, Susan K. 2009. “Perceptions of Public Library Accessibility for People with Disabilities.” Reference Li- brarian 50 (1): 43–54. Davis, Lennard J. 2006. “The End of Identity Politics and the Beginning of Dismodernism: On Disability as an Unstable Category.” In The Disability Studies Reader. 2nd ed. Edited by Lennard J. Davis. New York: Routledge. Dewey, Melvil. 1894. Decimal Classification and Relative Index for Libraries, Clippings, Notes, etc. 5th ed. Boston: Library Bureau. Drabinski, Emily. 2013. “Queering the Catalog: Queer Theory and the Politics of Correction.” Library Quar- terly 83 (2): 94–111. Goffman, Erving. 1963. Stigma: Notes on the Management of Spoiled Identity. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. Hill, Heather. 2013. “Disability and Accessibility in the Library and Information Science Literature: A Content Analysis.” Library and Information Science Research 35 (2): 137–42. Huber, Jeffrey T., and Mary Gillaspy. 1998. “Social Constructs and Disease: Implications for a Controlled Vocabulary for HIV/AIDS.” Library Trends 47 (2): 190–208. Jaeger, Paul T., Brian Wentz, and John Carlo Bertot. 2015. “Accessibility, Inclusion, and the Role of Librar- ies.” In Accessibility for Persons with Disabilities and the Inclusive Future of Libraries. Vol. 40, Advances in Li- brarianship. Edited by Brian Wentz, Paul T. Jaeger, and John Carlo Bertot. Bingley: Emerald.
134 • The Library QuarterlyKoford, Amelia. 2014. “How Disability Studies Scholars Interact with Subject Headings.” Cataloging and Classification Quarterly 52 (4): 388–411. Library of Congress. 1910a. Classification. Class H. Social Sciences. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office. Library of Congress. 1910b. List of Subject Headings. Washington, DC: Library of Congress. Longmore, Paul K. 1985. “A Note on Language and the Social Identity of Disabled People.” American Be- havioral Scientist 28 (3): 419–23. MacDonald, Arthur. 1908a. “Moral Stigmata of Degeneration.” Monist, 111–23. MacDonald, Arthur. 1908b. Juvenile Crime and Reformation, including the Moral Stigmata of Degeneration, Being a Hearing on the Bill (HR 16733) to Establish a Laboratory for the Study of the Criminal, Pauper, and Defective Classes. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office. National Library of Medicine. 1879. Index Medicus. Vol. 1. Bethesda, MD: National Library of Medicine. National Library of Medicine. 1910. Index Medicus. 2nd series, vol. 8. Bethesda, MD: National Library of Medicine. National Library of Medicine. 1922. Index Medicus. 3rd series, vol. 2. Bethesda, MD: National Library of Medicine. National Library of Medicine. 2009. “MH Changes and Deletes. 2010 MeSH. August 13, 2009,” last modi- fied April 25, 2016. ftp://nlmpubs.nlm.nih.gov/online/mesh/1999-2010/newterms/replace2010.txt. National Library of Medicine. 2014. “Medical Subject Headings: Preface,” last modified November 7, 2016. https://www.nlm.nih.gov/mesh/intro_preface.html. National Library of Medicine. 2015. “Medical Subject Headings: MeSH Browser (2015 MeSH),” last modi- fied September 8, 2015. https://www.nlm.nih.gov/mesh/2015/mesh_browser/MBrowser.html. Oliver, Michael, and Colin Barnes. 2012. The New Politics of Disablement. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. Olson, Hope A. 2002. The Power to Name: Locating the Limits of Subject Representation in Libraries. Dordrecht: Kluwer. Online Computer Library Center. 2011. Dewey Decimal Classification System. 23rd ed. Dublin, OH: Online Com- puter Library Center. Pawley, Christine. 2003. “Information Literacy: A Contradictory Coupling.” Library Quarterly 73 (2): 422–52. Siebers, Tobin. 2008. Disability Theory. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. Snow, Kathie. 2009. To Ensure Inclusion, Freedom, and Respect for All, It's Time to Embrace People First Language. http://www.sccoe.org/depts/students/inclusion-collaborative/Documents/Person-First_Language_Article .pdf. Snyder, Sharon L., and David T. Mitchell. 2006. Cultural Locations of Disability. Chicago: University of Chi- cago Press. Tennis, Joseph T. 2012. “The Strange Case of Eugenics: A Subject’s Ontogeny in a Long-Lived Classifica- tion Scheme and the Question of Collocative Integrity.” Journal of the American Society for Information Sci- ence and Technology 63 (7): 1350–59. Tillett, Barbara B. 2002. “Library of Congress Liaison Report to ALA/ALCTS/CCS/CC:DA, Annual Meeting, January 2002,” last modified July 10, 2010. http://www.libraries.psu.edu/tas/jca/ccda/lc0201.html. Wiegand, Wayne A. 1996. Irrepressible Reformer: A Biography of Melvil Dewey. Chicago: American Library As- sociation.
Stigmatizing Disability • 135Melissa Adler: assistant professor of library and information science, University of Kentucky. Adler is affiliated with the Committee on Social Theory and the Department of Gender and Women’s Stud- ies at the University of Kentucky. Her book Cruising the Library: Perversities in the Organization of Knowledge will be published by Fordham University Press in April 2017. Her research concerns the history and politics of global knowledge organization systems. She has published articles in Information and Culture, Knowledge Organization, and Journal of the History of Sexuality. E-mail (cor- responding author): melissa.adler@uky.edu. Jeffrey T. Huber: professor and director of the School of Information Science at the University of Kentucky. Huber specializes in health information. He primarily teaches courses examining health information resources and services. His research focuses on the social construction of bodies of knowledge, health information outreach and health literacy programming for marginalized or under- served populations, and consumer health informatics. His current work is focused on examining the health care navigation model and assessing potential roles for information professionals within that model. E-mail: jeffrey.huber@uky.edu. A. Tyler Nix: graduate research assistant, University of Kentucky School of Information Science. Nix graduated with an MSLS from the University of Kentucky in 2015. Since graduation, he has par- ticipated in a 2-year postgraduate fellowship focused on health sciences librarianship. His profes- sional interests include data management, expert searching, and medical terminologies. E-mail: atylernix@gmail.com.