The Educating of Black Librarians: An Historical Perspective ROSEMARY RUHIG DUMONT An historical overview of the participation of blacks in librarianship and library science education is presented. Historical as well as present day barriers to such participation are explored. THE LIBRARY SCHOOL is the "one place where the legitimate claims, the unrealized ambitions and the unstated needs of all library interests" are met.1 It is there that the goals that guide librarianship are shaped. Consequently, when one wants to identify some of the reasons for the historical underrepresentation of black Americans in librarianship, one can look to the historical development of professional library science education for some of the answers. A caveat is in order before this paper begins. It has to do with the capacity of a white person to understand the black experience in li- brarianship. Some black librarians would doubt that capacity and resent any such undertaking as this paper by a white person. The education of black librarians, however, is an issue that affects, and must be of concern to all American librarians. Many black librarians realize that if their contribution to the profession is to be fully recognized and respected, whites must be encouraged to learn about the black librarian experience and understand it as best they can from the black point of view. This paper is one such effort. The paper will be divided into three major parts. The first will describe the historical development of library science education for blacks by DuMont is Dean, School of Library Science, Kent State University, Kent, OH 44242. Mss. received 11185; accepted 2186. 233
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science chronological periods. The second will discuss the present situation. The third part will attempt to appraise the historical development of library education for blacks and make recommendations for the future. HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PROFESSIONAL LIBRARY EDUCATION FOR BLACKS In looking at the secondary source material on the historical develop- ment of American library education for blacks, it should be noted that those historians who have chosen to study the development of American library education have made no attempt to include consideration of the special nature of library education for blacks in their investigations. Examination of the major works in the field show that they virtually ignore the issue.2 Yet, throughout the century that professional library science education has been available, the professional education of blacks has been regarded as a key to progress in the serving of black library patrons.3 Indeed, there is much evidence which suggests that it is the education of black library leadership which has been the critical element in the progress which has been made in the development of service for black library users. This conclusion does not suggest that library science education alone has been the reason for the successes and failures in service to blacks - it is to say that the condition of library science education has been a reflection of progress made toward service goals. Louisville Free Public Library 1910-1931? Historically, the development of library science education for blacks is mainly a chapter in southern library history. Over 90 percent of blacks, were, after all, in the south in the period when the first library schools were being established at the end of the nineteenth century.4 Library resources in the southern states at this time were extremely limited; there was no free public library service anywhere in the Southeast before 1895, and no school of library science until 1905. The library facilities and services that existed were for special groups of those who could afford to pay for the privilege of using them. Under these circumstances there were few librarians and fewer still who recognized the need for special library training.5 The concept of "separate but equal," confirmed by the United States Supreme Court in Plessy vs. Ferguson in 1896, meant that whatever limited library services were available for whites, were not necessarily available for blacks. Constitutional authority gave support for separation of the races in virtually every sphere of life. The facilities and services provided for blacks in all areas of public life were seldom anything like equal. This included library service and education for librarianship. As late as 1913, such large cities as Atlanta, Birmingham, Dallas, Mobile, Montgomery, Nashville, New Orleans and Richmond reported having no public library service for blacks.6 In order for such service to 234
The Educating of Black Librarians develop, blacks had to gain entry into the profession through appropriate education and training. This was most difficult. Blacks were denied admission to southern white colleges and universities; as a result of the Second Morrill Act they were relegated to a separate system of federally aided land grant colleges; and because of inferior education in segregated elementary and secondary schools, they entered higher education woe- fully ill prepared.7 Consequently, blacks were very slow in entering the ranks of professional librarians. Following the receipt of a certificate of completion by Edward Chris- topher Williams in 1900 from the New York State Library School at Albany, the next known black graduate was in 1926, when Hampton Institute (Virginia) graduated three professionals.8 The only measure taken in the interim to train black librarians was the establishment of an apprenticeship training class for high school graduates in Louisville, Kentucky, as part of the creation of a "Negro Department" in the Louis- ville Free Public Library. Starting in 1910 until the early 1930s, when it ceased to exist, the apprentice program trained most of the young women who worked in library branches serving blacks in the South, before the founding of the Hampton Institute Library School. Twenty-nine local persons and 12 out-of-town persons (from Houston, Birmingham, Atlanta, Evansville, Memphis, Knoxville, Nashville, and Chattanooga), took courses and practice work of four to six months in length.9 A paper read by Thomas Fountain Blue, th^/black director of the apprenticeship program, at the American Library Association (ALA) conference in Detroit, in 1922, characterized the apprenticeship training as "a child of necessity." "In those days a public library for colored people in the South was something 'new under the sun.' Naturally a trained colored library assistant was a rarity . . . The Western Colored Branch of Louisville . . . needed assistants, and so it was decided to train them."10 That such a program was the only source of trained black librarians for almost 20 years, reflects the limited nature of library service to blacks at the beginning of the twentieth century. Hampton Institute 1925-1939. The founding of the library school at Hampton Institute reflected increased interest in the development of black educational opportunities after 1920 - a development encouraged in large part by three large and purposeful private foundations - the Rosenwald Fund, the General Education Board, and the Carnegie Cor- poration of New York. These agencies were broadly interested in the improvement and expansion of education in the South, and within that general interest, with the improvement of educational opportunities for 235
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science blacks.11 They became most responsible for the direction of black edu- cational programming.12 In the area of library development, in particular, in the 1920s, the General Education Board gave over a million dollars for black college library buildings; a half million dollars was appropriated by the Julius Rosenwald Fund for county library development, which included some services for blacks; the Carnegie Corporation built some branch libraries for blacks and gave money to a couple of black colleges for their book collections.13 Library education for blacks also relied on foundation support. The Hampton library school founded with a grant from the Carnegie Cor- poration in 1925 had as its goal the encouragement of "proper develop- ment of library work with Negroes in the South" through the "prep- aration of Negro librarians in that environment."14 Hampton Institute had opened in 1868, with two teachers and 15 pupils. Founded by General Samuel Chapman Armstrong, with support from the Freedman's Bureau and northern philanthropists, it rejected the notion of a traditional literary education for blacks in favor of instruction in agriculture and simple crafts. Hampton thus became one focus of the educational dilemma that was to face black education leaders for more than half a century. In introducing the idea of vocational education for blacks, it attributed to this type of training a value superior to that offered by liberal arts colleges that were also being established at this time. Those interested in the advancement of black education would be placed in conflict by the two styles of training: they would debate the merits of one against the other and find that accepting either would rob them of some advantage which the other offered.15 Hampton's most famous student, Booker T. Washington, became a spokesperson for the concept of industrial education represented by Hampton. Washington pointedly advocated racial separation, the cul- tivation of friendship with white southerners and industrial, agricultural, and practical education. Industrial education was not to be a means of propelling blacks into the mainstream of the total American society; rather it was seen as a mechanism through which some blacks could be of special service to the growing black communities around the nation. From this mode of educational development, underwritten by northern phil- anthropy, emerged the system of "separate but equal."16 Hampton was selected as the site of the first library school for blacks for several reasons: First, it had a significant book collection in a good library building with a trained staff. Second, Hampton allowed a bi-racial faculty and so it could hire qualified white faculty to teach. Third, Hampton's 236
The Educating of Black Librarians alumni were placed in black leadership positions throughout the South and could aid in the placement of the library school's graduates.17 A white woman, Florence Rising Curtis, a graduate of the New York State Library School, was selected as director. She had served as assistant professor in the University of Illinois Library School and as vice-director of the Drexel Institute of Library Science. She had a staff of trained librarians to assist her. Beginning as a junior undergraduate program, Hampton eventually issued a bachelor's degree in library science and was accredited by ALA. The establishment of this school came at a time when state and regional accrediting associations were becoming aware of the position of the library in the educational program of the college and were therefore making the library a focal point in the accreditation procedure. With this impetus, the Hampton Library School was able to make a positive con- tribution to the black college library field. College libraries were the chief employers of its graduates. A 1940 survey showed that 70 percent of Hampton graduates were in college libraries, 15 percent in high school libraries, 12 percent in public libraries, and a few in other positions.18 The total number of Hampton graduates by the time it closed in 1939 was 183.19 Not only did the school furnish trained librarians, but it also promoted black college library interests. Every year, Director Curtis traveled for eight weeks throughout the South with the financial support of first the Rosenwald Fund and later the Carnegie Corporation, interviewing the presidents and faculties of black colleges. She aided them in the develop- ment of library facilities and services, providing them with book buying lists, floor plans and any other assistance requested. The expansion of the black college library program, in terms of new buildings, trained per- sonnel, and reorganization from 1925 until 1938, attest to the influence of the combination of accreditation demands and the Hampton Library School.20 Largely as a result of the work of Curtis, scores of black schools and colleges were accredited.21 Unfortunately, during the 1920s and 1930s, public library service in the South did not have adequate financial support, and thus the number of public libraries giving service to blacks was very small.22 Carnegie grants provided money for black library branches in some seven locations, but the administration, budgets and personnel in too few instances allowed for a vigorous, progressive public library program.23 Consequently, opportunities for trained black public librarians were limited. There was no accreditation stimulus to encourage the upgrading of public library service for blacks and little support to hire trained black librarians. 237
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science The support of school librarians was somewhat better. A plan for the training of school librarians was proposed by Curtis, to be sponsored by ALA. The General Education Board agreed to finance the program, which resulted in the establishment of four regional centers to offer courses for black school librarians for four consecutive summers from 1936 through 1939. These centers were at Hampton Institute, Atlanta University, Fisk University, and Prairie View A & M University. Basic courses were given in school library administration, book selection, refer- ence, and cataloging and classification.24 From this effort some two hun- dred teacher-librarians received the instruction required by the Southern Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools for high school librarians. Not all black library school students studied at Hampton for library science degrees during this time. Some did leave the South to obtain a library school education. A survey reported by Curtis shows that through 1934, 70 black students had enrolled in library schools other than Hamp- ton.25 She noted, however, the difficulties faced by these students. One difficulty encountered was a lack of suitable lodging places for black library school students within easy access to campus.26 A more significant problem was "the distance [of northern and western library schools] from the South and the consequent lack of knowledge of positions and success in placement."27 Because blacks were generally hired only in "black institutions" they were restricted to the South for the limited oppor- tunities available. Charlotte Templeton, librarian of the Greenville, South Carolina, Public Library and president of the Southeastern Library As- sociation, noted in 193 1 that in the South the demand was very limited for black librarians.28 Curtis reported in 1935 that it was not possible to place more than 15 or 20 library school graduates a year, due to limited opportunities, not only in the South, but in the North and West as well.29 As early as 193 1 , consideration was given to removing the library school from Hampton Institute. In March of that year, a conference was con- vened at Chapel Hill, North Carolina, by Louis Round Wilson, in his capacity as Chair of the Board of Education for Librarianship (BEL). Funded by the Rosenwald Fund, the purpose of the conference was to consider future possibilities in education for librarianship for blacks.30 To this meeting were invited representatives of all the foundations working in the South, representatives of black institutions offering any courses for the training of librarians, and representatives of the BEL. The discussions at this meeting covered the need for black librarians and the type of library science training needed to fulfill that need. Hampton's role in the education of black librarians was thoroughly reviewed. Although Hampton was credited with meeting "admirably the demand for college and school librarians" it was perceived to have 238
The Educating of Black Librarians "handicaps" for the continuation of this role.31 Among these handicaps were the lack of supervised practice and training for future public librarians and the school's lack of central location for its potential student body.2 By far the most serious weakness identified was the library school's connection with a "vocational school." This orientation was seen to be a distinct disadvantage to those black students who desired to take their professional training in a collegiate institution.33 The reluctance of such students to go to Hampton was "in some cases keeping desirable persons from going to library school."34 In other cases, students were making the effort to go to northern schools because degrees from these institutions were perceived to have more prestige in the South than degrees from Hampton.35 Consequently, beginning in 1931, a search was started for a more propitious affiliation for the one library school for the training of black librarians that was considered necessary by both library and philanthropic leaders. Atlanta University 1941. The new library school affiliation was a number of years in the making. Hampton continued to operate as a number of new options for the school were considered. Both Fisk University and Atlanta University were evaluated as possible new sites. Either one was seen to be able to provide more financial support for the school than was possible for Hampton.35 All three foundations involved in the support of library education for blacks, the Rosenwald Fund, the General Education Board, and the Carnegie Corporation, desired to find a permanent new home for the library school.36 The matter was put on "hold" however, until the Hampton School closed in June of 1939, due to the decisions by the foundations to cease further funding of it. The opening of a new school was not the immediate response to the Hampton closing. Instead, a survey was done in September of 1939 to determine if there was enough demand for black librarians at that point in time to warrant the establishment of "another library school for Negroes."37 The BEL asked Tommie Dora Barker, dean of the library school at Emory University, to prepare a report summarizing the need for a library school "with an estimate of the number and kinds of library positions likely to be open to Negroes in the next five or ten years."38 She surveyed the 16 states that maintained segregated school systems and concluded that two types of library education for blacks were needed: some semi-professional courses for teacher-librarians in secondary schools and a full one-year curriculum for those who wanted a profes- sional degree to work in public or academic libraries. The survey noted that "a majority of Negroes who are reported to be interested in taking or planning to take full professional training like to have the training in a 239
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science special school for Negroes in the South."39 While black institutions were endeavoring to meet the demand for semi-professional courses for teacher-librarians (25 such institutions were identified in the survey40), there was no institution endeavoring to give the full professional cur- riculum which met the accreditation standards established by BEL. Special attention was paid to the fact that black students from the South had difficulty in meeting the entrance requirements of library schools outside the South "because of limitations of background and inadequate academic preparation."41 Consequently, a school in the South that would be able to recognize and deal with these difficiencies was seen as necessary. One black library leader took exception to this recommendation. Wal- lace Van Jackson, librarian at Virginia Union University, in commenting on the report, noted that although certain emotional barriers were faced by black students because most library science teachers and students were white, he did not believe that developing a new library school with black faculty for black students was the answer. He saw that the surest way of developing strong black librarians was by being schoolmates of whites in "mixed schools" and having to meet the same academic standards as the white students.42 Van Jackson accepted the limited nature of the need for black librarians and estimated, as Curtis had done before him, that only 20 black pro- fessional librarians were needed a year. Thus, although most "mixed schools" would only accept one or two black students at a time, the small number of graduates needed could be absorbed by existing programs.43 Library education and foundation leaders disagreed. In March of 1940 a conference was held in Atlanta, funded by the Carnegie Corporation and the General Education Board to discuss the development of a school of library science for black students at Atlanta University. It is evident that Atlanta was selected because another library school (Emory) was already in Atlanta, and it was hoped that the two schools would be able to cooperate and perhaps even share some resources.44 The Carnegie Cor- poration established an endowment for the new school and at the same time gave funds to the Emory University library school to encourage this cooperative effort. The administrators of the new school thought it best to have an all black faculty,45 and so it opened in the fall of 1941 under the direction of Dean Eliza Atkins Gleason, and with two faculty members, Wallace Van Jackson and Virginia Lacy. Hampton Institute sent its professional library science collection to Atlanta to get the new school started. Enrollment was restricted to 25 students, who had to be college graduates and in the upper half of their graduating class.46 240
The Educating of Black Librarians The cooperative arrangements between Emory and Atlanta for the education of these students was slow to develop. In fact, the faculty at Atlanta "did not expect too much" from its proximity to Emory.47 Rufus Clement, the president of Atlanta University, pointed out in a letter to Robert Lester, president of the Carnegie Corporation, that it was the "existence of the racial situation" that necessitated two schools in the same city and that only limited cooperative activities were feasible.48 Thus, library science education for blacks continued to be a thing apart. The Atlanta University School of Library Service was accredited in July 1943; this action made the school the only accredited library school connected with a black institution. It became from the beginning the prime supplier of black librarians, not only for the South, but for the entire United States. North Carolina Central/Alabama A& M1941.A second library school for blacks was started in 1941. This school at North Carolina College for Negroes (now North Carolina Central University), in Durham, North Carolina, was created in response to a Supreme Court decision made in 1938 which ruled that the state of Missouri had to give equality in educational privileges to white and black law students, either by admitting blacks to the law school already in existence or by establishing a law school in a black institution. This decision affected the provision of professional education in all fields in all states that had separate educational systems for whites and blacks. The state legislature of North Carolina determined to establish a separate library school for blacks and so the school of library science in Durham was begun. Susan Grey Akers, dean of the library school at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill was selected as dean of the school in Durham. She held both positions simultaneously for the next five years, spending one day a week on the Durham campus.49 Unfortunately few records exist of these early years.50 There was an attempt in 1947 to gain accreditation for the school, but the untimely death of the director, caused postponement of that process indefinitely.51 The school was not accredited until 1975. Alabama A & M University is the third predominantly black institution to have a school of library science. This is a "single purpose" school, emphasizing school library media programs. It was not founded until 1969, and was also accredited in 1975. It is significant to note that both Hampton and Atlanta are private institutions and that no public institution with predominently black en- rollment had an accredited program in library science until 1975. None of the schools reached accreditation status without private funds. The Ala- bama school was given its push toward accreditation with a grant from the 241
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science W. K. Kellogg Foundation in 1972. In 1970, when North Carolina Central decided to strive for accreditation status, a consultant called in to assess the program, said that it would need an additional one million dollars to reach that goal.52 Special funding was not forthcoming from the state. Rather funds were received from the Carnegie Corporation of New York and the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation. Substantial contributions were also received from the Xerox Corporation and the B. Smith Reynolds Foundation.53 1954- On May 17, 1954, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in the case of Brown vs. the Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas, that the principle of "separate but equal" was unconstitutional. The Court pointed to injustices inherent in racial separation in public institutions and in 1955 ordered the various jurisdictions to embark on desegregation in education "with all deliberate speed."54 Now the problem became one of implementation. In the field of library science, it was the civil rights movement of the 1960s that caused ALA to look at the problem and to note that there were few minority representatives in either the profession or coming into it through library schools.55 In an attempt to change this situation, the ad hoc Committee on Opportunities for Negro Students in the Library Profession was established in February of 1966 by the ALA Executive Board, upon the recommendation of ALA President Robert Vosper. The major objective of the committee was "to suggest what steps usefully could be taken by the ALA to identify promising new Negro undergraduates who might, once identified, be effectively counseled and aided towards entering library school and securing positions in the library profession."56 Additional objectives included securing financial assistance for such students as well as appropriate library positions upon degree completion. The necessity for taking such special measures became evident upon analyzing the findings of a report put together by the ad hoc committee. It found that of the 9,204 students graduating from 25 accredited library schools between 1962 and 1966, only 372 or 4 percent were black. Over half of these had graduated from one institution, Atlanta University.57 American library schools were thus encouraged to begin making an effort to inform black college students of the opportunities in the library profession, and to motivate and counsel such students to enter graduate schools of librarianship.58 Not until the early 1970s, did library education opportunities for blacks begin to expand dramatically. Library education leaders began to focus on integrating predominantly white institutions, and the federal government became a significant force in this effort. The Title II-B Fellowship Program of the Higher Education Act of 1965 became the vehicle for integration in 1970 when the regulations were 242
The Educating of Black Librarians changed to provide that funds awarded be utilized to equalize oppor- tunities for minorities. Before 1970, minorities received only seven per- cent of the available Title II-B fellowships; by 1978 minorities received 80 percent of the fellowships.59 A survey and evaluation of minority programs in selected graduate library schools for the years 1974-75, done by Herman Totten, shows some of the initial impact of the availability of financial aid such as Title II-B for black students. Of the 282 black library school students he queried, 208 stated that the availability of financial aid was crucial to their choice of school. In addition, the inclusion of minority students in the regular course of study in the library school as well as the commitment of administrators, students, and faculty to minority support services, were crucial factors in retaining black students.60 A dissertation completed in 1980 by Marva DeLoach substantiated these findings. She examined the impact of Title II-B on minority re- cruitment into librarianship during the years 1970 through 1977.61 In the opinion of deans and directors who participated in her study, Title II-B did have an impact on minority recruitment. Title II-B fellowships were considered the prime source of training funds for minorities. She sug- gests a definite correlation between the availability of fellowships and the number of minority students when Title II-B funds are more plentiful. DeLoach shows that recruitment efforts for minorities peaked in 1970-71. Title II-B funds were used for that purpose. By the end of the period studied, minorities represented 10.7 percent of graduates re- ported in 1976 and 12.3 percent of graduates in 1977. Minorities seemed to be making rapid progress at last toward achieving adequate represen- tation in library and information science education. Recently reported data suggests that the period of rapid progress in the 1970s was temporary. The ALA Committee on Library Service to Minori- ties reported at the ALA annual conference in June of 1985 "that the minority student population in library schools has decreased sub- stantially, the recruitment of minorities is no longer a priority for the major U.S. library schools, and part of the problem is that scholarship funds have been cut."62 It appears that educational parity has not been achieved. Black li- brarians are not being produced at a rate commensurate with the total population of either the state in which they reside or the nation as a whole. The historical evidence presented here shows that black representation in professional education for librarians has depended on the monumental efforts of a very few white and black library leaders to develop special programs for blacks. They have had to rely on the interest and con- tributions of foundations and most recently the federal government to 243
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science provide a full range of opportunities for blacks to study librarianship. The overall effectiveness of the various programs supported by these private and public sources has not been measured. In the end, it seems that the lack of knowledge of effectiveness is also an impediment to equal opportunity. Namely, there appears to be no clearly mandated policy of equal opportunity in library science education; there is only a collection of loosely defined programs. Consequently, measuring and promoting progress for black librarians has been piecemeal: when racial inequalities in one place are dealt with, unseen inequalities emerge in other places. This situation has been further exacerbated by recent federal policy as expressed in three separate Supreme Court cases: Adams vs. Richardson, DeFunis vs. Odegaard, and The Regents of the University of California vs. Allan Baake. In the Adams vs. Richardson case, nine southern states and the state of Pennsylvania were charged with continually operating dual systems of higher education that effectively channeled black college students into predominantly or historically black colleges and white students into historically white institutions. The unresolved question which still exists currently is the degree to which designated states have complied with specific aspects of a court order handed down in June of 1973 pertaining to the enrollment of black students in graduate and professions) schools.63 Both the DeFunis case (1974) and the Baake case (1978) challenged the legitimacy of special programs designed to enhance opportunities for minorities and thus rectify the consequences of past patterns of discrimi- nation. The opinion of Justice Powell, writing for the Supreme Court, does not say how racial equality is to be measured and pursued. The Court says simply that it should be neither measured nor pursued on the basis of "race" alone unless stipulated by Congress. Educators may "take race into consideration" in making policy, but they may not use race as the sole criterion for the measurement or remediation of inequality.64 Further clarification of this point of view is found in the currently proposed executive order supported by President Reagan on the issue of affirmative action. Although dealing with hiring practices rather than educational issues, it reflects the notion the federal government, at least, desires no special programs based on race to rectify past discriminatory practice, and in fact, wishes to prohibit such programs in the future.65 Although the order has not taken affect as yet and its provisions are too ambiguous to permit precise projections of its impact on equal oppor- tunity for blacks, the potential impact in all spheres of national life, including higher education, are enormous. It is apparent that when the federal government pulls back its efforts in affirmative action, so do institutions of higher education.66 244
The Educating of Black Librarians The problems facing the recruitment of black students into li- brarianship are thus rooted in Supreme Court decisions and Presidential policy as well as problems inherent in the profession itself. A major problem is suggested in declining enrollments. Librarianship has serious difficulties in competing with professions with earning capacities so much greater than that earned by librarians. In general, librarians are under- paid for the services they perform, and increasing librarian salaries is not a matter of priority in most institutional settings. This poses a major threat to efforts to attract strong individuals of any race to the profession. The limited or dwindling pool of black applicants suggests that re- cruitment policy can no longer rely on a potential large pool of college students from the humanities and social sciences. That group of students is declining in number.67 It is now necessary for schools of librarianship to establish outreach programs and implement stronger recruitment ac- tivities in the high schools so that information about the field can be disseminated early to help secondary school students make appropriate career decisions. There are also problems of retention in some institutions because of the lack of preparation, weak study skills, communication inadequacies, and writing deficiencies of some students. In addition, there are problems that relate to alienation and isolation within schools in which black students are in very small numbers and without psychological support, cultural re- inforcements and social bonds, in what can be perceived as an unwelcome or hostile environment.68 Of special note is the role faculty members may play in fostering such a negative environment. Regardless of the mo- tivating forces that may cause such a situation to exist, it can only be remedied through skillful institutional and societal intervention. The problem of financial aid will also continue to exist as long as the average income of black families is only 78 percent of the income of white families.69 Many black students believe they cannot attend school without financial aid. Yet the $ 1 8 billion federal student aid budget has fluctuated by nearly $2 billion since 1981, when Congress began to phase out the educational benefits available under Social Security programs and put new restrictions on eligibility for guaranteed student loans.70 Library schools need to recognize that to enroll black students, they have to provide generous scholarship assistance. Funds can come from the schools themselves as well as foundations, business firms, and individual donors. And despite cutbacks, federal government programs, including Title II-B, can be utilized by some. Subsidization of graduate library education should be based, of course, on both need and merit. But full financing of minority students should be based most extensively on a professional commitment to seeking out and 245
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science producing black librarians, as a way of encouraging diversity in the profession.71 AN APPRAISAL Any overall appraisal of the black experience with library science education is impossible at this stage because large scale participation is so recent. A few general conclusions can, however, be stated. On the negative side, from the point of view of blacks, a strong indictment is surely in order. First, it is a fact that for the one hundred years in which professional library science education has been in exis- tence, schools of library science, with the exception of course of the special schools for blacks, showed little evidence, until recently, of any sense of responsibility to educate black librarians. Second, it can hardly be claimed that library science education for all it has attempted to do recently, has yet achieved a state of integration. One school is still educating 50 percent of all black librarians. It is not possible in such a situation to gain full respect for the black librarian experience when the profession at large is so isolated from that experience. There are nonetheless,, some positive things one can say about the historical development of library science education for blacks. There can, for example, be little doubt, that it has been largely responsible for the development of black leadership in the library profession, and this lead- ership has claimed some of the leadership in librarianship generally. The visibility of black library leaders can be used to encourage other blacks to consider entering the library profession. Such a goal can be realized, however, only if the social, economic, and educational barriers against access to equal professional schooling are eliminated. That is most likely to occur with sustained library leadership, some federal and state support and cooperation between library schools and private funding sources, combined with a genuine commitment to equality of opportunity. Equal opportunity must be a priority at every step of the decision process to recruit, admit, and educate black librarians. This means doing more than waiting to see what school enrollment figures look like at the end of an academic year, and responding hastily, after the fact, to any inequities identified. It is time for library schools to take an active role in ensuring the equity of all institutional processes. In the view of this writer, such a step would be a powerful force toward development of better library service for all. References and Notes 1. Dalton, J.: Library Education in the Southeast Since World War II. In: Library Education in the Southeast Since World War II and University Libraries and Change: Proceedings of Two Symposia Sponsored in Honor of Louis Round Wilson's 1 00th Birthday. Chapel Hill, School of Library Science and University Library, 1976, p. 22. 246
The Educating of Black Librarians 2. Vann, S.K.: Training for Librarianship Before 1923: Education for Librarianship Prior to the Publication of Williamson's Report on Training for Library Service. Chicago, ALA, 1961; Davis, D.G.Jr.: The Association of American Library Schools, 1915-1968: An Analytical History. Metuchen, NJ, Scarecrow, 1976; Carroll, C.E.: The Professionalization of Education for Librarianship With Special Reference to the Years 1940-1960. Metuchen, NJ, Scarecrow, 1970; Churchwell, CD.: The Shaping of American Library Education. Chicago, ALA, 1975. 3. See for example Wilson, L.R. : Education for Librarianship - A New Opportunity in the South. In: Library Conference Held Under the Auspices of the Carnegie Corporation of New York and the General Education Board. Atlanta, Atlanta University, 1941, p. 17. 4. Pifer, A. : The Higher Education of Blacks in the United States. New York, Carnegie Corporation of New York, 1973. 5. Anders, M.E.: The Development of Public Library Service in the Southeastern States, 1895-1950. Dis- sertation, Columbia University, 1958, pp. 62-63. 6. Yust, W.F.: What of the Black and Yellow Races. ALA Bulletin, 7: 159-167, July 1913. 7. Pifer, ref. 4, p. 16. 8. Marshall, A. P.: The Black Librarian's Stride Toward Equality. In: Phinazee, A.L., ed.: The Black Librarian in the Southeast: Reminiscences, Activities, Challenges. Durham, NC, North Carolina Central University, 1980, p. 12. 9. Blue, T.F.: Apprenticeship Training for Negroes in the Louisville Free Public Library. Paper read at the ALA Conference, Work with Negroes Round Table, Detroit, 1922. Quoted in Wright, L.T.: Thomas Fountain Blue, Pioneer Librarian, 1866-1935. Master's Thesis, Atlanta University, 1955, p. 31. 10. Ibid., pp. 34-35. 1 1 . Bowles, F. and De Costa, F.A.: Two Worlds: A Profile of Negro Higher Education. New York, McGraw Hill. 1971. d. 37. 12. Carruthers, I.: Centennials of Black Miseducation: A Study of White Educational Management. Journal of Negro Education, 46:299, Summer 1971. 13. Shores, L.: Library Service to Negroes, Wilson Library Bulletin, 5:311, Jan. 1931. 14. Annual Report of the Board of Education for Librarianship, 1924-25. As quoted in Smith, S.L.: The Passing of the Hampton Library School. Journal of Negro Education, 9:51, Jan. 1940. 15. Bullock, H.A.: A History of Negro Education in the South: From 1619 to Present. New York, Praeger, 1970, p. 33. 16. Meier, A.: Negro Thought in America 1890-1915: Racial Idealogies in the Age of Booker T. Washington. Ann Arbor, The University Press. 1963, pp. 85-99. 17. Curtis, F.R.: Problems and Conditions which the Librarian Faced and the Progress which has been Made. In: Library Conference . . ., ref. 3, p. 67. 18. Jackson, W.V.: Negro Library Workers. Library Quarterly, 10:106, Jan. 1940. 19. Anders, M.E. : The Contributions of the Carnegie Corporation and the General Education Board to Library Development in the Southeast. Master's Thesis, University of North Carolina, 1950, p. 26. 20. Gleason, E.A.: Negro Libraries and Librarianship, 1945. Atlanta University Library School Library vertical file, (typed copy). 21. Jackson, W.V.,: Florence Rising Curtis. Library Journal, 69:1060, Dec. 1, 1944. 22. Du Mont, R.R.: Race in American Librarianship: Attitudes of the Library Profession. Journal of Library History, in press. 23. Curtis, F.R.: Librarianship as a Field for Negroes. Journal of Negro Education, 4:94, Jan. 1935. 24. Jones, V.L.: A Dean's Career. In: Josey, E.J., ed: The Black Librarian in America. Metuchen, NJ, Scarecrow, 1970, pp. 26-27. 25. Curtis, ref. 23, p. 95. 26. See Jones' comments on this problem in A Dean's Career. . ., ref. 24, p. 28. 27. Curtis, ref. 23, p. 95. 28. Templeton, Charlotte to Sarah CM. Bogle, March?, 1931. ALA Archives. 29. Curtis, ref. 23, p. 96. 30. Bogle, Sarah CM. to Louis R. Wilson, Feb. 4, 1931. ALA Archives. 31. TemDleton to Bode, ref. 28. 32. Ibid. 33. Conference on Training for Librarianship for Negroes. Chapel Hill, NC, March 5, 1931. Transcript of meeting. ALA Archives. 34. Ibid. 247
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 35. Ibid. 36. Foreman, Clark to Louis R. Wilson, March 26, 1931. ALA Archives. According to the Foreman letter, the Hampton Library School budget for the 1930-31 academic year included $12,500 contributed by the Carnegie Corporation, $5,500 contributed by the Rosenwald Fund and only $2,450 contributed by Hampton Institute. The total income of the school for its 14 years existence was $21 1,922; the Carnegie Corporation gave $155,000 of that amount. See Anders, ref. 19, footnote 18, p. 26. 37. Barker, T.D.: Memorandum on the Need in the South for a Library School for Negroes. Chicago, Board of Education for Librarianship, ALA, 1939. ALA Archives. 38. Ibid. 39. Ibid., p. 4. 40. One of these institutions was Hampton Institute. The Carnegie Corporation continued to give financial support to Florence Rising Curtis "for the training of Negro librarians" even after the library school had officially closed its doors. See Carnegie Corporation Annual Report, 1938-1939, p. 22. 41. Barker, ref. 37, p. 42. 42. lackson, Wallace Van to Anita M. Hostetter, Feb. 12, 1940. ALA Archives. 43. Ibid. 44. Lester, Robert M. to Rufus Clement, Oct. 18, 1940. ALA Archives. 45. Clement. Rufus to Florence Risine Curtis. Oct. 31. 1940. Atlanta Universitv Archives. 46. Library School File, 1941-42. Atlanta University Archives. 47. Clement, Rufus to Robert M. Lester, Aug. 17, 1940. Atlanta University Archives. 48. Ibid. When Atlanta opened, the points of cooperation agreed upon with Emory included the shared purchase of expensive and unusual material; the shared use of material; the sharing of expenses for invited lecturers; the sharing of expenses for film rental and purchase; and the offering of "two lectures by Emory University faculty" at Atlanta. Library School File, 1940-41. Atlanta University Archives. 49. Crumpton, K.: The School of Library Science at North Carolina Central University. In: The Black Librarian . . ., ref. 8, pp. 276-277. 50. Phinazee, A.L.: "The Education of Black Librarians in the Southeast." Paper presented to Library History Interest Group, Association of American Library Schools, Jan. 31, 1981. 51. Crumpton, ref. 49, p. 277. 52. Phinazee, ref. 50. 53. Ibid. 54. Blackwell, J.E.: Mainstreaming Outsiders: The Production of Black Professionals. Bayside, NY, General Hall, Inc., 1981, p. 17. 55. ALA Ad Hoc Committee on Opportunities for Negro Students in the Library Profession Progress Report to the ALA Executive Council, June 27, 1967. ALA Archives. 56. Ibid. 57. Ibid. 58. Ad Hoc Committee on Opportunities for Negro Students in the Library Profession [to graduate schools of library science], May 26, 1967. ALA Archives. 59. DeLoach, M.L.: "The Impact of Title II-B on Minority Recruitment." Paper presented to Library History Interest Group, Association of American Library Schools, Ian. 31, 1981. 60. Totten, H.L.: A Summary and Evaluation of Minority Programs in Selected Graduate Library Schools. Journal of Education for Librarianship, 18:18-34, Summer 1977. 61. DeLoach, M.L.: The Higher Education Act of 1965, Title II-B: The FellowshipslTraineeships for Training in Library and Information Science Programs: Its Impact on Minority Recruitment in Library and Information Science Education. Dissertation, University of Pittsburgh, 1980. 62. A Disparity Exists . . ., Library Journal, 110:43, Aug. 1985. 63. Blackwell, ref. 54, p. 30. 64. Morris, L.: Elusive Equality: The Status of Black Americans in Higher Education. Washington, DC, Howard University Press, 1979, p. 2. 65. Davidson, J.D., and Watkins, L.M.: Quotas in Hiring are Anathema to President Despite Minority Gains. Wall Street Journal, Oct. 24, 1985, p. 1 + . 66. Evans, G.: Social, Financial Barriers Blamed for Curbing Blacks' Access to College. Chronicle of Higher Education, Aug. 7, 1985, p. 1 + . 67. Ibid. 248
Teaching of Government Publications 68. Institute for the Study of Educational Policy: Equal Educational Opportunity for Blacks in U.S. Higher Education: An Assessment. Washington, DC, Howard University Press. 1976, chapter 3. 69. Statistical Abstracts of the United States 1984. Figure 716, p. 434. 70. Evans, ref. 66. 71. Robbins-Carter, Jane: Multi-cultural Graduate Library Education. Journal of Education for Li- brarianship, 18:312, Spring 1978.