The Community Engagement Model in Library and Information Science Education: A Case Study of a Collection Development and Management Course Bharat Mehra and William C. Robinson School of Information Sciences, University of Tennessee, 425 Communications Building, 1345 Circle Park Drive, Knoxville, TN, 37996. E-mail: bmehra@utk.edu, wrobinsi @gmail.com This article presents the Community Engagement Model (CEM) in library and informa- tion science (LIS) education based on a case study of a collection development and management course taught during two semesters involving thirty graduate students. Students partnered with self-selected community agencies to develop collections to meet the needs of particular audiences in varied community-based settings. The arti- cle also reviews the learning experiences from the perspectives of the instructor, stu- dents, and collaborating community representatives, including discussion of the course goals, assignments, methods, and community impact. Results show positive gains for both LIS students and the collaborating community agencies. LIS students gained an understanding of collection development variables at work in particular community-based information organizations. Community representatives reported that partnering with students made a positive difference in their agency owing to stu- dents' practical and timely choices, levels of knowledge and range of selections, and their consideration of financial and strategic factors relevant to the community. In a professional school, learning in community engagement activities places students in the field where they encounter challenges that make LIS work stimulating and fruitful. Additional examples of how to make community engagement a more effective part of the LIS curriculum are needed. The CEM presented in this article may help other LIS educators conceptualize their courses towards this goal. Keywords: Collection development and management, community engagement, Community Engagement Model, course case study. Introduction Contemporary trends in library and in- formation science (LIS) education call for adopting a community (or civic) engagement model to re-define tradi- tional notions of outreach and service that have been add-ons to LIS teaching, instruction, and research agendas (Har- ris, 2008; Riddle, 2003; Soska & Butterfield, 2004). According to the Higher Education Network for Commu- nity Engagement (2007): Increasingly, higher education institutions are intentionally connecting academic work to public purposes through exten- sive partnerships that involve faculty and students in active collaboration with communities. This idea of 'community engagement' is renewing the civic mis- sion of higher education and transform- ing academic culture in ways that are both exciting and challenging. (<][ 1) This does not imply that the community concept has been under-represented in LIS education as even a passing historical glance at the profession will reveal numer- ous examples and community-related J. of Education for Library and Information Science, Vol. 50, No. 1- Winter 2009 ISSN: 0748-5786 ©2009 Association for Library and Information Science Education 1 5
1 6 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE constructs, including: service learning, community informatics, participatory re- search, experiential learning, and commu- nity-based action research, to name a few (Ball, 2008; McCook, 2000a) integrated into LIS theory and praxis (e.g., civic li- brarianship) (McCabe, 2001) and com- munity librarianship (Muddiman, 1999). Each of these community-based concepts and practices have their ardent supporters and applicants of use in LIS education, as well as their own specific contexts of ap- plication, strengths, weaknesses, limita- tions, challenges, and desired outcomes (Durrance & Pettigrew, 2000; Slaymaker, Christiansen, & Hemming, 2005). Com- munity engagement, however, draws at- tention to the progressive, collaborative, and participatory elements of other com- munity-based practices in LIS education and captures a deeper library-community spirit based on democratic ideals and hu- manistic notions of equality, social eq- uity, and justice (Chatman & Pendleton, 1995; Gibson, 2006; McCook, 2000b; Mehra, in press). The teaching and learning of informa- tion creation, organization and dissemi- nation processes in LIS education provides significant opportunities for the application of community engagement principles and practices (Mehra, 2004). These practices promote various kinds of interaction between the students, instruc- tors and community members in LIS re- quired and elective courses, independent study, practica, student participation in community activities, and student in- volvement in externally funded projects (Grotzinger, 1 97 1 ; Mehra & Sandusky, in press; Monroe, 1981; Neill, 1975). This article reports on the implementation of community engagement in the collection development education process based on a case study of a course taught twice dur- ing consecutive semesters that required LIS students to partner with self-selected community-based agencies (e.g. non- profits, religious institutions, public and academic libraries, school media centers, etc.) to develop meaningful collections. The article also reviews the learning ex- periences from the perspectives of the in- structor, students, and collaborating community representatives, including discussion of the course goals, assign- ments, methods, and community impact. The student-community collaboration resulted in benefit for both the students and the community agencies. Students gained an understanding of the chal- lenges in applying collection develop- ment principles to particular agencies and communities. For example, commu- nity wants were often different than ex- pected. Existing collections were in fact adequate, but there were problems in physical and intellectual access. Reviews were required for selection, but were ei- ther not available or not useful. Financial resources were much more limited than expected. In responding to these circum- stances students learned how to integrate theory in practice, thereby effectively meeting the community's needs, wants, and aspirations (Roy, 2001; Yontz & McCook, 2003). Community representa- tives reported that collaborating with LIS students during the course made a posi- tive difference in the effectiveness of their service in meeting the needs of vari- ous constituencies in a timely, cost-effec- tive, efficient, and practical manner. For example, students had the energy, enthu- siasm, and time to develop collections otherwise undeveloped. Typically, stu- dents had subject background experience and knowledge that was lacking locally. Students had access to a research-exten- sive library with a wide variety of re- sources useful for developing and managing collections. Students were more familiar with non-traditional re- sources, including the use of Web 2.0 re- sources. Finally, students had immediate access to a faculty member with knowl- edge and experience. Socialization into the profession is an integral part of career success. Working with local information professionals,
The Community Engagement Model in Library and Information Science Education 1 7 seeing how and why they practice and the challenges they face is a valuable learn- ing experience. At the same time, local professionals have an opportunity to learn much more about contemporary professional education as well as the val- ues, interests, and skills of the next gener- ation of professionals. For the teacher, each development pro- ject - interacting with the student - pro- vided an opportunity to learn more about challenges and solutions as well as par- ticular problems, attitudes, and values in the communities. This current awareness sharpens the instructional focus and makes it immediate. The roles of an appropriate instructor, student, and community representative, as well as the dynamics of interaction be- tween them, are central to the success of community engagement efforts in LIS courses. An LIS instructor must be able to make decisions in conceptualizing and determining the relevance of community engagement between LIS students and community representatives in their courses. They must also be able to find creative solutions to provide a structured mechanism that may facilitate commu- nity engagement activities. The role of the student is to be dedicated to the task and develop a willingness to draw con- nections between LIS theory and prac- tice-based, process-oriented facts in collection development, based on the re- alities and dynamics of the community setting. An effective community repre- sentative is one who is willing to work with the student on an ongoing basis to provide contextual details about the col- lection and the agency. The interactions between the three players are most impor- tant to facilitate and make possible en- hanced student learning and achievement of community-based outcomes in collec- tion development. In a professional school, learning in community engagement activities places students in the field where they encounter challenges that make LIS work stimulat- ing and fruitful. Additional examples of how to make community engagement a more effective part of the LIS curriculum are needed. For LIS educators to orches- trate community-based activities in their academic courses requires further appli- cation of their skills and knowledge be- yond those practiced in traditional classrooms (Crandall & Gershenfeld, 2006; McCook, 2000b). Shared knowl- edge of varied community-based experi- ences builds a repertoire of effective tools, strategies, and praxis that extend each student's learning to achieve supe- rior results. Based on course experiences documented in this article, salient ele- ments of a community engagement model (CEM) are presented for future testing and application in other LIS courses that may contribute toward this goal. Representation of Community in LIS Education The term "community engagement" has historical significance since it re- flects ongoing efforts in LIS education, and in the American academy - espe- cially in land-grant educational institu- tions - to show the impact of their academic activities on the everyday expe- riences of lay people who support local, regional, and state colleges and universi- ties via their tax contributions (Barker, 2008; Reardon, 1998). Rhetoric sur- rounding a community engagement dis- course in academia has recently drawn some attention owing to political pres- sures to convince legislative representa- tives and decision-makers to continue (or increase) funding for centers of higher learning (Bender, 1997; Kezar, Cham- bers, & Burkhardt, 2005). The concept is believed, additionally, to challenge the general public perception of colleges and universities as isolated "ivory towers" disconnected from routine day-to-day pursuits (Etzkowitz, Webster, Gebhardt,
1 8 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE & Regina, 2000). Before discussing the CEM and its elements, it is appropriate to briefly trace the emergence of select the- matic threads of community found spe- cifically in the context of LIS education. This will contextualize contemporary trends of community engagement in LIS education as they are connected to their historical theoretical-and-praxis under- pinnings in the American academy. Historically, integration of commu- nity-based efforts in LIS education has been impacted by at least three signifi- cant domains of influence (if not more): • Broad trends in the American academy; • External developments from outside the LIS professions including those from other disciplines (e.g., education, community development, community networking, computer science, business and organizational management, etc.); and • Internal developments within the LIS professions (i.e., librarianship and information science research). An in-depth review of each commu- nity-based concept and method is beyond the scope of this discussion since each topic has been extensively addressed on its own terms; additionally, here the dis- cussion is not meant to be all-encompass- ing in its extent and inclusion of all community-based concepts and methods. The goal in this section is to provide rep- resentational evidence to show the influ- ence of various community-based concepts and methods in the LIS profes- sions, and thereby, on LIS education. The article acknowledges that there have been multiple sources and areas where some of these community-based concepts and methods may have been simultaneously developed and practiced over the years. The intention here is to present one mode of analysis in discussing the origins of the different community-based concepts and methods and their influence on LIS edu- cation. Broad Trends in the American Academy Service along with teaching and re- search are considered the three tradi- tional pursuits in the American academy (Kruecken, 2003). Most colleges and uni- versities in the United States have out- reach programs that advance knowledge in practical areas of concern such as agri- culture, the environment, human health and well-being, and community life by supporting research, education, and ex- tension activities (Baker, 1999; Kennedy, 1999). This mission has shaped service learning practices in the classroom where students partner with community repre- sentatives throughout or for a portion of the semester (Bringle & Hatcher, 1996; Jacoby & Associates, 1996) to enhance their professional skills and competen- cies while helping communities address, improve, and find solutions to their phys- ical, social, cultural, political, civic, eco- nomic, and moral problems (Boyer, 1990). Recent service learning efforts provide more systematic, scientific, and theory-based assessment beyond anec- dotal evidence collected in the past (Bringle & Hatcher, 2000; Cone & Har- ris, 1996; Giles & Eyler, 1998). Service learning has two forms. First, students, faculty, and university representatives play a leadership role in taking action to make improvements in local communi- ties; and second, students partner with community members as equals to facili- tate changes together, leading to greater capacity building in the community (Claus & Ogden, 1999; Schneidewind & Davidson, 1983; Wade, 1997). LIS educators have been influenced by the concept of service learning owing to shared socio-humanistic, community building, and service-related goals (McCook, 2000c). Several LIS faculty have documented their experiences in service learning, thereby clarifying its
The Community Engagement Model in Library and Information Science Education 1 9 scope and relevance (Elmborg et al., 2003; Peterson, 2003; Roy, 2001), and have provided case studies of service learning applications (Cuban & Hayes, 2001) in specific LIS courses (Becker, 2000; Witbooi, 2004). LIS practitioners in academic, public and other library set- tings have also shared perspectives while partnering with faculty in implementing service learning programs (Rhodes & Da- vis, 2001 ; Sweeney, 2002) and courses in information literacy, reference, collec- tion development, user instruction, and technology training. External Developments from Outside the LIS Professions Various community-based concepts, methods and approaches from outside the LIS professions have influenced and been integrated into LIS theory and prac- tice. For example, LIS history in the United States shows intertwining rela- tions between library service and educa- tional missions (Shores, 1935; Winsor, 1880) owing to their overlapping do- mains (e.g., information literacy, quest for knowledge and learning, critical thinking, student instruction, classroom involvement, and ties to the community; see Färber, 1974; Hardesty, Semiti, & Tucker, 1986). Melville Dewey (1876) wrote early on the view of the librarian as that of an educator during his times "when a library is a school, and the librar- ian is in the highest sense a teacher" (p. 5). Educational philosophies of the prag- matists (e.g., John, Dewey, Charles Sanders Pierce, William James, and Jane Adams) offered an important focus on ac- tive and practical learning applications and study of problems in context that have developed into specific approaches such as inquiry-based learning, experien- tial learning, service learning, etc. (Billig & Eyler, 2000; Kirschner, Sweller, & Clark, 2006). These have provided sev- eral opportunities to incorporate commu- nity into LIS activities (Bruce, 2008; Mehra, 2005). They have also influenced LIS educators and students to become "reflective practitioners" (Schon, 1996) and civically engaged professionals (Saltmarsh, 2005) who develop a "transformative link between the action of serving and the ideas and understanding of learning" (Eyler, Giles, & Schmiede, 1996, p. 14). The shared growth in LIS and education has contributed toward commu- nity and civic engagement in libraries and LIS education and expanded their role from passive bystanders to active partici- pants involved in reconnecting with local communities and developing library-com- munity convergences that further progres- sive changes and democratic ideals (Mehra & Srinivasan, 2007). Participatory action research (PAR) is another important community-based concept that has extended learning in LIS education and traditional research to pro- vide social justice and social equity out- comes at community-wide levels (Bishop, Mehra, Bazzell, & Smith, 2003; Mehra, Bishop, Bazzell, & Smith, 2002). PAR has its origins in Paulo Freire's philosophical and educational theories that critically reflect on the role of indi- viduals in society (Deans, 1999; Freire, 1974; Gaventa, 1993) and has involved the participation of socially disenfran- chised community members as equal pro- viders and beneficiaries in the process of conducting research (Brown, 1985; Fals-Borda, 1979). Applying principles of decentralization, deregulation, and co- operativeness in execution (Greenwood & Levin, 1998; Stringer, 1999), PAR is also practiced as action research that fo- cuses on the "social practice and its trans- formations, along with the changes that occur in the social institutions and rela- tionships that support it" (Kemmis & McTaggart, 1988; Mehra, 2006, p. 205). Both espouse developing assets in local communities towards community build- ing (Callaway, 1981; Maguire, 1987; Stanley & Wise, 1983), community de- velopment, and capacity-building out-
20 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE comes (Chavis & Wandersman, 1990; Kretzmann & McKnight, 1993). These values are finding real-world relevancy in the LIS professions to promote commu- nity action and further social changes to address the deep-rooted foundations of prejudice and discrimination that under- lie inequalities in the distribution of re- sources and power in our society (Mehra, 2005;Sohng, 1995). With the advent of computers in our everyday life since the closing decades of the last century, a number of terms have been used in different contexts (e.g., civic networking, community bul- letin boards, community computing, community information systems, com- munity telecomputers and telecommunity systems, FreeNets and CivicNets) to de- fine community networks in terms of the "use of computer network technology to address the needs of the community" in one form or another (Morino, 1994; Schüler, 1995). In their efforts to address community-wide inequities (Gurstein, 2000), community networks promote citi- zen participation, capacity building, dem- ocratic action, and intercommunity cooperation (Schüler, 1996). Community networks played a significant role in the 1990s in providing information and com- munication technologies (ICTs) to underserved populations and participating in national and local policy implementa- tion debates surrounding the issue of "dig- ital divides" as the obvious and troubling socioeconomic, sociopolitical, and socio-technological gaps between the haves and have-nots in computer owner- ship, Internet access, and ICT use (Lenz, Straubhaar, LaPastina, Main, & Taylor, 2000; National Telecommunications and Information Administration, 1999; Novak, Hoffman, & Venkatesh, 1998). Owing to recent struggles for survival by community networks that faced severe economic cut-backs and limited financial support, dwindling political backing, un- reliability of a volunteer-based workforce, lack of a permanent social and technical infrastructure, and competing pressures from commercial and business-oriented enterprises (Bishop, Tidline, Shoemaker, & Sálela, 1999; Virnoche, 1998), librar- ies and information agencies have adopted many of the functionalities and roles that were previously provided by these community networks, for example: computer workstations in library set- tings, provision of online community in- formation via the library's website, community information and referral ser- vices, electronic bulletin boards with local news announcements, electronic job placement services, digital communica- tion mechanisms, etc. (Pettigrew, Durrance, & Unruh, 2002). With strong ties to community networking, the recent emergence of "community informatics" as an interdisciplinary field of scholarship and practice provides progressive princi- ples and practices concerned with the use of ICTs to enable and empower individu- als and communities to meet their goals and expectations (Bishop & Bruce, 2005; Gurstein, 2004). Community informatics is also gaining currency in LIS education and other disciplines owing to its empha- sis on ICT use for democracy, community collaborations, and action for social change in real-life and virtual environ- ments (Bishop, Bruce, & Jones, 2006; Bruce & Bishop, 2007; Day & Schüler, 2004). Internal Developments within the LIS Professions Different trends and developments in li- brarianship and information science re- search have incrementally led to an integration of community-based represen- tations and practices in LIS education. The deep historical ties in the western world between libraries and their local communities emerged as a result of ser- vice-based ethics developed since the eighteenth century to meet the informa- tion needs of diverse users (Ranganathan, 1931 ; Shera, 1983). Initially, the library's
The Community Engagement Model in Library and Information Science Education 21 role was centered on information dissem- ination, providing access to information for different user communities, and help- ing them based on an understanding of their needs by application and use of in- formation organization, such as classifi- cation, and representational systems such as catalogs (Ray ward, 1994). The library as a service-oriented information re- source center that caters to the local com- munity's needs and its role as a referral agent to local community information further cemented the library's purpose as an information provider (Middleton & Katz, 1988; Rodger, Jorgensen, & D'Elia, 2005). This role has recently been extended with a focus on profes- sional values and ethics that place librari- anship in the context of civic engagement and outreach as a means to further de- mocracy (Kranich, 2005; Westney, 2006). The need to integrate commu- nity-based experiences in the LIS curricu- lum has also found favor, thereby bridging perceived gaps between theory and prac- tice in LIS education and developing a fo- cus on service-oriented fundamentals beyond information technologies and ac- cess to information (Dillon & Norris, 2005; Rothstein, 1967). A focus on user-centered issues in in- formation science research during the 1980s provided an unintentional trend that has resulted in current attention to community-based issues in the LIS pro- fessions, including LIS education. The emergence of the user-centered paradigm as an alternative (or addition) to sys- tem-focused research in developing more effective and usable computer systems in information sciences (Dervin & Nilan, 1986) provided impetus for more holistic approaches, as exemplified by the infor- mation seeking process model (Kuhlthau, 2004). To understand infor- mation problems, the first step in which was to consider human factors, such as information needs (Case, 2007; Dervin, 1992), cognition (Foreman-Wernet & Launterbach, 2003), affect (Nahl, 2007), and human information behavior (Belkin & Vickery, 1992; Marchionini, 1995) in information use environments (Taylor, 1991) as important in the assessment, evaluation, and improvement of informa- tion services (Dervin, 1982; Saracevic, Mokros, & Su, 1990). Recognizing the role of contextual factors, including cog- nitive, social, cultural, organizational, af- fective, and linguistic factors, in human information behavior (Pettigrew, Fidel, & Bruce, 2001) within specific informa- tion environments, such as workplace, home, and other public and private areas, and situational dynamics in the processes associated with people's interactions with various information systems and technologies (Schamber, Eisenberg, & Nilan, 1990) provided the next (possibly unintentional) step towards an expanded vision of community acknowledgement in information science research. It has also led to a growth in specific sub-do- mains of knowledge based on intersec- tions and convergences between internal user-centered developments in informa- tion science research and external changes in various disciplines, such as human-computer interaction from the in- tersection between psychology and com- puter science (Preece, Rogers, & Sharp, 2002; Dix, Finlay, Abowd, & Beale, 2003; Sears & Jacko, 2007), computer supported cooperative work in computer science and organizational behavior (Baecker, 1992; Harper, Palen, & Taylor, 2005; Randall, Harper, & Rouncefield, 2007), communities of practice in busi- ness management and organizational set- tings (Lave & Wenger, 1991; Wenger, 1999; Wenger, McDermott, & Synder, 2002), and others. Additionally, studies on the information divides within and across demographic groups in different societies (Chatman, 1996; Mehra, Mer- kel, & Bishop, 2004) have recently led to an acknowledgement of commu- nity-based dynamics in which underserved populations, libraries, infor- mation science research, and LIS educa-
22 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE tion are embedded (Hersberger, 2002; Van Dijk, 2005). A recent threat to libraries and infor- mation agencies has been to stay relevant and respond to the changing climate in the 21st century. As Casey and Savastinuk (2007) eloquently articulate: Change is everywhere ... the pace of that change somehow feels faster than ever before . . . because in many ways it is faster. . . . Technology has played a key role in this perception of change, but it is by no means the only factor. Shift- ing population centers, changing demo- graphics, and the cyclical ups and downs of the economic roller coaster all con- tribute to the change with which libraries must deal. (p. 1-2) Business 2.0 trends from management and organizational settings (Carter, 2007), and Web 2.0 technologies that al- low participatory, collaborative, and so- cial applications via the Internet (Kalakota & Robinson, 2000), have driven the development of a correspond- ing Library 2.0 model for information professionals to respond to constant con- temporary changes by purposeful in- volvement of users in the design and evaluation of library and information ser- vices (Crawford, 2006; Maness, 2006). LIS educators are beginning to recognize the potentials of involving commu- nity-based agencies in their efforts to pro- vide students with learning opportunities in the application of Library 2.0 strate- gies in their classroom environments and beyond (Naslund & Giustini, 2008). Only a few select community-based concepts and methods have been incorpo- rated in LIS research and education. In the years to come, LIS professionals will continue to promote community engage- ment in ways that integrate positive di- mensions from earlier community-based approaches to create holistic, demo- cratic, fair, equitable, and just informa- tion systems and services that are meaningful to all people, including those on the margins of society, and empower them to promote positive changes in their everyday lives. Course Description This article reports on IS 560 (Devel- opment and Management of Collec- tions), which was initially developed by Robinson in 1 972 to provide LIS students with best practice experience in develop- ing and managing collections. Since then, the same model has been used effec- tively by four different faculty members, including Mehra during the spring and fall 2007 in the School of Information Sciences (SIS) at the University of Ten- nessee (Mehra, 2007). During both se- mesters IS 560 was taught as a synchronous distance education course using Saba Centra 7.6, "an online learn- ing environment that combines a highly interactive virtual classroom learning, e-meeting, and web seminar platform with a learning content management system to deliver optimal blended learn- ing" (Saba Centra Suite, n.d., 1 2). In ad- dition, Blackboard 7.0 (Blackboard, n.d.) and e-mail provided asynchronous communication and information-sharing tools. Students enrolled in this course lived in a variety of communities and states with some far from Tennessee. This variety of experiences enriched class discussions and added depth to student learning. IS 560 is required for students in the school media track and is recommended for all students in the SIS program. IS 560 students are required to build a semes- ter-long partnership with a community organization or agency of their choice to create or extend a professionally devel- oped collection. Course content provides students with knowledge of the collec- tion development and management pro- cess with an emphasis on its core principles. Community-based projects enhance students' skills in how to apply collection development procedures in
The Community Engagement Model in Library and Information Science Education 23 dînèrent community and information or- ganization contexts. Students document details of their collection development work (e.g., community analysis or devel- oping an adoptable policy statement) in the form of web modules. The use of the Internet to share student work creates community awareness of LIS students' contributions while also encouraging stu- dents to improve their technological abil- ities and professional writing skills. The website record also provides an archival reference for future students in the course, and a history of community en- gagement in the program. Thirty students (21 students during spring 2007 and nine students during fall 2007) worked with a local community agency to develop 28 collections ( 1 9 col- lections were developed during spring 2007 and nine collections were devel- oped during fall 2007). The collections included a range of tangible and intangi- ble items in various formats. The collec- tion development project formed 60% of the final grade. In addition, students (1) analyzed the effectiveness of published reviews (15% of the final grade), (2) se- lected the single best item from a pool of similar items ( 1 5% of the final grade), (3) participated in class discussion (five per- cent of the final grade), and (4) submitted an essay on the lessons learned in devel- oping their collection with some empha- sis on challenges and effective strategies (five percent of the final grade). The nature of course delivery played a significant role in the instructor's deci- sions regarding course content, structur- ing the lectures and discussions, organizing the assignments, and assess- ing student work. For example, students could select a community organization or agency in their region based on their con- venience, interests, professional net- works, and their career development objectives. The dispersed nature of the student body in the course served as an opportunity for students to respond to their local realities, relate collection de- velopment to a community context, and share their regional experiences with each other in the electronic classroom. Table 1 summarizes the information about the partnering community agencies and the collections developed across the two semesters. Since the students were distance learners, their agencies were geographically dispersed across Arkan- sas, Georgia, Tennessee, and Virginia. The following is a brief discussion of two course activities: the use of "building blocks" to teach the collection develop- ment process, and student documentation of their collection development work in web modules. Both were particularly sig- nificant in facilitating community en- gagement and helping students develop specific web-based competencies. Building Blocks in the Collection Development Process The assignments in IS 560, done inde- pendently or in pairs, guided the students in the collection development process through eight step-by-step activity mod- ules, or building blocks. Students com- pleted each activity module by an assigned date. Six assignments each earned nine percent of the final grade while two assignments each earned three percent of the final grade. The purpose of these activity modules was to ensure that students made adequate progress in de- veloping their collections continuously throughout the semester. Topics of these activity modules included: • Assessing the community agency and its parent organization (as appropriate); • Building a sound rationale for their collection; • Conducting needs assessment and community analysis; • Constructing a collection development policy; • Assessing agency strengths and weaknesses; • Evaluating the existing collection;
24 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE Table 1 . Type of Community Agencies and the Subjects of the Collections. No. Type Count Location Subjects of the Collection 1. School media 10 Tennessee Elementary school: paranormal center/school (Chattanooga, Cordova, or supernatural; social sciences; library Knoxville, Madisonville) sciences; guided reading books; Virginia (Viginia Beach) childhood development; weather. Middle school: high interest materials, science and social studies. High school: cookery, archival materials. 2. Academic library 8 Arkansas (Searcy), Physical resource design; geol- (college/university) Georgia (Atlanta), ogy; school safety management; Tennessee (Knoxville). books on domestic birds; music instruction materials; Memphis music; English literature; Is- lamic studies. 3. Public library 4 Tennessee Personal finance; science; (Johnson City), Spanish language; children's Virginia (Falls Church, non-fiction. Newport News) 4. Religious 4 Tennessee (Knoxville, Free web resources on reli- institution Memphis) gions; Ecumenism and religious (e.g., church) studies; children/youth/adult in- terests. 5. Bookseller 1 Tennessee (Nashville) Graphic novels for chil- dren/young adults. 6. Non-profit 1 Tennessee (Nashville) Resources on helping with organization grief/loss for adopted children. • Selecting specific items for the collection; and • Promoting the collection. Breaking down the collection develop- ment process into these sequential build- ing blocks provided students with a conceptual and organizational frame- work for their semester-long engagement with the selected community agency. Fo- cused building blocks or activity modules made larger projects feasible by dividing them into smaller do-able parts that were more achievable. It also allowed for ef- fective utilization of student time and ef- forts in an outcome-oriented process where the tangible products were directly related to the needs of different commu- nity agencies and their constituencies. Students could build strong connections between core collection development principles and competencies and commu- nity use outcomes that directly made a real difference in people's lives. Student Documentation of their Work in Web Modules In addition to the sequential collection development assignments, IS 560 stu- dents also learned technical skills by building and uploading web modules of their work on the class website (IS 560
The Community Engagement Model in Library and Information Science Education 25 Class Project, 2007a; IS 560 Class Pro- ject, 2007b). Students completed their building block assignments based on spe- cific deadlines and deposited their work via Blackboard. The instructor provided students with comments, suggestions, and grades based on the work completed at this stage. Students had to revise their work based on the instructor's comments and upload it on an assigned server using a web template provided by the instruc- tor. Two percent of each grade was de- ducted if its revised module was not deposited on the website by the end of the semester. The experience in electronic social networking to develop the website and sharing a notable electronic product expanded the nature of learning. In order to facilitate this process, some prepara- tion tasks on the part of the instructor in- volved: demarcating space on a secure server for building the class website; cre- ating a web page that explained the pro- cess and listed the names of files for each student's individual building block; de- scribing and clarifying to students the se- cure file transfer process and the use of the SSH software via secure identifica- tion and password-protected procedures. Significant Learning Experiences This section discusses the role of com- munity context in the collection develop- ment process based on the perspectives of the instructor, students, and partnering community representatives. Community engagement is discussed in terms of the opportunities and challenges provided as a result of incorporating community ex- periences in the collection development process. Instructor Perspective Based on the experiences in IS 560, Ta- ble 2 lists opportunities and challenges in incorporating community engagement during each building block activity mod- ule in the collection development pro- cess. On the whole, working with com- munity organizations or agencies in their local environments provided students with realistic and rewarding professional experiences. Community-based projects gave students opportunities to build and extend their professional relationships, LIS competencies, and management skills. Since students shared their experi- ences with one another through a website, the breadth of learning was sub- stantial. Opportunities varied. Some stu- dents (40%) developed collections for organizations where they had existing re- lationships, including clerical or paraprofessional responsibilities. Often, these students had inside knowledge that informed their collection development decisions. This was shared with others. Major challenges students noted in- cluded: limited knowledge of the agency's policies, politics, and practices and difficulty in learning particulars; dif- ficulty in identifying appropriate scope of work within the semester's time-bound course expectations; and, lack of skills in developing community contacts and rela- tionships. Student Perspective Students provided informal feedback throughout the course and formal com- ment at the end of the semester. The course averaged 4.0/5.0 for the two se- mesters using a standard course assess- ment instrument. Statements regarding the role of community engagement in creating course opportunities and chal- lenges taken from the 24 student re- sponses to open-ended questions were ranked. Students identified opportunities fo- cused on: the practical nature of working with real and individually selected col- lections (ranked first); the process of breaking down collection development into achievable and easily understood steps (ranked second); connections be- tween theory and practice (ranked third
26 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE <d u CD o u _c c CD Q_ _O <D CD Q u _CD "Õ U c 4-» CD CD DO 03 DO LU 'E E o u *o _CD O 0¿ CN _ÇD _Q |2 </> m ni .E . ^ § "g </> <u S m S <u.è" . g « 3 - I ë âïgii §E§ III! Ili «filili 1 &-SÎ les g 5 i g-i-'s-i-s 2 SP o - T3 ë - -oo-(uE^mo°- *Z € . i^° Í&.-SÍÍJ! c £ iß 1 I â -S 1 & E 2 S .E r ~ >. 2 1 1 E 8 y ^ m« I -s ^ t i "i O 225I&3-ÕEO o2-OoCtc(üc> E y ? m« ^ t O o2-OoCtc(üc> o ? ,; J 3 « c TO-ÇcP(o>rï>.a) w o .£ Ä ,; « w c ^ _i£(o£-aQ-£-o-u .9- "g « ob 1 ? 3 1Í « § -o I |¿ ■ S i f s s «I. | üiníü.iiU I Ili fi! ¡niUUì Ä- 5^^^ c ä5 - .-2 o -s g, « c °- §2-õb>.--5-õ5j "^So-^ g </>S¡2 oj(J^^ Ä^^^S - ■oë « ^ K oo.y'g -o iß-s-S ~ .s "i 81 g J| -1 ïll^H a-0uro<íl0EUn!Sn)n3X = O 3 tí vS >« ■g E £ ^ -s = o E « « -S >. o = 3- I |-ol S" iß = § ^8 "? S I il <o3O cû -tz Uo3u U « ô
The Community Engagement Model in Library and Information Science Education 27 a; I 2 u c a» E Q_ _O CD CD Û C u _ÇD "5 U c c cd E a; DJO CO DJO c LLJ 4-> 'c D E o U *4- O o TÍ a> #c '4-» c o CN _a; |2 ai «. - g5 n -C CD CD • - Ht n fi CD 1 1 111 Jill I & ? c S *¿ '3! <5 o S ï^ ? 13 JP c *¿ <5 o a;^"3 > S8^§^ a;^"3 o.| g; "S 8 > u »lui ^rs-si *- I« I c -r ? ? s è 8 !fr filli ! -lOaJoJ U ai Q. ^ S. cy^ gP C "" c & >. 00 c C /, C c "D -Q c 5 ^ /, O C ° c "D 3 - -Q Í '35 c °cc^c:c^_> o_^u^q3oj DDCDcDm"~a3O"O Ql - CDCD^- - llllüili iïllïl iS 45 ■q.-q.^ 2-2E ¿^ÎUSS C ÛJD C '43 j¿ .b cd aí u "K ~ = J2 >- 'x ^ c fi u co u cd >E o u i|ï. 1 is lí 1 f J I f .1 ?1 f î ÛÛ t/> tr'rv C ro t^ '+3 CD O '+-1 j? J= S >O (D o " "Ü 6 Z lo vD h>! ' oó
28 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE and fourth); representation of uniqueness and flexibility in tailoring to each stu- dent's needs (ranked fifth and sixth); de- velopment of critical thinking and writing skills (ranked seventh); learning to strategize an approach for professional development (ranked eighth and ninth); and, learning from the experiences of other students and guest speakers about their collection development process (ranked tenth). Categories of intellectu- ally stimulating aspects that contributed most to student learning included: per- ceived beneficial outcomes owing to in- tersections between course content (theory), real community-based settings (hands-on practice), and the use of build- ing blocks via the course assignments (structured mechanism to orchestrate community engagement). Students identified challenges in learn- ing focused on: building a community partnership (ranked first); difficulty in finding an appropriate collection to de- velop (ranked second); relating assign- ment expectations to their project work (ranked third); completing their assign- ments (ranked fourth); and developing their web modules (ranked fifth). De- tracting course aspects that took away from student learning involved: practical issues of planning and time commitment in building community relationships that intruded into students' work and personal life schedules; and, development of in- formation competency skills that often required making difficult and implicit connections between theory and practice. Students' suggestions for course im- provement included enhanced student in- teraction and involvement during class time, better sharing of their project devel- opment during break-out sessions and group activities, and having guest speak- ers on subject collections. Additionally, students offered feedback especially rele- vant in the context of delivering a dis- tance education course. For example, some students suggested the use of online tools beyond applying them for informa- tion sharing and communication pur- poses. These students wanted electronic classroom participation of the commu- nity representatives they were working with so that the community representa- tives could share their community-based experiences and provide feedback about working with the students in collection development activities. Feedback received from students after the course was over indicated that stu- dents found the step-by-step process to collection development very useful in demonstrating how the principles they learnt in class transferred to a "real life" project. Additionally, students found that developing small collections worked within the time frame of 14-15 weeks in the semester, especially since many of them had no previous experience devel- oping collection development policies. Students indicated that they found the process of developing a small collection helpful, and that they expected to be able to replicate the building blocks when building larger collections in the future. Some students who were in paraprofessional roles while taking the course reported that while engaging in the collection development process for their class project, they simultaneously applied the process to other collections in their work settings. Working on a smaller collection in class made the task of apply- ing principles and process to larger col- lections much easier to manage. Community Perspective The authors contacted community rep- resentatives by email at least six months after the students were enrolled in the course to provide feedback about IS 560 students' work for their agencies. Nine- teen out of the 28 contacted provided de- tailed feedback about the students' efforts in the course. They included stu- dents' supervisors, paraprofessional and professional staff, patrons, primary, sec- ondary, and/or tertiary audiences using
The Community Engagement Model in Library and Information Science Education 29 the individual student's partnering li- brary or information agency. Community representatives expressed a high level of satisfaction and gratitude for student in- volvement in developing collections for their various community agencies. Indi- vidual students were commended for their practical and timely choices, levels of knowledge and range of selections, and their consideration of various factors relevant to the community while develop- ing policies for the agencies, such as fi- nancial constraints, lack of resources, needs/wants of specific patrons, and stra- tegic directions of the institution. For ex- ample, one community representative appreciated the informal (yet organized) approach adopted by a student in working with various audiences in the community to query them about their information needs to enrich, reinforce, and modify the existing collection. Some students in paraprofessional roles within the com- munity agency where their projects were completed were especially commended regarding how they applied their knowl- edge from the course to further their pro- fessional careers, get job offers, and subsequently improve their performance in professional job responsibilities after the class was over. All community repre- sentatives reported that collaborating with the student during the course had made a positive difference in the life of their agency and extended its role and ser- vice provision in novel and enriching ways. For example, one community rep- resentative reported that the partnering student's collection development efforts on social science curriculum materials in an elementary school setting resulted in children's improved reading habits and increased standardized test scores after just one year. Some challenges that were identified in the student-community agency partnering process included time constraints, rigor owing to the specific collection's subject, and limited avail- ability of resources. For example, one community representative appreciated the student's suggestions for her agency's collection and lamented that the work had to be "kept on the side" owing to a lack of financial resources to purchase items rec- ommended by the student. One commu- nity representative perceived that the small number of items (15-20 items or more) that the students were assigned to select was a limitation when a selector might be expected to evaluate a collection of thousands of books, and do so in a short time. A Community Engagement Model The use of building blocks in the col- lection development process proved to be invaluable as a pedagogical tool in facili- tating community engagement partner- ships between the IS 560 students and the different community agencies. Experi- ences in this course case study provided positive evidence to support the use of building blocks as a structuring and methodological tool in the teaching of collection development and the manage- ment of community engagement prac- tices in the classroom. The instructor, students and community representatives found the use of building blocks worth- while, especially in the enactment of community engagement during the teaching of a synchronous distance edu- cation course where their application made a big difference in overcoming per- ceived limitations of electronic/online classes. Based on experiences documented in this course, analysis of scholarly litera- ture on related community-based topics, and a critical reflection on our teaching strategies and efforts over the years, we present the CEM to initiate dialogue on use and application of community-based practices in the LIS curriculum. The goal in adopting the CEM is to pro- vide a broader philosophical point of view that may replace service learning and "service-based" ethics in LIS educa-
30 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE Table 3. Community Engagement Model in Collection Development. Element "Building Block" Implementation 1. Critical and reflective Assessing the Identified limitations and gaps research training students community agency in the existing collections; to question traditional LIS and its parent Proposed collections to help values, practices, organization; Building agency achieve greater ideologies, and processes a sound rationale for success. while immersed in the collection. community-based realities. 2. Contextualization of Building a sound Understood everyday practices students' course work in rationale for the to identify potential impact in the everyday experiences collection; the life of the patrons (and the of community members to Conducting needs agency). acknowledge imbalanced assessment and circumstances. community analysis. 3. Recognition of Conducting needs Applied data-collection traditionally identified assessment and methods to document user "users" as equals. community analysis. feedback about their experiences in use of LIS collections. 4. Emphasis on social justice Constructing a Took action to propose change and social equity collection via policy development; outcomes via action to development policy; Identified user-centered change imbalances in Assessing agency facilitating/ inhabiting distribution of resources, strengths and variables to evaluate agency information, and power. weaknesses. strengths and weaknesses and proposed changes. 5. Application of change Evaluating the Facilitated analysis and agency and collection; Selecting compilation of users' feedback empowerment to facilitate specific items for the to evaluate and select people's own efforts for collection appropriate items. making changes and improvements in their circumstances. tion and the American academy at large. Traditional approaches to "service" and "outreach" are inappropriate for the 21st century since they may be associated with a missionary zeal that considers lo- cal communities outside the realm of mainstream discourse and practices, and therefore, needy and impoverished re- quiring service to uplift their downtrod- den existences (Mehra, in press). "Community engagement," on the other hand, is both rhetorically neutral, and combines and draws attention to the in- tertwining of the concepts of collabora- tion, ongoing action-oriented activities, community building, and learning to- gether, elements that other commu- nity-based concepts - such as experiential learning, action research, and participatory action - may lack. Community engagement implies a less academic and focused approach than
The Community Engagement Model in Library and Information Science Education 31 community informatics or Library 2.0, in favor of a more holistic and integrated ef- fort that connects teaching, research, conventional service, and student partici- pation in community collaborations to achieve socially-relevant outcomes. The agenda in a CEM is to acknowl- edge, represent, and further the applica- tion of the concept of diversity in real, tangible and meaningful ways via com- munity-based activities that facilitate collaborations between students and community representatives to achieve mutually-defined objectives and expecta- tions. This requires recognizing the value of the assets and skills of community par- ticipants and taking into account the change agency and efficacy power within the capacity of each human being. The proposed CEM incorporates the follow- ing elements to demonstrate its demo- cratic and participative ideology: 1. Critical and reflective research that trains students to question traditional LIS values, practices, ideologies, and processes while immersed in commu- nity-based realities (Habermas, 1993; McClure & Hernon, 1991); 2. Contextualization of students' course work in the everyday experiences of community members to acknowledge imbalanced circumstances; 3. Recognition of "users" (patrons or cus- tomers) as equals who are experts in their own ontologies, circumstances, experiences, and practices since others do not possess this knowledge (Mehra, 2005); 4. Emphasis on social justice and social equity outcomes via action to change imbalances in distribution of resources, information, and power (Mehra, 2006); and 5. Application of change agency and em- powerment to facilitate people's own efforts for making changes and im- provements in their circumstances (Mehra, Albright, & Rioux, 2006). It is important to note that it may not be possible to incorporate and apply the five elements equally in each course. The main objective is for LIS educators to consider the elements of the CEM as they begin thinking about community engage- ment as an option while developing con- tent in their LIS courses. Table 3 summarizes the application of the CEM in IS 560. Each element of community engagement is analyzed in terms of the building block that most favored its ap- plication and its implementation. Though there are various opportunities in the LIS classroom to integrate students' efforts in community engagement, such as inde- pendent study, practica, student partici- pation in community-based initiatives, and different forms of community-based action research projects in elective and required courses, this article analyzes the CEM only in the context of the collection development activities that formed part of IS 560. Teaching IS 560 provided the instruc- tors with initial opportunities to explore the application of elements from the CEM with some degree of success. The use of building blocks provided an effec- tive strategy to streamline the community engagement activities. These efforts can be further strengthened in future teaching iterations by incorporating greater de- grees of additional and ongoing interac- tions between the LIS students and community agencies in terms of their quantity, quality, intensity, and impact. Immersed in their community-based settings, IS 560 students were constantly relating the course content and the collec- tion development and management pro- cess to their community-based experiences and realities. First, students regularly informed their community agencies about applying lessons from the classroom to address existing problems they encountered in the real professional work situations. Second, students' partic- ipation in class during the course indi- cates that their learning of theory was
32 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE also getting informed and modified by their community-based experiences. They critically reflected on their knowl- edge/experiences in the classroom and community-based environment to gain a better understanding that ultimately re- sulted in the development of a collection that was meaningful and useful to the col- laborating community agencies and their audiences. Students' critical reflections on existing LIS values, practices, ideolo- gies, and processes in their commu- nity-based settings were most significant in the early stages of project develop- ment, when they were able to assess the community agency in terms of its exist- ing limitations and gaps in the collections in order to propose changes that would help the community agency achieve greater success in service provision. Un- derstanding and contextualizing their collection development work in the ev- eryday practices of the community agency helped students develop a sound rationale to justify their collections; the needs assessment and community analy- sis provided a deeper understanding of users' everyday information seeking be- haviors and collection use practices. Stu- dents recognized the staff at the community agency as peers and superi- ors, while gathering user feedback helped them to recognize that the patrons and au- diences in the community agency were also equals, since they were providing students with information the students did not have otherwise. Developing an actual policy statement and listing vari- ous strengths and weaknesses of the com- munity agency from a user's perspective provided action-oriented social justice outcomes in the course. The role of the student was that of a facilitator, analyzing and compiling users' feedback, to evalu- ate and select appropriate items and pro- pose improvements to the collection. Conclusion This article highlighted community en- gagement experiences in an LIS course from the perspectives of its instructor, students, and partnering community rep- resentatives about the role of community engagement in the collection develop- ment process. There is a need for docu- menting other LIS instructors' strategies in incorporating community engagement activities in their required or elective courses to further understand the signifi- cance and relationship of community in the teaching and practice of library and information work. The use of building blocks in IS 560 proved to work well in managing community engagement and directing student learning of the collec- tion development process. Building blocks may be translatable to the contexts of other LIS courses that have potential to incorporate community engagement ac- tivities. Documenting socially-relevant out- comes and community engagement in LIS courses is a first and essential step in gaining a critical self-reflective view of the role of the profession in community building and community development ef- forts (Gupta, Koontz, Massisimo, & Savard, 2006). Showcasing LIS teaching and research involving communities is important to address negative public per- ceptions about the limited role LIS pro- fessions play in society, and will also promote a deeper understanding of users' interactions with knowledge, since users are immersed in their specific commu- nity's values and practices (Afzal, 2008; Buckland, 2003). Adopting a CEM that integrates connections between educat- ing the next generation of information professionals, best practice-oriented re- search, and community-based activities in the LIS curriculum will also help ex- tend the profession beyond its traditional roles as information organizers and disseminators to information providers engaged in making community-wide so- cial changes (Freeman & Hovde, 2003). Community engagement is important for the survival of the LIS professions since
The Community Engagement Model in Library and Information Science Education 33 it can provide a competitive edge over other information-related practitioners, such as book manufacturers and publish- ers, web designers, and computer and software engineers (Landau, 2008). Hence, proactive business practice calls for a strategic marketing vision to pro- mote the profession as a key player in community building (Owens, 2003). Given successful documentation of re- search studying the impacts of commu- nity engagement activities in LIS courses, it is now an opportune time for LIS professionals to get involved in ex- tensive community action and commu- nity engagement initiatives. To build upon an old collection development statement, providing the right content to the right person at the right time can be a dramatic and life-changing event. Com- munities depend upon content availabil- ity to make good social, economic and political decisions. Community engagement recognizes these realities and presents a strategic ap- proach that draws closer ties between teaching, research and service missions in the American academy. Community engagement in the IS 560 classroom pro- vided students with opportunities to learn from their participation in real-life com- munity-based projects that helped them make stronger connections between theo- retical constructs and everyday practice. LIS has the opportunity to take a leader- ship role to further community engage- ment activities and discard outdated service/outreach rhetoric that represents ego-centric and imbalanced power reali- ties. Acknowledgements Many thanks to the community repre- sentatives and LIS students in the two sections of the course reported in this ar- ticle for sharing their experiences and perspectives. The authors want to thank Dr. Suzie Allard and Dr. Kimberly Black for sharing their syllabi and experiences in teaching this course. We thank Cindy Lancaster (SIS Coordinator of Technol- ogy Services) for her assistance in setting up the technological infrastructure for the class website. The authors would like to thank the reviewers of an early version of this article that was presented as a juried paper at the Association for Li- brary and Information Science Education 2008 Annual Conference. We also con- vey our appreciation to the two anony- mous reviewers for sharing their comments that strengthened the content and quality of this article. References Afzal, W. (2008). Community, identity, and knowl- edge: A conceptual framework for LIS research. Library and Information Science Research Elec- tronic Journal, 18('). Retrieved November 2, 2008, from http://libres.curtin.edu.au/libresl8nl/ waseem article mbw2 Ess&Op rev. pdf. Baecker, R. M. (1992). Readings in groupware and computer-supported cooperative work: Assisting human-human collaboration (interactive technol- ogies). San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann. Ball, M. A. (2008). Practicums and service learning in LIS education. Journal of Education for Library Science, 49(1), 70-82. Baker, E. (1999). Principles of practice for aca- demic/practice/community research partnerships. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 76(1), 86-93. Barker, D. (2008). From service learning to the scholarship of engagement: A taxonomy of civic renewal in American higher education. Paper pre- sented at the Annual Meeting of the American Po- litical Science Association, Hilton Chicago and the Palmer House Hilton, Chicago, September 2, 2004. Retrieved November 2, 2008, from http: //www.allacademic.com/meta/p59505_index. html. Becker, N. J. (2000). Service learning in the curricu- lum. Journal of Education for Library and Infor- mation Science, 41(4), 285-293. Belkin, N. J., & Vickery, A. ( 1 985). Interaction in in- formation systems (Library and Information Sys- tems Research Report 35). London: British Library. Bender, T. ( 1 997). Intellect and public life: Essays on the social history of academic Intellectuals in the United States. Baltimore, MD.: Johns Hopkins University Press. Billig, S. H., & Eyler, J. (Eds.) (2000). Deconstruct-
34 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE ing service-learning: Research exploring context, participation, and impacts (Advances in Ser- vice-Learning Research). Charlotte, NC: Infor- mation Age Publishing. Bishop, A. P., & Bruce, B. C. (2005). Community in- formatics: Integrating action, research and learn- ing. Bulletin of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 31(6). Re- trieved November 2, 2008, from http://www.asis. org/Bulletin/Aug-OS/bishopbruce.html. Bishop, A. P., Bruce, B. C, & Jones, M. C. (2006). Community inquiry and informatics: Collabora- tive learning through ICT. Journal of Community Informatics, 2(2). Retrieved November 2, 2008, from http://ci -journal. net/index. php/ciej/article/ view/349/253. Bishop, A. P., Mehra, B., Bazzell, I. & Smith, C. (2003). Participatory action research and digital libraries: Reframing evaluation. In A. P. Bishop, N. Van House, & B. Buttenfield (Eds.). Digital li- brary use: Social practice in design and evalua- tion (pp. 161-190). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Bishop, A. P., Tidline, T., Shoemaker, S., & Sálela, P. (1999). Public libraries and networked informa- tion services in low-income communities. Librar- ies & Information Science Research, 2/(3), 361-390. Blackboard, (n.d.). Blackboard Worldwide. Re- trieved November 2, 2008, from http://www. blackboard.com. Boyer, E. (1990). Scholarship reconsidered: Priori- ties of the professoriate. New York: The Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching. Bringle, R. G., & Hatcher, J. A. (1996). Implement- ing service learning in higher education. Journal of Higher Education, 67(2), 221-239. Bringle, R. G., & Hatcher, J. A. (2000). Meaningful measurement of theory-based service-learning outcomes: Making the case with quantitative re- search. Michigan Journal of Community' Service Learning, 7(Fall), 68-75. Brown, L. D. (1985). People-centered development and participatory research. Harvard Educational Review, 55(0,69-75. Bruce, B. C. (2008). From Hull house to Paseo Boricua: The theory and practice of community inquiry. In B. Dicher (Ed.), Philosophy of pragma- tism: Salient inquiries. Cluj-Napoca, Romania: Babes-Bolyai University. Bruce, B. C, & Bishop, A. P. (2007). Community in- quiry. In D. Schüler (Ed.), Liberating voices! A pattern language for communication revolution. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Buckland, M. K. (2003). Five grand challenges for li- brary research. Library Trends, 57(1), 675-686. Callaway, H. (1981). Women's perspectives: Re- search as re-vision. In P. Reason & J. Rowan (Eds.), Human inquiry: A sourcebook of new para- digm research (pp. 457-471). New York: Wiley. Carter, S. (2007). The new language of business: SOA & Web 2.0. Lebanon, IN: IBM Press. Case, D.O. (2007). Looking for Information: A sur- vey of research on information seeking, needs, and behavior. New York: Academic Press. Casey, M. E., & Savastinuk, L. C. (2007). Library 2.0: A guide to participatory library service. Medford, NJ: Information Today, Inc. Chatman, E. (1996). The impoverished lite- world ot outsiders. Journal of the American Society for In- formation Science, 47, 193-206. Chatman, E. A., & Pendleton, V. E. M. (1995). Knowledge gap, information seeking and the poor. The Reference Librarian, 49/50, 135-145. Chavis, D. M., & Wandersman, A. (1990). Sense of community in the urban environment: A catalyst for participation and community development. American Journal of Community Psychology, 18, 55-82. Claus, J., & Ogden, C. (Eds.). (1999). Service learn- ing for youth empowerment and social change (Vol. 5). New York: Peter Lang Publishing. Cone, D., & Harris, S. (1996). Service learning prac- tice: Developing a theoretical framework. Michi- gan Journal of Community Service Learning, 3, 31-43. Crandall, M., & Gershenfeld, N. (September 15, 2006). How do we educate our future library lead- ers and managers? Library Leadership Network Commons, (September/October). Retrieved May 22, 2008, from http://www.libraryleadership.net/ Crandall091206.asp. Crawford, W. (2006). Library 2.0 and "Library 2.0." Cites & Insights, 6(2). Retrieved November 2, 2008, from http://cites.boisestate.edu/civ6i2. pdf. Cuban, S., & Hayes, E. (2001). Perspectives of five library and information studies students involved in service learning at a community-based literacy program. Journal of Education for Library and In- formation Science, 42(2), 86-95. Day, P., & Schüler, D. (Eds.). (2004). Community practice in the network society. New York: Routledge. Deans, T. (1999). Service-learning in two ways: Paulo Freire's critical pedagogy in relation to John Dewey 's pragmatism. Michigan Journal of Com- munity Service Learning, 6, 5-29. Dervin, B. (1982). Useful theory for librarianship: Communication, not information. Drexel Library Quarterly, 73, 16-32. Dervin, B. ( 1 992). From the mind's eye of the "user". In D. Glazier & R. Powell (Eds.), Qualitative re- search on information management. Englewood, CO: Libraries Unlimited.
The Community Engagement Model in Library and Information Science Education 35 Dervin, B., & Nilan, M. (1986). Information needs and uses. Annual Review of Information Science and Technology (Vol. 21 , pp. 3-33). White Plains, NY: Knowledge Industry Publications. Dewey, M. (1876). The profession. American Li- brary Journal, 1 (September), 5-6. Dillon, A., & Norris, A. (2005). Crying wolf: An ex- amination and reconsideration of the perception of crisis in LIS education. Journal of Education for Library and information Science, 46(4), 280-298. Dix, A., Finlay, J. E., Abowd, G. D., & Beale, R. (2003). Human-computer interaction (3rd edi- tion). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. Durrance, J. C, & Pettigrew, K. E. (2000). Commu- nity information: The technological touch. Li- brary Journal, 125(2), 44-46. Elmborg, J. K., Leighton, H., Huffman, H., Bradbury, J., Bryant, T. Britigan, D., et al. (2003). Service learning in the library and information sci- ence curriculum: The perspectives and experi- ences of one multimedia/user education class. Research Strategies, 18(4), 265-281. Etzkowitz, H., Webster, A., Gebhardt, C, & Regina, B. (2000). The future of the university and the uni- versity of the future: Evolution of ivory tower to entrepreneurial paradigm. Research Policy, 29(2), 313-330. Eyler, E. S., Giles, D. E., & Schmiede, A. (1996). Practitioner's guide to reflection in service learn- ing. Nashville, TN: Vanderbilt University. Fals-Borda, O. (1979). Investigating reality in order to transform it: The Colombia experience. Dialec- tical Anthropology, 4, 33-35. Färber, E. I. (1974). College librarians and the uni- versity-library syndrome. In E. I. Färber & R. Walling (Eds.), The academic library: Essays in honor of Guy Lyle (pp. 12-23). Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press. Foreman-Wernet, L., & Launterbach, E. (Eds.). (2003). Sense-making methodology reader: Se- lected writings of B renda Dervin. Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press. Freeman, R. S., & Hovde, M. S. (2003). Libraries to the people: Histories of outreach. Jefferson, NC: McFarland & Company. Freire, P. ( 1 974). Education for critical conscious- ness. New York: Seabury. Gaventa, J. (1 993). The powerful, the powerless, and the experts: Knowledge struggles in an informa- tion age. In P. Park, M. Brydon-Miller, B. Hall, & T. Jackson (Eds.), Voices of change (pp. 21-40). Westport, CT: Bergin & Garvey. Gibson, C. (2006). Student engagement and infor- mation literacy. Chicago, IL: Association of Col- lege & Research Libraries, American Library Association. Giles, D. E., & Eyler, J. ( 1 998). A service learning re- search agenda for the next five years. New Direc- tions for Teaching and Learning, 73, 65-72. Greenwood, D. J., & Levin, M. (1998). Introduction to action research: Social research for social change. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Grotzinger, L. (1971). The status of 'practicum' in graduate library schools. Journal of Education for Librarianship, 11(4), 332-339. Gupta, D. K., Koontz, C, Massisimo, A., & Savard, R. (2006). Marketing library and information ser- vices: International perspectives. Berlin, Ger- many: Walter de Gruyter. Gurstein, M. B. (2000). Community informatics: En- abling communities with information and commu- nication technologies. Hershey, PA: Idea Group Publishing. Gurstein, M. B. (2004). Editorial: Welcome to the Journal of Community Informatics. Journal of Community Informatics, 7(1). Retrieved April 24, 2005, from httpV/ci-journal.net/viewarticle.php? id=29&layout=html. Habermas, J. (1993). Justification and application: Remarks on discourse ethics (C. P. Cronin, Trans.). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. Hardesty, L. L., Scmitt, J. P., & Tucker, J. M. ( 1 986). User instruction in academic libraries: A century of selected readings. Metuchen, NJ: The Scare- crow Press. Harper, R., Palen, L., & Taylor, A. (2005). The inside text: Social, cultural and design perspectives on SMS (computer supported cooperative work). Heidelberg, Germany: Springer. Harris, B. R. (2008). Communities as necessity in in- formation literacy development: Challenging the standards. The Journal of Academic Librarian- ship, 34(3), 248-255. Hersberger, J. (2002). Are the economically poor in- formation poor? Does the digital divide affect the homeless and access to information? The Cana- dian Journal of Information and Library Science, 27(3), 44-63. Higher Education Network for Community Engage- ment. (2007). HENCE. Retrieved November 2, 2008, from http ://henceonl i ne.org/. IS 560 Class Project. (2007a). IS 560: Development and Management of Collections, Class Project: Develop a Collection Portfolio Spring 2007. Re- trieved from http://athena.cci. utk.edu/bmehra/ IS560/IS560Sp07/. IS 560 Class Project. (2007b). IS 560: Development and Management of Collections, Class Project: Develop a Collection Portfolio Fall 2007. Re- trieved from http://athena.cci. utk.edu/is560/ IS560Fall07/index.html. Jacoby, B. & Associates. (1996). Service-learning in
36 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE today's higher education. In B. Jacoby & Associ- ates (eds.), Service-learning in higher education: Concepts and practices (pp. 3-25). San Francisco, CA: Jossev-Bass. Kalakota, R., & Robinson, M. (2000). e-Business 2.0: Roadmap for success (2nd ed.). Indianapolis, IN: Addison- Wesley Professional. Kemmis, S., & McTaggart, R. (1988). The action re- search planner (3rd ed.). Geelong: Deakin Uni- versity. Kennedy, E. M. (1999). University-community part- nerships: A mutually beneficial effort to aid com- munity development and improve academic learning opportunities. Applied Developmental Science, 3(4)y 197-198. Kezar, A., Chambers, A. C, & Burkhardt, J. C. (2005). Education for the public good: Emerging voices from a national movement. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. Kirschner, P. A., Sweller, J., & Clark, R. E. (2006). Why minimal guidance during instruction does not work: An analysis of the failure of constructivist, discovery, problem-based, experi- ential, and inquiry-based teaching. Educational Psychologist, 41(2), 75-86. Kranich, N. (2005). Civic partnerships: The role of libraries in promoting civic engagement. Re- source Sharing and Information Networks, 75(1/2), 89-103. Kretzmann, J. P., & McKnight, J. L. (1993). Building communities from the inside out: A path toward finding and mobilizing community assets. Chi- cago: ACTA. Kruecken, G. (2003). Mission impossible? Institu- tional barriers to the diffusion of the "third aca- demic mission" at German universities. International Journal of Technology Manage- ment, 25 "(1 -2), 18-33. Kuhlthau, C. (2004). Seeking meaning: A process approach to library and information services. Westport, CT: Libraries Unlimited. Landau, H. (2008). The small public library survival guide: Thriving on less. Chicago, IL: ALA. Lave, J., & Wenger E. ( 1 99 1 ). Situated learning: Le- gitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press. Lenz, B., Straubhaar, J., LaPastina, A., Main, S., & Taylor, J. (2000). Structuring access: The role of public access centers in the "Digital Divide." Austin, TX: University of Texas. Retrieved No- vember 2, 2008, from http://www.utexas.edu/ re- search/tipi/reports/ joe_ICA.pdf. Maguire, P. (1987). Doing participatory research: A feminist approach. Amherst, MA: University of Massachusetts. Maness, J. M. (2006). Library 2.0 theory: Web 2.0 and its implications for libraries. Webology, 3(2). Retrieved November 2, 2008, from http://www. webology.ir/2006/v3n2/a25.html. Marchionini, G. ( 1 995). Information seeking in elec- tronic environments. New York: Cambridge Uni- versity Press. McCabe, R. B. (2001). Civic librarianship: Renew- ing the social mission of the public library. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press. McClure, C. R., & Hernon, P. (Eds.). (1991). Library and information science research: Perspectives and strategies for improvement. Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing Corporation. McCook, K. de la P. (2000a). Librarians and compre- hensive community initiatives. Reference and User Services Quarterly, 40(1), 24-26. McCook, K. de la P. (2000b). Reconnecting library education and the mission of community. Library Journal, 725(90), 164-165. McCook, K. de la P. (2000c). A place at the table: Participating in community building. Chicago: ALA. Mehra, B. (2004). Service learning in library and in- formation science (LIS) education: Connecting research and practice to community. InterActions: UCLA Journal of Information and Education Studies, 7(1), Article 3. Retrieved November 2, 2008, from httpV/repositories.cdlib.org/gseis/in- teractions/vol 1/issl /art3/. Mehra, B. (2005). Library and information science (LIS) and community development: Use of infor- mation and communication technology (ICT) to support a social equity agenda. Journal of the Community Development Society, 36('), 28-40. Mehra, B. (2006). An action research (AR) mani- festo for cyberculture power to "marginalized" cultures of difference. In D. Silver & A. Massanari (Eds.), Critical cyber-culture studies (pp. 205-2 1 5). New York: New York University Press. Mehra, B. (2007). Spring 2007 IS 560 Syllabus [Word document]. Retrieved from IS 560: Devel- opment and Management of Collections Spring 2007: https://web. utk.edu/~bmehra/ Spring07IS560syl.doc. Mehra, B. (in press). Integrating socially-relevant projects and achieving meaningful community outcomes in required library and information sci- ence courses: From a service model to community engagement. In L. Roy (Ed.), The service connec- tion: Library and information science education and service to communities. Chicago, IL: ALA. Mehra, B., Albright, K. S., & Rioux, K. (2006, No- vember 3-8, 2006). A practical framework for so- cial justice research in the information professions. Paper presented at the 69th Annual Meeting of the American Society for Information Science & Technology 2006: Information Reali-
The Community Engagement Model in Library and Information Science Education 37 ties: Shaping the Digital Future For AIL Austin, TX. Mehra, B., Bishop, A. P., Bazzell, I., & Smith, C. (2002). Scenarios in the Afya project as a partici- patory action research (PAR) tool for studying in- formation seeking and use across the "digital divide." Journal of the American Society of Infor- mation Science and Technology, 53(14), 1259-1266. Mehra, B., Merkel, C, & Bishop, A. P. (2004). Internet for empowerment of minority and marginalized communities, New Media & Society, 6(5), 781-802. Mehra, B., & Sandusky, R. J. (in press). Applications of community-based action research in elective courses: Partnering Library and Information Sci- ence students with underserved populations to meet their information technology needs. In L. Roy (ed.), The service connection: Library and in- formation science education and service to com- munities. Chicago, IL: ALA. Mehra, B., & Srinivasan, R. (2007). The li- brary-community convergence framework for community action: Libraries as catalysts of social change, Libri: International Journal of Libraries and Information Services, 57(3), 123-139. Middleton, M. S., & Katz, B. (1988). Information and referral in reference services. New York: The Haworth Press. Monroe, M. E. (1981). Issues in field experience as an element in the library school curriculum. Jour- nal of Education for Librar ianship, 22(1-2), 57-73. Morino, M. (1994, May 5, 1994). Assessment and evolution of community networking. Paper pre- sented at the Ties that Bind Conference on Build- ing Community Computing Networks, Cupertino, CA. Muddiman, D. (1999). Public libraries and social exclusion: The historical legacy (Public Library Policy and Social Exclusion Working Paper 2). Leeds, United Kingdom: Leeds Metropolitan Uni- versity. Nahl, D. (2007). The centrality of the affective in in- formation behavior. In D. Nahl & D. Bilal (Eds.), Information and emotion: The emergent affective paradigm in information behavior research and theory (pp. 3-37). Medford, New Jersey: Informa- tion Today, Inc. Naslund, J., & Giustini, D. (2008). Towards school li- brary 2.0: An introduction to social software tools for teacher-librarians. School Libraries World- wide, 14(2), 55-67. Retrieved November 2, 2008, from http^/weblogs.elearning.ubc.ca/ googlescholar/ naslund_giustini.pdf. National Telecommunications and Information Ad- ministration (NTIA), U.S. Department of Com- merce. (1999). Falling through the net: Defining the digital divide. Washington, D.C.: NTIA. Re- trieved November 2, 2008, from http://www. ntia.doc.gov/ntiahome/fttn99/. Neill, S. D. (1975). The place of practice in a gradu- ate library school. Libri, 25(2), 81-97. Novak, T. P., Hoffman, D. L., & Venkatesh, A. (1998). Diversity on the Internet: The relationship of race to access and usage. In A. Garmer (Ed.), In- vesting in diversity: Advancing opportunities for minorities and the media. Washington, D.C.: As- pen Institute. Owens, I. (2003). Strategic marketing in library and information science. NY: Routledge. Peterson, L. (2003). Using a homeless shelter as a li- brary education learning laboratory: Incorporat- ing service-learning in a graduate-level information sources and services in the social sci- ences course. Reference & User Services Quar- terly, 42(4), 307-310. Pettigrew, K. E., Durrance, J. C, & Unruh, K. T. (2002). Facilitating community information seek- ing using the Internet: Findings from three public library-community network systems. Journal of the American Society for Information Science & Technology, 53(' 1), 894-903. Pettigrew, K., Fidel, R., & Bruce, H. (2001 ). Concep- tual frameworks in information behavior. Annual Review of Information Science and Technology, 35, 43-78. Preece, J., Rogers, Y. & Sharp, H. (2002). Interaction design: Beyond human-computer interaction. New York: J. Wiley & Sons. Randall, D., Harper, R., & Rouncefield, M. (2007). Fieldwork for design: Theory and practice. Hei- delberg, Germany: Springer. Ranganathan, S. R. (1931). The five laws of library science. Madras, India: Madras Library Associa- tion. Ray ward, B. W. (1994). Some schemes for restruc- turing and mobilizing information in documents: A historical perspective. Information Processing and Management, 30, 163-175. Reardon, K. M. ( 1 998). Participatory action research as service learning. In R. A. Rhoads and J. P. F. Howard (Eds.), Academic service learning: A ped- agogy of action and reflection (pp. 57-64). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. Rhodes, N. J., & Davis, J. M. (2001). Using service learning to get positive reactions in the library. Computers in Libraries, 2/(1), 32-35. Riddle, J. S. (2003). Where's the library in service learning? Models for engaged library instruction. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 29(2), 71-81. Rodger, E. J., Jorgensen, C, & D'Elia, G. (2005).
38 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE Partnerships and collaboration among public li- braries, public broadcast media, and museums: Current context and future potential. The Library Quarterly, 75(1), 42-66. Rothstein, S. (1967). A forgotten issue: Practice work in American library education. In W. A. Katz & C. A. Bunge (Eds.), Rothstein on reference . . . With some help from friends (pp. 199-224). New York: Haworth Press. Roy, L. (2001). Diversity in the classroom: Incorpo- rating service-learning experiences in the library and information science curriculum. Journal of Library1 Administration, 33(3-4), 213-228. Saba Centra Suite, (n.d.). Saba Centra Suite: Over- view. Retrieved November 2, 2008, from http:// www.saba.com/products/centra/. Saltmarsh, J. (2005). The civic promise of service learning. Liberal Education, 9/(2), 50-55. Saracevic, T., Mokros, H., & Su. L. ( 1 990). Nature of interaction between users and intermediaries in online searching: A qualitative analysis. Proceed- ings of the 53rd ASIS Annual Meeting 1990, 27, 47-54. Schamber, L., Eisenberg, M., & Nilan, M. (1990). A re-examination of relevance toward a dynamic, situational definition. Information Processing and Management, 26, 755-776. Schneidewind, N., & Davidson, E. (Eds.). (1983). Open minds to equality: A sourcebook of learning activities to promote race, sex, class and age eq- uity. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. Schon, Donald A. (1996). Educating the reflective practitioner: Toward a new design for teaching and learning in the professions. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass, Inc. Schuler, D. (1995). Creating public space in cyberspace: The rise of the new community net- works. Retrieved November 2, 2008, from http:// www.scn.org/ip/commnet/iwdec.html Schüler, D. ( 1 996). New community networks: Wired for change. Reading, MA: Addison- Wesley. Sears, A., & Jacko, J. A. (2007). The human-com- puter interaction handbook: Fundamentals, evolving technologies and emerging applications (2nd ed.). Canberra, Australia: CRC. Shera, J. H. (1983). Librarianship and information science. In F. Machlup & U. Mansfield (Eds.), The study of information (pp. 379-388). New York: Wiley. Shores, L. (1935). The liberal arts college, a possibility in 1964? School and Society, 41 (January), 1 10-14. Slaymaker, T., Christiansen, K., & Hemming, I. (2005). Community-based approaches and ser- vice delivery: Issues and options in difficult envi- ronments and partnerships. Retrieved November 2, 2008, http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/10/27/ 38498595.pdf. Sohng, S. (1995). Participatory research and com- munity organizing. Paper presented at The New Social Movement and Community Organizing Conference, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. Retrieved November 2, 2008, from http^/www.interweb-tech.com/nsmnet/docs/ sohng.htm. Soska, T., & Butterfield, A. K. J. (2004). Univer- sity-community partnerships: Universities in civic engagement. Binghamton, NY: Haworth Social Work Practice Press. Stanley, L., & Wise, S. (1983). Breaking out: Femi- nist consciousness and feminist research. London: Routledge. Stringer, Ernest T. (1999). Action research. Thou- sand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. Sweeney, I. (2002). Learning by doing: Engaged ser- vice and the MLS. American Libraries, 33(2), 44-46. Taylor, R. S. (1991). Information use environments. In B. Dervin & M. Voigt (Eds.), Progress in Com- munication Sciences (pp. 217-255). Norwood, NJ: Ablex. Van Dijk, J. (2005). The deepening divide: Inequality in the information society. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Virnoche, M. E. ( 1 998). The seamless web and com- munications equity: The social shaping of a com- munity network. Science, Technology and Human Values, 23(2), 199-220. Wade, R. C. (1997). Community service learning: A guide to including service in the public school cur- riculum. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press. Wenger, E. ( 1 999). Communities of practice: Learn- ing, meaning, & identity. Cambridge, MA: Cam- bridge University Press. Wenger, E., McDermott, R., & Synder, W. M. (2002). Cultivating communities of practice. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press. Westney, L. (2006). Conspicuous by their absence: Academic librarians in the engaged university. Reference & User Services Quarterly, 45(3), 200-203. Winsor, J. (1 880). College libraries as aids to instruc- tion: The college library. In Circulars of informa- tion of the Bureau of Education (Number 1). Washington, D.C.: United States Government Printing Office, pp. 7-14. Witbooi, S. L. (2004). Service learning in the library and information studies curriculum at the Univer- sity of the Western Cape: An exploratory study. Mousaion, 22(1), 89-102. Yontz, E., & McCook, K. de la P. (2003). Ser- vice-learning and LIS education. Journal of Edu- cation for Library and Information Science, 44( 1 ), 58-68.