Introduction To Library Science: An Attempt MASANOBU FUJIKAWA AT THE OUTSET, I feel I have to admit that any discussion of what should constitute a course in * 'Introduction to Library Science" is bound to develop into the issue of "What is library science?". Nevertheless, unless we have a blueprint of some sort on which the structure of library science is shown, however sketchy it may be, it is difficult to develop our study and discussion of curricula, courses, and units in the field of education for librarianship. Any study of a specific subject requires a definition of its range. And this definition, being concise and objective, fails to give a clear image, though, at the same time it seems to ease the mind of those engaged in the study because it provides more freedom of interpretation. Can we then define library science in terms of the practices of li- braries in action? Librarianship is not infrequently referred to as a profession based upon experiences and skills in libraries, and it has been commonly understood that education for librarianship should aim principally at the preparation of library personnel for library work. But when we find rather diverse approaches to the introductory part of the librarianship, we can not help wondering if there has been any agreed upon method of initiating students into our field, a method based upon a clear definition of library science. In any other branches of organized human knowledge, principles and methods were developed from experiences. They were extracted out of the facts experienced and not a little effort was directed towards the establishment of methods applicable to their fields. Scholars and researchers have tried different methodologies in order to organize facts into a certain acceptable order. It is also obvious from abundant evi- dence in the field of library science that painstaking and patient efforts 144
Introduction To Library Science: An Attempt along the same line have been made by our predecessors and colleagues. However, practical demands from libraries have been so urgent that they have worked a kind of barrier to the development of a sound theoretical approach to our field. This makes it more difficult to main- tain critical judgment of our educational program. It certainly is true that there is a vast diversity in library phenomena because of their history, their varying types, functions and size, their governing bodies, their clientele, as well as because of the techniques they employ. It seems very difficult to define the range of the object of library science, but this is true of any science. The history of libraries covers a period no shorter than any other branch of science, so we cannot complain that we have not had enough time to organize our observations and thinking. And, if we feel the lack of an adequate method, or rather methodology by which we shall be able to achieve a certain common ground in analyzing and organizing library phe- nomena, this lack must be met by those concerned with research and education in our field. The following is a mere outline of a course "Introduction to Library Science" for undergraduate students in the second year of college, or third year students enrolled in the Japan Library School who have com- pleted the B.A. course. Selection of topics is influenced by the fact that the class meets once a week for 110 minutes during the whole academic year. These topics are also related to the contents of other courses offered in the professional two year program. It should be noted that the following outline represents my personal opinion rather than that of the faculty of the Japan Library School or any other group of Japanese librarians. Any organization of knowledge must necessarily employ two ways of examining objects, namely deductive and inductive methods, though the weight of each differs from one science to another. In what follows I have tried to deduce the existing concept of library phenomena and at the same time to provide students with an opportunity to observe the present situation and try to find a new approach through the in- ductive method while they are enrolled in our school. First, let us admit that in any learning, whether it be scientific or aesthetic, one has to consider the faculty of thinking as peculiar to the human race. This thinking faculty is stimulated by achievements of others and the stimulation is given through communicative activities of one sort or another. Since man has the desire to express his ideas, it is very natural that he seeks every available or conceivable means of expression, and if his means of expression is understood by his asso- 145
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP dates it opens the way for communication. This process constitutes one unity and its elements cannot be separated. There have been quite a few methods and media for communica- tion and "recording" is one of the most significant methods among them, the one most closely related to the idea of library. Once man mastered the technique of recording and found that it was a very con- venient means of communication with his contemporaries and with those who came later, it was very natural to continue to produce re- cordings whenever necessary. Since the act of recording means to keep what should be communi- cated in a form and is addressed to somebody physically outside him, admitting that he himself could be the addressee, there will be a physical body of recorded materials. Meanwhile the addressee or the receiver of records may want to keep some of them longer because he may find lasting value in them. He may keep all records available or addressed to him or may discriminate or select them for further keeping. This act leads easily to the act of collecting records. The collecting activity may vary by who collects what in which manner for what purpose. Whatever shape the activity may take, collecting activity pre- sumes future use. If one does not expect the future use of recorded materials, or any form of materials for that matter (think of the col- lecting activity of museums), one will not start collecting. In antici- pating future use, one has to preserve recordings and the act of pre- serving varies by various elements, e.g. for whom, how, and where. Since preservation assumes use, when the body of materials grows larger, and it is apt to be so when time goes by, one may have to try to find some means which enables him to use preserved items more effectively. The effective use of materials urges one to think of the way of arranging, storing, and keeping records of them (secondary recording) . When the collection becomes still larger or more specialized in its nature, some auxiliary means will be necessary in the use of the materials. Interpreters of them or particular tools and aids which will provide easier access to what is collected and preserved will be em- ployed in due course. As the body of collected materials becomes more bulky and its con- stituents more complex, some kind of direction or policy is required to keep it in desirable condition and order, as well as to decide who takes responsibility for it. The direction or policy should clarify factors relating to materials, such as those who handle them, those who use them, places to keep them, ways and means to promote their use, etc. In the course of time, one will feel more secure and encouraged if one 146
Introduction To Library Science: An Attempt finds persons or organizations facing similar problems and may wish to make contact to them. On the other hand, as a collection grows, its users may grow in number or more concentrated use may be expected because growth of the collection is commonly caused by the increased power of a collector, increase in those who produce recordings, or increase of the rate of producing records in some specific areas. And to the responsibilities involved with acquiring, arranging, and serving materials, are added that of rendering assistance and advice to users. Being provided with materials needed, tools to locate them, space or facilities to make better use of them, services to meet needs, all of these based on a certain well planned policy, users will find it easier to locate materials they want. Through wise use of these recorded materials, users may create something new, something of scientific sig- nificance or of aesthetic value. The process of this creative activity, which is more aptly called research activity in the scientific field, must be well understood by those whose role is to render service for the progress of human intellectual and creative activities. To have a better understanding of what has been mentioned above, it is necessary to trace the mode of thinking in the past and that of today in various areas of human activities and to have a perspective of our future in terms of the way people approach their aims. Thus the discussion comes back to the starting point. This old method of setting up a circle to indicate growth of any organism I dared to adopt simply because I felt it could be understood more easily by those who had just come into our field. The schematic illustration reproduced below shows graphically the more detailed description given on the following pages. IX. Creative activity - I. Thinking -- II. Communication I I I I i III. Recording I I I I VIII. Assistance to readers IV. Collecting I I I I VII. Administration - VI. Organization - V. Preserving for effective use 147
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP As an indication of how the course is developed, I have listed briefly the points emphasized in each topic as follows: I. Thinking. A. Definition and illustration of sense datum, perception, and conception. B. Explanation of expression as human activity. C. Significance of the above in organization and formation of knowledge. D. Relationship to classification and identification of objects. II. Communication. A. Definition and illustration of communication. B. Discussion of possible methods and media employed in communication. C. Explanation of sign, symbol, language, and code. D. Explanation of logic and its relation to ways of construct- ing and discovering ideas. HI. Recording. A. Definition of recording activity and recorded materials. B. Media; e.g. sound, figure, letter, etc. C. Devices and tools; e.g., 1. String, clay, bamboo, paper, plastic disc, magnetic tape, etc. 2. Ink, paint, any physically or chemically responding substance, etc. D. Who makes what kind of record in what manner for what purpose. E. What kind of materials are available in various fields of intellectual and emotional activities. F. Brief survey of characteristics of the broad subject fields of knowledge and of corresponding recorded materials. IV. Collecting. A. Illustration and discussion of collecting activity. B. Who collects for what purpose. C. How, or through what channels recorded materials are col- lected. D. How needed items are chosen. (Selection) 148
Introduction To Library Science: An Attempt V, Preserving. A. Discussion of preserving activity. B. For whom recorded materials are preserved and for what purpose. C. How recorded materials have been preserved. VI. Organization for effective use. A. The possible convenient way of using collected and pre- served materials. B. Ways and means to arrange materials for convenient use. C. Survey of main classification schemes. D. Understandable and economical way to find items needed. (Identification) E. Survey of existing indexing methods. F. Possible ways of keeping up with prolific production of re- corded materials; e.g., 1. Necessity of bibliographic control (Bibliographies, abstracts, indexes, etc.) 2. Newer techniques employed in classifying, retriev- ing, and reproducing materials and their contents. G. Personal elements required. VII. Administration. A. Definition of administration and terms closely related to it. B. Personnel problems. 1. Capacity and responsibility. 2. Control and encouragement. 3 . Desirable system. C. Materials. 1. Desirable ways to control and develop collections in accordance with staff and users. 2. Other facilities or organizations with which coopera- tion is to be established. 3. Policies to be planned and executed. D. Facilities and equipment. 1. Characteristics of those needed in libraries. 2. How to take care of them. 3. Maintenance policy. 149
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP E. Public relations activities. 1. Definition of public relations activities in libraries. 2. Effective way of carrying out public relations activi- ties. F. Governing bodies. 1. National and local governments. 2. Laws, regulations, and ordinances affecting libraries. 3. Present problems. G. Professional organizations. 1. Their objectives and characteristics. 2. Future expectations. VIII. Assistance to readers. A. What constitutes assistance to readers. Interpretation and understanding of records. B. The scope and means of assistance. C. Effective methods. D. Evaluation of service to users. (In this topic advisory service, circulation and reference service will be discussed more fully) IX. Creative activity. A. Discussion of creative activity in sciences, technology, and in creative world. B. Definition of research. C. Survey of research methods, with illustration of their char- acteristics in different subject fields. D. Products of creative activities and their dissemination. 150