SALARY DETERMINATION AND OCCUPATIONAL SEGREGATION AMONG LIBRARIANS' Nancy A. Van House2 This study identifies the determinants of librarians' salaries and tests human capital-based explanations of librarianship as a women's profession and of intra- occupational segregation by sex within librarianship. Earnings functions are developed for men and women in public and academic libraries and for women in school libraries and are found to be statistically significantly different from one another. Personal, human capital, and job determinants of salaries for each group are identified. The differences in the earnings functions imply different reward structures in the various types of libraries. Salary differences by sex within library type are decomposed and found to be due primarily to differences in individual characteristics, but also to differences in the reward structures for men and women in the same type of library. A major economic theory of occupational segregation, supply-based human capital theory, is examined for its ability to explain the continuing predominance of women in the library profes- sion and, within the profession, the disproportionate representation of men in academic libraries. The results are mixed. Demand-based institutional analysis is suggested as a possible alternative explanation. 1. The data reported here are from a survey of American Library Association members, Career Profile of American Library Association Personal Members, performed by Leigh S. Estabrook and Kathleen M. Heim for the American Library Association Committee on the Status of Women in Librarianship, with support from a Bailey K. Howard ALA Goals Award. The analysis is based on work supported in part by the National Science Foundation under grant IST-8409625. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this paper are mine and do not necessar- ily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation. This paper won the 1985 Association for Library and Information Science Education (ALISE) Research Compe- tition. 2. University of California, Berkeley, School of Library and Information Studies, Berke- ley, California 94720. [Library Quarterly, vol. 56, no. 2, pp. 142-166] K 1986 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-2519/86/5602-0001$01 .00 142
SALARY DETERMINATION 143 Three kinds of sex differences have been observed within the library profession. One is that men earn more than women [ 1, 21. The second is that men are overrepresented in the higher-level jobs relative to their numbers in the profession as a whole [3, 4]. The third is that men and women are distributed disproportionately across types of libraries [5, 6]. None of this necessarily means that there is sex discrimination within the library profession, however. These differences may be due to sex-linked factors other than discrimination. The purpose of this study is, first, to identify the individual character- istics that determine librarians' salaries; second, to determine whether earnings functions differ across library types and sexes; and, finally, to use these functions to test possible explanations for the large numbers of women in the library profession and for the disproportionate distribu- tion of the sexes within the profession. The Economics of Sex Differences Salary differences between men and women have been large and persis- tent. Although some of the difference is due to differences in earnings between men and women in the same occupation, research has found that earnings differences are largely due to occupational differences; that is, women earn less than men, on average, primarily because they are in occupations that pay less [7]. Some occupations are clearly gender typed, and, surprisingly, have remained so despite social changes over the last few years [8, 9]; the most segregated occupations, like librari- anship, have remained the most stable [10]; and the ones with the most women generally pay the least [7]. Two general economic approaches to the explanation of sex differ- ences in the labor market exist, one focusing on the employee and his or her choices, or supply conditions, and the other on the employer, or demand conditions. The most well-developed models of salary and occupational distribution are supply based, utilizing human capital theory. The empirical research on demand-based models is in its pre- liminary stages [1 1]. The two approaches are not mutually exclusive; it is likely that both demand and supply factors are at work [12]. Salary Differences Human capital theory contends that earnings are determined by a work- er's productivity,3 which is determined in turn by his acquired character- 3. It is irrelevant to this discussion whether human capital investment improves the worker's productivity or serves only as a screening device to indicate to the employer that the worker is promising [13]; the concern here is with its influence on earnings.
144 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY istics, such as education and experience, and innate characteristics, such as ability and tastes. Workers can enhance their productivity, and there- fore their earnings, by investing in their human capital, including formal and informal education and work experience. If the characteristics that determine earnings are distributed randomly across the population, then men's and women's earnings will not differ systematically. Earnings do differ by sex, however, which human capital theory has attempted to explain as a function of workers' choices regarding the factors that determine earnings. Historically, the major difference in men's and women's labor market experiences has been the extent and continuity of their labor force participation. Human capital theory has focused on the relationships among earnings, labor force participation, factors that affect participa- tion (such as parenthood), and investment in human capital. Labor force participation is itself a form of human capital accumulation because experience increases a worker's knowledge and skill. In addition, labor force participation helps to determine the worker's investment in human capital. Those who plan to work fewer years will realize lesser rewards from human capital and so have less incentive to invest in it. In a review of the empirical research on wage differentials, Donald Treiman and Heidi Hartmann [7] conclude that about half of the differ- ence in earnings between men and women has been explained by differ- ences in education, labor force experience, labor force commitment, or other human capital factors believed to contribute to productivity differ- ences. The remaining unexplained differential is interpreted by some as evidence of sex discrimination. No method exists for measuring dis- crimination directly, so the usual approach has been to explain as much as possible of the difference in salaries using individuals' productivity- related characteristics, with the unexplained sex-linked residual used to estimate the effect of sex discrimination (for example, [14, 15]). Occupational Distibution Jobs consist of clusters of characteristics, including salary, fringe benefits, working conditions, the character of the tasks performed, and intrinsic and extrinsic rewards. Human capital theory asserts that a rational decision maker chooses among closely related occupations with the goal of maximizing expected benefits. Research has focused particu- larly on the effect on occupational choice of expected lifetime income, a measurable, objective benefit (for example, [16]). An individual's ex- pected lifetime income in a given occupation depends on its reward structure and on his innate and acquired characteristics and career pattern. The difference in labor force participation between men and women
SALARY DETERMINATION 145 has also been proposed as a major determinant of occupational distribu- tion. Polachek [17, 18, 19] hypothesized that people who expect career interruptions choose occupations where the rewards for continuous participation and/or the penalties for interruption are the least. Such occupations will,therefore tend to attract women. Polachek demon- strated that women who spent the most time out of the labor force during their working years were most likely to be in the occupations in which implicit wage losses for women with intermittent labor force participation were the least. Other research, however, has disputed these findings [8, 20, 21]. Research on the Library Labor Market Research in librarianship has examined salary differences by sex among librarians but has not explicitly addressed the reasons for either the continuing predominance of women in the library profession or the dis- proportionate distribution of men and women among types of libraries. Two studies have used multivariate methods to explain salary differ- ences by sex among librarians. In 1980, Kathleen Heim and Leigh Estabrook [2] surveyed a sample of American Library Association (ALA) members. They related librarians' sex, status, salaries, career patterns, and a range of personal and demographic factors. They per- formed two salary regressions, one each for academic and public librari- ans, with sex entered as an independent variable. The assumption underlying this approach is that sex is a determinant of salaries, but that the coefficients of the other variables do not differ by sex within library type. Sex was significant in each regression. Other variables that were significant for both public and academic librarians were date of birth and of MLS, leave time taken, number of publications, number of professionals supervised, and level in the organizational hierarchy. For public librarians, size of organization and number of nonprofessionals supervised were significant as well. W. S. Siebert and A. Young [22] used a human capital model to test the importance of market discrimination and family role factors in salary differences among male and female librarians in Great Britain. Using data from a sample of employed (British) Library Association members, they developed separate earnings functions for married and single men and women, and for married men and women with and without chil- dren, and compared them to test the effect of sex, marital status, and children on earnings. For single men and women the earnings functions were not statistically significantly different and sex was not a significant variable in a combined regression. Single women earned more than
146 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY married women with the same characteristics, but married men earned more than single men. Having children increased married men's earn- ings but reduced married women's. Siebert and Young concluded that such discrimination as may have existed among British librarians was more tied to family and children than to sex. The effect of parenthood suggested to them a productivity-based explanation of earnings differ- ences: men with children were more highly motivated financially, while women with children perhaps placed less emphasis on their work. Another study of sex differences in librarianship by Nancy Van House [23] compared the social and private returns to the investment in an MLS degree for men and women. All were negative; that is, the MLS degree did not generate enough additional income to balance its cost, but the returns were worse for men than for women, given men's greater earnings in nonlibrary occupations. She suggested that this may contribute to the continued predominance of women in the profession: librarianship is a poorer investment for men than for women. One might argue that these findings imply that librarians are uncon- cerned with income. Another study by Van House [24], however, found that the number of MLS graduates is a function of starting salaries, indicating that potential librarians do consider income in making career choices. The two sets of findings are consistent if one considers that work yields both monetary and nonmonetary rewards. Within an occupation, holding constant its nonmonetary rewards, total benefits will change with salary. But in comparing occupations, the individual may trade off monetary and nonmonetary benefits, choosing librarianship, despite its smaller economic returns, because of its greater (for that individual) nonmonetary rewards. The subject remains a utility maximizer, with salary as one component of utility. The Present Study This study develops a human capital model of the determinants of librarians' salaries by sex and type of library; tests the ability of human capital theory to explain why the majority of librarians continues to be women; and tests a human capital-based explanation of the differences in the distributions of men and women among types of libraries. Human capital theory is widely accepted as a basis for earnings func- tions [7]; it is more controversial as a basis for explaining occupational differences by sex [11] but remains the leading economic theory in this area. The present study, therefore, is significant on two grounds: for what it reveals about the library profession in light of current economic theory and methods; and as a test of the ability of human capital theory
SALARY DETERMINATION 147 to explain occupational and intraoccupational distribution in a female occupation. The Data The data are from Heim and Estabrook's [2] 1980 survey of ALA members. They sent questionnaires to a random sample of 3,000 ALA personal members, excluding lay (that is, nonlibrarian), student, and trustee members. They received 1,987 usable responses (1,552 from women, 435 from men), for a response rate of 67.1 percent. One important limitation of these data is that all respondents were ALA members; approximately 25 percent of U.S. librarians belong to ALA.4 Comparing the Estabrook and Heim sample with other data from the ALA [25] and a national survey of libraries [5], it is reasonably representative of ALA members, but compared to the profession as a whole [5], it is more male (21.7 percent vs. 15 percent) and includes more academic librarians (31.8 percent vs. 15.5 percent) and fewer school librarians (13.6 percent vs. 47.9 percent). One can also conjecture that librarians who belong to a professional association are likely to have a higher degree of career commitment and to be in higher level jobs, but no data on this exist. For the present analysis, only white MLS degree holders employed full time in public, academic, and school libraries for whom data were present for all the relevant variables were included, for a sample size of 536 (table 1). Male school librarians and respondents in other work settings (for example, special libraries) were excluded because there were too few of them. Nonwhites were excluded because of their small numbers and because previous research has shown that they generally have different earnings functions than whites [26]. Earnings Functions Human capital theory says that earnings are a function of those charac- teristics that make a worker productive, and/or those personal character- istics that affect productivity and labor force participation and commit- ment. In this study, separate earnings functions were developed by sex and type of library. Three kinds of variables were tested for their effect on salary: (1) personal, or life-cycle, variables-marital status, number of children, and perceived mobility limits (a dichotomous variable); (2) human capital variables-education beyond the MLS (as an index of additional degrees), experience as a librarian, tenure in current job, and time taken for personal leaves and for continuing education; (3) job- related variables, defined as those specific to or primarily determined by 4. There are approximately 136,000 librarians [51 and 35,000 ALA members [25].
>i t-lt0 r 0~ O O * _ s t~~~ t b- 0 C' an 4 cf ec t- to - O Z l l a - w- dz ?N O C t- or - Ot- C) 000 - s~ ~~~~~~~e el C'*0 I 0L -i cNNr a : > za e e r ~~ct' $ - ." I.-, c c o~~~~~~~~~~~0 > .4 .j c3 vi t o o6 o6 c.6 oz .4~~~~~4
o ce CA C in cn C 0) cq cli CA v CA 00 C4) C,4 0) oo cq 0) V) r- Cq o6 ui c)6 "'r Ci C C'4 ce O 00 Cq C14 in C) a) Z o C4 C4 Cq t- X cq cj C14 en oo t-.. oc r- O on in o6 o6 ifi c to v ci r- ai m to x t- C> "t z C ai cli cli t- 06 kr; C4 t- CA kf) a 4j v biD LO .> C) gc W5 > cl* .; > bO U bC M u v E a bc bO 0 bC E ou > > U 6 U Z 149
150 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY an individual's work situation-level in organization, number of profes- sionals and nonprofessionals supervised, size of organization, activity in professional associations (an index composed of membership in organi- zations, service on committees, and offices held), and number of pub- lications. Some structural variables that might have been of interest, such as region of the country or union membership, could not be included because data were unlvailable. Because this is a national random sample (albeit of ALA members), geographically related differences should be randomly distributed among respondents, and no bias should result. Other variables that could not be included (and are commonly unavail- able for earnings functions) are ability and motivation. To the extent that these and other omitted variables are equally distributed among men and women and across types of libraries, no bias results when making comparisons by type of library and by sex. (Presumably the job achievement variables [for example, level in organization] pick up some of the effects of ability and motivation.) Libraianship as a Female-typed Profession Human capital theory predicts that librarianship should show the char- acteristics of a profession that allows intermittent labor force participa- tion, and its members should show a propensity for intermittent partici- pation. The specific hypotheses tested in this study are: (1) librarians should show a high incidence of labor force withdrawals, and/or (among women especially) a high incidence of those characteristics likely to cause them to interrupt their working lives: marriage, children, and limits on their mobility; and (2) librarians' earnings functions should show low rates of appreciation and/or depreciation, low returns to other forms of human capital investment, and low penalties for mobility limits and family responsibilities. The Distribution of Men and Women by Type of Library Table 2 shows that male librarians are employed disproportionately in academic libraries and hardly at all in school libraries. If the same factors affect people's distribution within as among professions, then the sectors TABLE 2 U.S. EMPLOYED LIBRARIANS BY SEX AND TYPE OF LIBRARY (%) Public Academic School Special Total Female 87 65 91 80 85 Male 13 35 9 20 15 SOURCE.-[5).
SALARY DETERMINATION 151 that employ the most women should be the most amenable to intermit- tent participation, and the people choosing those sectors should, in the aggregate, show the highest propensity toward intermittent participa- tion. Specifically, the large numbers of men in academic libraries and their virtual nonexistence in school libraries leads to the following hy- potheses. (1) The propensity of librarians within a type of library to interrupt their careers should be inversely proportional to the represen- tation of men in that sector, with school librarians the most likely to interrupt and academic the least. (2) The incidence of family respon- sibilities among women in a type of library should also be related to its proportion of men, with female school librarians having the greatest incidence of marriage and family responsibilities and academic women the least. (3) Academic librarians' earnings functions should evidence the greatest returns to experience; the largest penalties for career inter- ruptions, mobility limits, and/or family responsibilities; and significant returns to human capital investment. School librarians' earnings func- tions should be the opposite. Earnings Functions Respondents were grouped by sex and the type of library in which they were employed. Separate earnings functions were developed for men and women in public and academic libraries and women in school libraries. Four sets of regressions were run. The first (table 3, regression 1) regressed salary level on all the personal and human capital variables hypothesized to be relevant. The second (table 3, regression 2) added in a second step the job-related variables. In this way any variance common to any of the variables in the first two groups and to job-related variables was attributed to the former. The second two sets of regressions (table 4) retained, for purposes of comparison, only variables significant at the 95 percent level for one or more groups. Again, the regressions were run in two steps, with job-related variables entered in the second step. The regressions in table 4 were tested for their similarity across sex and library type. All pairs were statistically significantly different at the 95 percent level. Findings Librarians' salaries are determined primarily by experience and job responsibilities. Human capital factors have some effect on some groups, and personal characteristics have virtually no effect. The effect of labor force participation-experience and personal leave time-is crucial in human capital explanations of salary and occu- pational distribution. The coefficient of experience measures the in-
o - C-4 r' *I - - - z _ C0 4 00 rs000 0 O to C o 0~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~0 o _ oe z -- o : o.M ot - _ cn, Ul - t - cf t- or; _ ) cr; 0 J ~ ~~~~ I- __t H_ _ _ cn t- _z -n C to kn to o 0 ~o V r >J < I L _ 0 - IV C'- Q ( j 0 r-t w0 C * * * * J~~~~~ r- 24 * to et _* _* _ *_ t- a - OM0 O 0 LI * o>o) *M: :zt o II * u c Ci - q cw ; cs m ri an a - c4 oo *e) X _ o e - | - an V x0 M V t-b v 00 > ~ ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ o Cq a # - % ~~~CO 00 w-- o~~~~~ n CI in r- or ~ CC - ( r ~~~~~H o : o o. e -, o -. V o. 0 C4 0 to, 0t~~~~~~~~~~~e C4 ) _ 0 _ I 00~ ~~~~~~~~~~~0 152 e - b > t e 0 t b o Z ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~c C4 - r- to) -4 - (M of) bs NO 3 ~ ~ ~ ~~U 3c * o - Z N t- xn CD r-v 0 ?_ v on--2 t- - <R < 152
* *.-.-.*.-..... *OONo'u~0 _ __* _ _- * n 4 en In M en cq 3 r - 0t - oo* n e 040 ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~~~~~~~~0 00~ 0 _ , . * * * _ O * *~ * ~ <z a LO s N 0 00 t 1 C's ~N CuC 0~0 04c U) -. -Cr Cee -~ = -~ j C - *6 C0 * -Cu c)tO?s 0Xc * b 00 en O O 04 ao t- en? v- m r- cr} cd. G on c ) e -e) n _0 - _ 0_ . 04- * .-.* *. * * -I,? t-_zt e -t to LO ~~~~N~~ ~ _ I * Cf . . . . . * _ . 00 m~~~~~~~~~~0 * .-.* . * N '~~~~~C- ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ r 0 (C "O m oQ _ * C _ 0 _ C4 o- *- _ S o o o o > - tn C'l C') *r) Cf C * Cv in N CIO ~ ~ OC 0 0 ~ ~ ~ ~ 0 e > . . . . . _ * -s 00CNN a 4 00 .. . . * * z O r- t - 0 _ o 0 M. 0. .- ~ r 0- bi 0N 0 0 0 M >0 ~. - 6 < ~ ~ ~ ~ C -V X 4J0bo Q 00 00 N X 0 X -U - DNtX 153
TABLE 4 RESTRICTED REGRESSION RESULTS FOR SALARY BY SEX AND TYPE OF LIBRARY PUBLIC LIBRARIES ACADEMIC LIBRARIES SCHOOL Women Men Women Men LIBRARIES-WOMEN (N= 175) (N =48) (N= 147) (N= 104) (N = 62) VARIABLEa (1) (2) (1) (2) (1) (2) (1) (2) (1) (2) Human capital: Experience 409.9** 320.9** 627.7** 355.8** 380.6** 284.5** 804.3** 580.8** - 11.5 55.7 (44.8) (46.3) (147.3) (134.0) (55.4) (50.4) (75.9) (72.2) (89.6) (91.8) Tenure in present job 6.6 4.9 - 14.2 5.9 3.2 3.5 -25.7** - 16.5** 47.6** 36.9** (4.4) (4.2) (17.2) (15.3) (4.9) (4.4) (7.3) (6.2) (8.9) (9.4) Additional education 1,194.8* 560.6 - 1,127.7 -334.7 96.0 - 125.7 1,163.8** 1,196.3** 131.0 -372.1 (560.9) (538.0) (1,024.6) (873.0) (418.7) (369.9) (394.1) (337.4) (1,035) (1,112) Personal: Children 780.2* 784.7* 568.0 - 886.3 648.8 140.5 359.6 266.3 - 387.3 - 530.8 (374-4) (339.9) (912.5) (829.3) (444.4) (387.1) (424.5) (352.7) (629.0) (587.9) Job-related: Level in organization ... -263.1 ... -3,236.8** ... 58.9 ... - 1,230.4** ... 1,059.2 (lower value = higher (194.0) (913.3) (253.8) (383.8) (556.5) position in organization) Size of organization ... 1.2* ... 9.2** ... - 1.1* ... 3.3 ... - .9 (.6) (3.6) (.6) (3.3) (.7) Professionals supervised ... 178.4** ... 404.7** ... 247.1** ... 151.6 ... 31.1 (59.0) (148.8) (62.0) (94.1) (23.1) Nonprofessionals ... 8.7 ... - 33.6 ... 4.8 ... 30.8 ... 150.2 supervised (22.5) (42.3) (4.1) (46.3) (77.1) Publications ... 68.8 ... 84.9 ... 250.3** ... 49.9 ... 374.7 (70.0) (85.0) (58.2) (30.5) (193.4) Professional activity ... 224.4 ... - 174.2 ... 420.3* ... 187.6 ... -414.5 (176.7) (513.6) (193.8) (223.4) (347.2) Constant 11,724** 11,953** 15,169** 17,105** 12,807** 11,963** 12,717** 14,471** 12,783** 10,569** (465) (610) (1,847) (2,031) (660) (883) (1,141) (1,330) (887) (1,438) .57 .65 .35 .59 .36 .55 .58 .71 .50 .57 F 59.3** 33.3** 7.3** 7.8** 21.2** 19.0** 36.2** 26.3** 16.2** 9.0** NOTE.-Standard deviations are given in parentheses. First and second regressions are given by (I) and (2). 'Variables are defined in table 1. *Significant at .05. **Significant at .01.
SALARY DETERMINATION 155 crease in earnings missed by a person who takes time out. The coefficient of leave time (if negative, as expected) measures depreciation, or loss in earning power during the time out of the labor force. Profes- sional experience and/or tenure in present job were significant for every group, but personal leave time had no effect. This means that time out of the profession has a penalty in forgone appreciation but not in depreciation; that is, librarians who take leaves return to the labor force at approximately the real (corrected for inflation) salary at which they left. For public librarians, salary is a function of experience, size of organi- zation, and number of professionals supervised. The effects of each of these variables are greater for men than for women. For men, level of organization is also significant. The constant terms also differ, indicating additional unexplained sex-linked differences. Among academic librari- ans, experience and professionals supervised are again important, with men gaining much greater returns on experience than women. Men but not women show returns to additional education and to increasing rank in organization. Professional activity and publications are significant for women but not men. Size of organization has different results for men and women: women do better in smaller organizations, men in larger ones. Again, the constants differ, indicating additional unexplained sex- linked variance. For women in school libraries, the only significant factor in table 4 is time in current organization. Unlike the other groups, general experience is insignificant in their earnings function. Overall, the factor that has the most consistent and the largest impact on salary is experience. When the same variables are significant for both men and women in a type of library, men realize higher returns. And, although the regressions in table 4 differ for each group, women in public and academic libraries appear to have similar earnings functions in terms of the significant variables and size of coefficients. Decomposing the Earnings Differential Salary differences were decomposed into those due to individual charac- teristics and those due to the earnings functions, or structure. This method of testing for the effect of sex on earnings was introduced by Alan Blinder [14] and Ronald Oaxaca [15] and has been used by many since, including Siebert and Young [221, Kathryn Longwell [27], and Randall Filer [28]. This method compares what women would have earned had their characteristics been evaluated using the male (high wage) equation with what they did in fact earn. Symbolically, this can be represented as follows. If the earnings function for men is:
156 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY yM = oM + IPMXV + e then subtracting the equation for women from that for men yields: (yM - yF) = (EM - aF) + -m(xm X, ) + ) i i The first term on the right-hand side represents the unexplained differ- ence in earnings between the two groups; the second the difference in earnings attributable to the difference in employee characteristics; the last the differences due to the coefficients, that is, the difference between how the characteristics of one group actually are rewarded versus how they would have been rewarded using the other group's earnings func- tion. The first and third components are summed to determine differ- ences due to the reward structure, while the second measures the salary difference due to employee characteristics. This residual approach has several potential problems [11]. The specification problem.-The residual reflects the effects of omitted variables. If the sexes differ on an omitted productivity-related variable, the effects of discrimination may be under- or overestimated. If the sexes do not differ on the omitted variables, of course, then there is no problem. Endogeneity of some of the choice variables.-If labor market discrimination results in women reducing their human capital accumulation, for ex- ample, then the effect of discrimination will be underestimated, because part of the difference that is due to discrimination gets attributed to human capital. The interpretation of sex differences in the regression coefficients. -Differences in the returns on experience, for example, may represent differences in worker investment in on-the-job learning or in employer treatment. Supply and demand factors.-Wages are influenced by both supply and demand factors. Ideally, separate supply and demand equations would be estimated, but such an approach is generally impractical. The earn- ings functions that are estimated are essentially reduced form estimates reflecting both supply and demand. Measure of productivity.-The human capital variables used are only proxies for productivity, not direct measures of it.
SALARY DETERMINATION 157 TABLE 5 DECOMPOSITION OF SALARY DIFFERENTIAL BETWEEN MEN AND WOMEN IN SAME TYPE OF LIBRARY TYPE OF LIBRARY Academic Public Difference in earnings (yAl _ yF) $5,642 $4,984 Difference due to characteristics Xm(Xm - XF) 3,949 4,336 Difference (%) 70 87 Difference due to structure (,M _ aF) + XX(, - f ) 1,693 648 Difference (%) 30 13 SOURCE.-Second set of regressions from table 4 and mean characteristics from table 2. These problems do not invalidate the residual method, especially since no better method has been developed. They do, however, mean that one must be cautious in interpreting the findings. Table 5 presents the results of the decomposition using the second set of regressions in table 4. Among public librarians, 87 percent of the difference between men's and women's salaries is due to differences in individual characteristics, leaving 13 percent structural, or unexplained. For academic librarians, 70 percent of the difference is explained by characteristics, with the remaining 30 percent structural, or unex- plained. In both public and academic libraries, therefore, the differ- ences in men's and women's salaries are due largely to the worker's characteristics, despite the differences between men's and women's re- ward structures within type of library. Less of the difference in academic salaries can be explained by worker characteristics, however. Comparing Salaries Because differences in earnings across groups are due to both earnings functions and employee characteristics, it is difficult to compare salaries across types of libraries directly. One approach is to estimate what one group would earn in another type of library by substituting one group's mean characteristics into another group's regression. It is difficult to determine what might have been had people chosen other work settings: many of the characteristics that enter into the regression, including, of course, the job variables but also some of the human capital variables,
158 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY TABLE 6 SUBSTITUTION OF GROUPS' MEAN CHARACTERISTICS INTO OTHERS' REGRESSIONS: GROUPS EXPECTED EARNINGS IN ALTERNATIVE LIBRARY TYPES ($) EXPECTED SALARY LIBRARY OF IN OTHER TYPES OF LIBRARIES CURRENT CURRENT EMPLOYMENT MEAN SALARY Public Academic School Women: Public 17,297 17,500 17,300 Academic 17,449 17,300 18,100 School 17,371 17,500 17,900 Men: Public 22,281 ... 23,600 Academic 23,052 19,800 would probably differ. It is instructive, nevertheless, to see what hap- pens when the substitution is made. Table 6 presents the results of the substitution of the various groups' characteristics into the regressions of the same sex in the other settings, using the second set of regressions in table 4. The women would gener- ally earn about the same in the different types of libraries. Among men, however, the difference between academic and public library salaries is substantial, with both groups earning much more in academic libraries. Of course, people's behavior is to some extent determined by the reward structures where they work, so changing library types may well change characteristics. And organizational variables are also important in all regressions but school women's. However, since organizational variables represent a level of professional achievement not explained by the other variables and probably related to ability and motivation not measured by the personal and human capital variables, it was deemed appropriate to use the second set of regressions in table 4. Another difficulty in comparing salaries is that school librarians often work less than a twelve-month year. Respondents were asked their total annual income, specifically excluding summer school, but they were not asked the number of weeks that they worked, so the data for school librarians could include income for some who worked nine months and some who worked twelve months. Simply inflating the school librarians' reported income by one-third is not justified. A more subtle problem is how individuals value nine- versus twelve-month working years. An individual may not equate ajob with a nine-month contract to one with a twelve-month contract and a one-third higher salary: time off does not pay the rent.
SALARY DETERMINATION 159 Discussion Earnings Determinants Librarians' salaries depend on professional experience and job respon- sibilities. Human capital investment and job-related variables play a lesser role. Life-cycle variables, including family situation and mobility limits, have virtually no effect. Exactly which variables are significant, and the size of their coeffi- cients, differ across library types and by sex within type. The earnings function for men in academic libraries shows the greatest effects from human capital and job achievement variables; that of women in school libraries, the least. The earnings functions of women in academic and public libraries are similar to one another and different from those of their male co-workers. Despite the differences in earnings functions, much (87 percent) of the difference in salary between men and women within public libraries can be explained by employee characteristics. Within academic libraries, less (70 percent) of the difference is ex- plainable. It is dangerous to attribute the unexplained residual to dis- crimination, however. To the extent that it is due to other factors not included in the regression, the residual overstates the effects of discrimi- nation. To the extent that the explanatory factors included in the regres- sions are themselves the result of discrimination, it understates it. What can be concluded is that much but not all of the difference in men's and women's salaries can be explained by the factors included, and that in academic libraries in particular a fairly large unexplained difference remains. Men can expect to earn more in academic than in public libraries, ceteris paribus. For women, no significant difference by type of library can be concluded. Occupational Segregation and Librarianship The results provide mixed support for the hypotheses developed from human capital theory to explain the large numbers of women in the library profession. 1. Contrary to expectations, the women in this sample show a low incidence of the factors likely to promote career interruptions: mar- riage, children, and mobility limits. Instead, strikingly large proportions of these women are not married and/or are childless. Without compara- ble data for other professions, it is impossible to say whether librarians spend an exceptional amount of time out of the labor market, but it appears unlikely. 2. As expected, librarians' earnings functions show no depreciation (loss in earnings power for time out of the labor force) and no penalties
160 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY for mobility limits and family responsibilities, and only academic men's earnings show significant returns to other forms of human capital invest- ment; but, contrary to expectations, earnings do show appreciation (increase in earnings with experience). These findings are especially significant because of the prevalence of the human capital explanation for occupational segregation and the lack of empirical tests of it at this level of occupational detail. Intraoccupational Segregation within Librarianship Research within an occupation may be a better test of theories of labor market outcomes because people within an occupation are more similar in tastes, abilities, and opportunities than those in different occupations. Within librarianship, the human capital approach leads one to expect the types of libraries to differ in their suitability for interrupted careers. The findings, again, are mixed. (1) The propensity of librarians within a type of library to interrupt their careers does not appear to be related to the representation of men in that sector. (2) Women in the different sectors vary little: female school librarians are about as likely to interrupt their careers as others, although they do spend more time on leave and are slightly more likely to be married than other women librarians. (3) However, earnings functions by library type are related to the propor- tion of men in that sector. Academic librarians' earnings, especially men's, show the greatest returns to experience and to other forms of investment, and school librarians' the least. The tendency of male librarians to go into academic libraries can be explained in part by the earnings functions. Since men earn more in academic than in public libraries, controlling for employee characteris- tics, it is rational for men to prefer academic to public libraries. Since women earn about the same in public and academic libraries, they have less economic reason to prefer one to the other. School libraries are different from other types of libraries not only in their salary functions but also in the kind of work performed and working conditions (often including a nine-month year), making them less directly comparable to the others. The conclusion to be drawn from this is that, while there are differ- ences in reward structures across library types, they provide only partial support for the human capital explanation of the distribution of men and women within librarianship or between librarianship and other occupations. What is striking about these data is that the earnings func- tions for academic men and school women seem to be at opposite ends of the continuum: the independent variables tested have the most impact on academic men's salaries and the least on school women's.
SALARY DETERMINATION 161 Alternative Explanations If human capital theory cannot satisfactorily explain occupational and intraoccupational segregation of librarians, what can? The prevailing alternative theory is demand-based institutional analysis. A definitive empirical comparison of institutional analysis and human capital theory is not possible within the limits of these data and the current state of research on demand-based theories, but some observations can be made. Institutional models shift the emphasis from the individual to the structure of labor markets and the way in which people are assigned to jobs. Segmented labor market analysis [29] postulates the existence of at least two labor market segments: a primary segment where the worker's skills are important to the production process, and a secondary one where they are not. In the primary market, a large part of the worker's skill is firm specific, and so a firm will hire workers who are expected to have low turnover; will provide good pay, benefits, and working condi- tions to keep them; and will invest in their training. The primary sphere is characterized by few entry points and by an internal labor market that governs promotions and relative salaries, limits the extent to which the employer can differentiate among people performing the same work, and creates a relatively rigid relationship among occupational categories. Employers can differentiate among people primarily in hiring and job assignment. Once people are in jobs, the employer is less likely to treat employees differently. The more preferred workers gain access to the primary market; other workers are left to the secondary sphere, where worker skill is less important, and continuity is not a goal. It has high turnover, many entry points, low salaries, and few opportunities for training or for advancement. An alternative institutional model has been proposed by Francine Blau [12]. Blau found evidence of an interfirm wage hierarchy that is relatively fixed and consistent across occupations. She suggested that firms paying high salaries (to all their employees) would have an excess supply of potential employees from which to choose and could be highly selective. Firms lower in the wage hierarchy would be less able to be selective. Within the firm, differences among workers performing the same work would be minimal owing to the internal labor market that governs promotions and relative salaries. Blau found evidence that there were more men in firms that paid higher salaries and that, within firms, differences in salary by sex were much less than those across firms. Segmented labor markets do not necessarily lead to discrimination; the question of how employees are assigned to the different segments remains. The theory of segmented labor markets was developed to explain labor market differences by sex and race, however, and the
162 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY traditional women's professions of teaching and nursing have the char- acteristics of a secondary labor market [30]. The different types of libraries may constitute different labor market segments whose boundaries are difficult to cross, so that once a librarian enters a sector she finds it difficult to change, even if jobs in another sector look more tempting. Librarians changing jobs generally stay within the same type of library [5]. Their skills are more readily transfer- able within than across sectors. Workers and employers are better able to compare jobs, skill levels, and salaries within library type, both because jobs and worker characteristics are more similar within similar libraries, and because people have better information. Given the distribution of men and women in the different types of libraries, if it is true that women's professions tend to be more like a secondary market, and if the different types of libraries constitute dif- ferent labor market segments within the profession, then segmented labor market models would lead one to expect school libraries to be the most like a secondary market, with low salaries and low rewards for investment in human capital and job advancement. Academic libraries would be the most like a primary segment, with high salaries and high returns to investment in human capital and job advancement. This is indeed roughly the case, although the differences between male and female academic librarians are greater than one would expect and the differences between women in public and academic libraries less. It is almost as though male and female librarians were operating in different segments: for women, the differences between public and academic libraries are much less than for men. Both supply- and demand-based explanations lead one to expect differences in salary structures between male and female occupations and suboccupations, with more men in the sectors with higher rewards for acquired characteristics like human capital investment and job achievement and greater penalties for discontinuous labor force attach- ment. This is indeed the case with librarianship. A major difference between supply- and demand-based theories is in the role of worker characteristics. Because supply-based models attribute differences in labor market outcomes to differences in worker characteristics, espe- cially labor market attachment, they posit greater differences in individ- uals' characteristics than demand-based models, where differences are due more to the group to which an employee belongs than to his or her own attributes. The differences in family circumstances, mobility limits, and leave-taking among the women in this sample are very small, lead- ing one to doubt the validity of supply-based explanations. The differ- ences among the reward structures in the different types of libraries are in keeping with demand-based explanations.
SALARY DETERMINATION 163 Limits of the Study This study has utilized an economic approach to sex differences in the library profession. Other approaches, especially the sociological ap- proach, are also necessary to complete the picture. This study is limited in its generalizability by the nature of the sample: members of the ALA, self-selected by their willingness and ability to pay a membership fee and no doubt by other characteristics as well. The sample is probably older and more professionally active and ac- complished than the library profession as a whole. Although this is a serious limitation, comparable data for the profession as a whole do not exist. The study is also limited by the data available. All information is self- reported. The data are cross-sectional. The categorical nature of the dependent variable makes it difficult to track rates of change. Only certain variables were available for the analysis. Several indexes (for example, of professional activity and of education) were constructed. The study would have been enhanced by more variable and continuous information (for example, years of additional education). The above analysis assumes that the models have been correctly specified and that the variables have been correctly conceptualized, operationalized, and measured. As is always the case, it is impossible to say that all these conditions have been fulfilled perfectly. To the extent that any of these conditions are not met, the results must be viewed with caution. Another limitation is that the only measure of benefits that has been used is salary. Fringe benefits could not be included; however, on aver- age, these do not differ much across types of libraries [31]. Undoubt- edly, other factors, such as working conditions, prestige, and the nature of the work itself, are important to librarians. These other factors differ less within than across occupations; other research in this area, which has also attempted to explain occupational choice using salaries, has compared unlike occupations. Furthermore, previous research [24] has shown that salary does play a role in librarians' occupational choice. Clearly, it is not the only factor, but it is one that does have validity in explaining aggregate behavior. Conclusions This study has used economic theory and methods to identify the deter- minants of librarians' salaries to test for differences in salary functions across types of libraries and sexes, and to explain the large numbers of
164 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY women in the profession and the differences in the relative numbers of men and women in the different types of libraries. One major result of this study is the development of earnings func- tions by type of libra-ry and sex. Librarians' earnings are determined largely by experience and job achievement, somewhat by other forms of human capital investment, and hardly at all by life-cycle variables. Ex- actly which of these factors are significant, and their effects on earnings, differ across types of libraries and, within type, by sex. Female school librarians are rewarded the least for investment and occupational achievement; male academic librarians earn the most, and their salaries are the most sensitive to human capital and job achievement. Men's salaries in academic and public libraries differ significantly, women's much less so. Another significant result of this study is its demonstration that much of the observed difference in men's and women's salaries can be ex- plained by worker characteristics and the type of library in which a subject is employed. The unexplained residual difference in public and especially academic salaries cannot safely be attributed to discrimination but does leave the question open. This study has also attempted to shed some light on the important question of why some occupations, including librarianship, are popu- lated largely by women. The prevailing approach in economics is human capital theory. Librarianship, however, fits only partially the portrait of a female-typed occupation painted by human capital theory. The reward structures are basically as predicted, with low penalties for career inter- ruptions and family responsibilities, but the women within the profes- sion do not appear to be predisposed toward career interruptions: large numbers are unmarried and/or childless, and few have taken leaves. One could argue that they picked this profession planning an inter- rupted career that did not materialize, but only behavior, not plans, are represented in the data. Within librarianship, the differences in earnings functions explain in part the large numbers of men in academic libraries: for men, academic libraries are the more remunerative alternative. What is not explained is why this is so; why men are in more responsible positions; and why they benefit more from improvements in salary-related characteristics than do women in the same work setting. The earnings functions in the different types of libraries differ in the directions predicted by both human capital theory and institutional analysis, but the lack of the expected differences in the personal charac- teristics of librarians raises serious questions about human capital theory as the sole explanation of intraoccupational distribution. Institutional
SALARY DETERMINATION 165 analysis appears to have potential as an explanation of intraoccupational segregation in libraries. The mixed findings regarding intraoccupational segregation are not surprising; the literature on occupational segregation is itself inconclu- sive at this point. In librarianship, as in the occupational segregation literature generally, both supply and demand factors appear to be im- portant. The institutional approach, however, merits more research. Additional research needs to be carried out using a true cross section of library professionals. ALA members are probably not fully represen- tative of their colleagues. In particular, the school librarians in this sample appear to be drawn from the higher-ranking positions. Further- more, this sample was limited to librarians in only three work settings, and in one of those settings only to women. It would also be instructive to compare librarians with individuals in similar occupations-other female-typed professions, for example-to see to what extent these findings are unique to librarians or true of other women's professions as well. Finally, it would be instructive to be able to include rewards other than salary in occupational selection. REFERENCES 1. Estabrook, Leigh S., and Heim, Kathleen M. "A Profile of ALA Personal Members." American Libraries 11 (December 1980): 654-59. 2. Heim, Kathleen M., and Estabrook, Leigh S. Career Profiles and Sex Discnrmination in the Library Profession. Chicago: American Library Association, 1983. 3. Martin, Jean K. "Salary and Position Levels of Females and Males in Academic Libraries." In The Status of Women in Libranranship: Historical, Sociologzcal, and Economic Issues, edited by Kathleen Heim. New York: Neal-Schuman Publishers, 1983. 4. Swisher, Robert, and Du Mont, Rosemary Ruhig. "Sex Structuring in Academic Libraries: Searching for Explanations." Library Quarterly 54 (April 1984): 137-56. 5. King Research, Inc. Library Human Resources: A Study of Supply and Demand. Chicago: American Library Association, 1983. 6. American Library Association. Office for Library Personnel Resources. The Racial, Ethnic, and Sexual Composition of Library Staff in Academic and Public Libranres. Chicago: American Library Association, 1981. 7. Treiman, Donald J., and Hartmann, Heidi L., eds. Women, Work and Wages: Equal Pay for Jobs of Equal Value. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 1981. 8. Beller, Andrea H. "Occupational Segregation by Sex: Determinants and Changes." Journal of Human Resources 17 (Summer 1982): 371-92. 9. Blau, Francine D., and Hendricks, Wallace E. "Occupational Segregation by Sex: Trends and Prospects." Journal of Human Resources 14 (Spring 1979): 197-210. 10. Meyer, PeterJ., and Maes, Patricia L. "The Reproduction of Occupational Segregation among Young Women." Industrial Relations 22 (Winter 1983): 115-24. 11. Blau, Francine D. "Discrimination against Women: Theory and Evidence." In Labor Economics: Modern Views, edited by William Darity,Jr. Boston: Kluwer-Nijhoff Publish- ing, 1984.
166 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 12. Blau, Francine D. Equal Pay in the Office. Lexington, Mass.: D. C. Heath & Co., 1977. 13. Machlup, Fritz. The Economics of Information and Human Capital. Vol. 3 of Knowledge: Its Creation, Distribution, and Economic Significance. Princeton, NJ.: Princeton University Press, 1984. 14. Blinder, Alan S. "Wage Discrimination: Reduced Form and Structural Estimates." Journal of Human Resources 8 (Fall 1973): 436-55. 15. Oaxaca, Ronald. "Male-Female Wage Differentials in Urban Labor Markets." Interna- tional Economic Review 14 (October 1973): 693-709. 16. Freeman, Richard B. The Market for College-trained Manpower: A Study in the Economics of Career Choice. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1971. 17. Polachek, Solomon. "Occupational Segregation: An Alternative Hypothesis." Journal of Contemporaty Business 5 (Winter 1976): 1-12. 18. Polachek, Solomon W. "Occupational Segregation among Women: Theory, Evidence, and a Prognosis." In Women in the Labor Market, edited by Cynthia Lloyd, Emily Andrews, and Curtis Gilroy. New York: Columbia University Press, 1979. 19. Polachek, Solomon W. "Occupational Approach to Self-Selection: A Human Capital Approach to Sex Differences in Occupational Structure." Review of Economics and Statistics 63 (February 1981): 61-69. 20. Zellner, Harriet S. "The Determinants of Occupational Segregation." In Sex, Discrimi- nation, and the Division of Labor, edited by Cynthia B. Lloyd. Columbia Studies in Economics, vol. 8. New York: Columbia University Press, 1975. 21. England, Paula. "The Failure of Human Capital Theory to Explain Occupational Sex Segregation." Journal of Human Resources 17 (Summer 1982): 358-70. 22. Siebert, W. S., and Young, A. "Sex and Family Status Differentials in Professional Earnings: The Case of Librarians." Scottish Journal of Political Economy 30 (February 1983): 18-41. 23. Van House, Nancy A. "The Return on the Investment in Library Education." Library and Information Science Research 7 (January-March 1985): 31-52. 24. Van House, Nancy A. "Projections of the Supply of Librarians." Library Quarterly 54 (October 1984): 368-95. 25. Lynch, Mary Jo. "Toward a Profile of ALA Membership." American Libraries 14 (October 1983): 611-12. 26. Corcora,n, Mary, and Duncan, Greg J. "Work History, Labor Force Attachment, and Earnings Differences between the Races and Sexes." Journal of Human Resources 14 (Winter 1979): 3-20. 27. Longwell, Kathryn M. "Factors Affecting the Incomes of Men and Women Physicians: Further Explorations." Journal of Human Resources 17 (Spring 1982): 261-75. 28. Filer, Randall K. "Sexual Differences in Earnings: The Role of Individual Personalities and Tastes." Journal of Human Resources 18 (Winter 1983): 82-99. 29. Doeringer, Peter B., and Piore, Michael J. "Unemployment and the 'Dual Labor Market."' Public Interest (Winter 1975), pp. 67-79. 30. Sorensen, Aage B. "Sociological Research on the Labor Market: Conceptual and Methodological Issues." Work and Occupations 10 (August 1983): 261-87. 31. American Library Association. Office for Research. Survey of Librarian Salaries. Chicago: American Library Association, 1982.