A CRITICAL INQUIRY INTO LIBRARIANSHIP: APPLICATIONS OF THE "NEW SOCIOLOGY OF EDUCATION" John Buschman' and Michael Carbone2 Much that is written about the library field does not take into account the social, political, and economic context in which libraries as institutions operate and in which librarians as professionals work. One field of scholarship that holds prom- ise as a model of critical inquiry for librarianship is the new sociology of educa- tion. This article seeks to establish and apply such an inquiry through a review of the relevant aspects of the new sociology of education and application of those insights to current research and practice in libraries. Connections of librar- ianship to dominant political, social, and economic trends are stressed. Introduction Inquiry into librarianship3 has been dominated by what Michael Harris has called the postulates of pluralism and positivism [11. Briefly, by plu- ralism Harris means that certain assumptions about American society and its libraries have characterized librarianship. Those assumptions appear to be: people in the United States are free to think and express their views (especially in print); publishers, and the media in general, are neutral, objective, and fair in their relationship to competing interests in society; librarianship serves the rights and interests of people through the neutrality of the services and collections provided; library users have pluralistic interests and use and influence libraries-like other social institutions-through the regular means of interest groups [ 1, pp. 215-16]. The working assumptions of pluralism have in turn influenced the kinds of questions to be asked of and about the library profession. Those 1. Rider College Library, Lawrenceville, New Jersey. 2. Department of Education, Muhlenberg College, Allentown, Pennsylvania. 3. The terms "librarianship" and "library field" are used in this paper as inclusive of the people and institutions of the three traditional areas of the field: public, academic, and school libraries as well as the professionals who work in those contexts. [Library Quarterly, vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 15-401 O 1991 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-2519/91/6101-0001$01.00 15
16 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY questions, Harris notes, have been studied with a positivistic form of research. Positivism is "based on the view that in the social as well as the natural sciences sense experiences and their logical and mathematical treatment are the exclusive source of all worthwhile information" [2, p. 5201. This has been translated to the social sciences in the form of a methodological imitation of the natural sciences with the attendant as- sumption that "complex [social] phenomena can best be understood by reducing them to their essential elements and examining the ways in which they interact" [3, p. 5181. The object of research is to discover laws and theories governing those phenomena in order to control them by applying the knowledge gained through research. Harris has traced how this has come to pervade and then dominate research in librarian- ship-and thus much of the profession's training and outlook-with the start and influence of the Graduate Library School at the University of Chicago [3]. The resulting (and current) agenda in librarianship Har- ris has characterized as the "dream of a physics of librarianship" [1, p. 2171. One could not do justice to the body of literature critiquing pluralism and positivism from theoretical, methodological, and practical perspec- tives, and it would not be useful to attempt to do so here. Again, Harris summarizes well the relevant points. Pluralism works on the assumption that our present social state is the result of a democratically achieved consensus. Problems are essentially technical hitches subject to the proper administrative solution, and the job of research is to find those administrative solutions. There is, in pluralism, the tendency not to ex- amine problems as possible symptoms of more fundamental social con- flicts. Also ignored in pluralist assumptions are differences in the distri- bution and access to power, access to channels of influence and information, and class. Harris argues that the neutrality upon which so much of the outlook of pluralism rests is only a surface appearance [1, pp. 216-17, 227-41]. Regarding positivism, no paradigm equivalent to the natural sciences has yet emerged that can govern even a significant minority of social scientists. Harris notes that "an essential difference between the sciences and the social (or human) sciences was that in the latter it was impossible to separate the subject (the researcher) from the object (those being studied)" [3, p. 521]. The idea of value-neutral research has been heavily critiqued. Mary Hesse has shown that, in the adoption of relationships among facts, theories, and the necessity of establishing a pragmatic crite- rion for predictive success, science itself has relied upon value judg- ments. Further, the social sciences do not have sufficient unifying theo- ries among them to satisfy the pragmatic criterion of predicting and controlling human actions [4, pp. 7-13], which would be the logical
CRITICAL INQUIRY INTO LIBRARIANSHIP 17 extension of the goals of the natural sciences projected to the social sciences. From his examination of the underlying assumptions of the library profession and its body of research, Harris concludes that "something appears to be dramatically wrong with research in library science. [The] research community . . . appears to be unable to communicate its find- ings effectively to practicing librarians [and they], always relentlessly pragmatic, don't pay any attention to the quality research that is avail- able" [3, p. 515]. In his call for a redirection and rethinking of library research, Harris reviews the new sociology of education (NSE)4 among other approaches to inquiry. Harris argues that it is the critical insight of this area into the relationship between American cultural institutions and the transmission of the dominant American culture that has rele- vance to librarianship [1, p. 237]. The remainder of this article will seek to establish the NSE as a basis for inquiry into librarianship. The new sociology of education is a perspective that interprets the complex of education, knowledge, teaching, and learning within the contexts of power, race, class, and gender in late Western capitalist de- mocracies. The mark of this field of study has been the insistence that social institutions and those who work in them cannot be studied apart from their social, political, and economic environments. As such, the NSE has for twenty years constituted an important critique of educa- tional history, reforms, and fashions. Like education, librarianship is generally considered to be in a state of change that is strongly influenced by information technology. As the Council on Library Resources noted recently, the rapidity with which changes have come "has pressed hard both library personnel and finan- cial resources and has fostered a transformation (some would say a dis- tortion) of collecting practices and service capabilities. It is certainly clear that the perception of what a library is and needs to be has changed for all time" [5, p. 25]. To understand these changes we need to look at the contexts of librarianship since "the form of our information system, the nature of education and the course of society itself" are all linked [5, p. 261. For this purpose, the new sociology of education offers an analytic perspective that holds promise. While all of the different paths of in- quiry of the NSE would not find parallels in librarianship, we believe that there is enough common ground to merit comparison. In so doing, we hope to accomplish two things. First, we can begin to sketch a critical inquiry into librarianship. As the Council on Library Resources has stated, "public and institutional policy questions, as distinct from techni- 4. The authors have chosen, from among several equivalent and standard abbreviations in this field of writing, to use in this paper "NSE" for "new sociology of education."
18 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY cal topics, are of great importance but receive little rigorous attention" [5, p. 27]. Second, by expanding the scope of the new sociology of education, its efficacy as a tool of analysis will be strengthened. In the process, we hope to raise different kinds of questions about librarian- ship. Through application of the kind of inquiry suggested by the NSE, the authors seek to examine the given, the taken-for-granted aspects of librarianship that, on the surface, appear to be "natural" and "objective" events. By demonstrating that they are related to outside agendas and trends, we question some of the automatic assumptions and movements of the profession. Such questions do not assume that previous writing about librarianship is wrong but rather that the current trajectory of librarianship represents choices made among alternatives. Those choices are open to question and demonstrations of proof. There are three steps in applying the new sociology of education to librarianship. First, the legitimacy of comparing the education and li- brary fields must be established; second, a summary review of the rele- vant aspects of the NSE will be given; and finally we will apply the NSE analysis to librarianship and discuss some of the questions raised. Comparison of the Education and Library Fields Establishing a basis for comparing librarianship and education begins with the institutions themselves. The Council on Library Resources con- siders the nature of the information and education systems to be inti- mately related. Even more fundamental is the link of libraries and schools as educative institutions in our culture. This is well illustrated in the charges put to school and academic libraries. Jean Key Gates defines the purpose of a school library program as "to support and further the purposes of the school or district of which it is a part" and observes that "the primary characteristic of a good academic library is its complete identification with its own institution" [6, pp. 191, 178]. This common purpose between schools and libraries extends beyond libraries specifically integrated into schools. According to the ALA Hand- book, municipal public libraries are charged with the support of group and individual needs "for information, education, self-realization, recre- ation, and cultural growth" and for supporting people's responsibilities in the community and as citizens [6, p. 661. While libraries have other social and cultural duties, they clearly share in the role and responsibility to educate the public. Lawrence Cremin's conception of education in "configurations" explains this idea well and links educative purposes and effects across public and private boundaries and among institutions. In sum, families, religions, and media as well as schools and libraries all
CRITICAL INQUIRY INTO LIBRARIANSHIP 19 educate, and all have their curricula within particular configurations of education [7, pp. 30-32; 5, pp. 17-18]. As institutions, libraries and schools share historical similarities as well. The development of the common school and the foundation for modern public education roughly parallels the period of the emergence of the public library. It has been said that "the beginning of our Ameri- can system of free public education provided a strong stimulus to the public library idea" [6, p. 67]. Both institutions were part of the move toward bureaucratization in the same era. Joel Spring notes that during the 1830s state supervision and organization of schools was a major reform in education [8, p. 72], while during the late 1840s and early 1850s George Ticknor and Edward Everett established the importance of library trustees at Boston Public Library [6, pp. 66-68]. The two respective professions are also comparable. Both teaching (with the exception of the professoriate) and librarianship are notable for the presence of a large proportion of women in the profession. By 1870-1900 women began to achieve numerical dominance in the teach- ing profession [9, pp. 316-171. The first female clerk was hired at Bos- ton Public Library in 1852, and women came to represent two-thirds of library workers by 1878 and over three-fourths by 1910 [10, p. 201]. Women presently make up two-thirds of the elementary and secondary teaching force and have maintained this level for the past twenty-five years [ I1], while over 80 percent of current master's degree candidates in the library field are women [12, p. 611]. Moreover, both teaching and librarianship have been seen as low- status professions. Women were "one answer to the great American quest to educate everybody, but to do it cheaply," and teaching in gen- eral was "almost universally rejected as a vocation" by the upper and upper-middle classes [9, pp. 311, 316-17]. In the 1970s teaching still drew from "young persons who do not have many other attractive pro- fessional options. They have chosen teaching as a profession because they recognized it as the most probable avenue out of blue collar and small business jobs" [13, p. 11]. Even the influx of some middle-class women into teaching did not change the overall status of the profession [14, pp. 465-66]. Despite changes, recent studies of the socioeconomic background of new teacher candidates show continuity in these histori- cal trends. For instance, education majors still tend to come from fami- lies with less income than non-education majors [15] and go to nearby colleges [16]. Further, education students bring "modest resources for attending and financing a college education," still have limited career expectations, and tend to have a certain amount of cultural insularity [16]. Some have linked the historically low status of librarianship to its feminization, which, according to Michael Winter, is "not so much the
20 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY numerical predominance of women, but rather the dominance of a ste- reotypically feminine image, attached to all librarians" [17, p. 34]. Fi- nally, it almost goes without saying, both professions have been histori- cally low paid by professional standards. Based on broad historical similarities, it would seem that applying the insights from research in education to librarianship is plausible and reasonable. What follows, then, is an overview sketch of some of the features of the new sociology of education and four areas of inquiry of particular interest to librarianship. The New Sociology of Education: A Brief Sketch A book from the British educational scholar Michael Young appeared in 1971. With that book, Knowledge and Control [181, the sociology of education took a new direction. As Young stated in a recent review and critique of the NSE, "academic work in education is inescapably involved in the wider movements and forces for social change and . . . therefore there is no escape from a clearer and more explicit sense of its political purposes" [19, p. 4]. The idea of the NSE was to redefine the sociology of education as a field of inquiry focused on the study of educational processes and pedagogy, specifically "around the problem of school knowledge, its definition and transmission" [19, p. 5]. Since the 1980s the NSE has become closely identified with "radical" or "critical" sociolo- gies of education [19, p. 41. This new field of inquiry has gone through several stages of growth and has now begun to come of age. However, the evaluation offered in 1977 by Jerome Karabel and A. H. Halsey is still correct today: the "new sociology of education is too new to permit a confident assessment of its contribution. Its influence so far derives less from research findings than from the distinctively different research priorities it proposes" [20, p. 52]. This is no small contribution, and, in fact, is one of the NSE's primary goals. By raising alternative questions, the NSE has managed to promote inquiry into many aspects of educa- tion and its institutions previously taken for granted. Seminal authors in this area of inquiry include Michael Young [18], Samuel Bowles and Herbert Gintis [21], Michael Apple [22], and Henry Giroux [23]. Excellent reviews and summaries of this work may be found in works by Madan Sarup [24], Jerome Karabel and A. H. Halsey [20], Stanley Aronowitz and Henry Giroux [25], and Mike Cole [26]. Perhaps Apple best characterizes the project of the NSE when he writes that people "are not simply objects of study but agents of change, of social forces they create beyond themselves. It is the recognition of these
CRITICAL INQUIRY INTO LIBRARIANSHIP 21 social dynamics, the fundamentally socio-political character of education policy, practice, and outcomes that seems to be missing in... research" [27, pp. 5-6]. The primary sources of the theoretical and conceptual framework of the NSE are drawn from interpretive analyses and Marxist perspectives that reject more traditional sociological inquiry and its positivistic base and orientation. Positivism, as earlier defined, is rejected because it stresses "the scientific method and statistical measurement, and sepa- rates 'facts' from 'values,' 'knowledge' from 'interest'" [24, p. 3]. With positivistic inquiry, social phenomena and institutions are not studied within social contexts but, rather, as if they were objective realities. Posi- tivistic forms of inquiry, the NSE argues, tend to be consensual, atheo- retical, and supportive of the status quo. In rejection of positivism, the NSE has contributed to the critical ex- amination of the taken-for-granted. The social world and its related institutions like schools and libraries are situated within the larger con- text of corporate capitalism and systems of power, class interests, gen- der, and technology. The NSE argues that there are important alterna- tive ways of ordering priorities and values and makes us aware of other ways of approaching problems. Inherently, the NSE leads to questions of whose interests are being served and out of what historical and cul- tural configurations institutions and knowledge emerge. For educators, then, ideas like the literary and intellectual canon, intelligence, and stu- dent ability (to name just a few categories) lose absoluteness and become fluid objects of study and inquiry. For instance, our assumptions about the universality of the literary and intellectual canon have been heavily critiqued. Clearly, once the canon is taken out of the realm of the univer- sal, its social and political nature is open to investigation. As Henry Giroux and Harvey Kaye have written, "the canon was considered to be a possession of dominant classes or groups; indeed the canon was fash- ioned as a safeguard to insure that the cultural property of such groups was passed on [and thus did not] incorporate and reflect the experience and aspirations of women, members of minority groups and children of the working class who have been entering the academy" [281. As it has developed, the NSE has become an eclectic movement influ- encing and embracing many areas of critical inquiry in education. Sev- eral directions and facets of inquiry within this body of literature present themselves as significant and useful for an analysis that seeks to study librarianship. These are: the sociology of knowledge, questions of power and its distribution, the nature of teaching as a world of work, and, finally, how institutions function within late corporate capitalist econo- mies and liberal democracies. Each deserves a brief closer examination.
22 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY The Sociology of Knowledge The major thrust of the NSE is to suggest that knowledge, or what counts as knowledge, is socially constructed. As Young has written: Knowledge transmitted in education is neither absolute nor arbitrary but is available "sets of meanings" which do not "emerge" but are collectively given. What is regarded as "logical" or "valid" is based on various standardized models which are necessarily sets of shared meanings which come to be taken for granted. The "rules" . . . are negotiated and selected in accordance with the purpose of the discourse, or the intentions of the enquirers. One of the out- comes of this view is that teachers may take these "rules" . . . for granted and then see the failure to comply with the social conventions of teachers as forms of deviance. [This suggests] that the interaction involved is in part a product of the dominant defining categories. [24, p. 15] This interpretation has led to critical questions about schooling-what is learned in schools, who learns it, and why. For example, whose knowl- edge gets into school curricula and how does it get there? What forms of legitimation does it take on, and, most important, how is it distrib- uted? How is such knowledge determined? What kind of cultural system does this knowledge legitimate and whose interest does it serve [25, p. 145]? While there are no "answers" to these questions in such a brief review, broadly speaking, the NSE has defined these as political ques- tions. What has been certified as knowledge and the method by which it has come to be established in schools has a dialectical relationship to political and economic needs, primarily of liberal capitalism. Unlike schools, use of libraries is not compulsory, but as Harris notes, libraries, like schools, are charged with perpetuating the dominant culture [1, p. 237]. The political nature of knowledge distribution suggests an impor- tant area of inquiry for librarianship. Power and Teachers' Work In studying how power manifests itself in schools, classrooms, curricula, and among students, teachers, and administrators, the NSE has raised questions about teacher autonomy and work alienation. Using Marxist ideas about alienation and human labor, these sociologists have noted the de-skilling of teachers in the form of prepackaged curricula, the rationalization of teachers' work through the introduction of educa- tional technologies, primarily computers, and institutionalized hierar- chical arrangements that tend to erode autonomy. The NSE has investi- gated the social and political uses and consequences of technology using Harry Braverman's concept of technology as social artifact [29]. This analysis has demonstrated that the introduction of computers into class- rooms brings attendant forms of classroom organization and bureau- cratic control. For example, teacher de-skilling now means that "skills
CRITICAL INQUIRY INTO LIBRARIANSHIP 23 and knowledge intrinsic to a job can now be rationalized and integrated into ... computer software.... The net result is ... a severely limited range of professional behavioral possibilities. A teacher's need to under- stand the normative function of schooling and the ability to achieve goals based on that understanding is severely circumscribed [and] does not include the what, how, when, and why of teaching something" [29, p. 209]. Any field that looks at the impact of the computer on inquiry and knowledge has an immediate relevance to librarianship. Gender and Teachers' Work By studying power through the forms of capitalist work organization, the NSE has examined schools as workplaces as well as the relative strength of teaching as a profession and its historical position within the larger social configuration of work, social status, and prestige. Gender has figured quite heavily into this analysis. As Apple suggests, gender is important because "we cannot completely understand why curricula are built the way they are without understanding at the same time who is doing the teaching" [14, p. 455]. Apple argues that gender has figured heavily in explaining why there have been so many attempts by outside forces (states, bureaucrats, industry) to control the curricula and peda- gogy of classrooms [14, p. 455]. The issue of gender, as studied in the NSE, includes more than the concentration of women in teaching and their status relative to men within and outside the profession. Also in- duded is how gender relates to issues of work autonomy and control of "women's work." The parallel to librarianship is obvious. Schools and Capitalist Economies A primary area of study within the NSE is the attempt to understand how schools function in an unequal social and economic system. A main thrust of this line of inquiry is the exploration of tension and contradic- tion between the needs of a capitalist economy in the reproduction of social class and a labor force and the goal of promoting full personal development, democratic social equity, and empowerment. Schools as institutions serve both functions in their dialectical relationship to a lib- eral capitalist society. NSE analyses have shed light upon the workings of corporate capital- ism and its influence on social institutions like schools. For example, although much revised, the correspondence principle, as developed by Bowles and Gintis, still stands as an important theoretical insight for the NSE. Briefly defined, this principle asserts that the school helps to integrate youth into the economic system through a correspondence between its social relations between teachers and students, students and students, administrators and teachers, and students and their work, and
24 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY the social relations of production within capitalist forms of work organi- zation and social class. The school helps to develop kinds of personal demeanor, self-presentation, self-image, and social class identification that are important ingredients of job adequacy. Also, hierarchical rela- tions of work are reflected in the vertical organization of school adminis- tration; alienated labor is reflected in the students' lack of control over the curriculum and through the system of grades rather than the stu- dents' integration with the learning process. In sum, "by attuning young people to a set of social relationships similar to those of the work place, schooling attempts to gear the development of personal needs to its requirements" [26, p. 31. Institutions like libraries that also exist within democratic societies and capitalist economies would face similar forces. By changing the nature of educational research, the NSE hopes to change the nature of power relationships between school and society and teacher and student in order to fulfill the promises inherent in democratic education. Perhaps by asking similar questions of librarian- ship and applying relevant insights from the NSE, a change can be made in the nature of library research, and important social issues will be addressed as a result. We turn now to such an analysis. Librarianship Viewed from an NSE Perspective Librarianship and the Sociology of Knowledge It is an article of faith that librarianship plays (or should play) an impor- tant role in the distribution of knowledge and information. The explo- sion of knowledge and information and our heightened ability to store and retrieve data have made issues of distribution and access more polit- ically important. Part of the problem are the complex relationships among politics/policy and technology and the economic context of our media. While these issues have been discussed in the library literature, the NSE provides a way of interpreting connections and probing further into political and power questions related to knowledge and information distribution and access. Put succinctly, knowledge and information are becoming more cen- tralized. Ben Bagdikian has chronicled this process in a landmark article in the Nation. Summarizing his findings, he observes that "a handful of mammoth private organizations have begun to dominate the world's mass media" and "together they exert a homogenizing power over ideas, culture and commerce that affects populations larger than any in his- tory" [30, pp. 805, 8071. The system of producing and distributing knowledge and informa- tion is being homogenized and centralized as well. Bagdikian notes that
CRITICAL INQUIRY INTO LIBRARIANSHIP 25 three conditions are needed for true freedom of information: freedom to read (and watch and listen to) all available media, diverse sources, and access. The last two are being seriously curtailed since the new planetary corporations "are just as ready as any dictatorship to suppress or de-emphasize news that might seriously question their power" [30, p. 8121. Increasingly, these corporations control, or seek to control, the entire media process from production through distribution, subsidiary distribution, publicity, and related media products. For instance, Time Warner, Inc., is the largest magazine publisher in the country (Time, Life, Sports Illustrated, etc.) but also owns both a mass-market book pub- lishing firm (Warner Books) and hardback and trade houses (Little Brown, Scott Foresman, and Time-Life). Time Warner also owns the Book-of-the-Month Club, the second largest record company, cable tele- vision firms, and Warner Brothers Pictures [30, p. 808]. Harris notes that much of what we take as objectivity on the part of journalists is driven by common understandings and limits to the amount of news that can be covered through the values and professional practices of journalism. "Powerful political and economic forces can dra- matically influence decisions on what is news, and the character of that news" [1, p. 2271. Walter Karp has written about the national media's overwhelming dependence on official sources and contacts with influ- ential politicians and their relative passivity in passing on that informa- tion. The role of the "adversarial press," he states, is largely a fiction [311. Advertisers greatly influence the content of the media as, for exam- ple, when the New York Times was pressured over coverage of auto safety issues in the 1970s [32, p. 661. In textbook publishing, ten of the largest college textbook firms con- trol over 75 percent of college text sales, and the eight largest firms publishing elementary and secondary textbooks account for 53 percent of the market [27, pp. 92-93]. Moreover, in a 1979 study of seventeen widely used secondary U.S. history textbooks, Jean Anyon concludes that those textbooks were not neutral in their descriptions of a crucial period in American labor and economic history and instead reflected the priorities of later powerful groups [33, p. 382]. These considerations are a part of the commercial book trade as well, as illustrated by the recent gutting of Pantheon Books. Pantheon's out- put was to be cut by 60 percent as a cost/loss cutting measure [34]. These decisions came from Pantheon's parent company, Random House, and the conglomerate that owns it, S. 1. Newhouse [351. Yet, according to one editor, by industry standards Pantheon produced a large number of high-risk titles for a relatively small sum, and other Random House divisions were losing money. Another measure of the profitability of Pantheon indicated that it would sell for at least thirty times its original
26 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY price [34]. An editorial in Publisher's Weekly stated that Pantheon "was certainly the one house through which valuable critiques of many Amer- ican assumptions, institutions, and attitudes could regularly find an out- let" [36]. Despite the prestige of the house, Newhouse had long sought to shut it down because of the "'left leaning' content of many of Pan- theon's titles" [35]. The same period has seen the privatization and restriction of govern- ment information. William Summers has noted: "When the government creates information it has a duty to make that information available to citizens . . . at the lowest possible cost or even on a subsidized basis if it is important. We have seen a serious eroding of that principle . . . under the Reagan administration. Since 1982 one out of every four of the government's 16,000 publications has been eliminated. [The Office of Management and Budget has become] the information czar in this country [requiring] cost-benefit analysis of government information ac- tivities, maximum reliance on the private sector, and cost recovery through user charges" [37, pp. 4-5]. Government information, gath- ered at the public's expense, is privatized by selling or giving it to a private company that can profitably repackage and remarket it. In turn, the traditional requirements of public access to government information are neglected. Private companies are under no obligation to make this information available to the public, or if they do, it does not need to be accessible, affordable, or archived [38, pp. 23-26; 39, pp. 3-9; 40, pp. 102-3]. Fees charged for access to this information are inherently dis- criminatory in a system based on free access as a right. A crucial development toward privatization is the use of information technology, which has figured prominently in new abilities to reduce "needless paperwork," store and distribute the information in different patterns, and turn distribution of government information over to pri- vate companies [41, pp. 15-21; 39; 42]. These companies in turn have promoted further privatization through the lobbying efforts of the In- formation Industry Association, and some enjoy a near monopoly on certain types of government information at low or no cost [43, p. 128; 38]. Five vendors supply over 90 percent of the use and sales of data- bases in this country [37, p. 5], and, further, the hardware needed to retrieve the newer electronic information is centralized: two-thirds of all the world's computers are manufactured by IBM, and four companies control the market for workstations [44, pp. 35-36]. John Haar has noted that "the basic function of the industry is to trade in access to and manipulation of information. And information is by its nature an essential component of power in our society" [45, p. 40]. Libraries, which rent access to privatized information, participate both in support of that industry and in distributing access to that component of power.
CRITICAL INQUIRY INTO LIBRARIANSHIP 27 The result is a system that mostly favors the business (private) sector at the expense of the public's right to know. The database industry has grown from $127 million in 1982 [46, p. 15] to $2.5 billion in 1989 [471, much of this growth fueled by remarketing government information [40]. Private companies profit by selling the hardware and software needed to store and retrieve this information. Additionally, databases develop preponderantly along the lines of business or business-related fields. For example, the 1990 DIALOG Database Catalog lists over three hundred fifty databases categorized by twenty-five general subjects. Of those twenty-five subject areas, twelve are specifically business related, and of the other thirteen, five (agriculture and nutrition, computer tech- nology, patents and trademarks, and science and technology) are of primary interest to the business and economics fields. Only the ONTAP (practice) databases and those dealing with books, reference sources, and the social sciences and humanities could be construed as largely irrelevant to business inquiries [48, pp. 1-6]. Libraries can gain access to these databases at a cost, but they are plugging into a system devel- oped from a business context, which has affected its content and struc- ture of access. Ironically, even the Library of Congress has participated in this movement through its well-publicized aborted attempt to levy charges to recover costs on bibliographic records that it has traditionally produced at low cost for the library community. These developments directly affect libraries. The producers of library materials are being narrowed to very few companies, and despite the profusion of titles on the shelves, if the spines on those titles were to be "replaced by the corporate colophon of the few who own this output, the collage would go gray with the few media multinationals that now command the field" [30, p. 807]. How well do librarians recognize and represent the context of the resources they collect, and how well does library education help librari- ans to see the political nature of the sources they use? Further, as Bag- dikian notes, "many of the most prestigious scientific societies have given publishing rights to corporations in order to save or make money. The resulting price increases . . . have forced university and other libraries to reduce the number of journals they buy" [30, pp. 812, 815]. Librarianship participates in an economic structure of information dissemination that is now threatening access to print and online re- sources. The economic power of libraries in purchasing and renting information should be directly coupled with the value of access implied in the profession and institutions of librarianship. The sources libraries collect are not objective; they represent and reflect the political and economic biases of the system. Wayne Wiegand has concluded that "from a larger society's perspective, the library's authority has been indi-
28 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY rect. It can be found primarily in collections, not in services.... Librari- ans have not been inclined to contest the decisions of the canon-making coalition [that is,] decisions . . . emanating from certified groups of expert professionals" concerning the contents of those collections [49, p. 75]. Questions related to political issues should be asked in the analy- sis of knowledge and information institutions; the traditional values of balance and objectivity only mask the context of information and power. One should ask how some of the standard, widely used reference books tend to shape and focus the inquiries of librarians and patrons. This must be done in order for librarianship to retain the credibility of its longstanding values. Librarians and Power By focusing on past patterns of power in education, the NSE has identi- fied serious questions about teachers' power and professional autonomy and the relationship of those professional concerns to technology. A resulting insight is the application of the blue-collar concept of job de- skilling (from industrialization and now automation) to the work world of teachers. Apple has noted that de-skilling tends to "separate concep- tion from execution" [50, p. 142]. With teachers this takes place through the centralizing and bureaucratizing potential of information technol- ogy and embedding of professional knowledge and control in it rather than in professionals. This same trend poses serious questions for librar- ianship. Winter has summarized the initial issues well in his discussion of the potential deprofessionalization of librarianship. A profession controls itself and attempts to control delivery of its services. Computers, on the other hand, undercut control of a knowledge base and result in outside experts brought in to use and maintain the hardware and software. Second, computers de-skill, and thus deprofessionalize, some library jobs. "Examples abound in acquisitions and cataloging, where the ratio of professional to nonprofessional workers has greatly declined in re- cent years" [17, p. 51]. Third, while the complexity of information re- trieval suggests an enhanced professional role for librarians, "one of the main trends in the information industry is to simplify access to put it within reach of the average consumer. If this trend continues . . . the deprofessionalization thesis will seem more plausible" [17, p. 52]. The development of CD-ROM products for general use certainly points in this direction. Last, as a result of the changes wrought by the introduc- tion of computers, supervisory functions of librarians are greater in number, and management in general has grown and changed in re- sponse to the increasing complexity of library organization [.17, pp. 50-52].
CRITICAL INQUIRY INTO LIBRARIANSHIP 29 In examining the deprofessionalization issue, the widely held assump- tion that information technology enhances the professional status of librarians must be questioned. The ultimate goal of artificial intelligence and expert system research is to build systems that can mimic human thought, discovery, and learning [51]. But Aronowitz concludes that the result of a true artificial intelligence in the library field will be to reduce the labor force and eliminate jobs. He notes that information systems have begun to have this effect already in fields like engineering where much professional knowledge has been embedded in information tech- nology [52]. Daniel Dennett has identified a similar trend in medicine, where expert systems have begun to take over diagnostic responsibilities, "leaving doctors as living interfaces between patient and system, who consolidate their direct observations into machine-readable symptom- atology and execute the therapeutic directives of the system" [53, p. 1391. According to Apple, there are enhanced jobs in education related to the centralized data and curricular systems-he calls this re-skilling -but the majority of jobs would be de-skilled as a result [50, p. 143]. Librarians are at least as likely to become de-skilled and deprofession- alized as they are to benefit from the introduction of information tech- nology. Another aspect of deprofessionalization is raised by James Govan, who discusses the notion of libraries' becoming mere market outlets for private information databases. "To the degree that libraries become retailing shops, to that degree will librarians cease to be professionals and will become shopkeepers of necessity" [54, p. 38]. Emily Fayen has asserted that, in a computer database-driven information environment, librarians would do well to adopt the ethic of the corporate information database manager as a professional model [55]. Glimpses into the future offer the vision of a reference desk stocked with a terminal, forms, and programs to answer frequently asked questions, and if help is still needed, the system could provide the office hours of a librarian with expertise on the subject [56, p. 580]. If this seems farfetched, consider the Educational Testing Service, which has software programs "specifi- cally designed to help young readers find library books that are compati- ble with their interests.... The database covers all reading levels appro- priate to teenage readers and deals with themes and issues that reflect the concerns of today's teenagers" [57]. This sounds remarkably like the professional turf of a young-adult services librarian in a public or school library. Can we take seriously the notion that librarianship will be an exception to the tendency toward the development of expert systems and deprofessionalization in the white-collar workplace? Second, historical changes in library administration suggest a general tendency toward centralization and increased bureaucratic control. A
30 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY century ago, library administrators were scholarly bibliophiles and skilled amateurs, but the library field has moved steadily in the direction of professional managers. That change came about initially as a result of the increasing size of collections and staffs, and it has been accelerated in recent years by information technology and the changes wrought as a result [46, pp. 29-42; 16, pp. 50-53]. As Winter has observed, "Library administrators [are now] a separate occupational group long split off from the main occupation [and] tend to think in terms of the organiza- tions they manage.... Their main focus is elsewhere [and their] refer- ence group includes other administrators whose managerial reach ex- tends over a number of occupational groups" [17, p. 138]. We cannot assume that the administration of work in an information technology environment will necessarily be more humane or encourage more creativity. Certainly, work in the computer industry itself does not provide a model of dynamic or fulfilling work of the future. As Ernest Kahane and Andrew Oram have remarked, "The majority of employees are routine wage-earners . . . found on the assembly line or in clerical positions and support staff. [For professional employees] computer companies stress standardization of work and the technical implementa- tion of immediate goals, while de-emphasizing the creative contributions of individuals and the evaluation of fundamental purposes. Such rein- forcement of technocratic values and centralization parallels the trend in other areas of society to use computers for the heightening of auto- mation" [58, p. 71]. Aronowitz notes that for libraries to continue to fulfill the educative and democratic function of free access to knowledge and information, we will always need librarians. But can librarians assume that through the adoption of information technologies they will continue to preserve that function? The issue is not whether the answer to that question is yes or no but, rather, that the question itself becomes a prominent professional issue. It seems clear from much of the literature on planning that (the inevi- table and good) technological change in libraries is assumed to be an administrative prerogative. Susan K. Martin comments that typically, this outlook views the process as depending mostly on whether "the management team is conservative or daring. . . . Usually a library with a strong leader and few committees will be bold in its actions because that institution does not need to take time to send potential recommen- dations through all the committees which require a voice in the deci- sion.... Organizational structure [will change] only if the introduction of technology matches the administration's desire to make a particular change" [59, pp. 381-82]. This does not sound like a blueprint for a future decentralized, collegial library workplace. Again, the question is
CRITICAL INQUIRY INTO LIBRARIANSHIP 31 not whether a collegial workplace is the ultimate goal but, rather, the degree to which our working assumptions about technology and man- agement preclude such a choice. As with other areas of work in the economy, technology is extending supervisory and management control within the library. So far it seems to have been aimed primarily at support staff. The responses to a "How Do You Manage?" column in Library Journal on a hypothetical "Elec- tronic Supervisor" were interesting [60]. Briefly, the management prob- lem of poor, or obtrusive, supervision of support staff through elec- tronic supervision was put forth, and respondents were asked to analyze the relevant issues. Electronic "spying" was described by a management librarian as a symptom of deeper problems in the library [61], and a library director's response said flatly that blaming automation was a red herring since it was only a management tool being used "without too much finesse" [62]. No one questioned the technology itself and the radical innovation in supervision and control made possible by it. The responses immediately defended the machine, noting instead problems with the people. The point is that the "solutions" offered by the respon- dents assumed that the technology was a neutral factor in the hypotheti- cal situation. But the possibility of electronic supervision tends to change significantly the nature of the problem and the balance of power in the staff/supervisor relationship. Is it reasonable to assume that the tools of information technology and the resulting management techniques will never be used on professionals? Under "narrowly technical [administra- tors] concerned primarily with producing a marriage between organiza- tion theory and the principles of 'sound' business management" [25, p. 27], librarians' professional freedoms will come to stand more starkly in contrast to the discipline inherent in a business-model bureaucracy [17, p. 131. Librarians and Work Teaching as a gendered profession and its effects upon teachers' work and autonomy were discussed earlier. Apple describes gendered labor in two ways. First, women's work is vertically divided, "in which women as a group are disadvantaged relative to men in pay and in the condi- tions under which they labor." Second, women are subject to a "horizon- tal division of labor where women are concentrated in particular kinds of work" [14, p. 456]. We suggest that women in librarianship are simi- larly divided. There has been much study in this area. Dee Garrison has written an excellent historical sketch of the feminization of the profes- sion. As women began to move into the library field and then dominate in numbers during the last twenty-five years of the nineteenth century, "charming theories were developed by both sexes to explain why the
32 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY feminine mind and nature were innately suited to the new occupation. [This] came to encompass librarianship as one of the proper fields open to women . . . because libraries held books and books denoted Cul- ture.... By late nineteenth century, women's sphere decidedly included the guardianship and enjoyment of culture" [10, p. 203]. Women's abil- ity (or lack of choice) to endure tedium and very low wages was also a factor drawing them into that field of work. Thus the historical begin- nings of women in librarianship were placed well within Victorian ideas of gender that led in turn to a conception of the field as a low-paid public service suitable for women [10]. This heritage has continued to this day. Donald Treiman's excellent review of the studies and statistics relevant to the pay equity issue in libraries reports that librarians are generally paid substantially less than comparably demanding professions, most probably as a consequence of its being a woman's profession [63, pp. 27, 23]. Librarians earn only 59 percent of what another typical worker with five or more years of higher education makes [63, p. 26]. Librarianship has been and continues to be numerically dominated by females and as such suffers from the con- sequent devaluing of work reflected in low pay. There is, however, a second area of interest: gender biases within the library profession. Garrison shows that historically, men quickly rose to leadership of the (by then) female-dominated library field. Further, she notes that those men played a significant role in casting women in librar- ianship in the traditional Victorian mold, consequently forming divi- sions of labor and definitions of library work that fit that gendered concept. Garrison quotes from Justin Winsor, an influential library leader of the time, to illustrate this point: "In American libraries we set a high value on women's work. They soften our atmosphere, they lighten our labor, they are equal to our work, and for the money they cost-if we must gauge such labor by such rules-they are infinitely better than the equivalent salaries will produce of the other sex" [10, p. 202]. Today, differences in pay between men and women librarians are relatively small as compared to other occupations (women are paid 94 to 97 percent of what men are paid in the field [63, p. 26]). However, differences do exist and are a persistent factor. There is an overall tendency toward favoring males in the workplace in most occupations. But "if there is discrimination against women in librarianship, it is more likely to be found in hiring and promotion decisions than in differences in pay for particular positions," since men are more likely to be found at higher levels within an organization and are more prevalent in the highest status (academic) libraries [63, p. 27]. David Dowell has also confirmed the general point in his study of the effect of gender upon
CRITICAL INQUIRY INTO LIBRARIANSHIP 33 salary. With twenty variables such as supervision responsibilities, length of service, and education held constant, a woman still earned 95.3 per- cent of the salary of a man [64, p. 97]. If at this point one can concede that librarianship fits the description of gendered work, both vertically and horizontally, then a possible workplace issue may be explored. Peter Rossi has commented that in professions in which women pre- dominate, "those occupations are not seen as seriously competing with other professions for personnel and resources, . . . develop[ingl within themselves a division of labor and accompanying status along sex lines" [10, p. 209]. This would explain in part why librarians have been so quick to embrace information technology. One of the authors has ar- gued elsewhere that, in an anxious push to capitalize on the glowing publicity afforded computers, librarians have uncritically endorsed the agenda inherent in the technology as a way of overcoming poor profes- sional status and image [65]. The NSE has noted and questioned the kinds of control aimed at gendered work. The critique of information technology that has been put forth in this article suggests that librarian- ship faces the possibility of becoming a de-skilled profession with more centralized bureaucratic control. Embracing information technology can be seen as what Kathleen Weibel describes as the "acceptance and even affinity for bureaucratic and hierarchical structures ... and compliance [which are] the hallmarks of the feminized professions" [66, p. 290]. In other words, current trends in information technology and library administration discussed earlier are related to the gendered status and history of librarianship. Issues of workplace and professional autonomy go beyond relative salary and biases within the profession and are con- nected to the feminized status of librarianship. The investigation of these connections is related to general issues of social equity and work autonomy and control of gendered work. Libraries and Capitalist Economies The NSE has argued that education has responded to the needs of American business in a manner detrimental to democratic and civic values, and that process tends to obscure the predominant economic agendas in democratic rhetoric. "Nowhere is it written that American schools are required to track, test, control, and sort out in response to the demands of the Pentagon or to those obsessed with exploiting mar- kets overseas" writes Maxine Greene [67, pp. ix-x]. However, there is no such thing as an economic determinism governing the course of education. The potential to greater serve democracy, social justice, and personal empowerment is always present. In applying this insight from the NSE to libraries, it should be noted that the tradition of serving democratic values and an informed citizenry has long been in place in
34 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY librarianship. There are, however, trends in librarianship that suggest that libraries have come in recent years to be more affected by an eco- nomic agenda. Some of this is implied in previous sections of this article. Certainly the trend toward privatization and centralization of information carries with it a heavy undertone of a driving economic agenda. Both the fed- eral government and private business view information primarily as an economic commodity as witnessed by the privatization of government information. Since libraries have traditionally dealt in what is now con- sidered a commodity, they cannot help but be pulled along, willingly or not. Second, through libraries' incorporation of information technology they have participated, however minor their contribution, in the agenda of converting the public to literate consumers ready for a technology- driven marketplace. This lays some of the social groundwork for com- puter-literate workers supposedly demanded by new high technology jobs [68, pp. 64-65]. Previously explored ideas of librarians as database managers and marketers of private information sources are relevant as well. There are other forces at work drawing libraries closer to more explic- itly economic agendas. John Kenneth Galbraith noted in 1979 a drive to save taxes by cutting public services (among them libraries) in the name of personal economic choice and liberties and the desirability of private services. Consequently, "the services curtailed (or which will be curtailed) have their heaviest impact on urban dwellers of the lowest income. [Those services] are neither less important nor more damaging to freedom than private services" [69, p. 483]. What Galbraith identified as a specific threat to public libraries has come to be identified as a general trend. While specifically analyzing trends in schools, Aronowitz and Giroux have noted a "technicist orientation [that] has been conso- nant with the tendency of American society as a whole toward depolitiza- tion and privatization.... Pressured by the long term decline of public revenues, [schools] have turned to increasing their ties with private re- sources, particularly business" [25, p. 197]. We suggest that this has affected much of librarianship as well. Academic libraries, as of 1986, have come to rely increasingly on private sources of funds [70). Public libraries are being urged to plug into the foundation and philanthropy network to provide funds for automation, and consultants recommend that they become more self-supporting through fees for in-demand ser- vices [71, p. x; 72]. Aronowitz argues that overall government financial support for the collection and dissemination of information has declined in the wake of cutbacks for basic research, and this, of course, has af- fected libraries [521. It seems that what Galbraith warned against is be- ginning to come to pass: a criterion of business-based analysis for the
CRITICAL INQUIRY INTO LIBRARIANSHIP 35 operation of libraries has changed their structure of financial support. Richard Reeves has pointed out that institutions can be turned into "professional beggars" in their search for money. That money often comes with strings attached. Donors can exercise "veto power over ev- erything from medical research to university curricula" [73]. Indeed, there have been questions about the connections of higher education administrators to corporate boards. Those boards do offer administra- tors a chance to work closely within the corporate world and to make contacts with influential people and potential donors. Administrators also learn the needs of industry and help their institutions become better known. However, David Noble has described this as an inherent conflict of interest, noting that with the high compensation received by these administrators for serving on corporate boards, whom they ultimately represent becomes a question [74]. If libraries are to be increasingly funded in this manner, they will become tied more directly to the agendas of donors or fee-paying clien- tele and may lose the tradition of intellectual independence. Further- more, by increased reliance on private funds, libraries themselves must almost certainly become entrepreneurial. The net result is a potential loss of what Giroux has called an important "critical public sphere." Along with Giroux, we would argue that libraries should be examples of such "critical public spheres where the capacity for learning is not reduced to economic or technical considerations; . . . where people can learn and practice the skills of democratic participation in the wider political, social, and cultural processes that structure American society. [Critical public spheres] promote an ethic of civic responsibility that holds in check those privatized and narrow interests that constantly threaten the public good" [75, p. 190]. Where might the entrepreneurial direction take the library field? Richard De Gennaro has argued that there has been a blurring of roles between nonprofit and for-profit enterprises within librarianship. Cor- porations are now involved in a wide array of activities that range from donating equipment to sponsoring research, while nonprofit entities like OCLC and the Library of Congress are aggressively pursuing markets and fees for services. "The evidence is that technology is . . . putting libraries into business, for better or worse.... The greatest challenge facing library leaders in the next decade is not to implement new tech- nology, it is to implement entrepreneurially oriented management struc- tures and cultures in our ailing industrial libraries" [76, pp. 42-43]. Restructuring toward fees and marketing of services may leave behind ideas of service, value (versus cost), and scholarship. Govan, reflecting on some of these trends, terms these developments "entrepreneurial librarianship," and he states his fear that "libraries will cease to be en-
36 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY listed in a common educational cause and will come increasingly to pur- sue separate goals in isolation" [54, pp. 37-38]. The public sphere and democratic traditions and values may not be well served by moves in this direction. If this seems overdrawn, consider that public libraries are investing in dial-up access systems in Colorado that provide wider access to infor- mation. This comes at the cost of limiting access to patrons who can afford the appropriate equipment [77]. Moreover, such services would be primarily of interest and benefit to businesses and not to readers of children's books, fiction, or history. Second, many academic and public libraries are marketing special information and research services spe- cifically to local business clientele. There is little question that in an age of limited financial resources, money allocated for these services is com- ing at the expense of others. The first true union of a library and com- puting center is being implemented at the Graduate School of Manage- ment at UCLA. The specific idea was to integrate the computing and information needs of a business school [78]. It would seem that this development ties a library even closer to the inherent agenda of infor- mation technology, and, parallel to the development of databases, it is taking place first in the context of business information. While librarians continue to struggle to serve traditional values and goals, powerful forces within the field are moving it toward business models of operation, into a more direct service to economic agendas, and away from those more traditional orientations. What began with responses to budget squeezes and implementation of new technology is resulting in movement toward entrepreneurial librarianship. Situated within cultural and economic frameworks of corporate capitalism, li- braries are not immune to the effects of economic policies and ideol- ogies. Conclusion We have argued that applying the insights of the NSE may be useful and important for offering a new perspective for viewing librarianship and for library research. A second goal, of expanding the scope of the NSE and enhancing its efficacy as a form of inquiry, has also been explored in this article. The authors are not suggesting that all the questions raised, or evidence and trends discussed, are unique. Rather, the attempt has been to bring together new and existing scholarship about librarianship according to a different and more comprehensive paradigm of inquiry. The overarching theme has been to demonstrate the connections of librarianship to larger social, political, and economic
CRITICAL INQUIRY INTO LIBRARIANSHIP 37 systems and the need for library research to study those connections. We strongly agree with Harris in his observation that current research in, and conceptions of, librarianship have long been uncritical and have contributed "to the structured silences relative to the ways in which social, economic, and cultural power relations shape the nature and extent of library service in America" [1, p. 221]. Clearly, important is- sues and questions arise when libraries are no longer seen as institutions that are apolitical. Next, by suggesting that libraries are connected to larger social, politi- cal, and economic agendas, the authors do not mean to imply that librar- ies are not still places where democratic ideas, free inquiry, and work autonomy are valued and supported. We do not want to imply through our critique that libraries are completely determined by these larger cultural forces. Rather, within this relationship there is a constant strug- gle between democracy and the reproduction of culture under capitalist economies. Indeed, within the act of critique itself is implied the room for resistance and change. In Giroux's call for a "new public philoso- phy," he notes that schools, and in the present analysis, libraries, do not stand alone in acting for the public good: The public sphere, in my view, refers to those arenas of social life such as church associations, trade unions, social movements, and voluntary associations, where dialogue and critique provide for the cultivation of democratic sentiments and habits; . . . where democratic traditions function to mediate the role of govern- ment action.... Political and ethical scrutiny ... defines citizenship not as a function of the state but as a quality that permeates all of social life, a quality that speaks to forms of critical literacy and social empowerment aimed at developing democratic and just communities. The principles that inform the role of the state and federal policy within this context are organized around a public philos- ophy dedicated to the creation of an educated citizenry capable of exercising political and ethical leadership in the public sphere. [75, pp. 192-93] Dedicated to these ideas, the authors urge a theory of librarianship and library research that promotes libraries as institutions involved in furthering democratic public spheres. Addressing these kinds of ques- tions is, as Winter has suggested, "an inherently critical enterprise." In his call for new inquiries into the profession, he suggests that we need to move beyond naive models that are only forms of status seeking. Only then can "we come to a more ecumenical sense of collegial control as a basic problem in all professional occupations. And from this we make an even larger step, seeing professional work in the larger context of all kinds of work" [17, p. 140]. Maintaining and expanding equity and professional autonomy and libraries as crucial public spheres requires that critical insights, like those suggested by the new sociology of educa- tion, become a staple of inquiry in librarianship.
38 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY REFERENCES 1. Harris, Michael H. "State, Class, and Cultural Reproduction: Toward a Theory of Library Service in the United States." In Advances in Librarianship. Edited by Wesley Simonton. Vol. 14. New York: Academic, 1986. 2. Gould, Julius, and Kolb, William, eds. A Dictionary of the Social Sciences. Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press, 1964. 3. Harris, Michael H. "The Dialectic of Defeat: Antimonies [sic] in Research in Library and Informatioi Science." Library Trends 34 (Winter 1986): 515-31. 4. Hesse, Mary. "Theory and Value in the Social Sciences." In Actiwn and Interpretatios: Studies in the Philosophy of the Social Sciences. Edited by Christopher Hookway and Philip Pettit. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1978. 5. Council on Library Resources. Council on Library Resources, Inc.: Thirty-Third Annual Report/1989. Washington, D.C.: Council on Library Resources, 1989. 6. Gates, Jean Key. Introduction to Librarianship. 2d ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1976. 7. Cremin, Lawrence. Public Education. New York: Basic Books, 1976. 8. Spring, Joel. The American School, 1642-1985. New York: Longman, 1986. 9. Hofstadter, Richard. Anti-Intellectualism in Amercan Life. New York: Vintage, 1963. 10. Garrison, Dee. "The Tender Technicians: The Feminization of Public Librarianship, 1876-1905." In The Role of Wome in Libranranship, 1876-1976. Edited by Kathleen Weibel and Kathleen M. Heim, with Dianne J. Ellsworth. Phoenix: Oryx, 1979. 11. Digest of Education Statistics. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1989. 12. Fasick, Adele. "Library and Information Science Students." Library Trends 34 (Spring 1986): 607-21. 13. Brosio, Richard A. Professors, Students and Some Endunrng Concerns in the West. Muncie, hId.: Ball State University Press, 1975. 14. Apple, Michael W. "Teaching and 'Women's Work': A Comparative Historical and Ideological Analysis." Teacher's College Record 86 (Spring 1985): 455-73. 15. Book, Cassandra; Freeman, Donald; and Brousseau, Bruce. "Comparing Academic Backgrounds and Career Aspirations of Education and Non-Education Majors."Jour- nal of Teacher Education 36 (May/June 1985): 27-30. 16. Zimpher, Nancy L. "The RATE Project: A Profile of Teacher Education Students." Jomrnal of Teacher Education 40 (November/December 1989): 27-30. 17. Winter, Michael. The Culture and Control of Expertise. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood, 1988. 18. Young, Michael, ed. Knowledge and Control. London: Collier Macmillan, 1971. 19. Young, Michael. "Curriculum and Democracy: Lessons from a Critique of the 'New Sociology of Education.'" London University Centre for Vocational Studies Occa- sional Paper no. 5, June 1988. 20. Karabel, Jerome, and Halsey, A. H., eds. Power and Ideology in Education. New York: Oxford University Press, 1977. 21. Bowles, Samuel, and Gintis, Herbert. Schooling in Capitalist America. New York: Basic, 1976. 22. Apple, Michael W. Ideology and Curriculum. Boston: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1979. 23. Giroux, Henry A. Ideology, Culture, and the Process of Schooling. Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1984. 24. Sarup, Madan. Marxism and Education. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1978. 25. Aronowitz, Stanley, and Giroux, Henry. Education under Siege. South Hadley, Mass.: Bergin & Garvey, 1985. 26. Cole, Mike, ed. Bowles and Gintis Revisited. Philadelphia: Falmer, 1988. 27. Apple, Michael. Teachers and Texts. New York: Routdedge & Kegan Paul, 1986.
CRITICAL INQUIRY INTO LIBRARIANSHIP 39 28. Giroux, Henry A., and Kaye, Harvey J. "The Liberal Arts Must Be Reformed to Serve Democratic Ends." Chronicle of Higher Education (March 29, 1989), p. A44. 29. Carbone, Michael. "Computers in Education, a Cautious View: Technology as Social Artifact." Contemporavy Education 56 (Summer 1985): 207-12. 30. Bagdikian, Ben H. "The Lords of the Global Village." Nation (June 12, 1989), pp. 805-20. 31. Karp, Walter. "Who Decides What Is News?" Utne Reader 36 (November/December 1989): 60-68. 32. Parenti, Michael. "What Role Do Advertisers Play in Deciding the News?" Utne Reader 36 (November/December 1989): 66. 33. Anyon, Jean. "Ideology and United States History Textbooks." Harvard Educational Review 49 (August 1979): 361-86. 34. Donald, Roger. "Taking Issue with the Random 40." Publisher's Weekly (April 20, 1990), p. 48. 35. "Schiffrin to Leave Pantheon Books." Publisher's Weekly (March 9, 1990), p. 10. 36. Baker, John F. "A Sad Day for Andre Schiffrin-and for Publishing." Publ'sher's Weekly (March 9, 1990), p. 8. 37. Summers, F. William. "Introduction: The Need to Know." In Effective Access to Infor- mation. Edited by Alphonse F. Trezza. Boston: Hall, 1989. 38. Kranich, Nancy C. "Information Drought." Library Journal (June 15, 1989), pp. 22-27. 39. Gray, Carolyn. "Information Technocracy: Prologue to a Farce or a Tragedy." Infor- mation Technology and Libraries 6 (March 1987): 3-9. 40. Seghers, Frances. "Computerizing Uncle Sam's Data." Bu.siness Week (December 15, 1986), pp. 102-3. 41. Sprehe, J. Timothy. "OMB Perspective on Electronic Collection and Dissemination of Information." In Effective Access to Education. Edited by Alphonse F. Trezza. Boston: Hall, 1989. 42. Campbell, Brian. "Information Access and Technology." LITA Newsletter (Summer 1988), p. 1 1. 43. Crowe, Lawson, and Anthes, Susan H. "The Academic Librarian and Information Technology: Ethical Issues." College & Research Libraries 49 (March 1988): 123-30. 44. Schuman, Patricia Glass. "Reclaiming Our Technological Future." Library Journal (March 1, 1990), pp. 34-38. 45. Haar, John. "The Politics of Information: Libraries and Online Retrieval Systems." Library Journal (February 1, 1986), pp. 40-43. 46. Moran, Barbara. Academic Libraries: The Changing Knowledge Centers of Colleges and Universities. Washington, D.C.: Association for the Study of Higher Education, 1984. 47. Jacob, Rahul. "A Boost for the Electronic Press." Fortune (August 28, 1989), p. 14. 48. DIALOG Database Catalog, 1990. Palo Alto, Calif.: Dialog Information Services, 1990. 49. Wiegand, Wayne A. "The Role of the Library in American History." In The Bowker Annual of Library and Book Trade Information, 33rd Edition. Edited by Filomena Simora. New York: Bowker, 1988. 50. Apple, Michael W. Education and Power. Boston: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1982. 51. Baer, John. "Artificial Intelligence: Making Machines That Think." Futurist 22 (Janu- ary-February 1988): 8-13. 52. Aronowitz, Stanley. "The Political Economy of Libraries." Keynote address at the ACRL/NY Annual Symposium, CUNY Graduate Center, New York, November 17, 1989. 53. Dennett, Daniel C. "Information, Technology, and the Virtues of Ignorance." Daeda- lus 115 (Summer 1986): 135-54.
40 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 54. Govan, James F. "The Creeping Invisible Hand: Entrepreneurial Librarianship." Li- brary Journal (January 1988), pp. 35-38. 55. Fayen, Emily Gallup. "Beyond Technology: Rethinking 'Librarian.' " American Librar- ies (April 1986), pp. 240-42. 56. Ford, Barbara J. "Reference Service: Past, Present, and Future." College & Research Libraries News (October 1988), pp. 578-82. 57. "New Software Program for Libraries Introduces Teenagers to Books That Match Their Interests." ETS Developments 34 (Winter 1988): 2. 58. Kahane, Ernest, and Oram, Andrew D. "Where Computers Are Taking Us in the Education Field." In The New Servants of Power. Edited by Christine M. Shea, Ernest Kahane, and Peter Sola. New York: Greenwood, 1989. 59. Martin, Susan K. "Library Management and Emerging Technology: The Immovable Force and the Irresistible Object." Library Trends 37 (Winter 1989): 374-82. 60. Anderson, A. J. "The Electronic Supervisor." LibrayyJournal (October 15, 1989), p. 55. 61. Bellanti, Robert. "Big Brother and Bibliographic Processing." Library Journal (October 15, 1989), pp. 56-57. 62. Stephen, Ross. "Two Red Herrings." Library Journal (October 15, 1989), p. 57. 63. Treiman, Donald J. "Recognition of Merit: Its Effect on Pay Equity." Library Adminis- tration and Management 1 (January 1987): 23-30. 64. Dowell, David R. "Sex and Salary in a Female Dominated Profession." Journal of Academic Librarianship 14 (May 1988): 92-98. 65. Buschman, John. "A Critique of the Information Broker: Contexts of Reference Services." Reference Librarian (in press, issue 31). 66. Weibel, Kathleen. "Towards a Feminist Profession." In The Role of Women in Librarian- ship, 1876-1976. Edited by Kathleen Weibel and Kathleen M. Heim, with Dianne J. Ellsworth. Phoenix: Oryx, 1979. 67. Greene, Maxine. "Forward." In The New Servants of Power. Edited by Christine M. Shea, Ernest Kahane, and Peter Sola. New York: Greenwood, 1989. 68. Noble, Douglas. "Computer Literacy and Ideology." In The Computer in Education: A C'ritical Perspective. Edited by Douglas Sloan. New York: Teacher's College Press, 1985. 69. Galbraith, John Kenneth. "Are Public Libraries against Liberty?" American Libraries (September 1979), pp. 482-85. 70. Selsky, Deborah. "Academic Libraries: Increasingly Funded by Private Sources." Li- brary Journal (August 1989), p. 38. 71. Burlingame, Dwight F. "The Small Library and Fund-raising for Automation." Library High Tech 7, no. 26 (1989): 49-5 1. 72. "Make Libraries Pay Their Way, Advises Consultant." Amenrcan Libraries (January 1990), p. 13. 73. Reeves, Richard. "How Charity Differs from Philanthropy." Allentown (Pa.) Morning Call (December 28, 1989), p. A8. 74. Mooney, Carolyn J. "Academics on Corporate Boards: Beneficial for Universities or Conflict of Interest?" Chronicle of Higher Education (January 10, 1990), pp. Al, A16. 75. (;iroux, Henry. "Public Philosophy and the Crisis in Education." Harvard Educational Review 54 (May 1984): 186-94. 76. De Gennaro, Richard. "Technology and Access in an Enterprise Society." Library Journal (October 1, 1989), pp. 40-43. 77. Reid, T. R. "Computer Access System Brings the Library Home." Washington Post (September 2, 1989), p. A3. 78. Hall, Natalie. "A Match Made Online." American Libraries (January 1990), p. 70.