IV Thematic Mapping, Data Mapping, and Geocoding Techniques for Analyzing Library and Information Center Data Philip M. Clark Methodologies based on computerized geographical information systems (GIS) are appearing with regularity in the library and information science literature and confer- ence proceedings. This article illustrates and discusses several specific GIS techniques available to LIS researchers, administrators, planners, and instructors. These tech- niques include thematic mapping (shading, coloring, or using various sized symbols to indicate amount and type), data maps (positioning actual data on maps rather than on tables), and geocoding (positioning addresses obtained from various reference sources to specific points on a map). Maps are used to illustrate the techniques recommended for more widespread use among library and information researchers. Introduction Methodologies based on computerized geographical information systems (GIS)1 are appearing with some regular- ity in the library and information sci- ence literature and conference proceedings. Both the Journal of Aca- demic Librarianship and Information Technology and Libraries devoted spe- cial issues to GIS in the summer of 1995. The October 1994 issue of the Journal of the American Society for Information Science was devoted to spatial informa- tion and digital mapping. Several pre- sentations at the 1994 and 1995 Summer Data Conferences of the Na- tional Center for Education Statistics explored the uses of GIS in displaying and analyzing federal data. The Internet contains active discussion groups de- voted to general GIS issues (GIS-L) and specific software problems (e.g., Map- info-L). Further, the U.S. Census Bu- reau, among others, maintains a Web site that is full of valuable information and software for those interested in GIS (http :// www. census.gov) . This article illustrates and dis- cusses several specific GIS techniques available to LIS researchers, adminis- trators, planners, or instructors. After a brief discussion of the concept of layers in GIS software, the paper discusses (a) the preparation of library planning documents that incorporate demo- 330 Volume 36, Number 4
Thematic Mopping, Data Mapping, and Geocoding Techniques 331 About the Author Philip M. Clark is Associate Professor, St. John's University, Division of Library and Information Science, Jamaica, New York. This paper was the 1995 winner in the Association for Library and Information Science Education (ALISE) Methodology Paper Competition. graphic and community characteristics data assembled using GIS software, and (b) the use of registration file and survey data to map library patron locations and characteristics. Using these examples, the advantages and disadvantages of three major GIS functions - thematic mapping, data mapping and geocod- ing - are illustrated. Map Layers The concept of layers is fundamental to an understanding of GIS. Computerized mapping programs deal with layers of data in the form of boundaries, points, lines, and text. It is common to think of these layers as individual transparen- cies that are stacked on top of one Figure 1 . Map overlays Fall 1995
332 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Figure 2. Combined map overlays another. Figure 1 shows six different layers that, when combined, yield the map shown in figure 2. The six layers are: ■ ALLOC3.MAP U.S. Census Block Group boundaries ■ OCMUNI.MAP Municipal bounda- ries ■ OCMAIN.MAP The major county, state, and interstate highways ■ OCLIBS.MAP Points showing the locations of the main and branch libraries ■ TROVLAY.MAP Text labels for towns, libraries, and route numbers ■ HIBCIR5.MAP Points showing the street addresses of a sample of li- brary patrons The boundary layers can be colored or shaded in a variety of ways to give a visual depiction of the underlying data. This procedure is commonly referred to as "thematic mapping" and has found great favor in both print and broadcast media. For example, both USA Today and the New York Times as well as the major news magazines make extensive use of thematic maps to illustrate points and convey information. Thematic Mapping Several different types of thematic maps can be prepared with GIS pro- grams. The most common types are il- lustrated in Figures 3 and 4. The first (figure 3, map 1) illustrates shading to Volume 36, Number 4
Thematic Mapping, Data Mapping, and Geocoding Techniques 333 Figure 3. Thematic maps: Shades, graduated symbol, and dot density maps show ranges of data. Here census block groups are shaded based on their total population. In the next ex- ample (figure 3, map 2), graduated symbols are used to show three levels of population size. The point symbols (dots) increase in size as the underly- ing population data increases in a block group. Dot density maps are commonly used to show population density. In this case, the block groups are filled with dots and the number of dots within a block group depends on the size of the population. Depending on the particular map- ping software, there are other thematic mapping methods. Figure 4 (left) illus- trates how pie charts can be used to show the male and female population distribution by block group. In this ex- ample, the size of the pie chart indicates levels of total population so that two dimensions (sex and population size) are combined in one symbol. Finally, it is possible to plot individual values such as the responses to a survey ques- tion. In figure 4, right, responses to a categorical survey question (asking how often the respondent visits the library) are plotted for each respondent. The color of the dot indicates the specific response (e.g., red means "several times a week," and blue means "about once a week"). The resulting map shows not only the dispersion of respondents across the geographic landscape but also shows clustering, if and when it is present. Fall 1995
334 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Figure 4. Thematic maps: Multivalue and individual value maps Constructing thematic maps ap- pears to be easy, especially now that computerized desktop mapping pro- grams are available at modest prices. Mark Monmonier gives excellent ad- vice in his How to Lie with Maps.2 His chapters "Data Maps Making Non- sense of the Census" and "Color At- traction and Distraction" raise important issues for both beginning and experienced map producers. Ed- ward Tufte's3 work is also important for the designer of maps. Monmonier, in particular, has an excellent discussion of how one de- cides where to place "class breaks" to determine the various shading or col- ors. There are many different ways to classify ordinal and ratio level data in- cluding (1) equal number of cases in each class, (2) equal range sizes, and (3) by quantiles. In spatial mapping, the number of class breaks becomes impor- tant because the eye can take in only a limited number of shades of gray or color and make meaningful sense of them. Pattern recognition is also a prob- lem when the number of classes be- comes large. At higher print resolutions of 300 dpi and 600 dpi, the fill patterns (the hatching in black and white) are scarcely discernible. The same holds true for various types of symbols and the sharing of those symbols. The use of color also has its diffi- culties. Some people are fully or par- tially colorblind. In addition there may be cultural prejudices against the use of certain colors. The progression of hues usedby USA Today to indicate tempera- ture bands is not necessarily an opti- mum one to differentiate levels of Volume 36, Number 4
Thematic Mapping, Data Mapping, and Geocoding Techniques 335 literacy. To reiterate, preparing the- matic maps that reveal correct, unbi- ased information is a difficult task and not one to be taken lightly. Data Maps Demographic analysis for the purpose of library planning is one possible ap- plication of GIS techniques. In 1993, this author constructed a series of plan- ning maps for a county library that were intended to define service areas for branch libraries and to provide maps and raw data on census data felt to be of importance to local branch heads. His- torically, the branches of the county li- brary have used data that were tied to municipal lines. Some attempts were made to use census tract information to provide more detailed analysis, but these were usually abandoned due to the difficulties in summarizing the in- formation without the use of comput- ers. It was felt that the capabilities of GIS could be used to explore planning at the micro level by utilizing census data at the block group level - the level of greatest detail for a wide variety of variables. In this instance, each branch head (seventeen in all) defined a service area by employing ordinary road maps. The branch heads were encouraged to think not about municipal lines but about where people lived - that is, at the neighborhood level. The boundaries they established were then transferred to computer maps. If a boundary estab- lished by a branch head crossed through a census block group area, the branch head was asked if he or she wanted to include or exclude that block group. Further, if a branch head changed his or her mind about the initial map gener- ated, the boundaries could be changed with relatively little effort. Once the boundaries for a service area are determined, all the block groups within those boundaries can be identified as belonging to that service area. This can be done rather easily by the mapping program. It involves in- voking a formula that requires one to "select all from within" the specified boundary. Census data can then be joined to these selected block groups via a relational database approach where the census file and the map file contain a common identifier. In this case, the common identifier was a num- ber constructed from the county census tract and block group numbers. The maps of the block group poly- gons can be purchased privately for a county or assembled from the Census Bureau's TIGER files. The process of constructing polygons from TIGER files can be difficult, but specialized software is available to simplify the process. In the branch service area study, twenty-seven demographic variables were collected from the U.S. Census STF 3A report. Each variable was se- lected by the library staff on the basis that it revealed information about cer- tain planning assumptions. The map- ping software was used to construct a demographic summary for the entire county (figure 5). Then a map was pre- pared for each branch's chosen service area showing the service area bounda- ries (figure 6). The software quickly cal- culated the demographic summary data. The next step was to plot the actual numerical data for each demographic variable on a map of block groups (fig- ure 7). In all, a total of twenty-seven maps of the demographic variables were made. These "data maps" were prepared for five regions of the county. To isolate the data for a given branch's service area, transparency overlays Fall 1995
336 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science o o a> *c o a o o "ö 0 N ö I CO IO o ö> Li- were prepared (not shown) that showed municipalities, roads, bodies of water, and other important identifiers. The use of transparencies also allows one to see continuous block groups that lie out- side the service area. It was thought that the presence of these adjoining block groups might be useful information at a later point when expansion of a service area was contemplated. Originally, the twenty-seven data maps were shaded to show block groups above and below one standard devia- tion of the mean. These proved to be too "busy" for easy understanding. In short, a form of information overload was ex- perienced by the staff and branch heads. The raw numbers were deemed useful because they illustrated the number of potential clients possessing the particu- lar demographic characteristic. A great deal of sophisticated analy- sis might be possible with the data in hand. It was not prepared, however, Volume 36, Number 4
Thematic Mapping, Data Mapping, and Geocoding Techniques 337 o "B "ö ö) *c ö Cl o 2 ö o o > s ü ö <5 Fall 1995
338 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science o "o "ö CO =5 CO 0 Ü Q_ Û. o E o "o Û r' 0) b ö) Volume 36, Number 4
Thematic Mopping, Data Mapping, and Geocoding Techniques 339 given the intent of the planning study. The software allows the computation of correlation and regression measures, but these features were not used in this study. The maps and data were only intended to be used locally in the prac- tical task of developing master plans for presentation to local groups. Since the statistical sophistication of the local us- ers is not great, analysis was kept to simple description. Geocoding Geocoding is the process of assigning longitude and latitude coordinates to records. These records can be the home or office of a library patron; the street addresses of churches, social agencies, or businesses; or the center of a region such as a zip code or municipality. GIS software has automated a great deal of the work of geocoding, although (as discussed below) there are still difficul- ties to overcome. Street address geocoding offers many opportunities for research and investigation. Placing pins on maps to show where people live has long been a useful technique. Computerized mapping makes this more accurate - accurate to within feet of its loca- tion - and can handle greater numbers of cases than a paper map with pins. Combined with thematic mapping techniques and distance computation, geocoded records are a valuable set of data. Data from a survey of library pa- trons can be used to illustrate some of the opportunities that geocoded data af- ford the researcher and planner. These data consist of registration records from the library's circulation control system, a count of the number of borrowing transactions by survey respondents from June 1989 through February 1991, and the responses of these in- dividuals to a four-page question- naire mailed to them in the summer of 1991. Street maps that originated with the U.S. Census's TIGER files were used to locate (i.e., geocode) library patrons' home addresses. The result is a series of points on a map that can be manipulated in various ways. Figure 8 is one example of how this type of data can be viewed. Each dot represents the home address of a survey respondent. The color of the dot indicates the home branch of the respondent (i.e., where that person ob- tained his or her library card). The size of the dot indicates one of four ranges of circulation data. The class breaks were set using relatively simi- lar numbers of cases in each range. Among the many things that might be learned from viewing this map are: ■ Each branch seems to have at least a few people in the heaviest bor- rowing group. ■ People registered at the main li- brary live farther away than do other registrants. ■ Several people live great distances from their home branch (a fact only apparent when the map is viewed in color). It is also possible to calculate straight-line distances between two points to test hypotheses about dis- tance and borrowing. At least one GIS system permits the calculation of distances by tracing the route from point A to point B, following the major roads rather than line-of- sight. Geocoding can be a time-con- Fall 1995
340 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Figure 8. Survey responses by geographic location suming and difficult business. While perhaps a majority of addresses will result in hits, many records will not match with the TIGER records of house numbers and streets. There are also many errors in the TIGER files themselves. One section of a road may be called Main Street, but a few miles farther on it becomes State Highway 518. Post office box numbers will not match; nor will rural delivery routes. Spelling errors, incor- rect address numbers, incompatible abbreviations, and ambiguous ad- dresses all pose problems for geo- coders. Despite these problems, however, geocoded files have great utility and offer promise for the explo- ration of many problems that relate to location. Summary This article discusses a few of the tech- niques that use geographical information system software for the study of issues of importance to libraries and information centers. Thematic maps can visually im- part information that may not be im- parted in a table of numbers. The ability of GIS software to merge and separate territories or groups of polygons has con- siderable potential in defining market ar- eas that are more detailed than, say, the municipal boundaries commonly used. The assembly of data at a neighborhood level is a relatively easy task for a trained "mapper." Data maps can be prepared that locate clusters of patrons, businesses, demographic traits, and economic wealth. Finally, geocoded records from Volume 36, Number 4
Thematic Mapping, Data Mapping, and Geocoding Techniques 341 address files can be linked to data about an individual or entity and analyzed to see the effects of distance or proximity on library use rates or preferences. In all, GIS can be viewed as a suite of tech- niques that complement the data han- dling and statistical procedures available in SPSS, SAS and other such packages. An experienced data analyst will probably want to be well versed in the capabilities of both. References and Notes 1. The software used to generate the maps for this paper is Maplnfo for Windows, a product of Maplnfo Corporation of Troy, New York. 2. Mark Monmonier, How to Lie with Maps (Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Pr., 1991). 3. Edward R. Tutte, Visual Display of Quan- titative Information (Cheshire, Conn.: Graphics Pr., 1983) and Envisioning In- formation (Cheshire, Conn.: Graphics Pr., 1990). Fall 1995