AN APPROACH TO THEORY AND METHOD IN GENERAL SUBJECT HEADING MARIE LOUISE PREVOST C HARLES A. CUTTER wrote in the Preface to his Rules: "But strict consistency in a rule and uni- formity in its application sometimes lead to practices which clash with the public's habitual way of looking at things. When these habits are general and deeply root- ed, it is unwise for the cataloger to ignore them, even if they demand a sacrifice of system and simplicity."' When he wrote this and charged us to enter compound subjects under their first word, he said, in effect, "The public is always right," and opened the way to the maelstrom of our present general dictionary catalog. Cutter did admit that the proponents of the noun rule had a case. After quot- ing John C. Schwartz2 on the noun entry only, he added: "This is plausible. If the public could ever get as accustomed to the inversion of subject names as they are to the inversion of personal names the rule would undoubtedly be very convenient."3 In saying this he conveyed a truth that he did not then care to have picked up and honestly tried out. Cutter was set, once for all, on the haphazard adjective approach to subjects; and all of us became set with him and thereby committed to a series of rules most of which contain provisions for their own reversal. The clear wisdom of Schwartz was swept into the discard; and slowly the subject currents in our dictionary catalogs have multiplied and collided until we do not know where we are going at any moment. Why was so much stress laid by Cutter and his followers at the start on subject cataloging according to the "public" mind? The answer seems obvious. With other library fathers, Cutter believed that systematic arrangement by classes and their breakdowns would be ade- quately cared for by classification. Our present schemes were very young, hope- fully starting to grow. He was still work- ing on his own "expansive" (which was to be even more expanded) when he died. Systematic arrangement being thus pro- vided for, it became a matter of small concern to bow to expediency in our dictionary catalogs; in fact, it became a virtue. But this concept of "expediency" needs to be examined a little more close- ly. What is the "public" which we, in general libraries, serve through the catalog? Children, young people, adults; the expert, the inept, the illiterate, the savant; scientists, artists, authors, teachers, and-librarians. Once the di- verse nature of the users of the catalog is recognized, it becomes a patent absurd- ity to speak of cataloging according to the "public" mind, as if that mind were a single entity. Logically, there are two alternatives in attempting to construct a subject cata- log for the use of the public. One is to try to incorporate in it all the entries which ' Rules for a Dictionary Catalog (4th ed.; Wash- ington: Government Printing Office, i904), p. 6. 2Schwartz had built up a short-number classi- fication and a list of subject headings, using the noun approach, for his books in the New York Apprentices' Library. S Cutter, op. Cit., p. 73. 140
THEORY AND METHOD IN GENERAL SUBJECT HEADING 141 any of the different classes of users may conceivably look for. The other is to construct it according to a system which can be understood by librarians-the group which uses it most and which alone is in a position to help those who do not understand it. The first alternative is obviously im- possible of achievement. Even if it were possible-which it is not-to discover all the entries which it might occur to all the users of the catalog to consult and even if it were possible for catalogers to in- clude them all in the catalog, the result- ing tool would be so huge, so unwieldy, and so confused, with the same subject appearing under various terms, that it would defeat its own purpose. The second alternative is feasible, and it is the one which I am proposing in this paper. Our present practice, I think, repre- sents a hopeless attempt to combine the two intrinsically incompatible alterna- tives-to have a system, but to modify it so that it will serve all users equally well. Its failure has been documented in theses and other studies by writers, who, accepting the assumption that the cata- log is intended to serve the user (by implication, every user), point out that, to a greater or less degree, it does not achieve this objective.4 The usual sug- gestions are (i) to make changes in the catalog on the basis of further study of users' needs and habits, subserving the latter, and (2) to train users in the in- telligent use of the catalog by teaching them the rules on which it is based. The first suggestion, for reasons which have already been pointed out, is impractica- ble except, perhaps, for a special library serving a relatively small and homo- geneous group. The second suggestion would be excellent if we had a simple and logical set of rules which were consistent- ly applied; but that is what, in our at- tempt to make the catalog all things to all men, we are helplessly getting further and further away from. No existing general list of subject headings, in its entirety, is a logically thought-out product. All are full of the inconsistencies and conflicting ideas con- current on just growing. This does not mean that no rules have been made and followed; rather, it means that the rules are inconclusive and, particularly, that they themselves were not disciplined and co-ordinated prior to application, nor was there any intention to make them inflexible. Concession (mostlytacit) has been made to habit and to the diffi- culties of change. An attempt to arrive fully at the principles underlying any list from an examination of the list itself is foredoomed to failure. All existing lists are inadequate, not easy to lean upon mentally, unscientific. Nowhere are we directly instructed or sufficiently as- sisted by analogy in the assignment of headings to new subjects or to new aspects of old subjects. And up to the present we have spent our thought on detail in the effort to improve things as they are-an approach that has got us nowhere. The only way to produce a clear theory is to cast loose all ties with the past for the time being; to analyze our objectives and our practices; and then to reconstitute. And in this reconstitution of the catalog it seems clear to me that our aim must be to make it a simpler tool for the librarian and, with a modi- cum of initiation, for the intellient read- er. The less intelligent must lean on pro- fessional competence-as, in fact, they 4See, e.g., Patricia B. Knapp, "The Subject Catalog in the College Library: An Investigation of Terminology," Library Quarterly, XIV (July, 1944), 2I4-28.
142 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY always have done. In other words, we must make plain the truth that no one can use a catalog who does not know how, and, for those who do know how, we must make its use quicker, easier, and more sure, disavowing openly and with- out shame the pretense that it can be, successfully, a free-for-all. The following suggestions, then, are intended to clarify the approach to sub- ject headings, primarily for the staff and secondarily for those other users to whom the staff imparts its not very complicated skill. CURRENT USAGE VERSUS THE NOUN APPROACH Let us look briefly at the types of headings now in use and their arrange- ment in the catalog. A. For subjects other than place, person, or name of event: (i) noun; (2) noun plus subhead after dash; (3) noun plus adjective inverted after comma, or noun plus qualifying noun inverted after comma; (4) adjective plus direct subject noun; (5) adjective plus indeterminate noun, or adjectival phrase; (6) qualifying noun plus direct subject noun; (7) noun plus qualifying word in parentheses; (8) noun followed by "and '" (composite heading); (g) noun followed by preposi- tional phrase. B. For names of events: sometimes entered under name of event, sometimes with name of event as subhead. C. For place names: (i) place; (2) place plus subhead; (3) place plus po- litical or other unit in parentheses, as "(state)," "(city)," "(diocese)"; (4) place plus political unit in parentheses, plus subhead; (5) place plus subhead "His- tory," plus dates; (6) place plus subhead "History," plus name of event; (7) place plus geographic division after comma, as "Mount, Cape"; (8) geographic division preceding place name; (9) place plus geographic division in parentheses; (io) place plus geographic division in parentheses plus subhead. In the arrangement of these forms in the catalog, each form may have its separate alphabet. Under a given initial subject word we find an alphabet for the dash, another for the comma, another for the parentheses (perhaps), and still another for the "ands" and phrases. There may even be more, inspired by local idiosyncrasy. Given a catalog with which one is not intimately familiar, no one can anticipate how many alphabets it may be wise to struggle through before giving up the search. And the same holds for place names. Have we not, then, too many forms, too many alphabets, too much uncertainty? Can we not reduce the forms, reduce the alphabets, and substi- tute clarity for vagueness and certainty for doubt? Granted such a possibility, who among us will deny its desirability? In our early days the voices raised in favor of the noun approach were far too readily silenced. This was understand- able enough, since we were out to pop- ularize our catalogs and the adjective was the path of least resistance. For the purpose of learning through experience, we probably have had to pass through this phase before we could look at the noun approach cold-bloodedly enough to appreciate its invariable basic value. Yet, even in this veritable era of the adjective, we have been unable to lean on its invariable use. We introduced the subhead (with its clarity); we introduced the composite heading (with its vague- ness); we introduced the inverted head- ing (but filed it in a stray alphabet of its own). We now have so many possibili- ties, even within a single specific subject, that we do not know where to look. And most of us still cry for more adjectives.
THEORY AND METHOD IN GENERAL SUBJECT HEADING I43 Yet the more strictly we follow the exact meaning of words in choosing them for our headings, the more exact will the service rendered by the head- ings be. This is axiomatic. But we have kept running away from this concept out of mistaken kindness; we seem almost to have lost any appreciation of its worth in our efforts to exalt the popular, change- able term. The charge that many head- ings, in particular composite and phrase headings, are catch-alls for the cata- loger's ease has too much truth in it for our comfort. In returning, as we should, to a criterion of "exactness first," noth- ing, the writer believes, will be of such immediate and steady assistance as the adoption of the noun approach only. It is the fact that in all the types of headings now in use, however couched, the noun identifies the subject, with the single exception that when approach is by adjective or qualifying noun, as in (4), the primary noun, the direct subject noun, may be obscured-as the sub- ject "Nations," is obscured in the heading "International relations." Our commercial friends have been wiser than we librarians. Certain of their guides, notably Thomas' Register of Manufactures, have laid hold unerringly upon this condition and have construct- ed their tools accordingly, cautioning all users to look for the noun only. And their tools continue to sell. Let us examine the working of this principle as applied to headings. It might be expressed in the rule: "All headings begin with the noun indicating the direct subject." This removes from our list all approaches by adjective or qualifying noun, turning such as are re- quired into see references. To use such references at all would be a concession to transition, since this rule itself makes them superfluous. At present, wherever the popular, the current, the habitual, approach to a subject is adjectival, from two to an indeterminate number of pos- sibilities exist in most catalogs. Given our rule, applied, only one possibility exists. It cannot be stressed too much that systematic use of the adjectival phrase may scatter aspects of a given subject to the four winds or, literally, to the twenty-six letters, while restriction to the noun-plus-subhead keeps an entire subject segregated and intact. At present we have columns of headings in which "School" is used as an adjective, then "Schools" with numerous subheads, and then about two dozen types of schools beginning with as many different adjec- tives. Who is to know, offhand, that "Attendance" is to be found under "School," "Accounting" under "Schools," and "Art" under "Art" but not under "Schools" at all? Our persist- ent use of both methods for a given sub- ject (no matter how we differentiate the types of aspect) removes logic from the makeup, and ease from the use, of all our catalogs. Now imagine knowing in advance that you go to your direct noun first without any question whatever; and that, going automatically to "Schools," you find in subhead position a single alphabet of all aspects- Schools-Accountiing Schools-Art Schools-Attendance Schools-Centralization Schools-Commercial -with no long list of see also references and no further, usually incomplete, list of references from inversions. Conceive also the simplicity of estab- lishing a heading for a new aspect. No agonized surmises as to what the Library of Congress will do with it; no holdups
THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY of material; no temporary assignments to be changed later. Our choice, still arbitrary in the broad sense, now follows a consistent, indeed a uniform, pattern. Again, it should not for a moment be thought that this breakdown of a subject by the use of its subheads only works against the "specific" service we have from the start (and no doubt rightly) sought to give. "Schools-Commercial" is precisely as specific as "Commercial schools," and, with our direct-noun key in mind, just as immediately findable. The segregation value, when it obtains, is an added, not an alternative, service. TYPES OF HEADINGS PROPOSED Good headings are (or should be): (i) arbitrary terms, (2) definite as to coverage, and (3) specific via the sub- head. A good list is neither a directory nor a phrasebook. Its intention is to lead the eye as directly as possible to the salient words indicating subjects and their interrelation, using the same meth- od of approach to all subjects and having under each subject a single alphabet of breakdowns, aspects, and juxtaposed subjects. The following are proposed: A. For subjects other than place or personal names: (I) noun (direct sub- ject); (2) noun (direct subject) plus sub- head after dash; plus further subheads after dash if required for breakdown;6 (3) noun (direct subject) plus qualifying word in parentheses; (4) noun (direct subject) plus qualifying word in paren- theses plus subhead after dash; plus further subheads after dash if required; (5) noun (direct subject) plus subhead with preposition in parentheses inserted after the dash (to avoid erroneous or indefinite impression); (6) noun (direct subject) plus subhead with qualifying phrase in parentheses inserted after the dash (to clarify distinct subjects brought into juxtaposition). B. For names of events, including wars: name of event invariably-with see also to history plus dates, as desired. C. For place names: (i) place; (2) place plus subhead; (- ) place plus political unit in parentheses; (4) place plus political unit in parentheses plus subhead; (5) place plus subhead "His- tory," plus dates; (6) place plus geo- graphic division in parentheses; (7) place plus geographic division in parentheses plus subhead. To the instinctive objection by many that breakdown by subhead alone will not be adequate, the writer can only submit that it has been found to be so in a list covering, now, some seven thousand headings with a variety of content fairly analogous to a general list, whose prin- ciples have served equably and com- fortably for seventeen years at the Newark Business Branch and in the transference of its headings to the main library catalog as required. 'While it is customary to refer to commercial or business service in public libraries as a type of specialization, the material required by a business branch (even more than by a division in the main building) reaches frequently into general subjects. The Newark list covers many industries, trades, and businesses, together with subjects expressing func- tion, as "Salesmanship"; others supply- ing sidelines of data, such as those need- ed in advertising; and subjects con- tributory to business, as "Statistics," "Costs," and so on. Most of the ques- tions concerning breakdown that occur in the construction of a general list apply to it. Each heading was selected, de- s Subheads include noun plus inverted adjective and noun plus inverted qualifying noun, the dash being substituted for the comma to insure one alphabet.
THEORY AND METHOD IN GENERAL SUBJECT HEADING fined, delimited, and co-ordinated in the whole, to meet known reference needs, in the mind of Linda H. Morley, who was then in charge of the branch and giving in person topnotch service to it. Her list, prepared for 2400 Business Books and its supplement and taken over for the branch catalog, has the integrity and consistency of a one-man job whose maker's ability is too well known to require comment. Her break- down was entirely by subhead. It has been rightly said of our general lists that they give little help to the specialist. Therefore, a list which can compass the general and insert without friction, wherever possible, provision for the special seems to be the desidera- tum which we are all seeking. The needs of a specialist who approaches a general catalog may be expressed as (i) ability to reach all material on his subject in a segregated group and (2) ability to con- sult this material in full breakdown. It would seem that the general catalog should aim at least to supply his first necessity wholly in spreading before him all it has on his primary subject and to include as much of his second necessity- breakdown indication-as the library's policy of analysis permits. Further sub- division for the nonce we may have to leave to the special librarian; yet, if desired, it is easily open to us. We can, I think, achieve this service merely by following our two already advocated procedures: (i) to break down by formal subhead only and (2) to enter under both "keys" with appropriate subheads, when two key headings (headings hav- ing, or fitted to have, subheads) meet in a subject term, never permitting the substitution of a see reference for either. A second objection to the noun approach--that too much material will congregate under given nouns-is bound up with our present concept of the desirability and expectation of finding our material under adjective and in a small compass. This is merely a habit of mind which can be changed. The mind can be trained to seize on the salient sub- ject noun as one crosses to the catalog, expecting to find all its modifications in a single alphabet of subheads; and eye and hand will quickly learn to leap from guide to guide instead of from card to card, as we now automatically adjust our approach to the Webster or the Oxford dictionary. It is a matter of orientation. Once used to it, one has a strong staff to lean upon. "Chemical affinity" will be- come automatically "Chemistry-Affini- ty." "Iron trade" will become "Iron -Trade." "Iron age" will become "Age -Iron." And even "Intercultural rela- tions" (a compound adjective hitched to an indeterminate noun) will right itself into "Cultures-Interrelation," unless we agree that "Race" is better than "Culture" for our purpose. It will be noticed that the proposed rules permit no composite headings and no running headings, except where the name of an event takes a running form. The conjunction "and" rightly should become anathema in headings. Wherever it now appears, it either kills the pos- sibility of definite indication, hitches on a useless appendage, or presents, as Alex Ladenson has put it recently, no real sub- ject area. While a preposition in 'a running heading may lead to vagueness, certain current running headings do make good sense. The intention here is to eliminate the running form by recasting it in sub- head form after Morley, who found that a preposition in parentheses (to signify "disregard in filing") modifying a sub- head was needed for clarity, as in "Salesmanship-(to) Children." Pro-
I46 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY vision for it seems of distinct value in a general list. Also the prepositional phrase invented by Morley to indicate type of reader, rather than content matter, for certain items, as "Accounting (for the executive)," filed at the Business Branch arbitrarily before "Accounting" (for its local reference importance and to draw attention to its unusual intention), could well be modified to file in the single-subhead alphabet of a general list as "Accounting-(for the) Executive." In other words, where needed to modify a subhead, a preposition or prepositional phrase may be inserted in parentheses and disregarded in filing-except, of course, to keep itself intact. Consonant with this disposition of the preposition, the eliminated composite, or "and," heading may be replaced in subhead fonn by any requisite brief phrase in parentheses (signifying "dis- regard in filing") that will tie up lucidly the two key nouns, as "Education-(re- lation to) Democracy"; "Art-(relation to) Morals"; "Railroads-(regulation by) Government"; "Church-(relations with) State." One particularly bad employment of the "adjective plus direct noun" appears in the present language and literature groups. No less than when it occurs in classification does sharp cleavage be- tween headings for the language and for the literature of a country cause trouble to cataloger and reader. The reason we have no heading for "English" in its present frequent coverage of both lan- guage and literature (other than by a third grouping under "Philology," which seems still further to complicate our differentiation troubles) may be laid at the door of our persistent use of the word, and of its sister-words, as adjec- tives. A shift to the substantive meaning would fill the need for a comprehensive term, enable us to apply our direct-noun approach here also, shorten headings, and give all material in one, instead of several, groups. This would mean that subheads now in use for both language and literature, together with all direct nouns now following the adjective, would be thrown into a single secondary alpha- bet, thus: English English-Abbreviations English-Ballads English-Business English-Drama English-Essays English-Fiction English-Grammar English-Study -with further subheads as required. This would also apply to tribal names of American Indians. Again, beyond everything, we need exactness in our terms, as the astute among us have declared. For a work on the interaction of the dawning peace and another subject, we would not continue to assign two vague headings as "World war, I939-45-Peace" and, say, "De- mocracy." The phrase in parentheses would open the door to such clear exacti- tude as: World war, 1939-45-Peace-(affected by) Democracy World war, I939-45-Peace-(effect on) De- mocracy World war, 1939-45-Peace-(affected by) Education World war, 1939-45-Peace-(effect on) Edu- cation World war, 1939-45-Peace-(affected by) Religion World war, I939-45-Peace-(effect on) Re- ligion and our rule for double entry for a con- juction or juxtaposition of key headings would add: Democracy-(affected by) WVorld war, I939-45 -Peace Democracy-(effect on) World war, 1939-45- Peace and so on.
THEORY AND METHOD IN GENERAL SUBJECT HEADING 147 This would be of great assistance in establishing a heading instanter for a brand-new subject. Since the phrase in parentheses is disregarded in filing (ex- cept, of course, for the secondary ob- servance of keeping cards on an identical subject together), it would be of no practical moment whatever if the phras- ing within the parentheses varied from that employed in sister-libraries, for example, if "influence" or "result" were used instead of "effect." Any one of them would answer equally the purpose of anyone approaching the catalog, for the latter invariably would come hold- ing nothing in mind but the key nouns. The proposed rule for names of events forces all entries for events under the best-known (generally the only) phrase and forbids its use as a subhead. This phrase may be subjected to breakdown as for noun, though such a breakdown is seldom required. The proposed rules for place follow current practice in the latter's points I-6 and reject current practice in the latter's points listed as 6, 7, and 8, in the follow- ing respects: (i) Names of events are not to be used as subheads. As desired, they may also be connected with country, subhead "History," plus dates, by see also reference from name of event. (2) Geographic division will not be indicat- ed, capitalized, after place name preced- ed by comma. (3) Geographic division will not precede place name as heading. Thus differentiation in the treatment of geographic divisions to indicate common verbal usage, as "Cape Ann," "Vesuvius (mount)," will be eliminated by the con- sistent use of parentheses and lower case, even for "Virginia (city)," in the interest of having a single alphabetic line with no filing complications. The only ap- parent exception (not a real one) is the case in which the word signifying geo- graphic division is not used in its in- herent sense, as in "Cape Colony." Some examples of apparent hurdles in heading shift may be given. Our use of "Natural history" defines it as the con- sideration of nature in general, which may or may not be presented in the form of history. The long-accepted phrase is bad for its purpose, whereas the area it covers is succinctly expressed in the sub- ject "Nature." "Natural" itself is not too clear, since it may mean "habitual"; and "history" may be a misnomer for any title to which it is applied. The teachers who caused us to establish "Nature study" were clear thinkers, yet in so doing we added to our muddle. We should retain for them "Nature- Study" and recast all "Natural" and "Nature" headings into a single alphabet of subheads under "Nature." Similarly, in the term "International relations" we are talking about nations, their interrelation, and the heading be- comes "Nations-Interrelations." In "International law," two key headings meet. To give specialists in both their leads, we need both "Nations-Law," and "Law-International." CHANGING THE CATALOG Change in any catalog could be made by degrees. Since we are already using nouns with subhead and inverted head- ings, as well as adjectival compounds and phrases, we can start using the first only (noun with subhead) for all new subjects without preliminary warning. Then we can go back and change old subjects, block by block, heading by heading, as we get down to them. It would not be so bad as reclassification! That we should disregard what will seem at first to be "odd" in the substitu- tion of noun for adjective as long as the sense is plain will be a needed advance
148 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY warning, or we will inhibit ourselves from acclimatization. As an example of change, take the small subject group, "Libraries." Under the "Libra-" approach we now have I48 lines, spread under three key words, in six alphabets ("Librarians," "Li- braries" plus subhead, "Libraries" plus inversions, "Libraries and -," "Li- braries for--" "Library-"). Of these I48 lines, 68 indicate active head- ings and 8o are see references to "Li- brary" as qualifying noun or to ad- jectival phrases scattered throughout the list. Blanket references are made to special classes of libraries and to names of cities with subhead "Libraries." Recasting under the suggested rules we get: Libraries-Access to books -Accession dept. -Accounting -Administration -Advertising (of) -Agricultural -Anecdotes -Architecture -Arrangement of books. See Li- braries-Shelf dept. -Art -Associations -Bibliography -(for the) Blind -Bookkeeping. See Libraries-Ac- counting -Botanical -Branches -Buildings. See Libraries-Archi- tecture -Bulletins -Business -Camp. See Libraries-War -Cataloging -Catalogs -Centralization -Charging systems -Chemical -Chicago -Children's -Church -Circulation -Classification (books) -Classification (personnel) -College. See Libraries-Univer- sity -Commercial -Commissions -Conferences -County -Dental -Depository -Duplicates -Economy. See Libraries-Science (of) -Engineering -Ethics -Exhibits -Extension -Fiction -Finance -Fittings -(service to) Foreigners -Gifts -Governmental -Handwriting -Heating -Historical -History -History-Ancient -History-Medieval -History-Renaissance -History-I7th-x8th centuries -Hospital -Humor. See Libraries-Anecdotes -Imaginary -Institution -Insurance -Insurance (of) -Junior college. See Libraries- University -Law -Law (of) -Legislation. See Libraries-Law (of) -Librarians -Librarians-Interchange of -Librarians-Negro -Library day -Lighting -Loans-Interlibrary -Medical -Military -Monastic -Moving -Municipal reference -Musical
THEORY AND METHOD IN GENERAL SUBJECT HEADING I49 -National -War -New York -Working men's -Newspaper -Y.M.C.A. -Newspaper office -Order dept. Thus, in place of the original con- -Organization glomerate, achieving 68 active headings -Package in 148 lines, we now have I22 active -Parish headings and 13 see references confined -Pedagogical to synonymous subheads. -Pensions -Personnel. See Libraries-Li- Since in this arrangement no use is brarians made of the initial word "Library," -Picture approaches will channel, perforce, to the -Post plural "Libraries"; hence no references -Postal from "Library" to "Libraries" are -Prison -Private needed. -Proprietary In beginning to reconstruct our list -Railroad Y.M.C.A. along the suggested lines, we will assume -(relations with) Readers the classifier's mind and work from the -Reference books broad inclusive heading to the farthest -Reference dept. required breakdown. -Reformatory -Rental -Rules GENERAL RULES -Salaries i. Be specific, but via the subhead, School , ,. -(relations with) School not the adJective. -Science (of) 2. Be definitive. Vague and ambigu- -Science (of)-Schools ous headings should be either eliminated, -Scientific delimited by clear definition, or re- -Shelf dept. placed by two or more concrete headings -Shelving (sfrte"ns) -Societies. See Libraries-Associa- (as for the "ands"). tions 3. Inverted titles are not to be used -Soldiers. See Libraries-War as substitutes for headings. At present -Special this is officially permitted for a new -Stamps idea whose area is not yet sufficiently -(relations with) State delimitable to permlt -of establishing a -State aid heading. Instead, use a tentative, tem- -Stations -Statistics porary heading, indexing it in pencil Subscription without references, writing it in pencil on -Sunday opening catalog cards. -Sunday school.. Supplies 4. Subject takes precedence of place -Technical invariably. Where subject subheads un- -Terminology. See Libraries-Dic- der place are desired, as for local needs, tionaries make the reverse entry also. Thefts (book) Theological PROCEDURE UNER A SUBJECT Trustees i. Take a broad subject such as that University indicated by the heading "Education," -Ventilation together with its subheads.
I50 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 2. From its see also references take all containing the word "education" and invert to subhead form, thus: Agricultural education to Education-Agricul- ture (but indicate, also, Agriculture-Educa- tion) Coeducation to Education-Coeducation Education of adults to Education-Adult Drama in education to Education-(through) Drama (but indicate, also, Drama-(in) Education Education and state to Education-(relations with) State Monitorial system of education to Education- Monitorial Montessori method of education to Education- Montessori Self-government in education to Education- Self-government Overpressure in education to Education-Over- pressure Jesuits-Education to Education-(of) Jesuits (but indicate, also, Jesuits-Education) Feeble-minded-Education to Education- -Feeble-minded (but indicate, also, Feeble- minded-Education) and interalphabetize with original sub- heads. Dig out the actual references now indicated only in blanket form (as "under names of,'' etc.) and do the same. Blanket references should be eliminated. 3. Examine the remaining see also's critically, to ascertain which should be retained because needed as key head- ings. Delimit and define such unless clear. Bend backward to keep their number down. 4. Distribute the remaining see also's as subheads under "Education" or under another retained key heading. See also references under "Education" will now be reduced to a few key head- ings-perhaps only to "Schools" and "Teaching." (At present there are seven- ty-five or more.) 5. Apply the four preceding proce- dures to the see also references under subheads of "Education." 6. Take each of the retained key head- ings and apply the above procedures to each and to its subheads. 7. Take all subsequent headings be- ginning with the word "Education" and change to subhead form. 8. Take all subsequent headings be- ginning with the word "Educational" and invert in subhead form, as "Edu- cational psychology" to " Psychology- Educational," or change to subhead of "Education,' as "'Educational surveys" to " Education-Surveys." 9. Check all references to all headings considered in steps i-6, to discover sub- heads appropriate to add to " Education" or to retain as key headings, and then make them. Io. Examine the entire result to re- move synonyms and clear up ambiguity. CONCLUSION Of his own rule, opening wide the door to the adjective, Cutter said: "It must be confessed that this rule is some- what vague and that it would be often of doubtful application."6 We have been using this rule for over seventy years, and we know no truer word was ever spoken. We have been leaning on a rule which has proved to be a reed. Cutter's objection to the opposite rule of Schwartz admitted that it (the noun rule) "was clear and easy to follow" but was objectionable because it would put subjects "under words where nobody unacquainted with the rule would expect to find them." Now should the noun rule be adopted, it would not be done sub rosa. Every library-school student would assimilate it overnight. At present, according to Cutter, we are expected to be teaching 6 Op. Cit., p. 7I.
THEORY AND METHOD IN GENERAL SUBJECT HEADING each new approachee to a catalog the rule of specific entry. The mere word "specific" will faze the ignorant; so why should he not be told at once to look for the "specific noun"-i.e., if he wants electric motors to look for "Motors" and turn over until he finds "Motors- Electric"? Is it really any harder to grasp? Then if we follow the further rules suggested here of entry both ways when two key-noun ideas are in conjunction or when two totally different subjects are brought into juxtaposition and if we add our occasional cross-reference from the more dominating type of the adjectival form (though the writer dreads even this concession), it will transpire that very few holes indeed remain through which to slip. And we should have an invariable rule on which to lean with the de- pendability of a staff. It seems as if the time had come to give John C. Schwartz and the lesser-known brethren who thought and think with him their chance to demonstrate.