BIBLIOTHECA CORVINA THE LIBRARY OF MATTHIAS (CORVINUS) HUNYADI, KING OF HUNGARY IN THE year 1913, the Florentine antiquarian, T. de Ma- rinis, sent a trade catalog to collectors. The catalog con- tained descriptions in the usual bibliographical manner, mystifying to the laymen, but delightful to bibliophiles, of manuscripts, incunabulas, and rare books. The most curious thing in the catalog was the single but significant word "vendu," following the entry of two items. Two rare manuscripts had been sold before they had even been put on the market. The entry for the first ran: "S. Didymi Alexandrini de Spiritu Sanc- to et Cyrilli Alexandrini opera e greco in lat. traducta." The second manuscript was: "Cicero. Opera." Both were described as richly ornamented, illuminated manuscripts of the Floren- tine school, executed for King Matthias Corvinus and showing his coat-of-arms. Both manuscripts were to be found in the collection of the Collegium Romanum until the year I870, when they mysteri- ously disappeared. Albert Berzeviczy, the Hungarian academi- cian, in writing of these manuscripts, remarked that he was cer- tain that they existed in some "unknown place" but that in spite of persistent efforts he had been unable to locate them. Berzevic- zy feared that they had been hidden away by whoever then pos- sessed them. His guess was not wrong. Their owner, the Floren- tine dealer, kept his acquisition a secret. The present owner- ship, however, is well known. They were purchased from Mari- nis by the famous collector, J. Pierpont Morgan. These manu- scripts, called "Corvinas," after the name of their first owner, Matthias Corvrinus Hunyadi, king of Hungary, are lying safely beside other priceless treasures in the vaults of the Morgan Li- brary in New York City. The name "Corvina" was derived from the raven (Latin, corvinus), an emblem on the Hunyadi 552
BIBLIOTHECA CORVIIN N 553 family's coat-of-arms. These two Corvinas, now listed as "Mor- gan MSS 496 and 497," once belonged to a library whose history is worth the telling. The fifteenth century was an age of the acquisition of literary treasures and the foundation of great libraries. During the hun- dred years between 1365 and I465, when the art of printing was being established, the birth of several great European libraries took place. The founding of the Library of Paris, the Library of Vienna, the Laurentian Library at Florence, and the Vatican Library in Rome falls in this period. Besides the beginnings of famous libraries, this century witnessed the building-up of the splendid private collections of Charles V of France, of Frederick, Duke of Urbino, and finally of Matthias Corvinus, king of Hungary.' The collection of King Matthias eclipsed all other private collections and was considered one of the marvels of the time. The brilliant execution of each manuscript is yet prover- bial. Today, about five hundred years after their execution, to possess a Corvina is a triumph even to collectors rich in treas- ures. In I453, Pope Nicholas V founded the Vatican Library from precious freights of classic literature salvaged before and after the fall of Constantinople. As a young man, Pope Nicholas used to say to his friends: "If I were rich I should indulge in two extravagances: in building and in the collection of books." Years later, as pope, Nicholas satisfied both of his early desires. He practically rebuilt Rome during his pontificate. Nor did he neglect his natural inclination for literary treasures. First, he grouped the scattered manuscripts in the Vatican. But he de- sired a larger and more valuable collection. Book agents were dispatched to seek rare manuscripts in seemingly unlikely places. From dark monasteries, he gathered the works of the writers of antiquity. In a surprisingly short time, he changed the atmosphere of the Vatican bookshelves. During a reign of eight years, the repository of papal bulls became a library of ap- proximately two thousand volumes. The Fathers of the Church xEdward Edwards, Memoirs of libraries: including a handbook of library economy (London, 1859), 1, 32-33 and 395-404.
554 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY -Plato, Aristotle, Ptolemy, Homer, Strabo, Xenophon, and Herodotus-were represented in his library. It was an era of prosperity, the papal coffers were filled, and the pope did not have to consider prices. For a fine copy of the Gospel of Mat- thew in Hebrew he paid five thousand gold florins. He delighted in magnificently bound copies. His favorites were in crimson velvet-very fashionable at that time with silver clasps.2 Pope Nicholas was not only a collector: he was an accom- plished librarian. Whenever, among the literati, the subject of the classification of manuscripts in a library was discussed, his opinion was received as that of an expert. He actually worked out a detailed plan for the arrangement of what he considered an ideal library. This plan was applied in the library of Cosimo de' Medici, and was later copied by other libraries.3 Everyone, however, did not pay in order to acquire. Cosimo de' Medici and Poggio Bracciolini ransacked cities and monas- teries for manuscripts. Matthias Corvinus, king of Hungary, employed all of the methods at the disposal of a collector and tyrant. When converted to the Italian Renaissance, through his marriage to Beatrice of Aragon, daughter of Ferrante, king of Naples, Matthias felt the need for a great library in Buda.4 There were a few manuscripts in the palace, mostly fiom the time of the Angevin dynasty, but these were out of style and in poor condition. However, they served to form the nucleus of the future library. King Matthias was well aware that two high ecclesiastics, Bishop Vitez and his nephew, Bishop Janus Pan- nonius, were great collectors of illuminated manuscripts. He, therefore, invited both of them to hand over their collections.5 The bishops protested. Janus Pannonius pointed out that there 2 Vespasiano da Bisticci, Vite di uomini illustri del secolo XV (Bologna, I892), pp. 28 ff. This work was published also in English: The Vespasiano memoirs. Lives of illus- trious men of the XVth century. Translated into English by William George and Emily Waters (London: Routledge & Son, I926). 3 Klemens Lffler, "Papst Nikolaus V als Biicherfreund," Zeitschrift der Bucher- freunde, Neue Folge, I (1909), 17479. 4 Albert de Berzeviczy, B6atrice d 'Aragon, reine de Hongrie (Paris, I 9I I- 12), I, 235 if. 5Vilmos Frakn6i, et al., Bibliotheca Corvina. Mdtyds kirdly budai kJnytdra (Buda- pest, 1927), p. 22.
BIBLIOTHECA CORVINA were other ways open to collectors. "Italy," he wrote, "is flood- ed with manuscripts for sale. Send money to Florence and Ves- pasiano da Bisticci will be able to purvey all of your orders."6 As Matthias had at first asked for Latin manuscripts, the bishop remarked satirically that, thanks to the courts' ignorance of Greek, part of his collection, at least, might be spared. And, if Greek ever should become fashionable in Buda, he would begin collecting Hebrew manuscripts. Janus Pannonius actually possessed a remarkable collection. He had bought his manuscripts piece by piece during his so- journs in Italy and treasured them as a true book-lover.7 This, however, did not stop Matthias in the execution of his project. The letters of the bishops, uncle and nephew, show that the major part of their collection became royal property, manu mili- tari. More valuable copies of other Hungarian nobles followed the same route. When there were no more books left to be ac- quired gratis, the king finally decided to buy them. One of his first orders was for Brutus by Cicero, The Campaigns of Alexan- der the Great by Flavius Arrian, The Tragedies of Aeschylus, and the Discourses of Aeschines. These copies were prepared by Flo- rentine artists and copyists under the supervision of the famous Naldus Naldius, who in a long poem sang the beauties of the Corvinas and the lavishness of King Matthias.8 All of these writings formed a part of the quattrocento's repertoire of eru- dite aspirations, established by mastro Tommaso Parentucelli of Sarzana, Cardinal of Bologna, better known under the name of Pope Nicholas V. Pope Nicholas was the literary arbiter of the time.9 Several Florentine artists were engaged in work for King Mat- thias: Attavante degli Attavanti, friend of Leonardo da Vinci; Giovanni Boccardi, called Boccardino Vecchio, whose first- known work dates from the year 1486; the brothers del Flora, Gherardo and Monte, whose work bears the influence of Ghir- landajo and Botticelli; finally, Francesco d'Antonio del Cherico. Concerning Attavante, it is to be noted that he painted the 6 Frakn6i, op. cit., p. 23. Vespasiano, op. tit., p. 87. a Frakn6i, op. cit., p. I 6. 9 Vespasiano, op. cit., p. 35.
556 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY raven in Matthias' coat-of-arms on a silver background. This fact, noted first fifty years ago by Csontosi, the Hungarian bib- liographer, has not attracted the attention of students and ex- perts.i' In spite of the steady work of the Florentines, the king's col- lection grew slowly. To rival other princely amateurs, Matthias invited to Buda a host of Italian miniaturists, writers, copyists, and binders. As their work advanced, a new problem arose: that of the shelving and the proper care of books. Matthias decided to build a sumptuous library connected with the royal palace. Built of red marble, it was situated near the chapel.", On its wall was written: MATHIAS PRINCEPS INVICTVS INGENII VOLVPTATI OPVS HOC CONDIDIT GENEROSVM The library was named Bibliotheca Corvina, and each manu- script or printed book that belonged to King Matthias' collec- tion is known as a "Corvina." The library itself was divided into two spacious rooms. One was reserved for Latin, the other for Greek and oriental manuscripts. The light was softened by the multicolored stained glass of which the windows were made. Graceful columns divided each room into sections. The precious manuscripts, bound in leather, scarlet silk, or crimson velvet, were laid upon artistically carved wooden shelves. In the en- trance hall a huge globe drew the attention, while the ceiling, painted in blue, showed the position of the stars at the time of Matthias' election as king of Bohemia, twenty years after he was elected king of Hungary. On the side wall the following lines were engraved in large Roman capitals:.2 CVM REX MATHIAS SVSCEPIT SCEPTRA BOHEMIAE GENTIS ERAT TALIS LVCIDA FORMA COELI All the manuscripts were decorated with the coat-of-arms of Matthias, showing a black raven holding a gold ring in his beak. xoJinos Csontosi, "Corvinische Handschriften von Attavante," Zentralblatt fur Bibliothekswesen (Leipzig, i886), pp. 213-14. It K1lmin Lux, A budai v4rpalota Mdtyds kordban (Budapest, 1922). 1 Dezso Csinki, "Mity"s udvara," Szdzadok (1883), p. I79.
BIBLIOTHECA CORVINA 557 A medallion of the king often appeared in the center composi- tion. The first and the second folios were richly illuminated. Delicate miniatures depicted persons and scenes. The manu- script of Didymus Alexandrinus in the Morgan Collection is a splendid example of the fine artistic craftsmanship which was the guiding rule. On the second folio of this copy is a full-page miniature painting. Across the top of the page is a cornice or reredos supported on both sides by a double row of pilasters. At the foot of the design is a reproduction of an antique bas-relief, representing Mars and Apollo. At the foot of the pilasters, two youths present shields bearing the coats-of-arms of Beatrice and Matthias, who are kneeling between the two rows of pilasters. Four heads, probably representing members of the royal fami- lies, appear behind the sovereigns. All of the foregoing form a frame for the central figure, that of St. Jerome, depicted in his cell, sitting before his writing desk. At his foot lies a lion, of which the head only is visible. In the background we see Flo- rence. On the cornices, heads of cherubs appear in the midst of exotic fruits and flowers. On two pilasters we discover the ini- tials "MA," used here as sigils for Matthias Augustus, proof of Matthias' Caesarian ambition. As to the artist of this miniature, the experts are divided in their opinions. Andre de Hevesy, who published a most valuable study on Corvinas, attributes the work to the brothers del Flora, Gherardo and Monte of Florence,"3 as does Bishop Frakn6i, an authority on Corvinas,14 while another Hungarian, the academi- cian Berzeviczy, biographer of Beatrice, attributes it to Fran- cesco d'Antonio del Cherico.'s However, certain authorities on fifteenth-century painting do not agree to this. They claim that "the picture in the lower border"-meaning, we think, Beatrice -"and the Triumph of Chastity in the Wallace Collection in London, both derive from an original composition by Pierro di Cosimo." There is a pencil note to this effect on the back of the '3 Andr6 de Hevesy, La biblioth?que du roi Matthias Corvin ("Publications de la Soci&6 frangaise de reproductions de manuscrits A peintures," Paris, I923), p. 29. 1 Frakn6i, op. cit., p. 42. i Berzeviczy, op. cit., I, 255.
558 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY cover of the Morgan copy.,6 However, such a work was never done by one single artist. The specialization of task was carried to the extremes; and before a manuscript was placed upon the shelf, it went through the hands of a dozen of skilled workmen. And as even the best artists collaborated with each other, it is not improbable that the miniature was the result of the talent of two or three artists. King Matthias confided the direction of his library first to Galeotto Marzio from Narni in the province of Umbria, who was recommended to him by Bishop Janus Pannonius. Perse- cuted by the inquisition on account of his book, De Incognitis vulgo, he came to Hungary and entered in the services of Mat- thias.'7 A contemporary medallion preserves his obese traits and his life-motto: Nascentes morimur finisque ab origine pendet. ("We die at our birth and the end menaces us from the begin- ning.") Another of Matthias' librarians was Taddeo Ugoleto from Parma, who served also as tutor of John Corvinus, Matthias' illegitimate son. Ugoleto made several trips to Florence, the book-market of the fifteenth century, to round out the collec- tion of the king of Hungary. It was probably through him that in I475 Matthias purchased the library of the Manfredini family of Bologna.'8 With these books, he increased sensibly the num- ber and the luster of his collection. Little by little, through confiscation, buying, and copying, the Bibliotheca Corvina became one of the most reputed of Europe. It was especially rich in Latin, Greek, and oriental manuscripts. There were very few printed books in the collec- tion, and not one in the Hungarian language. Matthias' col- lection was remarkable not only for variety of authors and sub- jects but also for artistic execution and philological value. It is extremely difficult to give a fair estimate of the number of vol- umes. It was estimated by different authors to have been from five hundred" to three thousand volumes.2o Concerning fif- This opinion was advanced by Mr. Berenson. 17 Hevesy, op. cit., p. ir* is J. Csontosi, "Korvina," in Pallas Lexikon. '9 Frakn6i, op. cit., p. 20. so Heresy, op. cit., p. 25.
BIBLIOTHECA CORVINA 559 teenth-century libraries, we know that the famous Giovanni Aurispa possessed three hundred Greek codexes;21 in I455, the Vatican Library contained 824 Latin and 414 Greek manu- scripts. Pius II added 40 to the Greek collection, and later Pope Sixtus IV found pride in counting one thousand Greek codexes. In I485, the Vatican Library contained 3,65o volumes.22 Cardi- nal Bessarion, the great book-lover, had 264 Latin manuscripts in 1468.23 The catalog of the Este family of Ferrara shows, in I436, 279 Latin, French, and Italian volumes with one Greek and one German manuscript. In 1495, the same library pos- sessed Si2 volumes.24 Considering these figures, I think that the Bibliotheca Corvrina, which was considered the largest of its kind, probably attained about one thousand various manu- scripts, estimated conservatively, a figure based also on con- sideration of the still-existing Corvinas. This estimate receives a slight attestation in the description of Matthias' library by a French knight, in I502, twelve years after Matthias' death, the period that witnessed the decimation of the collection. So we read: A4ussi y a belle et grande librairie jusques au nombre de troys 4 quatre cens livres escriptz en latin, grec et hongre; et la plus grant part hystoriez en chef d'euvre.'S Matthias' precious library had the same fate as the empire he ruled. After his death in 1490 it fell into decay. In Italy they feared that now that the king of Hungary was dead, there would be abundance in copyists. In fact, unemployment was provoked there by the manufacture and the sale of printed books. The Hungarian diet proclaimed that the royal collection would be maintained for the ornament of the kingdom. Notwithstanding the decree, it was ravaged by all those who entered, and the " R. Sabbadini, Le seoperte dei codici latini e greci ne' secoli XIV" XV, 2 vols. (Firenze, 1905-14). U Miintz and Fabre, La bibliothMque du Vatican au XV' sikle (Paris, I 887), pp. 9 if., 48ff. 23 E. G. Vogel, "Bessarionis Stiftung oder die Anfange der S. Marcus-Bibliothek in Venedig," Serapeum (1841), pp. 9 ff. 24 Sabbadini, op. cit. 2s Le Roux de Lincy, "Discours des c6rEmonies de mariage d'Anne de Foix avec Ladislas II," Bibliothque de l'Ecok des Chartes, II, ser. S (I86i), 438.
56o THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY folios served to ornament less princely collections. Matthias' son, John Corvinus, was the legal inheritor of the king's private fortune, including his library. He alone was authorized to take out books. When he saw that his chances for the throne were slight, since the nobles were divided in their choice upon the suc- cessor of Matthias, John Corvinus packed up gold, silver, and manuscripts and took flight from the palace. King Vladislav of Bohemia, and Matthias' successor on the throne of Hungary, ordered his arrest. In the encounter several Corvinas disap- peared. Beatrice, Matthias' widow, had planned to marry Vladislav. Her hopes vanished when Vladislav took to the altar Anna de Candale. In isoi Beatrice decided to return to her native city, Naples. Valuables piled up in nine carriages went with her, in- cluding a great number of illuminated manuscripts. Bishops and nobles also frequented the royal library, and, as it still happens, forgot to return the borrowed volumes. Or, it may be that they simply took possession of volumes that belonged to them by right. The year I 526 was fatal in the history of Hungary. The disas- ter of Mohacs was followed by the occupation of the kingdom by the Turks. The manuscripts that still remained in Buda fell into the hands of the invaders and were removed to Constantinople. Only ordinary volumes were left in the palace. As the Hungari- an king, Louis, son of Vladislav, died on the battlefield, his wife found refuge in Holland, taking with her a few manu- scripts from the Bibliotheca Corvina, among others the copy en- titled Officium beatae virginis cum tectorio veluti nigri deargenta- tum et illuminatum.26 Later, at the order of Philipp II, king of Spain, this copy was transferred from Holland to the library of the Escurial, near Madrid. Before the sixteenth century was over, copies of King Matthias' collection were to be found everywhere in Europe except Buda. From this period on, each manuscript has a history of its own. They were silent witnesses of wars, rev- olutions, treachery, theft, and murder. The mystery that sur- rounds them, their peregrinations from castle to castle, from 26 Tort/nelmi Tdr (Budapest, 1890), p. 367.
BIBLIOTHECA CORVINA 56I damp cellars to dark attics, put a special pride in (and price on) their possession. In i655, a French ambassador, Gaultier de Leslie, on his way to Constantinople, stopped in Buda. He visited and described the royal residence: "Le chateau presentait encore tous les ves- tiges d'une Cour vraiment Royale. Les colonnes d'un marbre eclatant qui l'appuient de toutes parts, les lions, les tigres et les corbeaux qui embelissent ses bases et ses extremites sont de riches monuments de l'ancienne gloire de la race des Corvin." Of the wealth of the Bibliotheca Corvina he wrote: "Toute cette prodigieuse quantite de livres se trouva r6duite a quatre cent pi&es environ, qui ne sont d'aucun usage, rong6es de la tigne, couvertes de poussi&e, mangees de rats et neglig6es entiare- ment."27 Unfortunately, the ambassador did not specify as to whether the four hundred volumes were printed books or manu- scripts. In the eighteenth century, manuscripts that belonged to the collection of King Matthias were not only the objects of interest on the part of antiquarians and bibliophiles but also the subjects of several theses. One of the first and the most erudite treatise on Corvinas was published in I776 by the Jesuit father, Xiste Schier. A pleiades of distinguished scholars endeavored to com- plete his researches.'8 In the National Museum of Hungary alone, generations of savants employed their time and talent in collecting patiently all of the data concerning the Corvinas. One of the most romantic searches after Corvinas was made by a Hungarian named Erno Simonyi. Being a supporter of Louis Kossuth, the revolutionary republican, Simonyi was forced to flee from Hungary when the revolution failed in I 848. Wander- ing from city to city, he finally reached Sheffield in England, 27 Ricaut, Histoirt de l'Empire Ottoman (Amsterdam, I672), p. 2I . 28 Budik, "Entstehung oder Verfall der von K6nig Matthias Corvinus gestifteten Bibliothek zu Ofen," Wiener 7ahrbficher (1839); E. G. Vogel, "Verzeichniss der Cor- vinischen Handschriften in i3ffentlichen Bibliotheken," Srapeum (I849); J. Csontosi, "Korvina," in Pallas Lexion; E. Muntz, "La bibliotheque de Matthias Corvin" (Notes Nouvelles, Bulletin du Bibliophile et du bibliothcaire (Paris, I899); W. Weinberger, "Beitrage zur Handschriftenkunde," Comptes rendus de l'Acadlmie des Sciences de Vienne, I908; Pal Gulyhs, Mdtyds kirdly konyotdra (Budapest, I9I6); and the already quoted work by Hevesy and Frakn6i.
562 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY where he was employed by a cutlery firm as agent for the Conti- nent. While traveling through Europe, after he had placed his scissors and knives, he never missed visiting the local archives in search of Corvinas, many of which he was fortunate enough to unearth. In some cases even the owners were unaware of the treasures they possessed. Thanks to Simonyi's precious infor- mation, the National Museum of Budapest was able to dress a fairly accurate catalog of the then existing manuscripts. Encouraged by the result of Simonyi's researches, three bibli- ophiles-Ipolyi, Henszlmann, and Kubinyi-departed to Con- stantinople in I862 in the hope of finding a few Corvinas in the Seraglio or palace of the Turkish sultan. Equipped with the recommendation of the Austro-Hungarian ambassador, they were admitted to the Sultan's library. After a few weeks of ne- gotiation and prayers, the Turkish archivist showed them six- teen Corvinas, bound in crimson velvet.29 But they were never admitted to the room where the Corvinas were kept, and were unable to find out whether this was only a part or all of the manuscripts that once belonged to King Matthias. When, in I 869, Emperor Francis Joseph went to Egypt to attend the in- auguration of the Suez Canal, he passed through Constan- tinople. Sultan Abdul-Aziz of Turkey, to please the emperor, presented him with four Corvinas. They were later deposited in the National Museum in Budapest. In Hungary the belief persisted that a great number of Cor- vinas were still hidden in the treasure chests of the Sultan's library in Constantinople. However, there was no way of as- certaining this assumption. The opinion was also advanced that many precious manuscripts were transported from Constan- tinople to Bagdad. The palace of Bagdad actually contained valuable documents, books, and illuminated manuscripts. But during the World War, in I917, a fire broke out and all the perishable treasures were prey to the flames. Hungary, with one eye on its past, in an effort to recapture the glory of bygone days, makes a serious effort again to reunite 29Arnold lpolyi, "Mityas kirgly k8nyvtira maradvAnyainak fbifedez6e," Magyar k8nyvszemle (Budapest, 1878), p. 103.
BIBLIOTHECA CORVINA 563 in Buda the manuscripts that belonged to King Matthias. In 1927, Signor Mussolini, as a diplomatic gesture, presented to the Hungarian National Museum two beautiful Corvinas which had been for centuries in Italy.30 And more recently, the Austri- an government, in conformity with an agreement concerning art works which were once mutually owned by Austria and Hungary but which remained largely on Austrian territory, has agreed to deliver over to Hungary sixteen manuscripts that be- longed to the Bibliotheca Corvina, together with other valuable codices.3" With our present knowledge concerning authentic Corvinas, a complete catalog would hardly contain two hundred items. Most of them are the cherished property of the Hungarian Na- tional Museum, but copies are to be found in the great libraries all over Europe. As we have mentioned, two manuscripts are in the Morgan Collection. A catalog prepared by Bishop Frakn6i enumerates I 52 Latin, 8 Greek manuscripts, and 4 incunabula, all authentic Corvinas, giving also their present owners. Of the four incunabula one, Statuta urbis Romae, with Matthias' coat- of-arms on its title-page, is supposed to be in America. How- ever, it is not listed in the Census offifteenth century books owned in 4merica.32 GiZA SCHUiTZ MONTCLAIR FREE PUBLIC LIBRARY MONTCLAIR, N.J. 30 "A Nation sentenced to death," Magyarsdg (Budapest, I929), p. IS. 3 The Manchester guardian weekly, XXVIII, 3 January 20, 1933), p. II. ." Bibliographical Society of America, Census of fifteenth century books owned in America (New York, 1919).