PUBLISHING ON PERMANENT PAPERS LEONARD SHATZKIN Untimely deterioration has put book paper squarely in the center of the stage under a very bright spotlight. This is certainly not the way we would have chosen for paper to attract the interest and attention of the users of books. Quite aside from the question of how long the paper will function satisfactorily, the objective is to have the paper in the book noticed as little as possible. The more the reader notices the paper, the more he is dis- tracted from the words and pictures which the paper is intended to hold before him. Yet, for all its planned un- obtrusiveness, paper characteristics are important in the highly complicated functions of the manufacturing process and in the final book itself. So specific are these functions that book paper is considered a special product to be man- ufactured only by paper mills which have the particular equipment, talent, and experience to provide paper specif- ically for books. Book paper (which, incidentally, accounts for about one-third of the cost of the finished physical book) resem- bles other paper, including tissues, writing papers, paper plates, and other familiar papers, in being essentially a matting of cellulose fibers. The cellu- lose fibers for all modern papers are obtained from wood, either by simply grinding it, as for newsprint, or by separating it into individual fibers by one of several complicated processes of chemical extraction. The cellulose fibers are quite small. If you put a powerful magnifying glass to a Kleenex tissue, you will be able to make out the larger fibers, but not the smaller ones. After the fibers are extracted, by whatever method, they have to be bleached. Actually, bleaching alone is not sufficicent to bring the cellulose to the desired color, or lack of color. Dyes are added to bring the resulting paper to the specified whiteness, or off-white- ness, depending upon the publisher's preference for color and the nature of the book for which the paper is in- tended. For a "reading" book, with no illustrations, a cream white or pinkish white paper would be preferred as being less fatiguing and less likely to strain the eyes. For a book with many illustrations, a neutral white or blue white paper would enhance the beauty and clarity of the illustrations at some small sacrifice of the ease of reading the text. Control of color in book papers, even after a particular color is chosen, must be very precise, more so than for printing papers in general. Very slight variations in shade, virtually impossi- ble to detect with the untrained naked eye, can cause unpleasant streaks along the edge of the final book if some pages are printed on one shade of paper and some on the other. Since even in one lot of paper delivered for printing a book, succeeding sheets may have been manu- factured several days apart, color con- trol is no simple problem. Moreover, publishers like to be able to use paper left over from a previous pressrun with additional paper delivered weeks or months later. The cellulose fibers are formed into paper by being suspended in water- 113
114 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY only about 1 percent of the mixture is fiber and 99 percent is water-and passed over a moving screen of very fine mesh. The screen permits the water and only the very finest of the fibers to pass through, leaving the bulk of the fibers on the wire as a thin matting from which the remaining water is then pressed and dried to leave the continu- ous sheet of paper. Here, too, the special requirements of book publishers create special prob- lems. First, there are the fibers them- selves. They differ not only by the way in which they are processed from the wood log but also by the species of tree. One way in which fibers differ is simply by their length. The longer fibers from coniferous woods make a stronger paper but one which is less opaque and with a surface much less suitable for printing. The shorter fibers from deciduous woods improve opacity by scattering more light. They also add some bulk to the paper for equivalent weight and, together with the filler pigments, provide a better printing surface and make a limper sheet, one which will lie flat when the book is open and will be softer and more pleasant to the touch. Depending upon the nature of the book and the printing process being used, the pub- lisher will want a particular balance of long and short fibers. Second, there is the mechanical pre- treatment. The fibers are passed through refining devices which abrade their surfaces and fray their ends, thus providing better opportunity for the fibers to "hook on" to each other and "swell" so that they adhere better to each other, making a stronger paper. But the more the fiber is beaten, the less opaque the paper and the tinnier it is, excellent for letterheads but very unpleasant in a book. Third is the way in which the fiber is fed onto the wire. All paper to be printed must have a high degree of uniformity. A halftone picture coarse enough to be printed on an uncoated paper would still have over 12,000 in- dividual dots per square inch of paper surface. If the paper accepts ink from these dots differently, it is clear the resulting picture will suffer and will differ from one impression to the next. Therefore, paper produced for print- ing, whether advertising pieces, maga- zines, or books, must not have soft spots and hard spots and must be uni- formly resilient. But books require an additional uni- formity which is not easy to achieve: uniformity of thickness. The binding process requires that all the books in any one binding run be of uniform thickness to go through the machines. The case, the stamping dies, and the dust jacket are made, in advance, to fit a predicted thickness of the pages of the book. The pages in the front, or the middle, or the back of the book may be printed on paper made at dif- ferent times. Indeed, since the book is printed in segments rather than all at once, we may be sure that any one book combines paper from widely separated parts of the paper alloted to that book. This means that the thickness of paper must be very closely controlled from run to run and also controlled across the width of the papermaker's wire for each run. When we consider that the width of the paper being made can be 80,000 times the thickness, the diffi- culty of controlling the uniformity of that thickness at extremely high speeds becomes apparent. Fourth is the way in which the paper is matted on the wire. Since the wire is traveling at high speed, it tends to place the fibers so that most of them lie paral-
PUBLISHING ON PERMANENT PAPERS 115 lel to the direction of motion, partic- ularly if the fibers are long. This results in a paper grain, with some important effects on both printing and binding. As paper takes on moisture, as it inevi- tably does in printing by the offset process, it tends to swell across the grain, which makes it difficult to print several colors successively in precise relation to each other. This and other characteristics of paper with a pro- nounced grain direction make it unde- sirable for use in books. A fifth problem in making paper for books is the tendency for the lower sur- face, the wire side, to differ in appear- ance, texture, and ink receptivity from the upper surface, the felt side. For many purposes, even printing purposes, considerable difference between the two sides of the paper can be tolerated, but not in books. Even minor two-sidedness, as this tendency is called, would be too obvious in the repeated comparison of- fered as one turns the pages of a book, so the papermaker goes to great efforts to make the paper surfaces as nearly alike as possible. As I have pointed out, paper is pri- marily a matting of fine cellulose fibers extracted from wood. But, of course, it is a great deal more complicated than that. Paradoxically, cellulose is not very ink-receptive, so filler materials are added to the pulp to increase opacity and also to make the finished sheet friendlier to ink. Also, to keep ink from spreading and to slow the absorption of water, the paper must be made mois- ture-resistant by adding other mate- rials. This process is called sizing. Starch, glue, and other materials have been used. The widespread use of rosin and alum for sizing, which renders the finished paper acidic, has been identi- fied as a principal cause for paper de- terioration. But even if we avoid rosin and alum because it has disastrous side effects, we cannot avoid sizing. For ex- ample, unsized paper such as used in towels, facial tissue, and blotting paper would not make desirable book paper. The need for sizing varies with the printing process. Paper for letterpress printing requires very lilttle; gravure paper needs more. Unfortunately, paper for offset printing, which has in recent years become the most widely used process in book production, and is becoming more so, requires a great deal of sizing. Offset printing makes a further de- mand on paper, one which is of minor consequence in letterpress and was of no concern when the papers that W. J. Barrow studied were manufactured. That is the stronger adherence of the fibers themselves to each other. The offset process requires a tacky ink, and generally the tackier the ink, the better the print. Also, the rubber surface which transfers the ink to the paper exerts a very strong pull on the fibers of the paper, as is clearly evident when one watches an offset press in operation and sees the paper literally pulled away from the rubber printing cylinder. Any material picked off the paper, whether it is fiber or some additive, works itself back into the ink and quickly degrades the print quality, making it necessary to stop and clean the press frequently. The better the adherence of the fibers and the filler material, the less difficulty the paper creates on the offset press. The growing use of large rotary presses, particularly offset presses, printing directly on rolls of paper and delivering folded signatures, has pre- sented a whole new set of demands upon the paper. The paper is pulled through these presses under great ten- sion. Slight defects in the paper are enough to cause it to tear under such
116 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY tension with traumatic effect upon the cost of printing that book. Even if, without tearing, the paper only stretch- es under tension, the changes in dimen- sion (just like a change in dimension due to moisture absorption) may ruin print quality if more than one color is being laid down. These presses, becoming increasingly more important in book manufacturing print at such high speeds that drying of ink, which must take place before the paper is folded, cannot be left to normal evaporation or oxidation. The presses are fitted with large ovens maintained at several hundred degrees, through which the paper is passed. Minute pockets of moisture in the paper may explode under this heat, causing blisters. This is an extreme, though not uncommon, danger. An everyday problem is to have the paper pass through the oven without embrit- tlement or other similar deterioration. Opacity is another demand which books place on paper to a greater degree than other paper uses. Years ago when books were simply evenly spaced lines of type, it was possible to mask some of the translucency of the paper by printing the lines of each page so that they corresponded exactly to the lines of the reverse page. With the increased use of illustration and mathematical formulas, and a generally freer use of white space in book design, we have to make greater demands upon the opacity of the paper to avoid the unpleasant intrusion of other pages on the page being read. This is increas- ingly a problem as we try to reduce the weight and thickness of books by using lighter and thinner papers. Opacity in paper is improved by the addition of filler such as clay, calcium carbonate, titanium dioxide, or other white pig- ments, all of which have in common that, while their role in keeping the printing from showing through to the other side is essential, they add nothing to the strength of the paper but in fact detract from it by interfering with fiber-to-fiber bonding. The growing demand for improved print quality and the greater use of illustrations in books have led to a marked increase in the use of coated papers in books. These papers were virtually unknown during the period from which Barrow collected his aged samples. Coating is a fine powdery material held together by binders and applied like a paint to the paper to give a smoother, more ink-receptive surface and one that reflects more light. The effect of these coatings, which tend to be alkaline or neutral, upon the life expectancy of an acidic supporting fi- ber mat has not yet been definitely es- tablished. They have, however, definite- ly brought a new set of conditions into the printing and binding of books with corresponding new demands upon the papermaker's skill. In one important respect the de- mands from the book publisher tend to create more difficulty than those from other users of coated papers. In advertising, and to a lesser degree in magazine publishing, the shininess of coated paper is an advantage. It makes pictures more brilliant and attracts a casual viewer's attention. Shiny coated paper is much easier to make than nonshiny coated paper. But shininess makes reading difficult and may cause eyestrain, though the reader may not be aware that the reflections from the paper are the cause of his difficulty. We insist on as little shininess as possi- ble in coated book papers, but we insist on retaining the same smoothness of surface achieved with shiny papers. This gives some idea, perhaps, of
PUBLISHING ON PERMANENT PAPERS 117 how paper functions in the manufac- ture of the book and its final appear- ance and use. I do not suggest that these considerations, and I have by no means enumerated all of them, make the permanence or, more exactly, the long life of paper unimportant. Not at all I In a sense, the life expectancy of paper is quite apart and in no way contradictory to the ways in which paper takes ink and goes through presses or binding machines, or how it looks and feels in the finished book. But it should be clear that all of these characteristics, including life expec- tancy, are relative. A paper does not take ink either perfectly or not at all; it does not change dimension either under all press conditions or under none; it does not either crumble im- mediately or last forever. Therefore we try to achieve a balance of the desirable characteristics of paper with- out assigning an absolute limit to any one. We are now conscious that life ex- pectancy has not been given the at- tention it deserves and that a new balance of paper characteristics is re- quired. If some of the experts in the field are cautious about how far to go in arriving at the new balance, such caution is understandable, even by those of us who are determined to take the essential steps toward adjustment without delay. Making paper last longer can be accomplished in two general ways. The first of these is to make it stronger to begin with. In current terminology, this is making the paper more durable. The second way is to make it retain its strength over a longer period. This is called making the paper more perma- nent-which is a great idea but an un- fortunate distortion of the word "per- manent." Making the paper stronger may be accomplished by using more long fibers, or prolonged beating, or the addition of strong binders, any of which may detract from the other char- acteristics we consider so desirable. Moreover, there is some question about where to stop in adding strength as long as the ultimate has not been reached. Fortunately, today's papers, because of the demands of today's book manu- facturing methods, are considerably stronger than the papers used 100 years ago or even fifty and twenty-five years ago. These papers, if the rate of de- terioration can be slowed, may very possibly be sufficiently strong to exceed librarians' standards for longevity. That is why there is some reluctance to endanger the balance of paper char- acteristics by introducing an overriding and somewhat arbitrary standard for fold strength or tear strength. On the other hand, the shifting of paper from the acid to the alkaline side or making it neutral, which is the prin- cipal method proposed by Barrow and others to slow its deterioration, seems to be easier and more fruitful. Nothing in the way a book is manufactured or the finished book is used makes acidity of the paper an advantage. And al- though the shift from acidity is not easily made, and involves considerable change in the papermaking process for some mills, it seems not to require a change in the balance of the other paper chracteristics I have described which are so important to the function- ing of paper in the book. As I have already suggested, the principal cause of acidity in paper, though perhaps not the only one, is the use of rosin and alum sizing in the papermaking process to make the paper less receptive to moisture. The shift away from acid requires that
118 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY some nonacid or nonacid-producing material be used to accomplish the same purpose accomplished by rosin and alum. Glue, which is not appropri- ate today, was used before the intro- duction of rosin and alum. There are other materials, unfortunately propri- etary, which are being used successfully by some paper manufacturers and which avoid residual acidity in the finished paper. Faced with the fact of speedy de- terioration of paper widely used in books and the heavy weight of evidence that this deterioration is being acceler- ated by residual acidity in the paper itself, what should the publisher do? He has obligations in at least two di- rections. On the one hand, the author is his client, relying on the publisher's business expertise as well as upon his ethical and moral sense. The publisher accepts the obligation to bring the author's ideas to the widest possible reading audience in a form appropri- ate to those ideas. That implies a great deal about the design of the book itself, the advertising and promotional campaign, the activity of the publish- er's salesmen, and everything that goes into producing and marketing the book. Clearly, as part of his obligation to the author, the publisher must suit the physical specification to the content and purpose of the book. Some books, or some editions of other books, are clearly intended to be read and dis- carded, and they may be made by processes and with materials of a life expectancy secondary to the lower retail prices which their economies make possible. But when the author has written for future readers as well as present ones, where the book is intended to survive some immediate role of mass-distribut- ed tract or casual entertainer, it must, within the sensible limits of good busi- ness, be made of materials and by printing and binding methods that will not thwart the author's intent. These are things which the author need not specify to his publisher or even know about. They are inherent in the author- publisher relationship. The publisher has an obligation to the purchaser of the book as well. The book buyer understands fully that the paperback in the newsstand rack is not meant to last, and he is not shocked or disappointed when it does not. On the contrary, building unnecessary durability into such a book, at the expense of increasing its retail price, would be a disservice to the buyer. But the buyer expects the book which by its content, format, and price clearly labels itself a candidate for his perma- nent collection, to have the qualities, within the practical limits of available technology, suitable to such a collec- tion. He does not look for a guarantee on the copyright page. The nature of the book is its own unwritten warranty from the publisher. Publishers have assumed these obli- gations to author and book buyer seri- ously and generally have performed well. Now we are face-to-face with the fact that, notwithstanding good inten- tions, we have not delivered the quality we thought we were delivering. The assumptions we were making about paper quality simply do not correspond to the facts. The principal credit for the increased concern clearly evident among pub- lishers over the quality of paper used in books belongs to the Council on Library Resources and to Mr. W. J. Barrow, whose research on durability and permanence was financed by the council. This is due as much to the timing of this research and the energy
PUBLISHING ON PERMANENT PAPERS 119 and clarity with which the results have been presented to the concerned parties as it is to the specific results them- selves. It seems that much of Barrow's work was anticipated by Sutermeister and by others. It is even probably true that Barrow's conclusions tend to be some- what oversimplified. But if the effect of residual acid in paper was under- stood in some circles in the paper in- dustry before Barrow, this understand- ing had certainly not penetrated to its publisher-customers. And perhaps the simplicity of Barrow's message-acid papers decay rapidly, alkaline or neu- tral papers decay slowly-provided the sharpness that enabled it to penetrate places where useful action could be taken. It is probably true that the condi- tions under which books are used and stored markedly affects the rate of paper decay. Polluted air may be kill- ing off books even more effectively than it is killing off the readers of books. We know from aging tests that both atmospheric moisture and tem- perature affect paper life, and not even in a consistent, predictable way. It may be necessary for libraries to protect their collections by controlling the atmospheres in which they are housed. But in spite of this, Barrow's admoni- tion is still valid-acid papers decay rapidly; alkaline or neutral papers decay slowly. It is the nature of the publishing business that the specialization which has taken place over the years has shifted more of the responsibility for the manufacture of books and the materials that go into them from the publishers themselves to the suppliers to the publishing industry. The pub- lisher is well aware of the qualities that are visually discernible-the sharpness of the ink impression, the evenness of the round, the accuracy of the folding. He is much less aware of the qualities which can be determined only by chemical or physical tests-the rub re- sistance of the cloth, the strength of the threads, the plasticity of the glue, and the longevity of the paper. It is the rare publisher who has on his staff a chemist or engineer, except in an editorial capacity, and even rarer is the one who has a program for routinely testing the materials which go into the books, or the books them- selves. Insofar as he must specify materials or the methods of manu- facture, the publisher depends upon his suppliers to describe the alternatives, explain the practical effect of their dif- ferences, and specify the cost of each alternative so that the publisher can pick what suits his own general pur- poses and the requirements of each particular book. Until the reports from libraries of the widespread deterioration of books on their shelves, and the disclosure by Barrow of the effect of the acidic resi- dues of prevailing papermaking meth- ods, the publisher believed he had a simple and straightforward choice among paper alternatives. In the pre- Barrow world, paper was divided into two broad classifications. The first of these was the papers which consisted largely of groundwood, or contained any appreciable groundwood. These papers were considered to be short- lived, in direct proportion to the per- centage of groundwood. It was easy to demonstrate that they would turn brown and brittle if left in the open sun on the publisher's own windowsill, and it was understood that the same thing happened, though at a much slower rate, even in the absence of direct ultraviolet light. Such paper,
120 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY when used in books at all, was used in books of passing interest which were not expected ever to enter permanent collections of either individuals or libraries. The other broad classification was papers made exclusively of cellulose fibers chemically abstracted from wood. These were free of any contami- nation from groundwood, and were therefore called "free sheets." Accord- ing to our pre-Barrow understanding, these free sheets, being pure cellulose, to which were added only what we believed to be relatively stable agents designed to retard moisture penetra- tion, improve opacity, and provide a more ink-receptive surface, would, if properly cared for, last as long as papyrus or the handmade rag papers of the early days of printing. We now know that this was an un- fortunate oversimplification. Removing the lignins and other impurities which seem so destructive in groundwood is not sufficient to guarantee long life to the resulting paper. As a matter of fact, when we conducted aging tests according to Barrow's procedure, we discovered to our horror that one free sheet we were using showed an esti- mated life-span of less than twenty- five years compared with more than 100 years for some of our groundwood papers, which, in turn, is substantially shorter than the more than 300 years we expect from neutral free sheets. Of all those involved in the move- ment of the idea from the author's mind to the library's shelf, the publisher is in the best position to do something about the revelation that residual acid destroys paper surely and quickly. After, all, he buys or specifies the paper used in his books. Since it is being produced commercially, and the ways to produce it are well known, he need only specify neutral or alkaline paper and he will have neutral or alka- line paper. As a matter of fact, this is exactly what a number of publishers have done. In time, no doubt others will take the same step. Hesitation, aside from the normal lag in reacting to any new development, is rationalized in varying degrees on four grounds. 1. Permanence is not the only qual- ity to be considered, and one must establish that other important paper qualities are not sacrificed to achieve small improvements in permanence. True. It is certainly true that in order to be manufactured at all, the book, and particularly the paper, goes through extremely demanding operations dur- ing which it is pulled, twisted, sheared, folded, yanked, perforated, scorched, dampened, pinched, sewed, and put through every conceivable torture test, often at incredibly high speeds. In addition to surviving the physi- cal trials of printing and binding, the paper must have the properties essen- tial to the book itself. As already noted, it must be opaque and completely uni- form in thickness and have a surface which accepts and holds ink nicely and is pleasant to the sight and to the touch, and for some applications (not popular with librarians) accepts foun- tain pen ink. It must have all these physical and cosmetic properties, even if it is very thin and light in weight, because bulky books are hard to read, cost too much to ship, and occupy too much valuable shelf space. One cannot ignore the fact that sur- vival is not the sole purpose of the book and that the physical demands of the manufacturing process are diffi- cult to deny. However, except in minor matters, there does not seem reason for
PUBLISHING ON PERMANENT PAPERS 121 real concern. For example, though it appears to be very difficult to produce tinted papers, particularly strong tints, by acid-free manufacturing methods, such papers are rarely used and can hardly be considered essential in any book. All of our experience with alka- line papers indicates that the other qualities we look for in paper have not suffered. Actually, we believe that ink drying has improved and that press conditions in offset lithographic print- ing are less critical than with acid papers. 2. Acidity is not the only factor de- termining the useful life of the paper. True. Barrow himself pointed out that paper must begin with a substantial resistance to tear and fold in order to last longer, whatever its rate of decay in strength. But Barrow's work also shows that acidity exercises much more leverage than can any conceivable improvement in starting strength. Ac- cording to Barrow, paper with a pH of 7.0 lasts twenty times longer than paper with a pH of 4.8. In other words, one would have to make a paper twenty times as strong at pH 4.8 to achieve the equivalent longevity of paper at pH 7.0. Quite aside from the fact that strengthening the paper so drastically would be costly, if not impossible, the paper manufacturers assure us that such strength could only be achieved at the expense of other important paper characteristics, notably opacity, ink receptivity, ease of binding, and the feel of the finished book. Therefore, the attack on acidity is the best way to obtain balanced paper characteristics plus long life. Even if putting all the blame on acidity is oversimplification, if other additives or pollutants in the water may have serious aging effects, this does not argue for delaying a shift from acid papers but rather that the research should not stop there. 3. Neutral paper is more costly. True. There are three factors tending to increase cost. The chemicals are more expensive; the papermaking ma- chines cannot run so fast; the limited number of producers inhibits competi- tion. The last of these will become less important as publishers specify neu- tral papers and mills are encouraged to enter the field. The first two may cause somewhat higher costs for neu- tral papers for a long period. But the choice between acid and neutral papers represents today's version of yester- day's choice between groundwood and "free sheets." Inevitably the choice must go the same way-in favor of quality even if costs do rise slightly. 4. A wholesale shift to neutral paper would disrupt the paper industry. True. An orderly transition requires time. Mill managements must sort out the alternative manufacturing methods available to them. They may have to make changes in equipment or acquire the right to use patented processes. New process control methods have to be learned and installed. It is by no means an easy change for the paper manufacturer to make. Not only must each publisher respect his papermaker's difficulties for the practical reasons that he must solve them if the paper is to be available, but, morally and ethically, he is obli- gated to allow time for the change in the light of those difficulties, regardless of how suddenly he, the publisher, has discovered the need for change. How- ever, it is hard to believe that the present pace of conversion to neutral papers cannot be greatly accelerated. Those of us who have shifted virtually all of our hard cover production to neu-
122 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY tral paper do not seem to be using enough paper to strain the capacity to produce it. And a number of mills seem to be in transition toward acid- free production methods, so additional capacity will soon be available. What- ever the actual capacity may be, pub- lishers, as the customers, should be asking the paper industry to do a little more than it can, rather than a little less. The revelations of Barrow and the new and proper concern of librarians about the strength and longevity of paper do not change the publisher's obligations to author or book buyer- they simply redefine them. We now know that for many years the publisher ,has unwittingly compromised his standards of quality. There is no ques- tion of attempting to justify or to perpetuate an error made out of igno- rance. Present knowledge dictates the use of acid-free papers for all books which openly, or by implication, are intended to have long life. DISCUSSION FORREST F. CARHART, JR. Mr. Shatzkin has listed many of the practical factors that pertain to the manufacture of book papers and their utilization by publishers. To most of us who are not directly involved in pub- lishing activities, this is informative and provides a useful background but is hardly a basis for intensive argument. My approach, then, will be to repeat for emphasis some of Shatzkin's principal statements, to point out areas of mod- est disagreement, to tell some of the experiences gained in the Library Tech- nology Program's studies on papers and card stocks, and finally, to offer some suggestions for future action. Shatzkin has very succinctly stated the difficulties that publishers face when they plan the production of a book. Each element that goes into the building of a sheet of paper used by the printer has an immediate effect on the publisher's finished product. To most of us who are librarians, many of these factors have not previously come to our attention. For most of us, one piece of paper seems to be like any other. Ob- viously, this is not the case. It is com- monly said that papermaking is still an art, not a science. But the precision of measurement and demands discussed by Shatzkin and others indicate that pa- permaking is becoming less of an art and is coming closer to being a science. We should dispose of a semantic problem before we proceed further. Shatzkin states that the use of the word "permanent" in relation to paper is an unfortunate distortion of the usual use of the word. Perhaps our immediate goal is paper with greater longevity, permanence being the ideal which we are hoping to attain. It is well known that residual acid in paper is a principal cause for paper de- terioration. It has also been well estab- lished that paper is likely to have a greater longevity and durability, if, among other things, it possesses a high degree of initial strength. There are, of course, other factors which affect the deterioration of book papers. The handling that the book re- ceives from the library staff and the borrowing public has a bit to do with its life expectancy. Still other factors are
PUBLISHING ON PERMANENT PAPERS 123 the conditions under which the book is stored before it reaches the library, the transportation conditions, the storage environment in the library, etc. Many of these are conditions over which li- brarians have little or no control. Thus, it is important to them that book pa- pers be of the highest practical quality when they are procured by the publish- er. Sizing has a great deal to do with the printability of the sheets and is very important to the printer and the pub- lisher. Shatzkin has indicated that most of the residual acid in papers comes from the sizing which is applied to the paper either internally or externally during the manufacturing process. A highly alkaline condition in paper is possibly just as injurious as a highly acidic condition. It has been shown by many that papers in the neutral pH range have a better chance of long life than do those which are acidic or alka- line. That this is not new information is shown by the number of paper manu- facturers who are aware of the qualities of better book papers and the number of publishers who are using such pa- pers. Indeed, Shatzkin's firm quietly announced some time past that it would print all of its future books on papers which would apparently have a longer life. Not only are initially strong papers needed to guard against later physical abuses, but they are necessary in order that we can all take advantage of the economics of the use of new high-speed web offset presses. But we have heard that such presses involve the use of a high-temperature drying cycle. Such an exposure to high heat argues for initial strength as well as all of the other qual- ities which make for longevity and dur- ability. Much progress is being made toward the end result we all desire-books pos- sessing the characteristics of greater durability and longevity. The need has been recognized by publishers as well as librarians, and now publishers are working with paper manufacturers to bring a better product to the printer- a mutually happy circumstance. I wish that Shatzkin had emphasized the need for strength as much as he did the need for acid-free papers. Obvious- ly, we should build strength into pa- pers in such a way that other desirable factors are not compromised. He men- tions that one of the ways in which strength can be attained is through the use of long-fiber woods in the pa- permaking process. Long-fiber woods (i.e., coniferous) are most typically used by southern paper mills, while short-fiber woods (i.e., deciduous) are more typically used by northern pa- per mills. The mill from which paper is procured and its location may have much to do with the nature of the sheet. It is possible to produce a strong sheet with good printing qualities from long- fiber woods. There are practical limits to the strength obtained by using short fibers, strong binders, and prolonged beating. Shatzkin says "There is some question about where to stop in adding strength as long as the ultimate has not been reached." I do not believe we are ready-any of us-to say that there are limits we wish to establish relative to the durability of our papers or their longevity. Neither are we ready to say we have reached the ultimate in print- ability qualities. Shatzkin suggests that there are at least four rationalizations which can be cited as delaying the general adoption of long-life papers for book publication. The first is that permanence is not the only quality that must be considered. I
124 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY disagree that some other important qualities cannot be overlooked to achieve small improvements in longev- ity. But we can note with great pleasure that efforts to produce better papers are not inimical to the production of papers suitable to the satisfaction of publish- ers. Neither the physical demands of the manufacturing process nor the sur- vival factor can be ignored. But pub- lishers are becoming alert to the dual needs, and this is progress-not enough, but progress. The third rationalization states that "neutral paper is more costly." This I find hard to accept as a flat statement. I can accept the fourth rationalization, "a wholesale shift to neutral paper would disrupt the paper industry," but I cannot accept what is to be inferred from this statement. If there were to be a sudden wholesale switch to the use of so-called permanent and durable papers for book publishing, one segment of the paper industry would indeed be dis- rupted. But the normal development of demand will bring about an appropriate supply. It is almost impossible that all publishers will decide simultaneously to use long-life papers. Thus, the changeover will inevitably be natural and gradual. The Library Technology Program (LTP) of the American Library Asso- ciation mailed two small questionnaires in the spring of 1968. This was done as a bit of staff work for the American Book Publishers Council-Resources and Technical Services Division (American Library Association) Joint Committee. One questionnaire went to publishers to identify the relative quantity of pub- lishing being done on permanent and/or durable papers. The second question- naire was addressed to paper manufac- turers. It sought information on the mill capacity for the manufacture of long- life papers compared with recent mill production. We found that there is much unused mill capacity available. We also discovered that in some in- stances there is a price differential be- tween permanent and durable book pa- pers and book papers of comparable quality lacking long-life characteristics. Usually, however, such price differen- tials were minor. The cost of changing a paper machine from acid to low alkaline or neutral production has been made without in- ordinate expenditures. Possibly it has been difficult for some mills to adjust to new production methods, but many mills, I am told, have found it to be a reasonably simple process. Perhaps I would be guilty of an overstatement if I said it was simply a matter of clean- ing up a machine so that traces of acid were no longer detectable. Overstate- ment or not-this has been a common experience. Before we talk of the future, it may be interesting to note a few other ob- servations from LTP's work which, like Barrow's, was financed by the Council on Library Resources. A few years ago, LTP gave one of its book printers eight papers on which we wanted some ex- periments conducted. Basically, we wanted to know whether permanent and durable papers were more difficult for the printer to use than ordinary book papers. All of the papers (five were permanent and durable) were found to be superior among those pa- pers with which the printers usually worked. And this applied to offset as well as letterpress printing. Of course, we could see some differences in print- ing results because some of the papers were designed for offset and some for letterpress work. But basically-all eight were very workable papers. The tired old objections of some printers
PUBLISHING ON PERMANENT PAPERS 125 were unmasked as simple objections to change. Another example of the fear of change arose during the work and dis- cussions which have led to the adoption of USA Standard Z85.1, a performance standard relating to permanent and durable catalog cards. We found that the paper converters and some paper mills were afraid to change the basis on which they historically had specified their card stocks. Rather than a recipe for combining materials, the new stan- dard calls for a minimum performance of the finished product whatever its in- gredients. It was even feared that the neutral pH requirement and a minimum level of folding endurance (one measure of strength) would be difficult (if not impossible) to attain. By the time the standard was adopted by the U.S.A. Standards Institute in 1969, no ques- tions were being asked regarding the pH requirement, and at least one man- ufacturer was regularly exceeding the minimum folding endurance level by more than 100 percent. The experience of the last few years shows it is likely that an upward revision of performance levels can now be discussed with profit. An earnest desire to provide a better product plus a willingness to experi- ment on the part of knowledgeable peo- ple brought about this new U.S.A. Stan- dard. And these were the ingredients of Barrow's efforts. After working with the restoration of old papers, he concluded independently that there should be a way to make paper from wood which would have the long-lasting characteris- tics of the best rag papers and that the wood pulp papers so made could be commercially competitive with the best rag papers. Printability was not his goal. His first attack was to study the causes of paper deterioration and seek remedies for paper failures. The papers he studied first were manufactured be- tween 1900 and 1949. Typically, these were uncoated papers, but not exclu- sively so. Those with coatings generally showed alkaline characteristics on the surface but had acidic cores. Barrow's own observations, stimulated by his in- tuition and later confirmed by his read- ings and laboratory investigations, brought him to the conclusions that ini- tial strength and neutral pH values are important to the durability and longev- ity of paper. One of Barrow's signal contributions was to tell all of us loudly, clearly, and concisely that we must seek acid-free and stronger papers. Barrow's concern has finally penetrated our consciousness and possibly is one of the reasons for this conference. We have recognized a problem, want to learn more about it, and seek solutions for the future. In the course of many years and par- ticularly in recent meetings of the ABPC-RTSD (ALA) Joint Committee, librarians have urged publishers to print more books on permanent and durable paper. Now the publishers have, among other things, asked the library repre- sentatives on the committee to identify those materials which should be printed on long-lasting papers and those which can be printed on cheaper short-lived papers. After all these years, we have no definitive answer. A thought expressed by Gordon Wil- liams of the Center for Research Li- braries is that from now on we should print everything on long-life paper. The economic factors which have precluded the use of permanent and durable pa- pers in past years now seem to be dis- appearing, and Williams' suggestion is not flippant, but highly appropriate un- der the circumstances. Many times we
126 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY are unable to distinguish, in the early days of its existence, ephemera from material of permanent importance. Thus, if books were printed on perma- nent and durable papers, we would have them available for a longer period of time than if printed on groundwood pulp. Not all paperbacks from the newsstand rack are subject to immedi- ate discard, for two reasons: first, some of these are the only available reprints which can be used to replenish library stocks; and second, some items of last- ing importance published in paperback versions are never published in the so- called hardbound editions. As librarians, we cannot presume to devise a recipe for better book papers, but we must take the responsibility for telling publishers and paper manufac- turers what is expected of the books they manufacture for us. Perhaps it is sufficient to say that we want books which will last as long as the knowledge in them will be useful to mankind. This is a goal which may be very difficult to attain. It may be one that is impossible to attain, but unless we set our eyes on a goal someplace along a continuum, we will make little or no progress in that direction. Barrow's work has indicated not only that residual acid is a factor which tends to make paper deteriorate but also that the constant flexing of papers in books is another factor. These seem so self- evident now that there is little question about these two factors being causes of deterioration. Thus it would seem that we might additionally suggest to pub- lishers and papermakers that we need both as much strength as it is feasible to build into new paper and at the same time paper that is neutral in a balance between acidity and alkalinity. How can we communicate to pub- lishers (and they in turn to paper man- ufacturers) the qualities which are de- sired and necessary? Normally a speci- fication or standard is the format used. In recent years, some contention has been noted because of embryonic activ- ities toward the development of per- formance standards for book papers. These efforts have been called "arbi- trary" and even worse names. But the enunciation by Barrow in 1960 of a proposed standard did bring attention to our paper problems, as Shatzkin has stated, and has stimulated discussion and interest. Whether Barrow's pro- posal was arbitrary is, I think, an aca- demic question. The result has been salutary. Only when a standard is needed but does not exist do we become painfully aware of its importance to us. The de- termination of a minimum standard for the performance of book papers will certainly not inhibit innovation and lead to undesirable uniformity, as has been claimed. Rather the setting of clear norms for desirable characteristics elim- inates the need to establish such values repetitively. Standards are the language for the dialogue between buyer and seller by specifying either a recipe for the material or the behavior of the ma- terial. Among other things, standards result in a greater confidence of the con- sumer in the material, a better under- standing of how to use the material, better quality control, lower inventories by elimination of unnecessary grades, better performance at lower prices through the reduced need for negotia- tions, more efficient inspection and test- ing, and, finally, lower prices to con- sumers through a rational basis for competitive bidding. The goal of the development of a performance standard for book papers is, in my estimation, a long-range goal. In the meantime, we must all insist that
PUBLISHING ON PERMANENT PAPERS 12 7 publishers require their paper manu- facturers to supply increasingly im- proved book papers. Constant experi- mentation with various combinations will show us the appropriate balances of factors governing paper manufacture which will provide improved papers. Testing, probing, and experimentation must not stop. We must continue to do more. Whether or not long-lasting papers are more costly (and they do not seem to be significantly more so), the law of demand and supply will bring the price still lower. Competition caused by de- sire to serve is marvelous for this pur- pose. Obviously, manufacturers have been afraid to go into the field of neu- tral papers in wholesale quantities be- cause they have not seen the market for the papers. They have not found the market because publishers have not pushed for such papers, since librarians have not pushed the publishers. The transition in the paper mills will take a little time but only as much as we will allow. Economics will not hinder prog- ress as much as lack of desire. As custodians of the books, librarians have one responsibility they cannot side-step. They must do all in their power to provide a proper environment for the books manufactured by the pub- lishers. To ignore this responsibility would be a gross dereliction of duty. Fortunately, there are several pub- lishers, as represented by Shatzkin, who have realized that the long life of a pa- per for books is an important thing for scholarship and, although economic considerations should have some atten- tion, they should not have paramount bearing on the decision to use long-life papers in the printing of books. At the present time, it is not entirely feasible to print all kinds of materials on the long-life papers presently available; but it is possible to print a great variety of materials on long-life papers, as has been proven by a great many publish- ers. The fact that we will soon be able to print more and more of our materials on long-life papers is due in great part to the knowledge, efforts, and sincere desire on the part of publishers to pre- sent a product that is needed by schol- arship. The publisher must continue to weigh the relative balance of the vari- ous factors that make up a good paper for the particular book he is printing. As long as he is looking for better pa- pers and calls upon his papermakers to provide him with papers that will have a longer life in libraries, we will move forward toward the goal that we want to achieve-that is, books that will stay in our libraries as long as they are needed. To repeat and summarize, these are some future steps which must be taken: ( 1 ) librarians must identify those items which are to be published on long-last- ing paper; (2) they must remind pub- lishers of the need for long-life papers in their books; (3) publishers must in- sist that paper makers provide long-life papers; (4) librarians must provide proper environments for storing the books; (5) librarians, publishers, and papermakers must develop some com- monly understood measures of book behavior or performance standards; (6) finally-librarians must urge pub- lishers to insist that the paper industry do a little bit more than it can rather than a little bit less.