LNegotiating Borders: Librarianship and Twenty-First-Century Politics Nadia Caidi, J. J. Ghaddar, and Danielle Allard ABSTRACT Recent developments in Canada, the United States, and beyond continue to test librarians’ re- solve and to redefine how we view ourselves and engage with communities. Drawing on exam- ples from both Canada and the United States and deploying the concept of “border” as an analytical trope, we seek to probe and unsettle the geographic, professional, and ideological in- terfaces that librarians constantly negotiate. In a world where data know no borders but indige- nous and other bodies are constrained by them, how do we respond to the “Calls to Action” of Canada’s Truth and Reconciliation Commission, to the violent displacement of millions of Syr- ians, to the resurgence of divisive politics and racist rhetorics, or to the surrender to data? Using the Trump election as a launching point, we explore key drivers for change in LIS in instances when politics spill into our professional purview. ibraries and the professionals that work within them are invariably shaped by the social contexts in which they are embedded. For the library and information science (LIS) field, the recent election of President Donald J. Trump has served as a stark reminder of how the boundaries of the professional and the political are far from stable and of the con- tinued relevance of racism in the world. The coming to power of an administration that flirts carelessly with facts and data and that espouses a divisive and at times vitriolic discourse meant to inflame rather than unite people tests librarians’ resolve today in much the same way that McCarthyism did during the ColdWar (Preer 1993; Robbins 1994, 1995, 1998, 2001; Jenkins 1996, 2001) or that the Patriot Act did after 9/11 (ALA 2002; Estabrook 2002a, 2002b; Jordan 2002; Oder 2003a, 2003b; Starr 2004; see also Caidi and Ross 2005; Lyon 2006; Caidi and MacDonald 2008; Roach 2011 for relevant discussion in a Canadian context). As with these instances, the new administration’s policies force librarians to confront ethical and practical dilemmas about the role of information institutions and professionals in facilitating chauvinistic and exclusion- ary policies that harm and discriminate against individuals and communities we are mandated to serve, that infringe on the right to privacy and freedom of inquiry, and that suppress the free and open exchange of knowledge and information on an ideological basis.Library Quarterly: Information, Community, Policy, vol. 87, no. 4, pp. 391–409. © 2017 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-2519/2017/8704-0010$10.00 391
392 • The Library QuarterlyWhen politics inordinately spills over into their professional purview, librarians tend to grip firmly to their core set of professional ethics and values in an attempt to assert their role in society and their engagement with the communities they serve. Moments such as the re- cent election of Trump thus serve to reify even as they challenge librarians’ and information professionals’ ethical and professional stances. Indeed, the repercussions of the Trump presi- dential victory were quickly felt within the LIS field in North America/Turtle Island. In an attempt to navigate alternative facts and fake news, some librarians and LIS educators took it upon themselves to develop information and media literacy opportunities for their pub- lics (ALA Public Programs Office 2017). Faced with the threat of removal of public data, gue- rilla archiving initiatives took place (with librarians in their midst) alongside more concerted efforts by the likes of the Internet Archive, which partnered with American and Canadian re- search libraries and educational institutions to house critical data (e.g., on the environment and climate change) on servers in the United States and abroad as a means of protecting data from Web scrubbing based on ideology. A controversial statement of support for the new administration issued by the Washing- ton Office of the American Library Association (ALA) provoked important debate within our professional associations and spaces about our core values and responsibilities and how they aligned with the new administration’s positions. As a consequence, ALA (2016a, 2016b) rescinded its original statement and qualified its position. Along with several other organizations (includ- ing the Association for Library and Information Science Education and the Association for In- formation Science and Technology), ALA released position statements opposing the new ad- ministration’s measures, including Executive Order 13769, which halted all refugee admissions and effectively banned citizens of Iran, Iraq, Libya, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, and Yemen from entry into the United States.1 This engagement from LIS professionals qualifies our profession’s po- sition on “neutrality” and allows us to be vocal on causes that we deem critical. In the current context, librarians and information professionals, as noted, have taken a strong position on such issues as the critical importance of access to public knowledge and information literacy, intel- lectual freedom, and the preservation of state-produced documents and information. In con- trast, the LIS profession has been relatively silent on other presidential executive orders, such as those that green-light the construction of the controversial Energy Transfer Partners’ Da- kota Access Pipeline that infringes on, and poses a threat to, the treaty lands of the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe of the Očhéthi Šakówiŋ, the Great Sioux Nation. Reactions to the election of Trump and recent decisions by the new administration signal that librarianship operates in an interconnected world, where what happens “there” has im-1. Since the passing of this executive order, a number of court challenges were launched challenging its constitution- ality. After a federal court effectively blocked the order, the administration issued on March 6 a new order replacing the earlier one with slight modifications (e.g., Iraq was removed from the list of banned countries). Court cases were also mounted against the revised text, and appeals continue to be heard on the court’s decision to uphold the block as this article goes to print.
Negotiating Borders • 393plications for “here.” In a show of support, the Canadian Federation of Library Associations/ Fédération canadienne des associations de bibliothèques (CFLA/FCAB 2017a) endorsed the American Library Association (ALA) statement issued January 30, 2017, defending library core values and condemning recent events in the United States. The rationale that both ALA and the CFLA/FCAB give for their position is that librarians champion values that include access to information, privacy, democracy, equity, diversity and inclusion, intellectual freedom, and social responsibility. CFLA/FCAB (2017a) goes on to say that “Canadian libraries stand together in unity with our American library colleagues in support of welcoming and inclusive commu- nities.” Such statements are laudable, but this article interrogates what it is that libraries mean when they speak about inclusion and diversity and how we might broaden and rethink these concepts in line with the current political moment. As individuals and as professionals, members of the LIS fields (broadly construed) serve their communities, provide access to information, and generally abide by the core ethics and values of our professions. As such, these professionals are already implicated in the wider so- cial and political environments in which they are embedded, whether they realize it or not, whether they choose it or not. Moreover, as Jonathan Cope (2017) notes, every facet of the library—and by extension, every decision and act of a librarian—has ideological and political import: “The vision of the ideologically neutral library should be consigned to the proverbial dustbin of history” (5). Earlier, we noted several examples of librarians responding unneu- trally and directly to the current political moment. Yet, we would like to argue in this article that LIS professionals are not always aware of the full extent to which they are implicated and of the responsibility they bear. At times, this is because of our tendency to focus too narrowly on the local or national context or the specificities of the communities we work with and to consider too little the broader historical and structural factors at play. We need to be attuned to, for example, how geopolitical interests and global processes manifest themselves at local, national, and transnational levels. In part, this would entail moving beyond strictly national framings of our work and institutions while recognizing that libraries (particularly public ones) are deeply embedded within national projects, histories, and structures. More specifically, because the Trump administration’s inflammatory, racist, and exclusion- ary rhetoric and actions raise such important questions for both US and Canadian soci- eties about the nature of diversity and inclusion within our national contexts, we ask: What do librarians miss when they approach diversity and inclusion from a narrow perspective that does not consider the intersecting histories and systems that oppress and marginalize those that are imagined as other? Moreover, as we consider the nature and scope of engagement by LIS professionals within the current political landscape, we must be aware of the broader political context of an allegedly postracial milieu, replete with rhetorics about the triumph of neoliberalism and a liberal antiracism that supports white privilege and masks racial tensions and inequalities. As critical race theorist Kimberlé Crenshaw (2011) points out, claims that we
394 • The Library Quarterlylive in a postracial milieu posit a racially egalitarian United States and, therefore, foreclose the possibility of addressing the persistence of racial injustice and the continued centrality of race in structuring the world. Crenshaw explains: “As post-racialism becomes the vehicle for a color- blind agenda, the material consequences of racial exploitation and social violence—includ- ing the persistence of educational inequity, the disproportionate racial patterns of criminali- zation and incarceration, and the deepening patterns of economic stratification—slide further into obscurity. Under the thrall of post-racialism, these stubborn conditions pose little chal- lenge to interpreting the historical election of one politician [Obama] as the end of racism” (1327). Declaring race to be irrelevant in fact sanctions and enables the persistence of the con- ditions that make racial oppression possible. Yet the resurgence of racial and divisive rhetorics with the Trump phenomenon, and parallel political movements in Europe and elsewhere, have made it increasingly untenable to posit a postracial turn, despite what the politics of ac- commodation and rollback would have us believe. Paradoxically, postracialism as an ideology had a hand in the Trump election; postracialism pragmatically reduces racial injustice or ineq- uity to racial difference and does not consider asymmetries in racial power. This move makes it possible for anxiety about white victimization (which Trump tapped into during his election campaign) to emerge in a country like the United States, where power, whether economic, political, or social, continues to be predominantly centered within the white population (al- though distributed unequally within it). Our discussion speaks to, and seeks to elaborate on, scholarship that is critical of the dom- inant diversity paradigm within our field. Most recently, in his literature review of diversity in LIS, David James Hudson (2017) noted that diversity is a trope of a liberal multiculturalism that treats racism as an individual problem or pathology rather than a structural phenomenon. This article seeks to respond to his call for an understanding of the historically contingent and so- cially constructed nature of racial categories and for research that moves beyond the prevalent diversity framework by attending to “the specificities of racialized and racializing knowledge production in different LIS contexts, as well as their intersection with the macro- and micro- dynamics of white supremacist power relations” (26). Hudson’s insightful work points to how the LIS field is itself a site in and through which racialized difference is produced and that, therefore, racial dynamics in LIS are an extension of broader systems of racial domination. We elaborate on Hudson’s work by attending to the histories and cross-border dynamics in- forming the LIS–race nexus within our political moment. The racial conundrums and the paradoxes of the Trump presidency are not easily con- tained within, or explained through, the nation-state borders of the United States. The con- tradictory forces at play in Trump’s election are felt everywhere, albeit differently. As the Ca- nadian state embarks on celebrations of the 150th anniversary of its establishment, it is confronted with its own challenges around the meaning of confederation and Canadian iden- tity and the role that settler colonialism and racial domination have played in the country’s history. The multifaceted and creative resistance taking place across the country to the official
Negotiating Borders • 395state narrative of confederation indicates the highly contested nature of the history of the making of Canada. The popular #colonialism150 and #Resist150 hashtags give a sense of the counternarratives and narrative refusals taking place in opposition to the official story: these hashtags counter and subvert the government’s own official hashtag, #Canada150. In another example, Kiera Ladner and Myra Tait (2017) counter the celebratory framing of Canada 150 through the assembly of an indigenous response. Their edited monograph is a collection of es- says and artistic contributions by indigenous and ally scholars, artists, and community leaders that rearticulates Canada 150 as also an anniversary of mourning, loss, and continued coloniza- tion, as well as an occasion to honor indigenous continuity, resilience, and resistance. Such counternarratives question which past is being celebrated or disavowed, and at whose expense. These issues arise even as some libraries, archives, and museums (LAMs) in Canada are seeking to respond to the “Calls to Action” of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC), whose work concerns the history and ongoing legacies of the so-called Indian Residential Schools (IRS) system.2 The TRC’s work highlights the relevance of colonial racism to the Canadian nation-state from its beginning 150 years ago to the present. More broadly, debates and reflec- tions in Canada on the country’s colonial foundations and its continued colonization and era- sure of indigenous peoples are informed by current US politics and, more generally, reactions to the Trump election across borders. Our discussion so far has pointed to a number of geographic, professional, ideological, and political interfaces that librarians negotiate in their work. It has also touched on the implica- tions of the Trump presidency to liberal antiracism, while insisting that our contemporary world continues to be indelibly marked by race. We have done so to highlight the historically constructed nature of race as a global phenomenon with national and local expressions. Build- ing from this, the remainder of this work asks: In a world where data knows no borders, while indigenous and other bodies are constrained by all sorts of borders (whether symbolic or ma- terial), how do we as librarians and information professionals respond to the resurgence of divisive politics and racist rhetorics across and beyond Turtle Island/North America? How should librarians respond to the challenges posed by the Truth and Reconciliation Commis- sion in Canada? And how do we attend to the violent displacement of millions of refugees the world over? We consider these examples as a means to concretely think through our re- sponsibilities and commitments as librarians and information professionals. More specifically, we operationalize the categories of race and border to contribute to a growing critical conver- sation within LIS about how we might become what John C. Bertot, Lindsay C. Sarin, and Paul T. Jaeger (2015) call true “change agents.” We do so by foregrounding the racial dimensions of the examples noted (the TRC, the global refugee crisis) and suggesting that LIS responses to the needs of colonized and racialized people must entail thinking and looking beyond national2. We note the problematic and deceptive aspects of the term “Indian Residential Schools”: such institutions were neither schools nor educational in any meaningful sense, and the term “Indian” is a colonial imposition that does not reflect how indigenous peoples identify and name themselves.
396 • The Library Quarterlyborders and the immediate present to understand both the situational and historical contexts and to come up with possible solutions. Living through Borders: The Truth and Reconciliation Commission Onöndowága (Seneca) scholar Mishuana Goeman (2013) recalls a childhood lived “from city to city to rural areas, from place to place.” (6) From her reservation of Tonawanda in upstate New York and her family home on Penobscot territory in Maine to urban centers across Turtle Is- land, Goeman’s story of family migration unsettles the colonial spatial logic that confines in- digenous people to reservations and gives rise to the false dichotomy of urban–reservation Native. (Notably, while government legislation in the United States, and Canada, confined indigenous peoples to reservations, urban centers are also built on indigenous land.) The Med- icine Treaties of the 1870s corralled indigenous peoples onto reservations in the United States, soon after the British North America Act of 1867 established the new Canadian nation-state. Reflecting on that political moment in the past, Goeman notes the relationship between these two events by considering how the inflicted violence by one nation-state supported suppres- sion and colonization across what came to be the Americas. As the United States Army forced indigenous peoples onto reservations, the southern borderlands of Canada and the northern borderlands of Mexico were further settled and consolidated in the process: “Cities grew, white immigration flourished, and the colony [Canada] no longer needed to rely on Britain for military protection. The settler nation states of the Americas, in recognizing one another’s boundaries and overlooking colonial violence, legitimate the settler state as an entity while overlooking the injustices toward Native people under its guise of the affairs of a sovereign nation. . . . Once territories and land were claimed by Western empires turned settler states, violent state practices were read as internal affairs” (Goeman 2013, 21). Goeman outlines how mutually enforcing settler-colonial entities and processes throughout Turtle Island led to the establishment of borders that cut through and across the land bases of the indigenous peoples that spread across what is now known as the United States, Canada, and Mexico. This applies to the Haudenosaunee Confederacy that Goeman belongs to as an Onöndowága woman. Our use of “settler colonialism” refers to the history of European conquest and settlement through violence of what became North America. Settler colonialism entails ongoing structural mech- anisms designed to clear the land of indigenous peoples to claim it as territory for the settler nation (Wolfe 2006). Racial categories are a critical foundation on which privileges, rights, and citizenship are granted or withheld within settler colonial states. Put another way, racism made it possible to place indigenous children in the IRS while nonindigenous children remained out- side the system. As we will elaborate, this definition positions all North American state insti- tutions, including libraries, as colonial institutions at their core. Other Haudenosaunee scholars, such as Susan Hill of the Kanien’kehá:ka (Mohawk, Wolf Clan), also speak to the far-ranging consequences of how the Canada–US border divides their
Negotiating Borders • 397land and people. From an indigenous perspective, Hill (2013) explains, “the border crossed us.” The nation-state borders of North America are considered tenuous at best from an indigenous perspective. Not only are these borders antithetical to indigenous relations to land and geo- graphic understandings, but they also do not register indigenous experiences of the regional and global nature and scope of settler colonialism. It is not a coincidence that in both Canada and the United States, indigenous children were forced into educational institutions that aimed not to educate but, rather, to eradicate indigenous cultures and languages and to sever indigenous children’s relations to their families, people, and land. (Even a cursory examination of the literature on residential or boarding schools on either side of the border would illustrate this point. The TRC final report [2015] is an excellent starting point to delve into this topic and access other relevant literature.) Established in June 2008, the TRC was mandated to foster a process of national reconcili- ation and truth telling about the IRS system. As part of its work, the TRC unearthed and cir- culated many stories that encourage us to consider how settler colonialism in Canada, despite all its particularities, needs to be understood as part of the shifting regional and global pro- cesses that made possible and today reinforce Canada’s borders. The tremendous work done by the TRC, which included the gathering of thousands of survivor testimonies and the col- lection and processing of thousands of state- and church-produced archival records, resulted in an account that details how more than 150,000 indigenous children were forcibly taken from their families, communities, and nations. The TRC’s work also demonstrates the violence and racism that made the IRS possible. Among other things, the TRC’s (2015) final report un- settles the national narrative of Canada and forces Canadian society to acknowledge and con- front its colonial past and present. And, as alluded to earlier, the TRC’s work also unsettles the fixity of our national borders; it speaks to the experiences and realities of indigenous people and nations whose lands and histories cannot be easily accommodated within the dominant spatial logics of North America. As such, the TRC is not just a Canadian issue. The TRC’s final report also compels libraries and other information institutions to reflect on the fact that they are themselves colonial institutions. Indeed, in its final report, the TRC calls for extensive changes in the fields of education, health, language, and law and in relation to LAMs. The pertinent Calls to Action and related discussion on LAMs in the final report in- dicate how these institutions are part of perpetuating a Canadian national memory and his- torical consciousness that erases indigenous experiences and histories as part of claiming the land as national territory. At an even more basic level, the fact that LAMs operate only in the languages of the settler society, and not in indigenous languages, is indicative of their colonial origins and present. Although beyond the scope of the discussion here, it is impor- tant to note that scholarship in the information fields is increasingly concerned with, and tending to, these and related issues at both practical and theoretical levels (e.g., Moorcroft 1993; Hills 1997; Szekely 1999; Wareham 2001; Carter 2002; Nakata and Langton 2005; Doyle
398 • The Library Quarterly2006; Laszlo 2006; Underhill 2006; First Archivist Circle 2007; Mathiesen 2012; Morse 2012; Russell 2013; Nathan, Shaffer, and Castor 2015; Ghaddar 2016). Although they have been slow to emerge, a range of responses to the TRC final report continue to be published. Diverse responses from government to academic to civil society organizations have included every- thing from the adoption of land acknowledgment language at postsecondary institutions to the hosting of panels and conferences on the TRC within the LAM fields. For example, the CFLA/FCAB (2017b) recently released a report titled “Truth and Reconciliation Report and Recommendations” that makes 10 far-ranging recommendations that work toward decol- onizing LAM institutions and that support indigenous peoples and cultural heritage in Can- ada. The Association of Canadian Archivists is likewise currently engaging in its own process of developing an official response to the Calls to Action that directly implicate archives. Per- haps most important, the National Centre for Truth and Reconciliation has been established at the University of Manitoba, as part of the mandate of the TRC, to house all statements, documents, and materials gathered during the TRC’s tenure and to make them accessible. In contradiction to this trend is the Canadian state’s celebratory rhetoric about its 150-year anniversary, which perpetuates the erasure of the violence and injustice toward indigenous peoples that made confederation possible. Information professionals cannot seek to engage with indigenous communities and the TRC while not considering the differing perspectives on the history and geography of Turtle Island/North America. We must remember that on occasions like Canada Day, Columbus Day, and the Fourth of July, we should not simply adopt a nationalist discourse that elides the fact that for indigenous peoples, these are not events that warrant celebration. The uncritical cel- ebration of such occasions posits an egalitarian and racially equitable North America/Turtle Island that does not reflect the lived experience of racialized individuals and groups. We call on LAMs and the professionals working within them to consider and engage with the alter- nate histories and perspectives of indigenous peoples when we are called upon (as is often the case) to support and participate in celebrations of national histories and anniversaries. Follow- ing the direction of the TRC, we call for an approach to the 150th anniversary of Canada through the framework of national reconciliation: “this intended celebration can be an oppor- tunity for Canadians to take stock of the past, celebrating the country’s accomplishments without shirking responsibility for its failures. Fostering more inclusive public discourse about the past through a reconciliation lens would open up new and exciting possibilities for a fu- ture in which Aboriginal peoples take their rightful place” (TRC 2015, 301–2). Clearly, the chal- lenges raised by the TRC are profound to Canadian identity and national memory and to the role of LAMs as resources on, and sites for, the commemoration of the past in settler-colonial North America. We argue that the social responsibility of LIS professionals vis-à-vis the TRC findings re- quires an often discomforting reflection on our various roles and relationships to the land
Negotiating Borders • 399and one other, especially between settlers and indigenous peoples. These uncomfortable con- versations within our libraries, at our conferences, and in our boardrooms may mean turning libraries into sites of potential disruption, but they are essential if we are serious about making space for indigenous peoples in our collections, intellectual tools, spaces, and payrolls. Keren Dali and Nadia Caidi (2017) refer to this as the “diversity by design” approach, which entails looking underneath the surface and starting the invariably difficult but honest conversations on the personal, social, familial, historical, community-level, and society-wide causes of diver- sity tensions (see also, Caidi and Dali 2015 on addressing diversity tensions). Moreover, we need to move beyond the conceptual imprecision of “diversity” in the LIS discourse, which makes it difficult to consider the dissimilarities and intersections of different forms of oppression, the power differentials between various groups, and the structural (rather than individual or in- terpersonal) aspects of racism (Hudson 2017). As part of their engagement and their institu- tional locations at the intersection of information, knowledge, and culture, we believe that librarians and other information professionals can and should play a key in fostering a climate for constructive conversations on such difficult but crucial social issues. Moving through Borders: Refugees, Migrants, and Diasporas The permeability and rigidity of borders are nowhere better illustrated than in the global pol- icy issue that is at the forefront of most national government agendas today: the claims for sanctuary of refugees and other displaced people fleeing economic, political, and social vio- lence in their home countries. Forced to leave their countries behind, displaced people are faced with policies seeking to control and hinder their migration. Most recently, the Syrian refugee crisis has garnered international attention as national governments and civil societies debate and mobilize in response to the millions of displaced Syrians and other Asian and Af- rican refugees landing on the shores of Europe and elsewhere. Under the influence of right- wing political movements, the global migration of diverse populations to Western countries such as Greece, Hungary, Austria, Australia, and the United States has been met at times by racist and nationalist anti-immigrant laws, policies, and discourses (Robins-Early 2016; Shear and Cooper 2017). Refugees escaping from political and economic oppression encounter the violence of white supremacist culture and liberal antiracism aimed at spreading Western cul- ture and meeting the needs of contemporary transnational capitalism (Avery 1995; Abu-Laban 1998; Li 2001, 2003; Stasiulis and Bakan 2005). As the Trump phenomenon starkly reminds us, white nationalism approaches and makes sense of refugee populations as dangerous and a threat to the security and values of the white nation. Racism is crucial to this endeavor because to bar or evict groups from the nation and its laws, you have to believe that these groups are a lower level of humanity undeserving of the rights and privileges you enjoy (Razack 2016). Notions of descent and claims of common origin are deployed to forge a sense of kinship and belonging that naturalizes how people come to be
400 • The Library Quarterlywhat they are. Through practices that exclude or marginalize racialized individuals and groups from the nation, white people and societies come to know themselves as superior people and, furthermore, as a superior people under threat or siege (Razack 2016). Paradoxically, even as white people come to know themselves as members of a racial kin group, they also come to un- derstand themselves as subjects who are raceless, universal individuals endowed with agency. In other words, they come to know themselves as particular kinds of citizens; citizens who have the freedom to make their own choices and who are secular and modern (Razack 2016). At its core, this is a story of European superiority, which is one that has to be told through each country’s national mythology. What is missing from white nationalist frameworks, of course, is an acknowledgment of the relationship between the displacement of diverse populations to Western countries and Western (neo)colonialism, imperialism, and racism. These continue to create divided worlds characterized by unequal conditions of development, racial injustice, class inequities, hetero- patriarchal exploitation, and the marginalization of minorities and refugees. This global dual- ity must be situated within the historical context of the geographical configuration of colonial governance. It is no coincidence that the populations being managed come from countries that were once European colonies; postcolonial diasporas are a product of the dispersal of peo- ple around the world as a consequence of Western colonialism and imperialism (Bhabha 1994). The dominant discourse in the West on the recent wave of Syrian refugees arriving in Western countries does not reflect the role of those countries, including Canada and the United States, in the making of this humanitarian crisis. If we consider howWestern countries are implicated in the Syrian refugee crisis from this perspective, then the conversation shifts markedly from one about the dangers posed by Syrian refugees to the West to one about the dangers and responsibilities of Western countries to Syrian refugees and their society. We might also con- sider how these responsibilities include ending those Western policies and initiatives that per- petuate the war so that refugees are afforded the possibility of returning home. Receiving countries such as Canada, which welcomed over the past 2 years only 30,000 of the millions of Syrian refugees, are therefore not doing enough to address the crisis. Such ef- forts have not been accompanied in Canada, or elsewhere, with efforts to end Western poli- cies that perpetuate the war or to generate any meaningful public debate on the topic. At the same time, the immigration system and policies contribute to placing these refugees into a particular class of people that stands in contrast to other classes and to citizens. Canada’s im- migration policy refers to refugees as the “humanitarian” class (by contrast to the “economic” class and the “family” class), and they are usually sponsored by either the government or a private entity or recognized by the Immigration Refugee Board as having a legitimate and well-founded fear of persecution in their countries of origin (Citizenship and Immigration Can- ada, n.d.). Upon their arrival, the Canadian government and the nonprofit settlement sector provide the refugees with settlement and resettlement services and support. Interestingly, var-
Negotiating Borders • 401ious immigration classification schemes are used to determine eligibility to specific resources or programs and to permanent residency or citizenship status. The stated rationale for such schemes is the adequate allocation of resources, but the fact that these eligibility criteria are defined inconsistently over time create a confusing environment for many service provid- ers (including public libraries) and for frontline professionals (Berinstein et al. 2006; Goldring, Berinstein, and Bernhard 2007). They also obfuscate the fact that those seeking refuge from persecution may not meet the bureaucratic or judicial criteria to qualify as refugees, and they therefore arrive under other immigration categories (e.g., family immigrants, foreign workers). In other words, these categories serve bureaucratic and legal ends in a manner that harms and excludes people, and therefore librarians must avoid an uncritical acceptance of or conformity with the logic and practical implications of them. In her examination of the temporary foreign worker program, Sarah Elizabeth Roberts (2014) notes that beyond the rational arguments that are used to justify such approaches, there are also values and assumptions that underpin these policies to highlight the relative and contingent nature of immigration classification systems. Specifically, Roberts suggests that “decisions are neither objective nor purely rational. Rather, decisions are based on specific un- derstandings of immigration classifications, and judgements regarding who needs and who deserves to access settlement services” (77). The consequences of imposing classifications and eligibility criteria upon categories of immigrants are significant for both the individual who is further isolated when made to feel as a subcitizen and for the agencies and institutions that serve the needs of these individuals. Indeed, any settlement funding provided by the relevant government department, Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship Canada (formerly Citizenship and Immigration Canada) generally comes with strings in the form of eligibility requirements attached. Such was the case for the Library Settlement Partnerships (LSP), which was funded by then Citizenship and Immigration Canada, starting in 2006, in a dozen commu- nities throughout Ontario. The aim of LSP was to bring settlement workers inside public li- braries to provide one-to-one services and referrals. The original LSP guidelines clearly state that settlement services at the public library were for “permanent residents; persons who have been deemed to be a convention refugee or in need of protection; live-in caregivers; and, per- sons whose in-Canada application for permanent residence has been approved in principle” (Operational Guidelines for Library Settlement Partnerships, cited in Roberts 2014). As illus- trated by the LSP example, public libraries do not operate in a vacuum. As publicly funded institutions, circumstances (in this case, funding) may dictate to librarians whom they should serve and what constitutes their publics, even if these conditions clash with their core ethics and values. The first step in imagining meaningful LAM engagement with refugees is to acknowledge that libraries and other information institutions are themselves institutions of the white na- tionalist state. It is well documented that public libraries participated in Americanization
402 • The Library Quarterly(and Canadianization) projects that aimed at educating and assimilating newcomers to the be- lief systems, values, and languages of white culture (Jones 1999, 2003). We must therefore be mindful and wary of the LAM sector’s past and present participation in and complicity with discourses and policies that construct a refugee as other, or as the not-quite-citizen who must be taught our values, language, and culture in a one-way exchange. We call on LAMs, and spe- cifically the professionals working within them, to consider all people as always part of our constituency regardless of their status, judicial or otherwise, vis-à-vis the nation-state. To do so is to reimagine who our public is and to reconceptualize in turn what the “public” in “pub- lic library” really means. It requires an expansive definition of who we are mandated to serve that takes us beyond the citizen–noncitizen binary as part of adopting an antiracist stance that refuses to acquiesce to the notion that those living in, and contributing to, our societies can be declared illegal aliens or that disavows our relations with people around the world. It also means understanding that information institutions and professionals must integrate with and adapt to the cultures, values, and languages of refugees as much as refugees need to integrate and adapt to our institutions and professions. If we acknowledge a need for such an antiracist stance premised on the idea that the library is a space for all, what are our responsibilities in cases when the funder dictates whom we can or cannot serve? When we are asked to run pro- grams and services that seek to assimilate rather than foster reciprocal exchange and transfor- mation? Or when information we gather or spaces we run expose undocumented and non- status people to capture and deportation?3 Librarians do indeed have a long tradition of providing settlement services to refugees, im- migrants, and other migrants in the form of ESL classes, translation services, and resources for those seeking assistance with various aspects of resettlement in the new country (Caidi, Allard, and Quirke 2010; Pyati 2010; Kennan et al. 2011; Lloyd et al. 2013; Lloyd 2014; Quirke 2014; Allard 2015; Bowles, Glass, and Ngan 2016). The delivery of settlement and citizenship-oriented programs are certainly important services that libraries provide, but we have already indicated the need to ensure that these programs are provided to all those who need them, not only those deemed by governments and funders as eligible. We also have suggested the need to critically assess the assimilationist imperatives underpinning many such programs and the need for new approaches. Moreover, the focus on only certain aspects of resettlement (usu- ally until one becomes a permanent resident) masks other potential needs; in emphasizing the provision model and specific types of services (e.g., settlement and citizenship services), libraries act as participants in the broader neoliberal project of producing citizens and produc- tive workers (Stevenson 2011, 2016; see also, Luyt 2001 for his examination of how reader ad- visory services played a similar function). Instead, we can, for example, consider the needs of patrons who are arriving from places of conflict and war or who are affected by such violence3. In that regard, librarians in the United States have recently prepared for the possibility of the forced removal of patrons by immigration officials (see, e.g., Griffey 2017).
Negotiating Borders • 403to assess how libraries might better incorporate programming that supports healing and cop- ing with trauma. We can also consider what assets refugees bring that can be harnessed and shared with librarians and the publics we serve. We also need to make more space for the wide range of linguistic, cultural, and other needs that patrons have. Although multilingual collections are usually available in public li- braries, their small size and lack of availability in most branches become a deterrent. Similarly, the search function in the library catalog often makes it difficult for patrons (especially those who do not speak the official language very well, if at all) to navigate through the multilingual materials available at the public library and locate an item in the catalog.4 Last, what new pro- gramming can be offered newcomers whose library literacy may be nonexistent? Are new cul- tural interfaces and modes of engagement deployed? We argue that reframing how we imag- ine our obligation to refugees might encourage us to reconsider the services we offer. It would also provide us an opportunity to reflect on our modes of engagement with the publics we serve. Specifically, how would taking colonialism and racism into account reframe who we think of as our public and the way we serve them? How do we ensure that our libraries do not inadvertently or deliberately keep some people out, whether because of the requirements of funders or otherwise? And how do we allow ourselves to be altered by our relationship with these communities at the level of our practices, beliefs, spaces, and tools? And what are the consequences of doing so? Helping refugees adopt, contribute to, and benefit from the estab- lished system is an admirable thing if, simultaneously, the system is also transformed in a way that accounts for the influx of different cultural, linguistic, and social capital. At a time when librarians are being constantly asked to communicate the value of what they do (with the help of moult metrics and other forms of audit), this may be an opportune time to reflect on the frameworks within which they operate (e.g., the library as space, the service provision model, the emphasis on information needs and gaps, the nonneutral classi- fication schemes). It may well be that our challenge as LIS professionals remains one of true engagement with our communities, outside the space of the library and outside the models and frameworks that characterize so much of the service provision paradigm that we are ac- customed to. In reflecting on the future of the MLIS and LIS professions, Bertot et al. (2015) note the imperative of apprehending “the broader ecosystem” in which information services are provided and of LIS professionals acting as “dynamic ‘people-persons’” able to work with a broad spectrum of individuals and being comfortable with implementing change and innova-4. In the “New to Canada” section of the Toronto Public Library website, an individual left the following post on the comments section: “Honestly, this post illustrates the problem TPL is having with its outreach. There is nothing in the post in arabic. Only a tiny fraction of the Syrians arriving here speak any English at all. Most don’t know what a library system is. How does the TPL imagine this information is going to actually reach Syrians or other arabic speakers? Google Translate is the best friend fur us helping Syrian families, but it only goes so far. IT’s exhausting to use. Please, if you at the TPL are at all serious about reaching out, do something more than provide the one-pager in arabic (that I picked up for our sponsored family). Get some content in arabic up. Build a bridge or two. I’m sorry to say I entirely disagree with Shelley above—this post to me demonstrates a huge blind spot, TPL!”
404 • The Library Quarterlytion (28). Confronting the limited frameworks in which librarians have operated and looking for alternative modes of engagement with racialized individuals and communities may require a new awareness and a new skill set well beyond “knowledge of crisis management techniques and social services training” (Bertot et al. 2015, 28; Dali, forthcoming). We can learn, for example, from indigenous ontologies that center and emphasize the im- portance of relationships and principles of reciprocity (see, e.g., Wilson 2008). Archival scholars are also considering how feminist approaches that also prioritize relationships might provide insight for archivists to consider how to ethically and responsibly conduct themselves when working in both community and state archival institutions. Through an approach based on a feminist ethics, archivists are seen as caregivers bound to records creators, subjects, users, and communities through a web of mutual affective responsibility (Caswell and Cifor 2016). Community- and indigenous-based archives, such as the Digital Archives and Marginalized Communities (DAMC) project, locate responsibility and purpose within a relational frame- work. In the DAMC, building and preserving trusting relationships are at the heart of the col- laboration of researchers, archivists, and communities (Allard and Ferris 2015). Throughout this article, we considered how librarians and information professionals might acknowledge and respond to this resurgence of divisive politics and racist rhetorics within both Canada and the United States. We have now come full circle as we point to relationship building and sus- taining partnerships with our publics as the raison d’être of LAMs and LIS professionals and, ultimately, the thing most worth preserving. As this article seeks to demonstrate, building these relationship requires acknowledging and addressing the colonial and racial power dy- namics within our profession and in relation to communities we serve while being attuned to the historically constructed and transnational dimensions of all colonial and racial catego- ries, boundaries, and projects. Conclusion The Trump election and coming to power of an administration that seeks to redefine facts and data to suit its agenda and that uses rhetoric and strategies meant to divide individuals and communities is a direct challenge to what librarianship stands for. It underscores the fact that, in our political moment, racist thinking continues to undergird powerful discourses and proj- ects. In this article, we consider how librarians and information professionals might acknowl- edge and respond to this resurgence of divisive politics and racist rhetorics within both Can- ada and the United States. More specifically, we operationalize the conceptual categories of race and border to contribute to growing critical conversations within LIS about the shifting roles and responsibilities of LAM institutions at the intersections of nationalist projects and global processes and the implications for those of us who work within these contested insti- tutional spaces. We explored two cases—the Truth and Reconciliation Commission in Canada and the global Syrian refugee crisis—to interrogate the rigidity of borders that do not reflect
Negotiating Borders • 405the lives of and relations among human beings and collectivities. The question we now ask is: What will LIS professionals do about it? Ultimately, we join other voices in calling on LIS pro- fessionals to move beyond neutrality and a liberal diversity model in their library education and practice, to increase their involvement with policy making and community work, and to develop more critical approaches in our educational and training programs (e.g., Litwin 2002; Good 2006/2007; Jaeger, Bertot, and Subramaniam 2013; Ghaddar and Caidi 2014; Jaeger et al. 2014; Cooke, Sweeney, and Noble 2016; Dali and Caidi 2016; Roberts and Noble 2016; Dali, forthcoming).References Abu-Laban, Yasmine. 1998. “Welcome/STAY OUT: The Contradiction of Canadian Integration and Immi- gration Policies at the Millennium.” Canadian Ethnic Studies 30 (3): 190–211. ALA (American Library Association). 2002. “Resolution on the USA PATRIOT Act and Related Measures That Infringe on the Rights of Library Users.” http://www.ala.org/alaorg/oif/usapatriotresolution.html. ALA (American Library Association). 2016a. “ALA Offers Expertise, Resources to Incoming Administration and Congress [RESCINDED].” Press release. ALA, November 15. http://www.ala.org/news/press-releases /2016/11/ala-offers-expertise-resources-incoming-administration-and-congress. ALA (American Library Association). 2016b. “ALA President Responds to Concerns from Members about Press Release Regarding Library Priorities and the New Administration.” Press release. ALA, Novem- ber 19. http://www.ala.org/news/press-releases/2016/11/ala-president-responds-concerns-members -about-press-release-regarding-library. ALA Public Programs Office. 2017. “Fake News: A Library Resource Round-Up.” Programming Librarian, Feb- ruary 23. http://www.programminglibrarian.org/articles/fake-news-library-round. Allard, Danielle. 2015. “Living ‘Here’ and ‘There’: Exploring the Transnational Information Practices of Newcomers from the Philippines to Winnipeg.” PhD diss., University of Toronto. Allard, Danielle, and Shawna Ferris. 2015. “Antiviolence and Marginalized Communities: Knowledge Cre- ation, Community Mobilization and Social Justice through a Participatory Archiving Approach.” Library Trends 64 (2): 360–83. Avery, Donald. 1995. Reluctant Host: Canada’s Response to Immigrant Workers, 1896–1994. Toronto: McClelland & Stewart. Berinstein, Carolina, Jean McDonald, Peter Nyers, Cynthia Wright, and Sima Sahar Zerehi. 2006. “Access Not Fear: Non-status Immigrants and City Services.” Preliminary report. https://we.riseup.net/assets /17034/Access%20Not%20Fear%20Report%20(Feb%202006).pdf. Bertot, John C., Lindsay C. Sarin, and Paul T. Jaeger. 2015. “Re-envisioning the MLS: The Future of Librarian Education.” Public Libraries 54 (6): 23–33. Bhabha, Homi K. 1994. The Location of Culture. London: Routledge. Bowles, Vickery, Elizabeth Glass, and Elsa Ngan. 2016. “Access, Opportunity and Connections: Leveraging the Powerful Brand of Public Libraries to Support Migrant, Global Populations—The Toronto Public Library’s Support for Syrian Refugees.” Paper presented at IFLA World Library and Information Con- gress 2016, Columbus, OH. http://library.ifla.org/1374/. Caidi, Nadia, Danielle Allard, and Lisa Quirke. 2010. “Information Practices of Immigrants.” Annual Review of Information Science and Technology 44 (1): 494–531.
406 • The Library QuarterlyCaidi, Nadia, and Keren Dali. 2015. “Can We Talk? Perceptions of Diversity Issues by Students with Diverse Backgrounds, and a Rumination on Personal Roads to Systemic Change.” New Library World 116 (11/12): 748–80. Caidi, Nadia, and Susan MacDonald. 2008. “Information Practices of Canadian Muslims Post 9/11.” Govern- ment Information Quarterly 25 (3): 348–78. Caidi, Nadia, and Anthony Ross. 2005. “Information Rights and National Security.” Government Information Quarterly 22 (4): 663284. Carter, Nancy Carol. 2002. “American Indians and Law Libraries: Acknowledging the Third Sovereign.” Law Library Journal 94 (1): 7–26. Caswell, Michelle, and Marika Cifor. 2016. “From Human Rights to Feminist Ethics: Radical Empathy in the Archives.” Archivaria 81 (Spring): 23–43. CFLA/FCAB (Canadian Federation of Library Associations). 2017a. “CFLA/FCAB Endorses ALA Defence of Library Core Values.” CFLA-FCAB, February 3. http://cfla-fcab.ca/en/advocacy/cflafcab-endorses-ala -defence-of-library-core-values/. CFLA/FCAB (Canadian Federation of Library Associations). 2017b. “Truth and Reconciliation Report and Recommendations.” http://cfla-fcab.ca/wp-content/uploads/2017/04/Truth-and-Reconciliation-Committee -Report-and-Recommendations.pdf. Citizenship and Immigration Canada. n.d. “Refugees and Asylum.” Government of Cananda. http://www .cic.gc.ca/english/refugees/index.asp. Cooke, Nicole A., Miriam Sweeney, and Safiya U. Noble. 2016. “Social Justice as Topic and Tool: An Attempt to Transform a LIS Curriculum and Culture.” Library Quarterly 86 (1): 107–24. Cope, Jonathan. 2017. “Four Theses for Critical Library and Information Studies: A Manifesto.” Journal of Critical Library and Information Studies 1:1–8. Crenshaw, Kimberlé W. 2011. “Twenty Years of Critical Race Theory: Looking Back to Move Forward.” Con- necticut Law Review 43 (5): 1310–52. Dali, Keren. Forthcoming. “Integrating Social Work Perspectives into LIS Education: Blended Professionals as Change Agents.” Advances in Librarianship. Dali, Keren, and Nadia Caidi. 2016. “A Two-Way Street: Building the Recruitment Narrative in LIS Pro- grams.” New Library World 117 (7/8): 499–539. Dali, Keren, and Nadia Caidi. 2017. “Diversity by Design.” Library Quarterly 87 (2): 88–98. Doyle, Ann M. 2006. “Naming and Reclaiming Indigenous Knowledges in Public Institutions: Intersections of Landscapes and Experience.” Advances in Knowledge Organization 10:435–42. Estabrook, Leigh. 2002a. “Coping, View 2: Response Disappointing.” American Libraries 33 (8): 37238. Estabrook, Leigh. 2002b. “The Response of Public Libraries to the Events of September 11, 2001.” Illinois Libraries 84 (1): 1–7. http://www.sos.state.il.us/publications/pdf_publications/illibrary_v84n1.pdf. First Archivist Circle. 2007. “Protocols for Native American Archival Materials.” First Archivists Circle, April 9. http://www2.nau.edu/libnap-p/protocols.html. Ghaddar, J. J. 2016. “The Spectre in the Archive: Truth, Reconciliation, and Indigenous Archival Memory.” Archivaria 82 (Fall): 3–26. Ghaddar, J. J., and Nadia Caidi. 2014. “Indigenous Knowledge in a Post-Apology Era: Steps toward Healing and Bridge Building.” Bulletin of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 40 (5): 41–45. http://www.asis.org/Bulletin/Jun-14/JunJul14_Ghaddar_Caidi.pdf. Goeman, Mishauna. 2013. Mark My Words: Native Women Mapping Our Nations. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Negotiating Borders • 407Goldring, Luin, Carolina Berinstein, and Judith Bernhard. 2007. “Institutionalizing Precarious Immigration Status in Canada.” CERIS Working Paper no. 61. Toronto: CERIS. Good, Joseph. 2006/2007. “The Hottest Place in Hell: The Crisis of Neutrality in Contemporary Librarian- ship.” Progressive Librarian 28 (Winter): 25–29. Griffey, Jason. 2017. “Plan. Prepare. Act.” Pattern Recognition: Reflections of the Present, Dreams of the Future (blog), February 22. http://jasongriffey.net/wp/2017/02/22/plan-prepare-act/. Hill, Susan. 2013. “Dr. Susan Hill—Riley Fellowship Lecture.” YouTube video, 56:09. Posted by “oralhis- torycentre,” October 28, 2013. https://www.youtube.com/watch?vpDwQyveFyYlw. Hills, Gordon. 1997. Native Libraries: Cross-Cultural Conditions in the Circumpolar North. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow. Hudson, David James. 2017. “On ‘Diversity’ as Anti-Racism in Library and Information Studies: A Critique.” Journal of Critical Library and Information Studies 1 (1). http://libraryjuicepress.com/journals/index.php /jclis/article/view/6/2. Jaeger, Paul T., John C. Bertot, and Mega Subramaniam. 2013. “Preparing Future Librarians to Effectively Serve Their Communities.” Library Quarterly 83 (3): 243–48. Jaeger, Paul T., Ursula Gorham, Natalie Greene Taylor, Karen Kettnich, Lindsay C. Sarin, and Kaitlin J. Pe- terson. 2014. “Library Research and What Libraries Actually Do Now: Education, Inclusion, Social Ser- vices, Public Spaces, Digital Literacy, Social Justice, Human Rights, and Other Community Needs.” Li- brary Quarterly 84 (4): 491–93. Jenkins, Christine. 1996. “ALA Youth Services Librarians and the CARE-UNESCO Children’s Book Fund: Se- lecting the ‘Right Book’ for Children in ColdWar America, 1950–1958.” Libraries and Culture 31 (1): 209–34. Jenkins, Christine. 2001. “International Harmony: Threat or Menace? U.S. Youth Services Librarians and Cold War Censorship, 1946–1955.” Libraries and Culture 36 (1): 116–30. Jones, Plummer Alston, Jr. 1999. Libraries, Immigrants, and the American Experience. Westport, CT: Greenwood. Jones, Plummer Alston, Jr. 2003. “The ALA Committee on Work with the Foreign Born and the Movement to Americanize the Immigrant.” In Libraries to the People: Histories of Outreach, edited by Robert S. Free- man and David M. Hovde. Jefferson, NC: McFarland. Jordan, Amy. 2002. “One Year Later: Examining the PATRIOT Act’s Impact.” American Libraries 33 (10): 20. Kennan, Mary Anne, Annemaree Lloyd, Asim Qayyum, and Kim Thompson. 2011. “Settling In: The Rela- tionship between Information and Social Inclusion.” Australian Academic and Research Libraries 42 (3): 191–210. Ladner, Kiera, and Myra Tait. 2017. Surviving Canada: Celebrating 150 Years of Betrayal. Winnipeg: ARP. Laszlo, Krisztina. 2006. “Ethnographic Archival Records and Cultural Property.” Archivaria 61 (Spring): 299–307. Li, Peter S. 2001. “The Racial Subtext in Canada’s Immigration Discourse.” Journal of International Migration and Integration 2 (1): 77–97. Li, Peter S. 2003. “Deconstructing Canada’s Discourse of Immigrant Integration.” Journal of International Mi- gration and Integration 4 (3): 315–33. Litwin, Rory. 2002. “Neutrality, Objectivity and the Political Center.” Progressive Librarian 21 (Winter): 72–77. Lloyd, Annemaree. 2014. “Building Information Resilience: How Do Resettling Refugees Connect with Health Information in Regional Landscapes: Implications for Health Literacy.” Australian Academic and Research Libraries 45 (1): 48–66. Lloyd, Annemaree, Mary Anne Kennan, Kim Thompson, and Asim Qayyum. 2013. “Connecting with New Information Landscapes: Information Literacy Practices of Refugees.” Journal of Documentation 69 (1): 121–44. Luyt, Brendan. 2001. “Regulating Readers: The Social Origins of the Readers’ Advisor in the United States.” Library Quarterly 71 (4), 443–66.
408 • The Library QuarterlyLyon, David. 2006. “Airport Screening, Surveillance, and Social Sorting: Canadian Responses to 9/11 in Con- text.” Canadian Journal of Criminology and Criminal Justice 48 (3): 397–411. Mathiesen, Kay. 2012. “A Defense of Native Americans’ Rights over Their Traditional Cultural Expressions.” American Archivist 75 (2): 456–81. Moorcroft, Heather. 1993. “The Construction of Silence.” Australian Library Journal 42 (1): 27–32. Morse, Bradford W. 2012. “Indigenous Human Rights and Knowledge in Archives, Museums, and Libraries: Some International Perspectives with Specific Reference to New Zealand and Canada.” Archival Science 12 (2): 113–40. Nakata, Martin, and Marcia Langton, eds. 2005. Australian Indigenous Knowledge and Libraries. Sydney: UTSePress. Nathan, Lisa P., Elizabeth Shaffer, and Maggie Castor. 2015. “Stewarding Collections of Trauma: Plurality, Responsibility, and Questions of Action.” Archivaria 80 (Fall). Oder, Norman 2003a. “FBI Has Visited about 50 Libraries.” Library Journal 128 (11): 17–18. Oder, Norman. 2003b. “Survey: Librarians Divided over Post-9/11 Privacy Issues.” Library Journal 128 (3): 16. Preer, Jean. 1993. “The American Heritage Project: Librarians and the Democratic Tradition in the Early Cold War.” Libraries and Culture 28 (2): 165–88. Pyati, Ajit K. 2010. “Information Needs and Behaviors of Diasporic Populations.” In Encyclopedia of Library and Information Sciences. 3rd ed. Edited by Marcia J. Bates and Mary Niles Maack. Boca Raton, FL: CRC. Quirke, Lisa Clare. 2014. “A Study of the Information Practices of Afghan Newcomer Youth in the Contexts of Leisure and Settlement.” PhD diss., University of Toronto. Razack, Sherene. 2016. “Gender, Race, and Citizenship in the Global Village: The Resurgence of Oriental- ism.” YouTube video, 1:10:21, filmed April 13, 2011. Posted by “NYUAD,” July 21, 2016. https://www .youtube.com/watch?vpmu4PLtpSVo4. Roach, Kent. 2011. The 9/11 Effect: Comparative Counter-Terrorism. New York: Cambridge University Press. Robbins, Louise S. 1994. “The Library of Congress and Federal Loyalty, 1947–1956: No ‘Communists or Cocksuckers.’” Library Quarterly 64 (4): 365–85. Robbins, Louise S. 1995. “After Brave Words, Silence: American Librarianship Responds to Cold War Loyalty Programs, 1947–1957.” Libraries and Culture 30 (4): 345–65. Robbins, Louise S. 1998. “Fighting McCarthyism through Film: A Library Censorship Case Becomes a ‘Storm Center.’” Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 39 (4): 291–11. Robbins, Louise S. 2001. “The Overseas Libraries Controversy and the Freedom to Read: U.S. Librarians and Publishers Confront Joseph McCarthy.” Libraries and Culture 36 (1): 27–39. Roberts, Sarah Elizabeth. 2014. “The Classifying Work of Immigration Policies in Canada: A Critical Analysis of the Temporary Foreign Workers Program and Access to Settlement Services.” Master’s thesis, Uni- versity of Toronto. Roberts, Sarah T., and Safiya Umoja Noble. 2016. “Empowered to Name, Inspired to Act: Social Responsi- bility and Diversity as Calls to Action in the LIS Context.” Library Trends 64 (3): 512–32. Robins-Early, Nick. 2016. “Europe’s Anti-Refugee Parties Are Dangerous Even When They Don’t Win.” Huffington Post, May 31. http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/europe-far-rightaustria_us_5745c61fe4 b03ede4413710a. Russell, Lynette. 2013. “Indigenous Knowledge and Archives: Accessing Hidden History and Understand- ings.” Australian Academic and Research Libraries 36 (2): 161–71. Shear, Michael D., and Helene Cooper. 2017. “Trump Bars Citizens of 7 Muslim Countries.” New York Times, January 27. https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/27/us/politics/trump-syrian-refugees.html. Starr, Joan. 2004. “Libraries and National Security: An Historical Review.” First Monday 9 (12). http:// firstmonday.org/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/1198/1118.
Negotiating Borders • 409Stasiulis, Daiva K., and Abigail B. Bakan. 2005. Negotiating Citizenship: Migrant Women in Canada and the Global System. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. Stevenson, Siobhan. 2011. “New Labour in Libraries: The Post-Fordist Public Library.” Journal of Documenta- tion 67 (5): 773–90. Stevenson, Siobhan A. 2016. “Immaterial Labour, Public Librarians, and Third-Generation Public Libraries.” New Library World 117 (3/4): 186–200. Szekely, Chris, ed. 1999. Issues and Initiatives in Indigenous Librarianship: Some International Perspectives. Auck- land: Te Rōpū Whakahau. TRC (Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada). 2015. Honouring the Truth, Reconciling for the Future: Summary of the Final Report of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada. Winnipeg: National Cen- tre for Truth and Reconciliation. http://www.trc.ca/websites/trcinstitution/File/2015/Findings/Exec _Summary_2015_05_31_web_o.pdf. Underhill, Karen J. 2006. “Protocols for Native American Archival Materials.” RBG 7 (2): 134–45. Wareham, Evelyn. 2001. “‘Our Own Identity, Our Own Taonga, Our Own Self Coming Back’: Indigenous Voices in New Zealand Record-Keeping.” Archivaria 52 (Fall): 26–46. Wilson, Shawn. 2008. Research Is Ceremony: Indigenous Research Methods. Halifax: Fernwood. Wolfe, Patrick. 2006. “Settler Colonialism and the Elimination of the Native.” Journal of Genocide Research 8 (4): 387–409.Nadia Caidi: associate professor, the Faculty of Information (iSchool), University of Toronto. Caidi’s research interests focus on human information behavior and information policy. She has received several grants for her research on information control and the public’s right to know in times of cri- sis. Her current research is situated in the context of global migration and the role that information resources, institutions, and technologies play in the everyday lives of migrant and refugee commu- nities. E-mail (corresponding author): nadia.caidi@utoronto.ca. J. J. Ghaddar: PhD student, the Faculty of Information, University of Toronto. Ghaddar received her master of information degree from the University of Toronto. She holds a Joseph-Armand Bombar- dier Canada Graduate Scholarships (CGS) SSHRC doctoral fellowship. She received the 2016 W. Kaye Lamb Prize from the Association of Canadian Archivists for her article The Spectre in the Ar- chive: Truth, Reconciliation and Indigenous Archival Memory (2016, Archivaria 82 [Fall]: 2–26). E-mail: jamila.ghaddar@mail.utoronto.ca. Danielle Allard: assistant professor, School of Library and Information Studies, University of Alberta. Allard held an SSHRC postdoctoral research fellowship in the Digital Archives and Marginalized Communities (DAMC) Project at Mamawipawin, Indigenous Governance and Community Based Research Space at the University of Manitoba. Allard holds a PhD from the Faculty of Information and a collaborative master’s degree (MISt) in information studies and gender and equity studies. Her research considers how digital information systems and archival platforms can be used to cre- ate activist participatory archives that challenge violent, colonizing, and stigmatizing representa- tions of vulnerable populations. Her doctoral research examined the information experiences of Fil- ipino immigrants to Winnipeg, Canada. E-mail: danielle.allard@umanitoba.ca.