THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Volume III JANUARY I933 Number i COMMUNITY STUDIES IN READING i. READING IN THE LOWER EAST SIDE T rHE colorful section of New York's Lower East Side, which ten years ago was renowned for squalid tene- ments, occasional geniuses, and social dynamite, is served by the Seward Park branch of the public library. The district extends south and east to the river from Houston Street on the north and Mulberry Street on the west. Today much of its intellectual energy has escaped into Brooklyn and the Bronx. The eager groups of young radicals with whom Lincoln Steffens went to school in the back rooms of the wine shops are now older and less eager and less radical. Most have moved away. The remnant live on their memories and hope for better times. Although the district is within a five-cent fare of the cultural centers of Greater New York, and in spite of several attractive building developments, it is characterized by poverty, a falling population, the passing of its distinctive old-world tradition,- and perhaps by a declining interest in substantial reading as such. It was accordingly selected by the New York Public Library as a good one to compare with more favored districts, like that served by the Fordham branch in the Bronx. By means of several such comparisons it should be possible to learn something of the nature and scope of serious reading in typical
2 THE LIBRARY QU ARTERLY communities, and also to define the importance of the library as one of many sources of supply. With the wise advice and close co-operation of the public- library authorities, two of us devoted some seven weeks in the district during the summer of I932 to the single purpose of find- ing methods whereby the distribution of reading matter could be studied with the greatest ease. We were after two sorts of method: first, short cuts to sales reports for newspapers, maga- zines, and books, together with data on the relative turnover of titles in rental libraries; and second, methods of finding, from public-library records, by whom and how much different sorts of reading matter are read. The latter is not easy. Hence a short report of progress is to say that such methods have been found and are probably not too complicated for any interested librarian to apply to his own community. To understand the distribution of reading matter, one must be able to answer such questions as these: What proportion of the population are readers? From what sources or agencies (such as newsstands, rental libraries, home libraries, settlement libraries, bookstores, pushcarts, book clubs, reading-rooms, and public libraries) do the readers get their reading? What kinds of reading matter and what proportion of each kind does each occupational group obtain from each source? To answer such questions with any completeness is a long hard job. But answers complete enough to be useful to the libraries may be secured from official records of the various distributing agencies. That is to say, the local chambers of com- merce' receive daily census data based on duplicate removal notices from the gas companies. The two or three news agencies that monopolize the community can estimate the local sales of morning papers and newsstand magazines. A single supply- house can usually report the titles most demanded in local rental libraries. Bookstores must be canvassed one by one, especially the secondhand bookstores. Book clubs, unfortu- nately, do not classify their subscribers by districts, but the ' We are especially indebted to Mr. Joseph Platzker, secretary, East Side Chamber of Commerce, for cordial and indispensable assistance.
COMMUNITY STUDIES IN READING 3 classification can be made from their mailing lists. Pamphleteer- ing agencies, like political and commercial organizations, have figures on the distribution of each title. Such are too small to be important in the Lower East Side. Data on library distribu- tion can, with sufficient patience, be obtained from library records. Expressions of reading interests and reports on actual reading by the community at large are obtainable through any of the political, trade, and social organizations, who can be per- suaded to fill out blanks. Granting the possibility of securing such facts, one may well ask what they are worth. There are at least four plausible answers. In the first place, an estimate of community reading on prob- lems of international relations, federal legislation, control of government by vested interests, justice to and from minorities, economic policies, political honesty, and the like, is perhaps the best single index of social intelligence. If the writing be sincere, competent, and multi-partisan, the more widely it is read, the better for the whole community. Its consumption by the gen- eral reader is a fair measure of social consciousness, of the desire to meet critical issues rationally, and of unwillingness to evade them. Hence the facts about community reading on current social problems teach us much about man as a social animal. They help us to find out how social he is: according to his oc- cupation, age, schooling, race, and habitat. Such facts show what intellectually curious people are curious about. Sociolo- gists in particular, and intelligent folk generally, should wel- come such information. Secondly, the facts show what reading is actually worth in the given community as a vehicle for ideas, and as compared with other arts of communication. One sure thing is that critical reading in some American communities is not provoked even by national disaster. The angels weep when devout public librarians foist "good reading" upon a radio-minded town. Potentially, reading satisfies genuine intellectual curiosities better than any other art of communication: first, because ideas in writing are permanent; and second, because they can
4 THE LIBRARY QUIRTERLY be made so readily available. Whereas conversation with a properly informed friend supplies ideas with far greater con- venience, the ideas evaporate. Motion pictures supply ideas more vividly; but the producer prescribes the ideas, the time, and the place. Museum exhibits, lectures, school courses, and other media also lack either permanence or availability, or both. But simply to possess these advantages does not give first place to reading as a source of the community's ideas. Whether or not reading contributes anything to community culture, de- pends entirely upon the community's disposition to read. Hence, before we take adult reading too seriously, it behooves us to learn how successfully reading competes wvith the other arts of communication. The percentage of serious readers in its different occupational classes is a fair indication of what reading means to the community. In the third place, and assuming that adult reading is sufficient in amount and distribution to be an important source of ideas, we need to know how library reading in the given com- munity compares with reading obtained from other sources, if only to avoid expensive duplication. Given a picture of the total reading situation, where does library reading fit in? To answer this question is the first step toward a planned economy of pub- lic librarianship, that is, a program aimed at results of cultural value to the whole community that are not accomplished by other agencies. It matters much to any community at any time whether its tax-supported institutions serve a large or a small part of the population, to what ends such service is directed, and how effectively the same ends are served by competing private agencies. In times of economic collapse, these questions matter a great deal more, particularly to the watchdogs of the city treasury. Hence, the urge toward self-preservation, if not pro- fessional curiosity, should make them interesting. Having mas- tered the essential problems of administration and come to grips with the psychology of reading, librarians now confront the mysteries of sociology. The present time is ripe for a formulation of social policy, and we lack the necessary facts.
COMMUNITY STUDIES IN READING 5 A fourth reason for collecting the facts is that the more we know about the sort of reading most acceptable to different population groups, the better able we are to select good reading for the library. We cannot say what reading is good reading until we can answer the questions "good for whom ?" and "good for what?" The Pulitzer committee decides that The Good earth is a good book. For whom is it a good book? Obviously for the com- mittee and others who share its taste for the sort of English Mrs. Buck writes, who are stirred by the human fortitude de- picted in the narrative, and who wish to follow the epic tragedy played in China today. But who are thus included? Certainly not the Americans of long residence in China, who find the novel too harrowing to be endurable; certainly not the 75 per cent of our population who read no books at all; certainly not the 50 per cent of book read- ers who read only trivial fiction for escape from serious thinking; certainly not the scrappy readers, probably about go per cent of the population, who read on vital problems only what they find in the press and magazines; and certainlyZnot)the small but important group of readers who seriously study the problems of civilization that now have their storm center in China. For the last, many other recent and authoritative books on Far Eastern politics will be of more direct value -as the Na- tionalist program for China, by C. C. Wu; Russia and the Soviet Union in the Far East, by V. A. Yakhontoff; Twenty years after the Chinese Republic, by Harold A. Van Dorn; China speaks on the conflict between China and 7apan, by C. Meng; and Chinese revolution, by A. N. Holcome. Hence the library's selection of "good" reading on China, or on any other subject appealing to the general reader, must be based upon evidence concerning the reading obtained from other sources, and concerning the reading abilities, educational status, and subject interests of groups who actually use the library. What follows is a selection from several questions on which there are tentative findings to report. Various other questions, of equal or greater importance, may be discussed when the
6 THE LIBRAfRY QUARTERLY study is extended to neighborhoods served by other branches of the New York Public Library. If similar data are collected in other urban and rural neighborhoods, the generalizations reached will be far more useful to the public-library administra- tor. i. How many residents are readers?-By "residents" we mean people over fifteen years of age who live in the area surrounding the Seward Park branch. We know the area of the branch regis- tration by the actual distribution of addresses. By "readers" we mean readers of the daily morning newspapers as estimated from sales in the district. Comparing the sales per person and the number of readers of each newspaper purchased with the population over fifteen years old, we estimate 8o per cent as newspaper readers. This is considerably lower than other esti- mates of readers in the population at large, which range from 92 per cent to 97 per cent. 2. How much is readfrom each source?-The 8o per cent read ten metropolitan dailies, plus about six evening papers, four of which are Jewish. The latter are more given to thought-provok- ing articles and less to advertising than the general run of English papers. There are some I35 newsstands in the district, selling English and foreign papers, weekly, bi-weekly, and monthly story magazines, and weekly and bi-monthly reviews. The foreign press sales are nearly half of the English. Jewish, Polish, Rus- sian, Hungarian, and Spanish papers sell in the order named. An astonishing fact in connection with press sales is that sales of all papers have decreased at virtually the same rate since January, 1932, and are still decreasing rapidly with no sign of recovery. It is a significant commentary on the radical- ism of the once-radical Lower East Side that the sales of left- wing papers have fallen off at the same rate as the sales of the conservative dailies and the tabloids. Newspaper reading in settlement-house reading-rooms and in the public libraries is negligible as compared with newsstands. Story magazines of the cheaper sorts are read by roughly half the adult readers of the district, and of course by many children.
COMMUNITY STUDIES IN REaDING 7 Among the large sellers are True story, Love story, True romances, Silver screen, Liberty, Detective story, Detective fiction, Saturday evening post, Colliers, McCalls, Ladies home journal-all five or ten cents a copy. There has been a perceptible decline in the sales of the sex magazines-partly due to the competition of salacious books and partly to the fact that sex magazines have not reduced their price; Gay parisienne, La Paree, Paris nights, Pep stories, Snappy stories, Spicy stories, and Ten story each sell for a quarter. These are obtainable only from the stands, including the ten or twelve stationery shops that sell old magazines for a very few cents, depending on how old they are. Next in line are cheap novels, rented from stationery, drug stores, and candy shop "libraries"; bought for ten or fifteen cents secondhand from the same source, or passed around among friends, chiefly by the youth of both sexes. Typical titles are Young desire, City girl, Loose lady, Virtue O.K.'d, 7oy ride, Secret places, Make Believe bride, and Blonde interlude. Such are almost the entire stock in trade of the rental libraries and the only sort of novel that competes successfully with the library novel. However, one usually finds in the rental collections a few different titles, like Bercovici's Allfor a song and Baum's Grand Hotel, together with a half dozen secondhand works of non-fiction. The last are either for rent or sale but commercial- ly as dead as the pre-Volstead sandwich, lending substance to more frothy fare but never tasted. Figures on the reading ot cheap novels are extremely difficult to check, but the average turnover of the rental libraries suggests that they serve from I0 to 20 per cent of the residents who make small or no use of the public library. Such figures mean little unless one bears in mind that the business of the legitimate bookshops in the district has fallen off about 6o per cent in the last two years and that of the rental libraries at least 25 per cent. Undoubtedly, in better times more such novels would be read. Poverty is driving the novel reader to the library for better novels. About io-iS per cent of the resident readers read non-fiction
8 THE LIBRARY 9UARTERLY or partly non-fiction weeklies, monthly magazines of discussion, commercial and political pamphlets, religious tracts, and other broadsides. Such are read to the extent that they are delivered gratis to the homes, picked up in places of business, or purchased at reduced rates. The actual sales of the Nation and New re- public, combined, probably do not exceed 4oo copies in the dis- trict. While the library is perhaps more responsible for the reading of more expensive non-fiction magazines than any other agency, the number of each sex and occupation who read each magazine both in and out of the library is hard to estimate. The figure is probably less than i per cent of the population and less than IO per cent of the branch registration. Records of reading in periodicals need very much to be made by every public library. The library's present opportunities to direct social thinking probably lie more largely in the field of periodicals than of books, for a majority of the urban popula- tion. Hence the present tendency to reduce periodical subscrip- tions, without any trustworthy evidence of demand, may turn out to be a serious mistake. The readers of reputable books in the Lower East Side are largely confined to the library clientele who number about 20 per cent of the residents. Excluding students, the readers of serious books on social issues are probably fewer than I per cent. Home libraries are extremely rare. Home visits revealed only borrowed books, except an occasional set of Hebrew scrip- tures in the original-inherited from a progenitor and kept in his memory. Settlement libraries are small, consist largely of gifts, and are not extensively used. The changing bookshops in the Lower East Side should be written up about every ten years. There are now about seven stores given over to English books and journals, with perhaps ten rental libraries selling books as well as renting them, a few pushcarts, and a few newsstands that sell secondhand books occasionally. If we add another fifteen bookstores dealing in Jewish publications, it can be said of the stores collectively that they retain the unique flavor of bookstores abroad. For one thing, they tend to specialize in a given field that the
COMMUNITY STUDIES IN READING 9 proprietor knows intimately, e.g., atheist publications, Russian literature, religion, politics of every complexion, reputable books in foreign languages, and pseudo-scientific books on sex. Also, the proprietors know books. They impress one as good people-courageous in their determination to believe that this unhappy world will always contain readers of good books, yet wistful of the old days whenever the talk turns upon sales. The famous shop of Maisel on Grand Street deserves a book of its own. One rarely meets an individual more competent than the proprietor to select the sort of books that everyone should read; nor does one often feel the seductive fascination of books so strongly as when poking around his shelves. Forty- five years at the same address, a warm interest in people as such, and an instinct for the well-written book in any tongue and on any theme, have produced a literary shrine of unusual richness. It feels a holy place. The same is true in a less degree of the Jewish bookshops. Zeal has increased as sales have declined. Their business has declined because of restricted immigration and the exodus of cultivated Jewish people, formerly held to the district by their ignorance of English, lack of professional contacts with Ameri- cans, and low rents. The present trade of the shops consists in sales of religious literature to the elderly and orthodox, and of Jewish books on other subjects to the youthful members of the nationalist movement. Another potent reminder of European book-dealers was a clean-shaven, clear-eyed German who attends a pushcart on Orchard Street. The cart contains about two hundred old novels selling for ten cents, with some thirty first-rate non. fiction titles mixed in-e.g., Muzzey's History of the American people. We talked about the times. He feared next winter the worst way. "The people are bewildered and frightened," he said. "They are now worse off than they know. I think it can- not be so bad in Germany. Look at those boys." He indicated two sallow-faced youths of sixteen who were turning away in disgust. They had mistaken an old etching of St. Catherine for something modern in the nude. "I have only clean things here,"
IO THE LIBRARY RUARTERLY he said, "and I sometimes make two dollars a day." "But why," he asked, "don't people read about the causes when they are bewildered? Now they read only on business when they read anything but dirt." Such people are mentioned with no intent of substituting sentiment for figures. They demonstrate the presence of thoroughly good people in the local book trades-nearly pros- trate though the business is. Such people make for a qualita- tive influence of reading which numbers do not catch. And so to the libraries. 3. Who use the public library.?-a contrast.-Occupation is the central fact in the lives of most Americans. Hence in comparing populations of any sort, it is convenient to compare the propor- tions engaged in different kinds of work. Occupation is pethaps the best single label, because it usually implies significant differ- ences in schooling, intelligence, and economic status, and often also implies differences in cultural status and age. The first thousand names were drawn from the registration files of both the Seward Park and Fordham branches and then classified roughly by occupation. The results are shown in Table I. Each group includes I,Ooo persons. There is a differ- ence between the branches in respect to sex. At Fordham the women exceed the men by i i per cent, and at Seward Park the men outnumber the women by io per cent. Since the wealthier women have undoubtedly more time to read, this fact may in part explain a difference in per capita circulation. But the most striking fact in the table is the high proportion of young students (very few beyond high-school age) who constitute nearly 6o per cent of the Fordham and 4o per cent of the Seward Park branches. The figures do not include chil- dren's room registrations in either case, which might add an- other 30 per cent. The ratios raise many significant questions. Is the public library assuming a responsibility properly charged to the school? Does the proportion of youngsters in the clientale restrict the library's educational influence upon adults? And what of the public revenue? Such questions invite careful atten- tion from many points of view.
COMMUNITY STUDIES IN READING I The larger proportion of skilled tradesmen at Seward Park and of housewives at Fordham suggest differences in reading demand which any library should be able to capitalize in select- ing its books. TABLE I OCCUPATIONAL DISTRIBUTION OF I,OOO REGISTRANTS IN SEWARD PARK AND FORDHAM BRANCHES* PERCENTAGE OCCUPATON - DIFFERENCE Fordham Seward Park Men: Professional ................... 2.9 5.6 + Students ...................... 2 9.5 18-.7 Clerks ........................ I.8 6.4 + Shopkeepers and salesmen .... - .9 6.-2 + Skilled tradesmen . ............. 5 4 - g 13.4 + Unskilled labor ................ 1.8 2.7 + Unknown ..................... o.8 2.1 I e.If, 2- Total men ....... 44.0 55I . ..1...... Women: Professional 5. 1 3.1 I Students .28.4 19.3 Clerks.. 10.1 + Skilled trades .2.4 4.9 - + Unskilled (including hoMe) .. 3.3 5.9 Unknown ..........1.... .3 ... I.6 + Total women ......5..6.... S6.o 44 9 .......... 100.0 IOO.o .......... Each group contains i,ooo registrants; hence the numbers from each branch in each occupation may be read by omitting the decimal. 4. How uniformly and how mach does the community read in library books?-A sample of 5,578 loans shows about one-third of the card-holders reading something. Two per cent of the readers account for io per cent of the loans; and 6 per cent, for 2i per cent of the loans. Thereafter the ratios fall off, till we have 6o per cent of the readers accounting for only 30 per cent of the loans. In other words, this means that most of the card- holders read very little, and a few of them read very much.
I2 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY The facts are shown in Table II. The curve is something like that shown in Figure i. 5. How much does sex and occupation afect the total amount of borrowing?-The answer to this question is "scarcely any." The TABLE II DISTRIBUTION OF 5,578 LOANS AcCORDING TO NUMBER OF LOANS TO INDIVIDUAL BORROWERS Numuzat OF BOOKS LOANED TO INDIVIDUAL BoRuowmts I j 3 4 s 6 7 8 9 101 It 1 18 19 21 23 Fiction. . 1,297 41471 73 5 8 25 13 7 4 3 7 I3 I I .5.3... Non-fiction.i,ISoj 240 74 30 13 5| I1 ..... I . .'''1.*.1 . Combined (not add- ed) . . * - I, 172 658 2 109 93 43 30 14 S 5 6 3.. I I I Percentage. 58.32I .7 9 73.63.06I .42 I o.46 o. 17 0.7 0.2 0.1.04 o.0 .404 .04 60\ 50. V10 30.\ .20 \ I0 30 20 10 5.4321 Percen#edg of bans Fio. I facts appear in Table III, which reveals a tendency that is per- haps the most puzzling we have found, namely, the tendency for all borrowers to borrow the same amount, regardless of differences in sex and occupation. As we shall see presently, both sex and occupation have much to do with the selection of reading. Why have they so little to do with the amount?
COMMUNITY STUDIES IN READING 13 With every expectation of having other and better explana- tions offered, one may suggest the hypothesis that the public library is regarded in the lower east side, if not elsewhere, as a sort of club. Membership confers distinction and carries a cer- tain exclusiveness. That is to say, to become a library member one has certain adjustments to make, which, taken en masse, explain why so few readers use the library. Some of the adjustments may be mentioned off hand. Others should be determined by controlled studies of readers who are TABLE III SHOWING PERCENTILE ANALYSIS OF 585 LOANS TO 295 BORROWERS CLASSIFIED BY SEX AND OCCUPATION Group. Percentage of Percentage of Groups E~~~~Lans Borrowers All men .............................. 45 S 48 . 5 All women .............................. 545 5 5I 5 Total of both sexes .................... 100.0 100.0 Students .............................. 38.5 36.2 Office workers ............................ 26.I 23.6 Skilled trades ............. 13 7 I7.9 Professional .............................. IO.3 9.1 Unskilled .............................. 7.S 8.I Shopkeepers (men only) ........... ........ 3.9 5.1 Total .............................. 100.0 100.0 not library users. To see ourselves as the non-library user sees us is our plain duty as a service organization. Among the condi- tions which obviously affect popular use of the library are the frequent failures to obtain a desired title at the desired time, the perplexities and consequent irritation of a large classed cata- logue, the inability to smoke (which should bother some women as much as it bothers some men), lack of toilet facilities, lack of reading privacy, distance from the library to the home, time restrictions on loans, fines for books overdue, library hours that may or may not coincide with one's ability and inclination to visit the library (not to mention opportunities for leisurely read- ing), the strangeness of the subject headings, and the distrac-
14 THE LIBRARY 9U4RTERLY tions of the open shelves. Many other conditions, peculiar to certain libraries, could be listed at some length. Such conditions, taken together, may discourage 8o per cent of the Lower East Side adult readers from taking out books from the library. If so, the fact would explain why a lady teach- ing high school reads no more than an auto mechanic, provided both are library members. Both have made their adjustments! Both belong! Both have more in common with each other than they have with other teachers or other mechanics-so far as the amount of their book reading in libraries is concerned, dependent, as this is, upon willingness to conform to the various conditions suggested. If this explanation of the facts contained in Table III is valid, it may suggest various means of increasing the number of serious library patrons. We must advertise books and maga- zines on subjects of major concern to those groups who now use the library, however seldom. We must eliminate all the red tape we can, as perhaps we are now doing. We must study the non-library user like the unknown species he is, and supply his wants in the fields of reputable and socially helpful reading, whatever they turn out to be. Another means of checking the effect of occupation upon amount of reading is to determine how many members of each occupational group borrow three or more books of the given sample. The distribution appears in Table IV, which merely confirms the general belief that women read more books than men and that the heavy reiders of each sex are found more largely among the professional workers and the students. At Seward Park the housewives qualify as heavy (novel) readers, and likewise the women clerks. The differences in amount, how- ever, are small. They are much smaller than differences in the kind of reading chosen by the various groups. 6. How much do sex and o"cupation affect the selection of read- ing?-The answer is "very much." Taking the crudest sort of distribution, that between fiction and non-fiction, we find from our samples the sex differences shown in Table V. This means that, whereas the men read about the same amount of each, the
COMMUNITY STUDIES IN READING Is women read more than four times as much fiction as non-fiction, in Seward Park if not elsewhere. TABLE IV DISTRIBUTION OF 304 BORROWERS OF THJEE OR MORE BOOKS ACCORDING TO OCCUPATION No. of Times Three or More Groups No. in Group Boks Aore Ratio Borrowed Men: Professionals ............. I 6 24 1.5 Students ................ so 57 I. Office workers ........... Ig 11 0.2 Shop and salesmen ....... IS 8 0.5 Skilled trades ............ 33 17 0.5 Unskilled ................ To 8 o.8 Total men ........... 143 125 0.9 Women: Professionals ............. I.. I I Students ................ 57 6o I.05 Office workers ........... 51 73 1.4 Skilled trades ............ 28 8 o.28 Unskilled (home) ......... 14 i6 I .1 Total women ........ i6i i68 1.04 Grand total. 304 293 ........... TABLE V SEX DiSTRIBUTION OF FicrioN AND NoN-FicrION LOANS Fiction Non-fiction Total Men: Number ................. 137 1 29 266 Percentage .......5......1. . 48.5 100.0 Women: Number ................. 257 62 319 Percentage .............. 80.5 19.5 .100.0 The effect of occupation appears slightly in the number of books relating to present social problems that are borrowed by members of different occupational groups. The sample both of
i6 THE LIBRARY Q,UARTERLY books and of readers is unfortunately too small to support generalizations. Of the 328 titles represented on the used-up book cards we examined, the 25 per cent most pertinent to the critical issues of the day were classified according to the bor- rowers' occupation. The loans of the selected (82) titles to each occupational group are shown in Table VI. TABLE VI OCCUPATIONAL DISTRIBUTION OF LOANS OF EIGHTY-Two TITLES CONCERNINO MODERN SOCIAL PROBLEMS No. of No. of Loans per Readers Loans Reader Men: 1. Professional .II 40 3.6 II. Students .2I 102 4.9 III. Office workers .8 30 3.8 IV. Shop and salesmen 7 21 3.0 V. Skilled trades .II 55 5.0 VI. Unskilled. 2 I7 8.5 Total men. 6o 265 4.4 Women: VII. Professional . 22 7 5 VIII. Students .22 123 5.6 IX. Office workers .20 II6 5.8 X. Skilled trades .10 28 2. 8 XI. Unskilled (home) 5 26 5.2 Total women .62 31S 5.1 Grand total. I22 580 4.75 The ratios are again what one might expect, even though the -reading of contemporary social criticism is relatively small in amount among all groups. To follow through such fragmentary data to valid conclusions regarding the groups who read most social criticism and the sort of material each prefers, would more clearly define the extent and character of the social think- ing stimulated by the public library. Of such evidence we can never have enough. 7. What titles are most popular?-The short answer to this
COMMUNITY STUDIES IN READING 17 question is to list the titles for which two book cards were used up during a period of two months. That such an answer is wholly inadequate is plain from the facts that, whereas recent books are most widely read, at least two years are required to fill up a book card on fourteen-day loans. The only other avail- able evidence of relative popularity, whatever that may mean, consists in the number of reserved applications for titles in use. This measure, perhaps, is even less satisfactory, since certain popular titles like mystery stories and certain works of non- fiction are sometimes exempt from such reservation, books at the binders and otherwise out of commission are included with books in active circulation in the reserves, and no one has yet devised a formula whereby to estimate the relative popularity of titles according to the ratio of the number of copies in circu- lation to the number of applications reserved. This concrete problem clearly invites investigation. Meanwhile we can only report the most popular of the titles two years old which were sampled. The seventeen are as follows: Cytron, Avek fun Volk Durant, Story of philosophy Feuchtwanger, Ugly duchess *Fitch, Plays *Hayes, Political and social history of modern Europe Kellock, Houdini, his lifc story Krasnov, Kostia the Kossack Lewisohn, Last days of Shylock *Maeterlinck, Blue bird O'Neill, Dynamo Porter, Sixes and sevens Priestley, Angel pavement Remarque, The Road back Rosenfeld, Yiddishe Geshikhte Wassermann, Gold Wells, Short stories Zangwill, Children of the Ghetto Required reading in the schools. Few as they are, the titles might suggest the major interests of the Lower East Side, were it not for the fact that the Fitch, Hayes, and Maeterlinck titles are required reading in the
i8 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY schools. With these exceptions Cytron, Krasnov, Lewisohn, Rosenfeld, and Zangwill express a plain racial interest. Durant and Wassermann imply a curiosity concerning world-events and social values. From all the rest we may infer a desire to escape into the various sorts of romance which the adopted country provides but which seldom exists on the Bowery. A year's accumulation of such cards, classified by occupation, would make an interesting psychoanalysis of the readers of any branch. 8. What subjects are most interesting to residents who do not use the library?-The data so far described invite the objection that the card-holders of the branch do not fairly represent the residents of the community. That is to say, the reading be- havior of women stenographers who hold cards is not the same as that of women stenographers who do not hold cards, since the card-holders are probably a selected group in respect to their reading interests. To meet this objection, it is necessary to persuade various occupational groups outside the library clientele to supply in- formation concerning their own reading. Three check-lists were prepared for this purpose. The first contains a list of sixty topics, thirty of which are those on which three times as many articles have appeared in periodical literature during the past six months as during the past two years. The remaining thirty topics are divided between those which previous studies have shown to be highly interesting to most Americans-and those which are uninteresting to most. The check-list requires the representatives of each sex-occupational group to indicate which topics are interesting to read about, which are not interesting, and which have some but not much interest. The results thus show what contemporary affairs would presumably be most read about by each group within the district if readable ma- terial on such subjects were sufficiently easy to obtain. The second check-list contains the same sixty topics as the first, but calls for indications of actual reading on the topics in- stead of subject interest. The reader is asked to state what reading he has done in recent weeks on each topic in newspapers,
COMMUNITY STUDIES IN READING Ig weeklies, monthlies, or books; where the reading was obtained, and how much of the reading was obtained from each source, e.g., friends, bookstores, libraries, et al. The returns to the second check-list clearly supply much helpful information when compared with returns to the first, since the comparisons show on what topics of most interest the given group has done little or no reading, and also suggest various conditions that account for the fact that the subject interests are not satisfied. Chief among such reasons are the scarcity, the difficulties of style and vocabulary, the inaccessibility, and the insufficient advertising of material on the preferred subjects. The third check-list contains 235 titles of books concerning the topics appearing on the first two check-lists. The reader is asked to show which of the titles he has heard about, whiclh he has seen, which he has read in part, which in full, and where he obtained each one he has read. The group returns to the third check-list help also to interpret the returns to the two other check-lists. In addition they show to what groups the local library branch as contrasted with local newsstands, bookstores, and other sources, supplies critical discussions of present eco- nomic, political, and social issues. How many and which groups are thus supplied depends, of course, upon how many groups use the library, wlhat reading the library holds upon each topic, hiow "readable" it is, and how effectively the reading is advertised to each group. To conclude, we may sacrifice an infinite variety of applica- tions to a single conicrete example of the public librarian's op- portunity in the present years of suspense. Reparations and war debts-these words epitomize the tragic story of the years since the Great War-years in which we have run through the gamut of emotions, from the flush of triumph and the exaltation of high resolve through the excitement of accomplishment and then the complacency of apparent success, to supreme doubt and apprehension, deepening into a moral rout of disillusion and despair. We were so sure in igig-we are so nervous in I932.2 2 H. W. Jervey, "Reparations and war debts," The American scholar, I (I 932), 450.
20 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY The wealth and variety of writing that records the spiritual and intellectual adventures of all manner of men in all coun- tries during all these vicissitudes is available for our own guid- ance today. It stands ready to explain what any one of us has enough curiosity to learn regarding the chances for Western civilization to survive. Such reading is as valuable an experi- ence for any rational person as modern society has to offer. How may the public library enable more of us to share the experience? The answer will be clear or vague in proportion to our knowledge of the kinds of people who read anything to acquire Weltanschauung, of what it is they read, of where they procure the reading, and of other and more acceptable reading the library might supply. It is to be hoped that both the pro- fessional need and the social obligation to secure such knowl- edge may encourage co-operation and widespread efforts in the directions now being explored by the branch librarians of New York City. DOUGLAS WAPLES GRADUATE LIBRARY SCHOOL UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO