A CRITICAL DISCUSSION OF "THE ETHICAL PRESUPPOSITIONS BEHIND THE LIBRARY BILL OF RIGHTS" Tony Doyle1 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Volume 72 JULY 2002 Number 3 In "The Ethical Presuppositions behind the Library Bill of Rights," Martin Fricke, Kay Mathiesen, and Don Fallis argue that the presuppositions of the Library Bill of Rights regarding censorship, access, and paternalism need re- vision. They also maintain that a revised Library Bill of Rights needs to rest on a sound philosophical foundation. The foundation they propose is John Rawls' version of social contract theory. I take issue with both claims. Re- garding social contract theory, I argue that utilitarianism yields nothing to it regarding the types of materials that libraries should offer and who should have access to those materials. As for the Library Bill of Rights itself, I criti- cize parts of their interpretation and their positions on censorship, access, and paternalism. My main concern here is with the authors' defense of pa- ternalism in libraries, which would commit them to Internet filtering. I dwell at some length on the dangers of filtering. Introduction Martin Fricke, Kay Mathiesen, and Don Fallis offer "The Ethical Pre- suppositions behind the Library Bill of Rights" [1] to show that the liberal positions on censorship, access, and paternalism supported by the Library Bill of Rights [2, pp. 3-4] and the American Library Associ- ation's (ALA) interpretations of them ([2, pp. 18-124, especially pp. 20-22 and 84-85] and [3]) need qualification. After a brief but useful discussion of ethical theory they identify four presuppositions of the 1. Reference librarian, Hunter College Library, 695 Park Avenue, New York, New York, 10021. Telephone 212-772-4181; Fax 212-772-4142; E-mail tdoyle@hunter.cuny.edu. [Library Quarterly, vol. 72, no. 3, pp. 275-293] © 2002 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-2519/2002/7203-0001$10.00 275
276 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Library Bill of Rights and their ALA interpretations: (1) the dissenting opinion should be presented (Article II); (2) we ought not to censor (Article III); (3) access should not be restricted for certain reasons (most notably age) (Article VI) ; and (4) paternalism should be avoided [2, pp. 84-85] . This article focuses on the authors' criticisms of presup- positions 2-4. Against the second presupposition they argue that cen- sorship in libraries is sometimes permissible. The third presupposition, they contend, is too vague about the "source of a person's right to use the library," as well as "the limitations on [the] right to access" [1, p. 478]. Regarding the fourth presupposition, they argue that some measure of paternalism toward minors in libraries is justified. In identi- fying and criticizing these presuppositions the authors seek to provide a sound philosophical basis for a policy on library censorship, library access, and the kinds of materials that libraries should offer. Fricke and his coauthors defend a version of social contract theory as the most plausible basis of a revised position on censorship, access, and mission. My primary concern will be with public libraries. What follows is a criticism of the following aspects of Fricke and his coauthors' article: first, that nothing as strong as presupposition 2 is actually implied by Article III; second, in the context of presupposition 3, that, contrary to what the authors imply, utilitarianism offers at least as sound a justification as the version of social contract theory that the authors defend for the mission of libraries; third, that the authors' attempt to put access largely in the context of voluntary and involuntary features of patrons is faulty; and fourth, that the authors' defense of paternalism with regard to minors has alarming implications for In- ternet filtering in libraries. The article finishes with a discussion of the hazards of filtering. The Library Bill of Rights and Censorship Article III of the Library Bill of Rights states that "libraries should chal- lenge censorship in the fulfillment of their responsibility to provide information and enlightenment" [2, p. 3]. Its presupposition, ac- cording to the authors, is that we ought not to censor. The authors point out that there is much that can inform and enlighten that librar- ies should not provide. They offer three strong examples [1, pp. 476- 77] . First, there is information whose distribution would violate intel- lectual property rights.2 Second, they mention information that would, 2. The ALA officially opposes infringements on intellectual property [see 4] .
A CRITICAL DISCUSSION 277 if publicly available, be unduly invasive of privacy - for instance, infor- mation about a person's genome. Such information could be used to deprive a person of a job, or of medical or life insurance. Third, they bring up the results of the monstrous medical experiments conducted by the Nazis on death camp inmates. No doubt much valuable medical information could be gleaned from these files. Still, the authors plausi- bly contend, "We might decide not to disseminate this information out of a desire to show respect for the victims and total abhorrence for the means of acquisition of the information" [1, pp. 476-77]. Also, opening these files might, though this is speculative, weaken the restrictions on, or reservations about, this kind of research in the fu- ture. The authors score a point against Article III here. All three types of materials could both inform and enlighten. Yet because of the poten- tial harm that unrestricted access could lead to, we should not provide library access to them. And not just there: examples two and three are fit objects of suppression generally. They conclude: "Such examples indicate that there are competing values that at least sometimes over- ride this unconditional principle. As a result, it seems that the ALA should adopt a more moderate position that recognizes the exceptions to Article III" [1, p. 477]. Right. But does Article III urge unconditional opposition to censorship, as the authors suggest? Compare the language of presupposition 2 with that of Article III. The former declares that libraries should not cen- sor - at all. The article itself, however, enjoins libraries to challenge censorship insofar as the practice inhibits their mission to inform and enlighten. Pornography, for instance, does neither. So Article III does not oblige libraries to oppose attempts to censor it. What about an astrology magazine that carries nothing but false advertising? Would libraries be obliged, consistent with Article III, to fight attempts to re- move it from the shelves? Maybe not. Also, look at the phrase "provide information and enlightenment" (emphasis added). Contrary to what Fricke and his coauthors imply [1, p. 476], the most plausible way to interpret this phrase is that libraries should only challenge the censor- ship of materials that both inform and enlighten. Compare "I want to go to Rome and Florence on my next vacation," with "I want to go to Rome or Florence on my next vacation." On this reading libraries might not be obliged to oppose those who would censor bomb-making sources either. Such materials are undeniably informative, though hardly enlightening. So they do not inform and enlighten. It looks like Article III does not support the unconditional principle expressed by presupposition 2 after all.
278 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Philosophical Foundations, Access, and Limiting Access Philosophical Foundations and Access Fricke and his coauthors look at several arguments for why libraries should offer a broad range of materials and make them accessible to all. One, the argument from truth, is a utilitarian argument deriving from John Stuart Mill. As a utilitarian, Mill was concerned to promote those policies or practices that best conduce to human welfare, that tend to maximize net happiness or "utility" (the total balance of hap- piness over unhappiness), where everyone's well-being is weighed equally. In chapter 2 of On Liberty, "Of the Liberty of Thought and Discussion," Mill maintained that society is better off the higher pro- portion of true to false beliefs that it holds [5, p. 23] . He argued that (nearly) unfettered speech and access to that speech is the most reli- able means of uncovering truth. If we want to give truth our best shot, we have to permit expression of all points of view, since we cannot know whether or not an idea is true unless it gets expressed. Once a view is expressed the best way to determine whether it is true or well founded is to expose it to no-holds-barred criticism. This implies not only free expression of ideas but unrestricted access to this expression. People need to know not only what can be said against what they do not believe but also what can be said for it; they should be aware both of what supports and gainsays their views. Only those views that survive rigorous debate deserve our fealty [5, pp. 20-22] .3 Applying Mill's argu- ment to libraries, we can say that they play a crucial role in ensuring that people have access to all views; they are repositories of free speech and thus help promote truth or at least help to ensure that people's empirical and moral beliefs are well justified. We will see below that the version of the social contract theory that the authors support can accommodate the argument from truth. There are four further things to note about Mill's position. First, he was not opposed to all censorship of speech. One restriction he urged is for speech whose expression constitutes "a positive instigation to some mischievous act" [5, p. 53] - for instance, speech calculated to incite a riot [5, p. 53] or other forms of immediate physical harm, like gratuitously yelling "Kill" to an attack dog in the presence of an inno- cent bystander [7, p. 12]. Although Mill does not say so, presumably he would restrict libel and speech involving criminal conspiracy; nei- ther has any tendency to advance truth. Second, his opposition to cen- sorship, as suggested above, is limited to ideas, that is, to expression 3. For a criticism of Mill's contention, that open discussion and the conflict of ideas is the surest way to the truth, see [6, pp. 333-34] .
A CRITICAL DISCUSSION 279 purporting to be true. Hence the argument from truth is silent about much fiction and poetry, about images, and about nonlinguistic expres- sive acts like flag burning [1, p. 474] . Third, Mill, as a utilitarian, makes no appeal to moral rights [5, p. 12], which at any rate play no role in the utilitarian conception of morality [8, pp. 105-6]: if we ought to remove nearly all restrictions on discussion and access, it is because the balance of happiness over unhappiness will be increased by doing so and not because people have a moral right to express or hear all points of view (compare [2, pp. 120-21]; I say more about rights pres- ently) . Fourth, the argument implies that all should have access to all the ideas that libraries provide, since open access promotes truth. A second argument for open access that the authors mention is the argument from democracy [1, p. 479; see 2, pp. 127-29]. Morally speaking, the argument contends, democracy is the best form of gov- ernment. But robust democracy requires a citizenry that is free to seek out all relevant information regarding, and to express its views on, pub- lic policy and candidates for public office. Unrestricted expression and access are also a further means of keeping its representatives account- able. Libraries play an important role in providing citizens with the information they need to meet these ends. In addition, the authors plausibly contend that libraries have an obli- gation to offer more than what the two arguments just canvassed are committed to. The authors are well aware of the limitations of the argu- ment from truth rehearsed above [1, pp. 474-75 and 487]. As for the argument from democracy, it "applies only to government information . . . [It] does not require public libraries to carry, as a matter of responsi- bility or duty, other documents that are not part of the democratic process, such as a Stephen King novel or those documents relaying the latest baseball scores" [1, p. 479]. Also, the argument applies only to full citizens and not to minors or aliens [1, p. 479]. To supplement the arguments from truth and democracy Fricke and his coauthors ap- peal to John Rawls' version of the social contract theory. Social contract theory has typically been offered as a means of (1) morally justifying the existence of government, (2) specifying which type(s) of govern- ment and what institutions are morally justified, and (3) limiting the state's coercive authority. Social contract theorists claim that govern- ment exists to protect our moral rights, which we have independently of the state's authority but which would not be adequately protected in anarchy. Rights, to borrow Ronald Dworkin's metaphor, are trumps that, from the moral point of view, override authorities' or other citi- zens' attempts to infringe them, barring a conflicting, overriding right [9, pp. 190-92] . As Fricke and his coauthors put it, rights "are justified claims or entitlements against others" [1, p. 470]. For instance, if I
280 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY have the moral right to free speech, no one is morally justified in de- priving me of that right unless another right trumps it. That is to say, others have a moral obligation to refrain from restricting or prohib- iting my speech, other things being equal. Rights are also trumps against utility. In other words, they are not necessarily overridden even if more net happiness will result by doing so [9, pp. 92 and 190-92; and 10, pp. 3-4, 22-33, and 183-92]. Fricke, Mathiesen, and Fallis explain that moral rights are typically distinguished into liberty rights and welfare rights. The former simply require * 'other people to refrain from interfering" with the exercise of the right; the latter make "it a duty or responsibility for some other person or institution to satisfy or meet the right" [1, p. 470]. The distinction sheds light on the argu- ments from truth and democracy. Both could support (the equivalent of) a welfare right to information necessary to promote truth (the argu- ment from truth) or strengthen democracy (the argument from de- mocracy) . Public libraries exist in part for the sake of this right. Rights theorists differ about the provenance of rights. According to some social contract theorists, for instance John Locke [11, pp. 4-30] and Robert Nozick [12, p. ix], rights preexist the social contract and thus any consensus about what rights people should have. For Rawls, by contrast, rights are the upshot of a hypothetical agreement; they do not exist prior to, or independent of, the social contract. He asks us to imagine a group of self-interested, rational people coming together to decide what basic rights and duties people should have. These con- tractors are to determine the "fundamental terms of their association," which will "regulate all subsequent criticism and reform of institu- tions" [10, pp. 11-14; see also p. 61] . To ensure that the original agree- ment, as Rawls calls it, is fair - to ensure that none of the contractors is able wittingly to bias the agreement in his or her favor - he supposes that they deliberate behind a veil of ignorance [10, pp. 12, 18-19, 136, and 139-40] . The veil masks all knowledge of individual characteristics of those in the so-called original position: sex, race, class, age, intelli- gence, sexual preference, physical characteristics, wealth, conception of the good, or the generation to which they will belong [10, pp. 12, 18-19, and 137], although they are aware of "the general facts about human society" [10, p. 137; see also pp. 142 and 158]. The contractors "must choose principles the consequences of which they are prepared to live with whatever generation they turn out to belong to" [10, p. 137]. Their agreement requires the unanimous consent of the con- tractors [10, pp. 141-42] . The fairness imposed by the veil ensures that the principles chosen will embody justice. Rawls contends that the contractors will agree on two fundamental principles. Rights derive from these. The first principle, the equality
A CRITICAL DISCUSSION 281 principle, states that "each person is to have an equal right to the most extensive basic liberty compatible with a similar liberty for others" [10, p. 60] . This principle guarantees free speech and the franchise (among other rights) equally to all citizens. Although Rawls does not say, one can imagine the contractors agreeing on the principle of complete lib- erty of speech on the basis of the arguments from truth and democracy. The second, the difference principle, says that inequalities in wealth and other social benefits are acceptable as long as they can be "(a) reasonably expected to be to everyone's advantage, and (b) [are] attached to positions and offices open to all" [10, p. 60]. The first principle has priority over the second [p. 61], meaning that free speech, for instance, cannot be abridged for the sake of "greater social and economic advantages" [10, p. 61; see also pp. 14-15 and 67]. This ranking removes the possibility of conflict, the bane of most rights theo- ries [see 1, pp. 471-72]. It also means that the prospect of increased utility cannot override the equality principle [10, pp. 176-77]. Although the authors do not identify either principle, both are rele- vant to their discussion. The equality principle is relevant because it implies a liberty right to nearly complete freedom of expression of and access to all points of view. The difference principle bears on the au- thors' case in the following way. Again, behind the veil the contractors will not know what their concept of the good is, although they will know that they have such a concept and a corresponding "rational plan of life" [10, p. 142] and that both will be revealed to them once the veil is lifted. The veil will ensure that they choose a society governed by basic rules that conduce to as many different conceptions of the good, or as many life plans, as possible; it will prevent the contractors from deliberately choosing a scheme that favors their own conception of the good life over others. Extending Rawls' scheme, Fricke, Mathie- sen, and Fallis ask us to "suppose that we [in the original position] have to decide whether and what kind of information will be available to us as members of society" [1, p. 481] . The authors plausibly contend that the veil will prompt the contractors to insist that benefits like access to information be distributed to everyone's advantage, with particular regard to those at the socioeconomic bottom, for the contractors will see that "information is essential to carrying out any plan" [1, p. 481]. Appealing to the difference principle, we can say that access to infor- mation will be not merely a liberty right, which is all that the equality principle guarantees; it will also be a welfare right, requiring others to help one have access to that information needed to live according to one's conception of the good [see 1, p. 470]. In other words, not only should the state not interfere with what one says, reads, sees, or hears; government has a further obligation to provide access to the kind of
282 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY information that one needs to live according to one's conception of the good, which likely includes being rational, well informed, and en- tertained. Information is a commodity, a benefit, a good. Again, the difference principle implies that goods should be distributed equally, unless some inequality benefits all. We can imagine how some inequali- ties in information distribution might do this - for example, trade se- crets, or state secrets during a morally justified war. Putting aside these exceptions, the difference principle implies that all should have equal access to the kinds of information central to the arguments from truth and democracy. Libraries would play an important role here. More- over, the authors conjecture, the contractors in the original position would recognize the likelihood that their conception of the good will require access to a broader range of information than the arguments from truth and democracy require [see 1, pp. 480 and 482]. The con- tractors will realize that they will probably want to have ready access to fiction, poetry, art books, or recorded music. They will insist that these types of materials also be widely distributed and be easily and cheaply available, ideally in public libraries: "Consider a book that is merely entertaining. Reading it is not going to make anyone a wiser voter, and it certainly does not contain any government information. Even so, access to such a book can be justified on the grounds that reading books that are merely entertaining promotes the conception of the good of at least some (and probably many) members of society" [1, p. 482]. Children too are included: "Behind the veil of ignorance, you do not know what your position in society will be. You may end up being a child . . . trying to achieve and develop your own conception of the good. Thus, behind the veil of ignorance, you will decide that children should have access to the information that they need in order to do so" [1, p. 482]. Also, the authors might have added, since those in the original position will not know whether they will be citizens of the society in which they spend the bulk of their lives, they will urge that libraries with their broad array of information be open to aliens as well. It does not follow, though, that everything in the library will be avail- able to all; in particular, it does not follow that children will be able to see or read everything or surf the Internet as they please. Again, remember the conditions of the original position. Behind the veil you would not know whether you will wind up a twelve-year-old boy with a yen for pornography or his potentially anxious mother. Hence, you would certainly not endorse principles that allowed minors to pur- sue their conception of the good however they see fit: "It is reasonable for you to conclude, behind the veil of ignorance, that it is best for
A CRITICAL DISCUSSION 283 children not to have access to pornography even if you end up being a child who wants such access" [1, p. 483]. I say more about paternal- ism below. The preceding argument is an admirable application of Rawls' ideas to the questions of why we should have public libraries, what kinds of materials they should offer, and who should have access to these mate- rials. However, I think the authors are too quick to dismiss the possibil- ity of a utilitarian justification for a similar conception of libraries, at least regarding the first two questions. They compare utilitarianism un- favorably with their ' 'hypothetical social contract argument," claiming that it would not support libraries with as liberal a policy on access or with as broad a range of information as does their Rawlsian position [1, p. 482] . This criticism is unfair to utilitarianism - by which the authors apparently mean Mill's argument from truth - on two counts. First, it is wrong to suggest that the argument from truth does not support access to as wide an audience as the Rawlsian argument. Maximizing access to all ideas is crucial to truth's emergence, and free access for all - citizens and noncitizens, children and adults - helps ensure that the library audience is the broadest possible. The broader the audi- ence, the more effective the promotion of truth. Second, the authors are right to suggest that, as pointed out above, the argument from truth only obliges libraries to provide materials likely to promote truth. The same could be said about the argument from democracy. However, these arguments are hardly the only ones available to utilitarians in support of libraries' offering other kinds of materials. In fact, it turns out that a utilitarian conception of the role of libraries will end up looking a lot like the Rawlsian. In other words, utilitarians can endorse the notion that libraries provide as wide a spectrum of information to as many kinds of people as the authors' hypothetical contract justifica- tion. Unlike Rawls' theory, utilitarianism is formally neutral on how good - that is, happiness, or the satisfaction of desires or preferences - should be distributed. Utilitarianism contains no provision that in- equalities be to everyone's advantage. All that matters is whether or not a given action, practice, or policy leads to more net happiness than any other alternative [see 8, p. 104; 10, pp. 26-27 and 187-89; and 13, p. 37] . However, the way in which the means to happiness such as in- come, adequate housing, or information is parceled out can pro- foundly affect the net good in a given society [8, p. 104]. Utilitarians can plausibly contend that benefits and burdens should be distributed equally unless an unequal distribution boosts utility. For instance, in- comes should be equal unless more utility accrues to some inequality
284 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY [see 8, p. 113]. It does. Higher salaries can induce hard work and can make some occupations more competitive than others. The utilitarian would agree with Rawls that higher salaries should be attached to those socially useful jobs that require considerable sacrifice and that we want to be highly competitive so that only the most capable people will qual- ify. Surgery, civil engineering, and computer programming are exam- ples. How much inequality utilitarians will sanction depends on the amount that maximizes utility. Furthermore, the utilitarian will insist that equal opportunity go along with these inequalities in income, again for considerations of utility. Being well informed is essential to equal opportunity. Entertain- ment, too, is beneficial; people are generally better off having af- fordable access to it than not. Take fiction, read either for entertain- ment or edification. Making an array of novels available to people in public libraries no doubt increases utility. Moreover, making this mate- rial available to citizens and noncitizens alike, as well as to children, is more likely to maximize utility than depriving noncitizens and children of the information. As we saw above, the argument from truth applies to noncitizens; minors, too, need to have access to all points of view, since this will help them cultivate the critical skills needed to decide which controversial claims are most justified and to be informed partic- ipants in democracy when they come of age. Similarly, noncitizens and children benefit from having access to "entertaining" items to the same extent as adult citizens. Thus it looks, contrary to Fricke and his coauthors, as if there is a plausible utilitarian justification for the broad mission of libraries that they defend on Rawlsian grounds. And the utilitarian justification comes without the fictional assumption of an original agreement struck behind a veil of ignorance. Limiting Access Fricke and his coauthors suggest that limiting patron access can be understood largely in terms of a person's voluntary and involuntary characteristics [1, pp. 483-84]. The former are under a person's con- trol - for instance, loud speech or poor hygiene. The latter are not: age, sex, or race are examples. Of course, some features, like weight or drug addiction, are in between. The authors concede this [1, p. 484] . I will join them in ignoring the gray area for now. The authors imply that involuntary features are generally not relevant to excluding access while voluntary ones - for example, deliberately setting the book drop on fire - are [1, pp. 478 and 484]. To wit, "There is something odd about denying access to anyone who is genuinely a member of the li- brary's constituency on the basis of an involuntary feature. The reason is that there is nothing that the patron can do about it" [1, p. 483].
A CRITICAL DISCUSSION 285 After all, "The distinction [between an involuntary and a voluntary feature] can be stated simply as that between what a person is and how he behaves" [1, p. 483]. This criterion for limiting patron access will not do. What about in- voluntary disruptive behavior, like that induced by Tourette's syn- drome? Undesirable voluntary features are amenable to blame, cen- sure, or punishment. The occasional vulgar outbursts of a Tourette's sufferer are not. That a patron so afflicted could not have done other- wise seems beside the point. Libraries could still reasonably exclude him. Also, as we saw in the preceding section and will see at greater length in the next section, the authors want to leave open the possibility that minors can be denied access to some library materials. But as the authors themselves acknowledge, age is involuntary [1, p. 483; see also pp. 485-86] . Given these two counterexamples, it is difficult, then, to see just what bearing the distinction between voluntary and involuntary features is supposed to have on access. Paternalism The following discussion is based on the authors' criticism of presuppo- sitions 3 and 4. Presupposition 3 reads: "Access should not be restricted for certain reasons, most notably age" [1, p. 477]. The authors derive this presupposition from Article V of the Library Bill of Rights: "A per- son's right to use a library should not be denied or abridged because of origin, age, background, or views" [2, p. 4]. Presupposition 4 states: "Paternalism should be avoided." Fricke and his coauthors rightly in- fer this presupposition from both Article V of the Library Bill of Rights [2, p. 4] and from the ALA's interpretation of this article [2, pp. 20-22 and 84-85]. The authors define paternalism as follows: "Paternalism usually involves the ones that are being paternal deciding what is best on behalf of the others, usually without their consent" [1, p. 484] .4 We saw briefly, in the section before last, that Fricke and his coauthors believe that those in the original position would likely sanction some form of paternalism. The authors are nevertheless wary of paternalism, save "where the receiving group is less than fully competent, by virtue of being young, infirm, mentally ill, and so on; then a defense can be made for paternalistic action, both for promoting good and for avoiding harm" [1, p. 484]. Obviously, parents are generally morally justified in behaving paternally toward their children regarding what the latter see, hear, or read in and out of the house. The ALA agrees 4. For a fuller account of paternalism see [14, pp. 45-52].
286 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY [2, p. 85] . So, contend the authors, are other adults, even strangers, when the parents or guardian (s) are absent or incompetent [1, p. 485] . The authors further argue that, if some types of paternalism toward minors are often justified outside of the library, then they are justified within. But the ALA's present policy regarding access is age blind: li- braries abjure acting in loco parentis with regard to library materials; it is not librarians' responsibility to take over for parents in deciding what books or images are appropriate for children [2, pp. 20-21 and 85]. Fricke and his coauthors object: "It is reasonable to assume that parents would not want their child accessing hard-core pornography. Thus by stopping a child from accessing such material, you are not 'taking over' from the parent; you are helping the parent" [1, p. 485]. The authors appeal to the following analogy to support their case. All would acknowledge that a stranger has the responsibility to stop a child from electrocuting herself by sticking a fork in a live socket. Similarly, when it comes to pornography, "librarians should not stand by and watch a child 'electrocute' herself, let alone help the child find a fork (which seems to be the present ALA policy) " [1, p. 485; see 2, pp. 20- 22]. The authors identify the source of the ALA's resistance to paternal- ism in how the organization deals with fallibilism. The fallibilist claims that we should hold beliefs and theories tentatively; she supposes that any belief or theory can be revised in the light of future experience. The authors, too, embrace fallibilism, which in the present context im- plies that any exercise in censorship is likely occasionally to go awry: some of what censors exclude should not have been excluded (false positives) , and some of what they permit should have been censored (false negatives) [1, p. 486; see also 5, pp. 18-19]. The authors claim that the ALA's response to fallibilism "is to propose that we not make any judgments or choices or decisions at all. They [that is, the ALA] wish not to censor anything, or to label anything, not to deny anyone access, and never to act paternally" [1, p. 486; see 2, pp. 20-22, 84- 86, and 103-4]. Regarding the claim that the ALA opposes all censor- ship, we have seen that the Library Bill of Rights implies nothing so unconditional. More to the present point, Fricke and his coauthors deny that fallibilism is committed to a wholesale rejection of censorship or paternalism, arguing that similar reasoning would imply that we should never try suspected murderers for fear of a wrongful conviction [1, pp. 486-87]. Their conclusion: "It is better to make the occasional mistake in censoring, labeling, excluding, or acting paternally, than it is to have a system of anything goes (which is what the LBR seems to commit us to with respect to, for example, access to the Internet)" [1, p. 487].
A CRITICAL DISCUSSION 287 The analogy with murder is strained. Juries are enlisted to determine guilt beyond a reasonable doubt; defense and prosecution adduce evi- dence and offer testimony in support of a their cases. But what is the evidence that some types of pornography harm children? If there is any, the authors have not revealed it. Also, without this evidence the electrocution analogy in the paragraph before last seems at best hyper- bolic: not only do the authors fail to provide evidence that access to some types of pornography poses a potentially lethal threat to children; they offer no evidence that such access poses any threat. To return to the murder analogy, most would surely agree that the cost of occasional wrongful convictions is worth the benefit of generally effective prosecution and conviction of those who have done the deed, so long as considerable safeguards against wrongful conviction exist. But, again, the analogy seems less than perfect. First, the history of censorship is at best checkered: time and again materials have been proscribed not because they were dangerous but because they were deemed antireligious, because they were contrary to prevailing sexual morality, or because they were perceived to be a political threat by those in power. Second, materials are often excluded by type - hard- core pornographic, hateful, violent - rather than item-by-item. As a re- sult, items are often not allowed to have their own case pleaded for them beforehand. This is especially a problem with blocked Internet sites, as we will see below. Nevertheless, the authors are undoubtedly on to something. There is much to give even stout liberals pause over the ALA's policy, particu- larly in light of the easy availability over the Internet of the kind of smut that the vast majority of them find deeply offensive. No conscien- tious parent really wants her child consulting hard-core pornography at home online; Fricke and his coauthors are right to point out that she doubtless is not eager to have the child contemplating it in the public library, either. Traditionally, as repositories of books and period- icals, libraries have not provided dirty pictures. This practice has changed with the installation of computers with Internet access. Al- though they do not broach Internet filtering, Fricke and his coauthors' position on paternalism apparently commits them to endorse some form of it in libraries [1, pp. 474 and 487]. In fact, they even intimate that they would tolerate filtering so that adults, too, would not have to take in unbidden explicit images on public access Internet computers [1, p. 474]. However, before we can conclude that the ALA should renounce its staunch opposition to paternalism (or Internet filtering), we need to look at the nature of filtering software and the costs of attempting to prevent the display of " inappropriate" or "unsuitable" material on the Internet in libraries.
288 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Internet Filtering Internet filtering software changes faster than high fashion, and any discussion of the state of the art now is likely to be history tomorrow. I hope, though, that what follows continues to pertain to censorware for a useful piece of the future. One way in which such software attempts to sift out unwanted sites is by keyword. This kind of software specifies a list of words or phrases such that, if any of them occurs in the site's header or in the site itself (depending on the software), that site is blocked. Anyone who has searched by keyword in a database knows the perils. On the one hand, one is often surprised by, even dismayed at, the number of false hits that such searches can yield; on the other hand, and more important in the present context, one is often frustrated at not being able to find information that one knows is out there. With keyword filters the prob- lem is this: no matter how subtly the software is written, it will inevitably permit access to "undesirable" sites (false negatives) and block useful or even unexceptionable sites (false positives) . For liberals, false posi- tives are the real concern. The stories of false positives in keyword blocking are legion. For example, if the software blocks variants of "sex," sites containing some form of the word, but which are actually about safe sex, abstinence, or gender, or that mention sextants, Sexton, or Middlesex, and so on, could be blocked.5 Here are two more exam- ples from a 1997 version of CYBERsitter. In those early days of the Internet it would block out Robert Frost's "Snowy Evening" because it contained "queer"; television actress Pamela Anderson Lee's name also raised the red flag [19; see 17, p. 38]. More recently Kurt Kleiner has revealed how mainstream censorware has blocked Web sites of the MIT Student Association for Freedom of Expression, the International Gay and Lesbian Human Rights Commission, the Village Voice, and the Christian Broadcasting Network, to name just a few [see 20, p. 22; for other recent examples, see 21]. A more accurate way of blocking sites is by address. Users are denied access to any blacklisted site. This approach has an obvious advantage over keyword blocking: only intended sites are blocked, barring mis- takes. However, coming up with the addresses is laborious and expen- sive. Also, any list will be woefully incomplete from the outset and will require constant updating, which itself is bound to miss a lot. Third, usually users will not know what they are missing. The makers of this software are understandably reluctant to reveal the contents of their list, since this secrecy is what makes the products valuable. This situa- 5. For other examples, see [15, pp. 42-43; 16, p. 39; 17, p. 38; and 18, pp. 89-90].
A CRITICAL DISCUSSION 289 tion is bad enough at home, far worse in libraries, where not even li- brarians will know what is being shut out [19; 20, p. 22; 22, p. 48]. (It is also a problem with keyword censorware where the keyword list is protected.) Speaking of both methods of blocking, Joshua Marshall points out [22, p. 48] that this kind of censorship is different from the old days of book banning. Those who would ban books generally had to wage public battle, raising the issue of just which books they wanted to strike from public schools or libraries. No longer: this newer bowdlerization is far stealthier. Finally, given the great expense involved in heaping up a congeries of forbidden fruit, companies will have to sign up many customers to be profitable. This suggests that there will likely be few companies in the future with the resources to compete, creating the prospect of precious few controlling a good deal of the flow of informa- tion [22, pp. 49-50] .6 As with censorship in other contexts, the threat of abuse here is con- siderable. Take the time-honored question of just who is making the decisions about what is appropriate and what their agenda is. For in- stance, Solid Oak Software, the makers of CYBERsitter, decided that "gay" (and presumably other references to homosexuality) was inap- propriate. Sometimes, of course, a company's agenda might have more to do with the market or with responding to various pressure groups than with Internet "safety." Even sites that the software company itself finds objectionable - sites that the user might want to have access to - can be blocked. For example, the manufacturer might blacklist anti- censorship sites or even sites that are critical of the manufacturer's own blocking practices, as did Solid Oak Software in 1996 [see 17, p. 38; 19, p. 50; 20, p. 22; also see 21; 22, pp. 48 and 50; and 23, p. 7]. When such software is installed in libraries, or when Internet providers or Internet search engines filter or block, censorship is imposed from without by private companies who answer not to the electorate but to their stockholders, other private companies, or public institutions like schools and libraries [see 22, pp. 46 and 50; 24, pp. 51-52; see also 25, p. 841; 17, p. 38; and 19, p. 50] .7 6. There is actually a third way, The Platform for Internet Content Selection (PICS) , which in theory enables users and organizations to decide for themselves which portions of the Internet they will have access to, depending on the rating of a site. Ratings can be assigned by the site's creator or imposed by a third party. Such a system raises serious censorship problems of its own. See [15, p. 43; 18, pp. 90-91; and 22, pp. 47-48]. However, discussion of PICS has petered out since 1998. 7. For some other considerations against filtering see [26]. For defenses of filtering see [24, 27, and 28].
290 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Paternalism and Censorship Again To return to the issue of censorship for minors generally, Fricke and his coauthors concede that mistakes are inevitable yet worth the costs of keeping children from certain types of potentially harmful material [1, p. 487]. Perhaps. Their main concern is pornography, and they imply that consulting it, or at least certain types of it, is seriously harm- ful to minors. However, as mentioned above, Fricke and his coauthors adduce no evidence for this claim. The fact that parents believe that some types of pornography are harmful does not show that they are; still less does it show that children ought to be "protected" from this material in public libraries. By analogy, the fact that some parents think that antireligious books or Web sites harm their children is no evidence that they do; again, it does not show that their children's access to such messages should be restricted out of the home.8 Nevertheless, the authors are right to point out that mistakes in library censorship are not (usually) disastrous or irreversible [1, p. 487] , unlike wrongful con- victions or executions. Library censorship seldom comes to burning books [1, p. 487]; seldomer still does it come to burning all extant copies of a given book. Fricke and his coauthors might also have ob- served that, even if gorging their eyes on hard-core pornography does not harm minors, probably little is lost by denying them access to this material. Perhaps too, as long as we do not know the effects of exposure to pornography on young people, society should err on the side of caution and keep it out of their way. Lack of evidence that pornography is harmful does not show conclusively that it does no harm. And once they turn eighteen (or whatever the age of legal majority happens to be) , they will be free to make up for lost time. Of course, this line of reasoning assumes that minors would not simultaneously be denied access to valuable or uncontroversial material along the way. To repeat: it is difficult to see how this balance could be struck. Also, this concession assumes that there are acceptable criteria for what counts as hard-core pornography along with reasonable assur- ances that those criteria will be correctly applied. Fricke and his co- authors themselves write as if what counts as pornography is uncontro- versial [for example, 1, p. 485], which it is not. What is considered pornographic varies with culture, time, and even person; likewise with regard to what counts as hate speech or "blasphemous" material and whether or not it ought to be protected or proscribed. I am thus pessi- mistic that generally accepted criteria for what counts as pornography, or hard-core pornography, could be devised. However, let us assume 8. For a discussion of whether pornography harms minors, see [15, p. 42].
A CRITICAL DISCUSSION 291 for the sake of discussion that all parties could agree on a definition of hard-core pornography and that the definition is serviceable. Maybe then libraries could effectively restrict access to print pornography without denying access to nonpornography; maybe, too, such restric- tion would be consistent with the utilitarian conception of expressive freedom defended in this article. However, we have just seen that the short history of Internet filtering suggests that separating the wheat from the chaff online is even less straightforward than with print. Since the authors have not grappled with this issue, nothing that they say should persuade readers that public libraries should adopt censorware in the interests of benign paternalism. And the just canvassed flaws of filtering software suggest that there is a positive reason for resisting its installation. The arguments from truth and democracy offer further reasons, since filtering can stifle material that promotes truth or strengthens democracy. Also, who censors? The authors respond that "the worry about who the censoring authorities should be is analogous to a worry that people might have about the crime of murder. That is, who should make the decision as to whether or not a particular person should be convicted of murder?" [1, p. 488]. Is it? First, we have a well-established, if not entirely perfect, mechanism for choosing jurors. Second, jurors are enlisted to decide guilt or nonguilt in the light of the evidence presented in court. Neither mechanism currently exists for judging candidates for censorship. And the history of censorship suggests that the ALA's concerns about a reliable mechanism for so- cially responsible censorship are well founded [see 2, pp. xix-xlvii; see also references 29-32]. The authors themselves suggest that it is chiefly librarians who should censor and thus determine what gets screened on the Internet [1, p. 488] . This assumes, what is dubious, that librarians have an exper- tise here. Second, it ignores the perils of censorware discussed above, since, again, many of these products do not even permit librarians to determine what does not get through. Instead, they and their users will have to repose faith in the decisions of private companies about which sites or types of sites are "inappropriate," "objectionable," or "un- safe." Conclusion Fricke, Mathiesen, and Fallis have done a fine job of analyzing the Li- brary Bill of Rights and of attempting to uncover their philosophical foundation. They make a credible case that, as stated, the document needs modification. It is perhaps too cavalier in its opposition to most
292 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY forms of censorship, too sweeping in its condemnation of paternalism, although in both cases I have tried to show that the ALA position is not as wide of the mark as the authors would have it. I have tried to show they are wrong to assume that the only justification for a network of public libraries with near universal access and a wide array of materi- als is a rights-based Rawlsian approach: utilitarianism makes at least as strong a case. Finally, they are a bit facile in their claim that the limited paternalism and concomitant censorship that they urge can be achieved without outweighing harms, particularly with regard to In- ternet access. REFERENCES 1. Fricke, Martin; Mathiesen, Kay; and Fallis, Don. "The Ethical Presuppositions behind the Library Bill of Rights." Library Quarterly 29 (October 2000): 468-91. 2. Office for Intellectual Freedom of the American Library Association. Intellectual Freedom Manual. Chicago: American Library Association, 1996. 3. Office for Intellectual Freedom of the American Library Association. "Libraries: An American Value." http://www.ala.org/alaorg/oif/ethics.html (last accessed May 20, 2002). 4. Office for Intellectual Freedom of the American Library Association. "Code of Ethics of the American Library Association." http://www.ala.org/oif/ethics.html (last accessed May 20, 2002). 5. Mill, John Stuart. On Liberty. Edited by David Spitz. New York: Norton, 1975. 6. Brison, Susan J. "The Autonomy Defense of Free Speech." Ethics 108 (January 1998): 312-39. 7. MacKinnon, Catharine A. Only Words. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1993. 8. Smart, J. J. С "Distributive Justice and Utilitarianism." Injustice and Economic Distribution, edited by John Arthur and William H. Shaw, pp. 103-15. Englewood Cliffs, N J.: Prentice Hall, 1978. 9. Dworkin, Ronald. Taking Eights Seriously. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1977. 10. Rawls, John. A Theory of Justice. Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap, 1971. 11. Locke, John. The Second Treatise of Government. Edited by Thomas P. Peardon. New York: MacMillan, 1986. 12. Nozick, Robert. Anarchy, State, and Utopia. New York: Basic Books, 1974. 13. Smart, J. J. C. "An Outline of a System of Utilitarian Ethics." In Utilitarianism: For and Against, edited byj. J. C. Smart and Bernard Williams, pp. 3-74. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1973. 14. Feinberg, Joel. Social Philosophy. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 1973. 15. Heins, Majorie. "Screening Out Sex: Kids, Computers, and the New Censors." American Prospect 39 (July-August 1998): 38-43. 16. Powell, Adam Clayton III. "Children, the Internet, and Free Speech." Media Studies Jour- nalU (Fall 2000): 36-41. 17. Wallich, Paul. "Parental Discretion Advised." Scientific American 277 (August 1997): 38. 18. Westfall, Joseph. "Cybersmut." Business and Society Review 102/103 (Spring 1999): 89- 94.
A CRITICAL DISCUSSION 293 19. Kleiner, Kurt. "But Who Guards the Guards?" New Scientist 153 (March 29, 1997): 50. 20. Kleiner, Kurt. "Watching the Detectives." Mother Jones 25 (July 2000): 22. 21. Peacefire. "Peacefire: Open Access for the Net Generation." http://www.peacefire.org (last accessed May 20, 2002). 22. Marshall, Joshua Micah. "Will Free Speech Get Tangled in the Net?" American Prospect 36 (January-February 1998): 46-50. 23. Kleiner, Kurt. "Anti-porn Firm Silences Net Critic." New Scientist 153 (January 4, 1997): 7. 24. Banks, Michael A. "Filtering the Net in Libraries: The Case (Mostly) in Favor." Computers in Libraries 18 (March 1998): 50-54. 25. Herb, Steven. "Intellectual Freedom and the Academic Library. ' ' College & Research Librar- ies News 60 (November 1999): 841-43. 26. Simpson, Carol. "Why Internet Filtering Doesn't Work." Technology and Learning 20 (April 2000): 48. 27. Beaver, William. "The Dilemma of Internet Pornography. ' ' Business and Society Review 1 05 (Fall 2000): 373-82. 28. Getgood, Susan. "Why Schools Should Use Filtering Software." Technology and Learning 20 (April 2000): 48. 29. Geller, Evelyn. "Intellectual Freedom: Eternal Principle or Unanticipated Conse- quence?" Library Journal 99 (May 15, 1974): 1364-67. 30. Lincove, David A. "Propaganda and the American Public Library from the 1930s to the Eve of World War И." RQ3S (Summer 1994): 510-23. 31. Robbins, Louise S. Censorship and the American Library: The American Library Association's Response to Threats to Intellectual Freedom, 1939-1969. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood, 1996. 32. Wiegand, Wayne. An Active Instrument for Propaganda: The American Public Library during World War I. New York: Greenwood, 1989.