Critical Literacy Performances in Online Literature Discussions Danielle E. Forest University of North Georgia. Email: danielle.forest@ung.edu Sue C. Kimmel Old Dominion University. Email: skimmel@odu.edu In today’s media-laden environment, the ability to read text from a critical literacy perspective is imperative, particularly for librarians who influence children’s reading choices and behaviors. This study examines the critical literacy performances of stu- dents in an online, asynchronous, graduate-level children’s literature course using a qualitative approach to content analysis. The findings indicate that students performed critical literacy in four ways: (1) they unpacked the social identities and norms evident in the books, (2) considered characters and events from multiple viewpoints, (3) inter- rogated issues of power, authority, and agency and (4) analyzed the historical, cultural, and sociopolitical contexts of the books. While the findings reveal critical literacy can be enacted in the context of online courses, students’ critically literate thinking was sometimes limited and superficial, suggesting students’ understanding of critical literacy could be deepened with additional instruction and scaffolding. Keywords: critical literacy, LIS education, online teaching, book discussion, children’s literature Introduction as critically literate thinkers (Harste & Albers, 2012; McLaughlin & DeVoogd, With the ready availability of technol- 2004b; Riley, 2015; Woodcock, 2009). ogy and traditional media, today’s Thus, library educators must take respon- society is more text-rich than it has ever sibility for incorporating critical literacy been, and readers are exposed to a range practices in the preparation and continuing of ideologies, values, and perspectives. education of school and public librarians. While such exposure can broaden read- Critical literacy is a sociocultural prac- ers’ worldviews, the ability to question tice (Janks, 2000) that should engage and evaluate the perspectives in texts is learners in dialogue and collaboration of paramount importance for citizens in a (Freire & Macedo, 1987; Riley, 2015). democratic society (Campano, Ghiso, & Yet engaging students in critical literacy is Sanchez, 2013). A critical literacy stance challenging for library educators instruct- is especially important for librarians who ing online, asynchronous courses because work with children because of the roles possibilities for collaboration can be lim- they play in helping young people develop ited. We wondered how library educators a questioning and critical perspective to- could effectively integrate critical literacy ward texts. While numerous studies sug- into such courses. To explore this idea, we gest children can successfully engage in revised our graduate children’s literature critical literacy, librarians must be knowl- course to include explicit instruction about edgeable about critical literacy before critical literacy and asked online student they can support children’s development discussion groups to consider books from J. of Education for Library and Information Science, Vol. 57, No. 4—(Fall) October 2016 ISSN: 0748-5786 © 2016 Association for Library and Information Science Education 283 doi:10.12783/issn.2328-2967/57/4/3
284 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE a critical literacy perspective. Our analysis familiar and comfortable” (p. 67). When of this endeavor was guided by the follow- readers wear critical literacy “eyeglasses,” ing question: In what ways do graduate they look beyond a text’s face value and students in an online, asynchronous chil- question its purpose and implicit meanings dren’s literature course engage in critical (Luke, 2012; McLaughlin & DeVoogd, literacy during discussions of children’s 2004a). They consider issues such as books? The purpose of our work was two- which groups of people in a text have pow- fold: (1) to consider whether analyzing er, which groups of people are privileged, children’s literature in online discussions and whose perspectives are represented or is a possibility for promoting critically lit- missing (Jones, 2006; Lewison, Flint, & erate thinking in library education courses, Van Sluys, 2002). Additionally, critically and (2) to inform the practices of library literate readers interrogate the complexity educators interested in integrating criti- of problems presented in texts (McLaugh- cal literacy in their children’s literature lin & DeVoogd, 2004b) and make connec- courses. Given critical literacy’s increas- tions and disconnections to texts (Jones, ing significance and the relative absence 2006). Engaging in these practices devel- of studies on critical literacy pedagogy in ops readers into active thinkers and criti- LIS courses (see Albertson & Whitaker, cal text consumers and empowers them to 2011, for one exception), our work comes challenge and re-imagine the text. at an important time. Learning to become literate in this way—critically literate—occurs through Literature Review social practice (Luke & Freebody, 1997). For example, the work of Campano et al. As Gee (1996) and Luke and Freebody (2013), Comber, Thomson, and Wells (1997) have contended, literacy means (2001), and Jones (2006) and others sug- more than the ability to decode a text and gests critical literacy can be fostered in comprehend it at a surface level. Literacy classroom cultures where students are also entails going beyond a text’s literal encouraged to engage socially through meaning and considering its implicit as- collaboration, discussion, and asking sumptions about the world. A text is a questions. This contention—that critical “loaded weapon” (Gee, 1996, p. 39) of literacy can be fostered through social in- its author’s values and beliefs; no text can teraction—undergirds our case for devel- ever be written or read from a neutral posi- oping students’ critical literacy practices tion (Luke & Freebody, 1997). Therefore through participation in book discussions. literacy, as Gee noted, necessarily involves Indeed, book discussions have potential the ability to read the implicit ideologies for developing critical literacy skills with- and values in a text and the author’s pur- in educational settings because they afford poses for producing the text. From the per- spaces for the dialogue and critical inquiry spective of those who advocate for critical (Eeds & Wells, 1989) that can foster a crit- literacy pedagogy, to be literate in today’s ical literacy stance. world means to be critically literate. Online Book Discussion Critical Literacy University educators have employed Though critical literacy can take differ- online book discussions for a variety of ent forms, we describe it here as a ques- purposes (e.g., Bowers-Campbell, 2011). tioning stance that readers assume when Online discussions may be particularly engaged in a text. Jones (2006) likened a conducive to critical literacy because they critical literacy stance to “a pair of eye- can be more democratic than face-to-face glasses that allows one to see beyond the discussions for two reasons. First, they
Opportunities and Challenges for Students in an Online Seminar-Style Course 285 give everyone an equal chance to partici- enrolled in an online master’s level chil- pate, particularly those who are shy or do dren’s literature course entitled Chil- not otherwise participate well in face-to- dren’s Literature across the Curriculum face discussions (Beeghly, 2005; Bowers- (CLATC) in summer 2014. CLATC’s Campbell, 2011; Coffey, 2012). Second, main goal is to familiarize students with they have potential for encouraging dia- the selection and evaluation of literature logue about personal or controversial top- for children. Students in CLATC are typi- ics (Kirk & Orr, 2003), the sort of dialogue cally seeking a master’s degree in educa- that may arise when books are discussed tion and/or certification as a school library through a critical literacy lens. or elementary teacher. In summer 2014, However, there are potential challeng- Danielle (first author) instructed two sec- es to practicing critical literacy in online tions of CLATC; all forty students across settings. Although online discussions can the two sections opted to participate in the make participants feel “safer” about ad- study. dressing controversial topics (Koopman, 2010/11), we wondered if there is also dis- Book Discussions comfort associated with discussing some issues, particularly when one does not In the summer 2014 sections of CLATC, know the social and cultural identities and students read and discussed four books for life experiences of group members. Criti- their literature circles. These books, shown cal literacy can be risky business (Riley, in Table 1, were selected because they are 2015), and we were curious about whether contemporary titles representing a range the absence of face-to-face interaction and of the genres studied in CLATC and are interpersonal relationship-building in our available in low-cost paperback editions. children’s literature course would hinder CLATC students read these titles and students’ willingness to discuss the some- discussed them in groups comprised of times sensitive topics addressed by the 4–5 students. Discussions were struc- books they discussed online. tured according to various roles enacted by students (see Daniels, 2002) to hold Methods them accountable for their participation. For example, the student in the discus- Context and Participants sion director role posed questions to group members and kept the conversation going, This study took place with students while the connector made connections be- Table 1. Literature Circle Books Read in Children’s Literature across the Curriculum. Title Genre Summary Love That Dog (Creech, 2001) Poetry A reluctant student grows in his confidence as a writer and his love for poetry. Lunch Lady and the Cyborg Fantasy Three students learn that their lunch lady Substitute (Krosoczka, 2009) (graphic novel) fights crime during her free time. The Higher Power of Lucky Contemporary A young girl fearing abandonment wishes to (Patron, 2006) realistic fiction gain more control over her life and takes mat- ters in her own hands. One Crazy Summer Historical fiction Three Brooklyn sisters visiting their mother (Williams-Garcia, 2010) in Oakland in the summer of 1968 attend a summer camp run by the Black Panthers.
286 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE tween the book being discussed and other refers to a strand of the chat centered on course readings. Students rotated roles a particular question, topic, or theme. Stu- within their groups throughout the semes- dents began new discussions when they ter. switched topics or posed new questions to The discussions occurred synchronous- consider within the chat. “Utterance” re- ly using the chat function of Blackboard, fers to a statement made by a student dur- CLATC’s course management system. ing a discussion. Sometimes an utterance Students were told each discussion should was a sentence fragment or brief expres- last a minimum of one hour. Groups met sion, but at other times, an utterance con- in a designated chat room set up by the in- sisted of a more complex thought. structor, and students typed questions and Phase 1: Initial Coding. At this phase, responses to one another. Students were we utilized Lewison et al.’s (2002) four asked to “record” their chats, which would dimensions of critical literacy to iden- produce a written transcript of the discus- tify discussions within the transcripts that sion that could be sent to the instructor for demonstrated critical literacy. These four grading. dimensions include the following: During each chat, students responded to questions they prepared and sent to • Disrupting the commonplace, or asking the discussion director in advance. Ad- questions of texts, considering how ditionally, students were asked to discuss language is normative, and analyzing questions designed to promote critically portrayals of people in media. literate thinking about the books. At the • Interrogating multiple views, or con- beginning of the semester, students were sidering multiple perspectives in a text, given critical literacy questions to discuss noticing who is privileged and margin- in their literature circles (see Jones, 2008, alized, and critiquing and reconstruct- p. 58 for the questions given to students). ing dominant discourses. Sample questions included “What kind of • Focusing on sociopolitical issues, or readers might feel like ‘outsiders reading interrogating the power of dominant this book?” and “Does the author/illustra- groups, viewing literacy as a way of tor use his/her power to repeat things that participating in the political process, already happen a lot in books?” (Jones, and using literacy for political goals. 2008, p. 58). Early in the semester, the stu- • Taking action and promoting social dents read an article about critical literacy justice, or using literacy to create a (Lewison et al., 2002) and viewed an on- more equitable world (Lewison et al., line lecture about critical literacy in which 2002, pp. 382–384). Danielle modeled how to deconstruct a children’s text using the critical literacy After we independently coded the tran- questions from Jones (2008). scripts for these four dimensions, we met to talk about our coding. In cases where we Data Collection and Analysis disagreed on how to code a discussion, we referred back to Lewison et al. (2002) and The 36 transcripts resulting from stu- negotiated until we reached agreement. dents’ literature circle chats were the pri- Phase 2: Open Coding. Because we mary data for this study. Transcripts were wanted to understand if students enacted analyzed in five phases using qualitative critical literacy in ways other than those content analysis (Berg, 2001). To clarify identified by Lewison et al. (2002), we the terms we use in our description of our elected to code discussions inductively in analysis, “chat” means the entire conver- this next phase. Using the discussions we sation had by a literature circle group dur- identified in Phase 1, we independently ing the hour-long meeting. “Discussion” labeled utterances in order to uncover nu-
Opportunities and Challenges for Students in an Online Seminar-Style Course 287 ances among students’ ideas. We labeled memos we wrote during/after coding and an utterance with a code that described the research meetings, we co-constructed a utterance’s meaning in order to begin mak- new framework comprised of four themes ing “analytic sense” of the data (Charmaz, that is based on the Lewison et al. (2002) 2014, p. 111). After independently open framework. These four themes are shown coding every utterance, we started the pro- in Table 2. cess of comparing our open coding. Our framework borrows the dimension Phase 3: Comparison Coding. Follow- of “interrogating multiple views” from ing Phase 2, we met to discuss and com- Lewison et al. (2002), although we prefer pare our coding. During our discussion of the term “perspectives” instead of “views.” open codes, we found we did not have out- Additionally, our dimension of “analyzing right disagreements about how we coded historical, economic, social, and political utterances. However, we did encounter contexts” is similar to Lewison et al.’s some differences of interpretation. When dimension of “focusing on sociopolitical we encountered interpretive differences, issues.” Otherwise, the themes within the we explained our reasoning behind our framework are unique and emerged from open coding and negotiated a new open our data, and we feel they best capture the code name. As a result of the comparison “big themes” we noticed in the students’ process, we were in agreement on the open discussions. codes given to every utterance. Phase 5. Final Coding. Once our new Phase 4. Developing Themes. During framework of four themes was created, this phase, we worked independently to we worked independently to categorize all group open codes to create themes or cat- of our open codes from Phase 3 into the egories, and when we finished, we met to new framework. Then, we met to discuss discuss and compare our categorizations. our coding. Although there were many in- After comparing our independent catego- stances of agreement, we encountered in- rizations, discussing the “big themes” we terpretive differences as we did in Phase observed in the data, and reviewing the 3. Again, we talked through our rationale Table 2. Critical Literacy Discussion Themes. Theme Description Unpacking social identities and norms Attending to social identities like race, gender, social class, geography, and religion and stereotypes associated with these identities. Recognizing the norms and expectations associated with social identities and cultural groups. Paying attention to diversity and differences. Interrogating multiple perspectives Considering characters and events from multiple or alternate points of view. Considering who is positioned as an insider (privileged) and who is positioned as an outsider (marginal- ized). Interrogating power relationships and Considering who has power and authority and who lacks agency power or is vulnerable. Considering who has agency and who does not. Analyzing historical, economic, so- Assuming a historical lens or perspective to understand char- cial, and political contexts acters or events. Connecting characters and events to social, cultural, and political forces or contexts. Relating characters and events to “official knowledge” conveyed by media and the school curriculum.
288 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE for categorizing utterances within the new elicited discussions about both male and framework and reconciled interpretive female roles and stereotypes. The hero- differences until 100% consensus was ine of this book is a crime-fighting lunch achieved. Next, we discuss our findings in lady with high-tech gadgets, and students relation to our research question: In what realized this portrayal is different from the ways do graduate students in an online, stereotypical depiction of lunch ladies as asynchronous children’s literature course old, lonely women. For example, Felicity engage in critical literacy during discus- described this stereotype common to lunch sions of children’s books? In this section, ladies and older women more generally: “I we describe each theme within our new can totally relate to thinking older ladies framework with supporting examples. All are cat ladies. It’s a stereotype for women student names are pseudonyms. who look lonely.” The students also ob- served that Lunch Lady reinforced ste- Findings reotypes about gender roles, particularly within school settings as the science and Unpacking Social Identities and Norms math teachers were portrayed as male and the secretaries and lunch ladies are female. In their discussions about the four In fact, stereotypes in Lunch Lady were books, students addressed social identi- so prevalent that Lana wondered “if the ties like gender, social class, and race and author was intentionally trying to make it discussed norms, expectations, and ste- seem appealing to what kids would think reotypes associated with these identities. up of as stereotypes.” Further, students talked about diversity Race. Race was discussed less frequent- among groups of people and observed that ly than gender, and most conversations social and cultural norms are evolving in about race occurred within chats for One contemporary times. Students did not take Crazy Summer, a story of three African- the identities of characters in the books at American sisters who visit Oakland, Cali- face value; they connected these identities fornia in 1968 and gain political aware- to trends and norms within the broader ness through participating in a day camp American culture. run by the Black Panthers. In one scene Gender. Gender received much atten- of the book, the middle sister, Vonetta, is tion in discussion of social identities. Ste- embarrassed by her younger sister Fern’s reotypes related to gender were a particu- habit of carrying around a white baby doll; larly salient theme. In discussions about Vonetta steals the doll and colors it with Love That Dog, students noticed the book permanent marker to give it black skin. initially reinforces the stereotype that, in Although the symbolism of Vonetta’s act Erica’s words, “boys don’t talk about feel- is obvious, only one group discussed this ings and poetry.” Although students dis- scene in terms of racial identity. Natalie cussed the stereotype that boys are not said, “I felt like [Vonetta] became a black “supposed” to express their emotions, par- panther. She excepted [sic] it immediately ticularly through writing poetry, they also and thought Fern needed a black doll.” The recognized that Love That Dog ultimately limited dialogue about this scene made us upends this stereotype. As Lana noted, wonder whether race was a challenging “[Jack] starts off slow to like poetry but topic to address during the literature circle then ends up loving it, shedding the ste- discussions. reotype that only girls can write and enjoy In some instances, students made per- poetry.” sonal connections about racial identity. Conversations about gender were not Natalie asked her group how Hirohito, a confined to stereotypes about males; biracial character, was similar to and dif- Lunch Lady and the Cyborg Substitute ferent from Delphine, the protagonist of
Opportunities and Challenges for Students in an Online Seminar-Style Course 289 One Crazy Summer. This prompted Chris- al. (2002), who named it “interrogating tina to relate to Hirohito: “I am mixed and multiple views.” When students interrogat- really didn’t understand where I belonged ed the books from multiple perspectives, until high school.” In another discus- they considered characters and events sion, Stephanie expressed her frustration from several viewpoints. They examined with the portrayal of the Black Panthers. what kinds of readers might feel like insid- Stephanie said, “I was actually angered at ers or outsiders while reading the books, times during the book being an AA [Afri- discussed people and situations marginal- can American] especially when [the Black ized in American culture, and asked ques- Panthers] wanted the girls to attend the tions about the authors’ choices. riot.” She contended, “just because you are Insiders and outsiders. Many groups that race doesn’t mean you need to believe discussed these questions from Jones what they are down for.” Although most (2008): “What kinds of readers might feel groups skirted discussions about race, the like ‘insiders’ reading this book? What personal connections made by Christina kinds of readers might feel like ‘outsiders’ and Stephanie suggest it was not a difficult reading this book?” (p. 58). Students took or “taboo” topic for them. up these questions to discuss who may or Reinforcing stereotypes. Although may not connect with the books. For ex- students explicitly addressed topics like ample, speaking about Lunch Lady and the stereotypes and norms, sometimes their Cyborg Substitute, Karen commented that comments reinforced stereotypes or sug- “There isn’t really any diversity of char- gested they ascribed to stereotypical acters, so any minority students could feel beliefs. For example, in a conversation excluded.” Students also noted that while about Love That Dog, Bob overgeneral- boys may connect with a book like Love ized with the statement, “Guys always That Dog, which has a male protagonist, think poetry is for girls.” The conversa- girls might feel excluded from this book tions about The Higher Power of Lucky for the same reason. also revealed that students possessed ste- However, the students were sometimes reotypes about social class. In this book, superficial when they talked about insiders Brigitte moves from her native France to and outsiders; they considered the likes/ the tiny desert town of Hard Pan, Califor- dislikes of readers rather than readers’ ex- nia to act as guardian for her ex-husband’s periences and identities. For example, Er- daughter, Lucky. Students did not think ica said “those that like knots” might feel Brigitte would remain in Hard Pan to care like insiders reading The Higher Power for Lucky because “She’s too high class” of Lucky, which includes a character who (Amanda), “definitely too classy for Hard ties knots for a hobby. Elizabeth suggest- Pan” (Felicity), and “fancy compared to ed that “some kids who don’t have pets” the other adults” (Julie). This conversation might feel like outsiders reading Love That suggests students may believe “high class” Dog, and several students mentioned that people would not belong in a small town. homeschooled students would feel discon- Although students were sometimes critical nected to the school setting and characters in their discussions about social identities, in Lunch Lady and the Cyborg Substitute. they did not always examine their own Invisible or silenced voices. Students assumptions about topics like gender and realized that some of the books gave at- class. tention to people or situations often miss- ing or less visible in children’s literature or Interrogating Multiple Perspectives in American culture more broadly. When Natalie asked, “What do you think was the This dimension of our critical literacy reason the author chose for the mother to framework is borrowed from Lewison et leave her children rather than the father
290 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE in the story?” about One Crazy Summer, Black Panthers as a community-oriented, she is referring to the fact that the mother kid-friendly group.” Students understood leaves her husband and young children. that viewing characters from multiple Christina observed, “It is something that perspectives could broaden their own per- happens that gets overlooked” indicat- spectives about other people. ing her awareness that abandonment by fathers is more common than abandon- Interrogating Power Relationships and ment by mothers, and One Crazy Sum- Agency mer interrupts this narrative. Lunch Lady and the Cyborg Substitute also provoked Within this theme, students exercised discussion about people who receive little agency by challenging and questioning the attention socially, particularly in school authors of the books. They also examined settings. Stacy commented that “No one issues of power within the books, includ- really pays attention to lunch ladies or cus- ing how power is advanced or constrained todians” and felt the book called attention by social identities and cultural expecta- to these less visible groups: “I sort of feel tions. Additionally, they recognized that like the author wanted school staff that are language is a form of power, especially the underappreciated to get noticed.” power of names and naming. Considering characters’ perspectives. Challenging the author. Students often Often, students assumed the perspectives questioned or challenged the author, exer- of characters, attempting to understand cising their own power to imagine other the reasons why some characters behaved actions or identities for the characters. as they did. One particularly controver- They queried each other about the author’s sial character was Cecile, the mother who purpose and in particular the intended au- abandoned her three daughters in One dience for a book. They recognized occa- Crazy Summer. Many students expressed sions when the author exercised power to anger over Cecile’s cold treatment of her deliver a message for educators as well as children. Despite their feelings, students students. As Marianne said in discussion tried to understand the reasons for Cecile’s about One Crazy Summer, “I think the au- actions, as Jane did: “Maybe something in thor wanted to show that children have a her past caused her to live her life as she voice too.” did.” Likewise, Angela attributed Cecile’s Defining power and agency. Occasion- perceived deficits as a mother to forces out ally, students directly interrogated the of her control: “She was doomed from the meaning of power. In both One Crazy start . . . she didn’t feel the girls were ever Summer and Lunch Lady, students talked hers.” Although some students were judg- about people in authority such as the po- mental about characters’ actions, especial- lice and their relationships with African ly Cecile’s, many of them considered that Americans or the power of school authori- characters had reasons for their behavior, ties including teachers and school boards. even if they remained unknown to readers. Amanda recollected that when Pa, an Af- In recognizing that people are multi-di- rican American man, and his daughters mensional, the students also realized that were stopped by the police in One Crazy books make it possible to alter perspec- Summer, Pa later shrugs off the incident tives about people. For instance, Brooke as “‘you know, the usual.’” Here, Aman- noted, “Maybe kids would view their da seems to suggest that interactions be- lunch ladies a little different after reading tween law-abiding African Americans and [Lunch Lady].” Debbie stated that One the police, a group of people with much Crazy Summer changed her opinion about power, may have been a commonplace the Black Panthers, a group often associat- occurrence in the 1960s. Several discus- ed with violence: “I had never heard of the sions surrounded the agency of characters
Opportunities and Challenges for Students in an Online Seminar-Style Course 291 including children to take power for defin- mother, “I think Cecile’s life was chosen ing their own lives. The Higher Power of for her—from the time period and her cir- Lucky provoked comments such as this cumstances.” They also saw the historical one from Rachel: “it’s about learning from nature of social norms, noticing differ- your past and knowing that the people in ences between contemporary and histori- your life that may have hurt you don’t cal attitudes about gender, race, and par- need to be the center of your life. If they enting. Jack pushed further to understand aren’t good people (like maybe her dad), the actions of Cecile through a historical you don’t have to let them define you.” lens: “Whites did not consider slave fami- Power and social identities and norms. lies important and were usually splitting Students talked about the pressure of so- parents and kids. This notion of a tradi- cial norms and interrogated relationships tional family is a difficult topic in Afri- of power to gender and class identities. can American history. I see that Cecile is For instance, they viewed the mothers in questioning the need for families.” How- both The Higher Power of Lucky and One ever, sometimes students did not view the Crazy Summer as disempowered by the books through a historical lens even when expectations of gender. As Stacy remarked it was merited. As mentioned previously, about the mother in One Crazy Summer, some students argued Cecile should have “Her mom died early, her aunt used her as never had children; they did not recognize a maid, and she felt trapped with her kids.” the limited availability of birth control in In the Lunch Lady and the Cyborg Sub- the book’s 1968 setting or the widespread stitute, students perceived Lunch Lady’s expectation that women should become class and gender identities as an advantage wives and mothers. and even a special power as Lucy sug- Media messages. Lunch Lady and the gested: “Yes and like a lot of superheroes, Cyborg Substitute also provoked some she wasn’t super wealthy or powerful. She conversation about media’s power to per- was a lunch lady.” Lunch Lady’s status as petuate stereotypes until they become part a less visible figure in the school setting of the cultural milieu, such as negative afforded her the power to fight crime while portrayals of school lunch ladies. Penel- protecting unsuspecting children from the ope observed, “Most of these stereotypes evils in their world. are from TV, not real life.” The media also received attention in discussions of Analyzing Historical, Economic, Social, One Crazy Summer. Students observed and Political Contexts the portrayal of the Black Panthers in the book was much more positive than in the Within this theme, students made con- mainstream media, as Angela noted, “The nections between the books and U.S. so- BPP was always portrayed as angry, gun- ciety past and present. At times, students slingers. The news never reported that considered the books through a histori- they served lunch, educated people about cal lens, evaluating characters and events their rights as citizens, and gave back to from the perspective of a particular time their community in a positive way.” This period. Further, they investigated the ways discussion led students such as Debbie in which media messages influence the to question other things they learned in social and political context of the United school, “Yea, but we were all taught Chris- States. topher Columbus was a good guy until we A historical lens. Students talked about were old enough to find out for ourselves.” race and gender as socially and histori- cally situated in the historical fiction se- Discussion lection, One Crazy Summer. As Casey noted about Cecile, the African American This study explored how graduate stu-
292 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE dents in a children’s literature course per- chats were student led and driven by stu- formed critical literacy within online book dent questions, we wondered about ways discussions. Our goals in undertaking this to inject critical questions and reflection research were to explore the potential of into all chats perhaps with instructor cre- online book discussions for developing a ated prompts for the chats or as follow-up. critical literacy stance and to inform other Further, in analyzing students’ chats, educators interested in promoting criti- we were struck by how readily students cal literacy. We found that online discus- discussed issues related to gender, partic- sions can indeed facilitate the reading of ularly in relation to Love That Dog, One children’s literature from a critical literacy Crazy Summer, and Lunch Lady, and how perspective: Students in our study paid wary students seemed about discussing attention to social identities like gender; race although it was a major theme in One considered characters and events from Crazy Summer. Even though discussions different perspectives; examined issues about social identities were invited in this of power, authority, and agency; and ana- course, we wondered if race was still an lyzed characters and events within social, uncomfortable topic for many students; political, and historical contexts. These we also noticed that social class received performances are consistent with the per- limited attention despite the context of spective of critical literacy that we have poverty in The Higher Power of Lucky. elucidated; they are also consistent with While we can only speculate on the rea- Gee’s (1996) belief that literacy entails sons why race and class were rarely dis- going beyond a text’s literal meaning and cussed, we do suspect that gender may reading its implicit meanings and values. have been a more comfortable topic be- We conclude that online discussions of cause traditionally, most students in the children’s literature can be vehicles for school library and teacher education pro- promoting and developing a critical lit- grams are women, and perhaps discussing eracy stance. gender roles and stereotypes felt “safe” or However, while many students in our were more relatable to the life histories of study demonstrated their understanding participants. Our observations about race of reading from a critical literacy perspec- and class suggest that even though online tive, as instructors, we recognized sev- spaces may be conducive to discussing eral missed opportunities for more critical sensitive topics (Kirk & Orr, 2003), they conversations. For example, few students are not necessarily conducive to discuss- discussed the social and historical impli- ing particularly sensitive or personal top- cations of a scene in One Crazy Summer ics. in which a character colors a white baby Another consideration for engaging stu- doll with black marker. Though one stu- dents further in critical literacy could be to dent noted this act signified the character’s have asynchronous discussions rather than solidarity with the Black Panthers, stu- real-time chats. Research suggests that dents did not otherwise critically engage asynchronous discussions, which provide with this significant event. We hoped stu- students ample time to formulate ideas, dents would question the lack of choices are more conducive to reflective thinking available to a young black girl in 1968 and (Beeghly, 2005; Larson, 2009). Since re- how this connects to racial relationships flection and deep engagement with texts and tensions in the 1960s. In some chats, are necessary for understanding through students provided superficial responses a critical literacy lens, asynchronous dis- when critical literacy questions were dis- cussions may be better suited to discus- cussed or seemed to disregard how their sions when the emphasis is on critically own assumptions and values influenced literate thinking. In the synchronous chats, their perceptions of the books. Since the students often mentioned the difficulty of
Opportunities and Challenges for Students in an Online Seminar-Style Course 293 keeping up with the chat’s fast pace. How- study suggests directions for additional ever, we are reluctant to give up synchro- research about critical literacy and how nous chats entirely as our students appre- a critical literacy stance can be fostered ciate the opportunity to interact with each among youth services librarians. More- other in real time, an important experience over, we hope it provides ideas for library in an online class in which students cannot educators who wish to meaningfully in- see or meet their peers. A hybrid discussion tegrate critical literacy in their courses. is one solution; students could have the In our world of readily available print and synchronous chats as usual and follow up digital text, critical literacy should be at the by posting additional ideas and responses forefront of our research and our teaching. on an asynchronous discussion board. In- structors could also utilize the follow up to References provide probes for further discussion. This hybrid model may give students increased Albertson, D., & Whitaker, M.S. (2011). A service- opportunities for extending their thinking learning framework to support an MLIS core cur- about the books, especially from a critical riculum. Journal of Education for Library and Information Science, 52(2), 152–163. literacy stance. Beeghly, D.H. (2005). It’s about time: Using elec- tronic literature discussion groups with adult Limitations and Future Research learners. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 49(1), 12–21. Although our findings suggest the po- Berg, B. (2001). Qualitative research methods for tential of developing a critical literacy the social sciences (4th ed.). Boston: Allyn & perspective through online discussions, Bacon. our study is not without limitations. First, Bowers-Campbell, J. (2011). Take it out of class: Exploring virtual literature circles. Journal of although students were assigned to view Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 54(8), 557–567. Danielle’s critical literacy lecture and read Campano, G., Ghiso, M.P., & Sanchez, L. (2013). an article about critical literacy (Lewison “Nobody knows the . . . amount of a person”: et al., 2002) during the first week of class, Elementary students critiquing dehumanization we did not know if all students actually through organic critical literacies. Research in the completed these tasks. Perhaps having an Teaching of English, 48(1), 98–125. assessment to gauge students’ knowledge Charmaz, K. (2014). Constructing grounded theory (2nd ed.). Los Angeles: SAGE. of critical literacy after viewing the lec- Coffey, G. (2012). Literacy and technology: Inte- ture and reading the article would ensure grating technology with small group, peer-led that students had a basic understanding discussions of literature. International Electronic of critical literacy before beginning their Journal of Elementary Education, 4(2), 395–405. literature circle discussions. Second, we Comber, B., Thomson, P., & Wells, M. (2001). could not be sure if students even read the Critical literacy finds a “place”: Writing and assigned books; although some students’ social action in a low-income Australian grade 2/3 classroom. The Elementary School Journal, in-depth responses clearly indicated they 101(4), 451–464. had read the books, other students said lit- Creech, S. (2001). Love that dog. New York: Harp- tle during discussions or made superficial erCollins Children’s Books. remarks. Some students’ limited engage- Daniels, H. (2002). Literature circles: Voice and ment with critical literacy could have been choice in book clubs and reading groups (2nd a function of their failure to read what was ed.). Portland, ME: Stenhouse Publishers. assigned. Finally, although many students Eeds, M., & Wells, D. (1989). Grand conversations: demonstrated their understanding of criti- An exploration of meaning construction in litera- cal literacy, we do not know whether this ture study. Research in the Teaching of English, 23(1), 4–29. understanding translated into their work with children. Freire, P. (1970/2000). Pedagogy of the oppressed. (M.B. Ramos, Trans.). New York: It is our hope that our learning from this Continuum.
294 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE Freire, P., & Macedo, D. (1987). Literacy: Reading level theory of the changing nature of literacy, the word and the world. South Hadley, MA: Ber- instruction, and assessment. In D.E. Alvermann, gin & Garvey Publishers. N.J. Unrau, & R.B. Ruddell (Eds.), Theoretical Gee, J.P. (1996). Social linguistics and literacies models and processes of reading (6th ed.; pp. (2nd ed.). New York: Routledge Falmer. 1150–1181). Newark, DE: International Reading Harste, J.C., & Albers, P. (2012). “I’m riskin’ it”: Association. Teachers take on consumerism. Journal of Ado- Lewison, M., Flint, A.S., & Van Sluys, K. (2002). lescent & Adult Literacy, 56(5), 381–390. Taking on critical literacy: The journey of new- Janks, H. (2000). Domination, access, diversity and comers and novices. Language Arts, 79(5), 382– design: A synthesis for critical literacy education. 392. Educational Review, 52(2), 175–186. Luke, A. (2012). Critical literacy: Foundational Jones, S. (2006). Girls, social class & literacy: notes. Theory into Practice, 51(1), 4–11. What teachers can do to make a difference. Ports- McLaughlin, M., & DeVoogd, G.L. (2004a). Criti- mouth, NH: Heinemann. cal literacy: Enhancing students’ comprehension Jones, S. (2008). Grass houses: Representations and of text. New York: Scholastic. reinventions of social class through children’s lit- McLaughlin, M., & DeVoogd, G.L. (2004b). Criti- erature. Journal of Language and Literacy Edu- cal literacy as comprehension: Expanding reader cation, 4(2), 40–58. Retrieved from http://jolle. response. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Litera- coe.uga.edu/wpcontent/uploads/?2013/03/repre- cy, 48(1), 52–62. sentations.pdf Patron, S. (2006). The higher power of Lucky. New Kirk, J.J., & Orr, R.L. (2003). A primer on the ef- York: Atheneum Books. fective use of threaded discussion forums. (ERIC Riley, K. (2015). Enacting critical literacy in Eng- Document Reproduction Service No. ED472738). lish classrooms: How a teacher learning commu- Retrieved from http://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED472738 nity supported critical inquiry. Journal of Adoles- Koopman, B. L. (2010/2011). From Socrates to wi- cent & Adult Literacy, 58(5), 417–425. kis: Using online forums to deepen discussions. Williams-Garcia, R. (2010). One crazy summer. Phi Delta Kappan, 92(4), 24–27. New York: Amistad. Krosoczka, J.J. (2009). Lunch lady and the cyborg Woodcock, C. (2009). Fight the dragons: Using substitute. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. online discussion to promote critical literacy in Leu, D.J., Kinzer, C.K., Coiro, J., Castek, J., & teacher education. Contemporary Issues in Tech- Henry, L.A. (2013). New literacies: A dual- nology and Teacher Education, 9(2), 95–116.