THE SATURDAY EVENING GIRLS: A PROGRESSIVE ERA LIBRARY CLUB AND THE INTELLECTUAL LIFE OF WORKING CLASS AND IMMIGRANT GIRLS IN TURN-OF-THE-CENTURY BOSTON' Kate Clifford Larson2 Originally established in 1899 to provide intellectual and social stimulation on Saturday evenings to poor, young Jewish and Italian working women and girls living in the North End of Boston, the Saturday Evening Girls' Club successfully expanded into seven additional library clubs over the next twenty years. By the 1910s, the clubs were supporting approximately 250 members, publishing a newspaper called the S.E.G. News, and operating an acclaimed art pottery, the Paul Revere Pottery. Under the tutelage of Edith Guerrier, a librarian, her partner Edith Brown, an artist, and Helen Osborne Storrow, their financial patron, the clubs' meetings focused on weekly dis- cussions of literature, economics, politics, music, art, and employment op- portunities. Participation in these clubs enabled some of the members to pursue higher education at a significantly greater rate than their cohort, and indeed even that of native-born white women of the time period. Using rarely available primary documents, I examine the role clubs and social re- form organizations played in advancing educational and economic agendas, and provide a rare look at the intellectual life of immigrant and working- class women. Introduction When Dora Cohen stole out of the house on Friday evenings, she did so in direct defiance of her father. A devoted member of the Friday Evening Girls' Club, ajunior group of the Saturday Evening Girls' Club 1. This article includes selections from my book in progress, The Saturday Evening Girls: Train- ingfor the Head, Heart, and Hand in Tun-of-the-Century Boston. See also Kate Clifford Larson. "The Saturday Evening Girls: A Social Experiment in Class Bridging and Cross Cultural Female Dominion Building in Turn-of-the-Century Boston." Master's Thesis, Simmons Col- lege, 1995. Currendy, the author is working on her dissertation, "Asanti Daughter of Zion: The Life and Memory of Harriet Tubman." 2. Ph.D. candidate, University of New Hampshire, Department of History, 20 College Road, Durham, New Hampshire, 03824-3586. Telephone 781-756-1930; E-mail kclhopper@unh. edu. [Library Quarterly, vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 195-230] ? 2001 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-2519/2001 /7102-0005$02.00 195
196 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY in Boston's crowded, immigrant North End of the early 1900s, Dora would later recall, "I had to be one step ahead of my father to get out on the Sabbath, but to me it was worth it" [1, p. 10]i. Dora was not unlike many of the other young women who belonged to the Saturday Evening Girls' Club (S.E.G.) and associated library clubs, who often had to hide their books and deceive their parents in order to partici- pate. The Saturday Evening Girls' Club had been established in 1899 through the combined efforts of three women: Edith Guerrier (a librar- ian), her lifelong partner, Edith Brown (an artist), and their upper- class patron, Helen Osborne Storrow. Frustrated by the lack of oppor- tunities for the educational, economic, and social advancement of immigrant and working-class women, Guerrier conceived of a "library club" program to provide educational, cultural, and social resources for the growing numbers of poor, young Jewish and Italian women living in the North End of Boston. Held on Saturday evenings to accommodate young women who worked during the week, the Saturday Evening Girls' Story Hour was originally conducted at the North Bennet Street Industrial School (NBSIS), a charitable institution dedicated to providing social services, industrial and vocational training, and Americanization programs to immigrants in the North End. This story hour soon developed and ex- panded into eight library clubs, identified by the day and the time of day on which they met, each holding meetings for young women of different age groups. For almost twenty years, the Saturday Evening Girls and the other library clubs met weekly to discuss literature, eco- nomics, politics, music, art, and employment opportunities. At their peak in the mid-1910s, the clubs supported approximately 250 mem- bers, published a newspaper called the S.E.G. News, operated the Paul Revere Pottery, and struggled to improve their community and their own lives through education, economic opportunity, and indepen- dence. The Saturday Evening Girls' Club and its associated library clubs provide a rare opportunity to examine the intellectual life of immigrant and working-class women and the role of clubs and social reform orga- nizations in advancing educational agendas and providing intellectual stimulation. The Saturday Evening Girls and their mentors left behind a rare sam- pling of primary material, most notably the S.E. G. Newvs, which docu- ments their experiences in the club and their lives in the North End. Combined with oral histories conducted with surviving S.E.G.s during the mid-1970s, and subsequent interviews conducted with descendants 3. The Friday Evening Girls' Clubwas the second club fashioned after the Saturday Evening Girls' Club. At age twenty, members of this club were inducted into the Saturday Evening Girls' Club.
THE SATURDAY EVENING GIRLS 197 FIG. 1.-Group photo of Saturday Evening Girls and other library club members, in the basement of North Bennet Street Industrial School, circa 1914 (courtesy of Mildred Adelson). and other relatives and friends of the S.E.G.s in the mid-1990s, these materials offer a remarkably consistent view of the important role that intellectual stimulation and opportunity played in the lives of these young women and girls. The library clubs, according to Fanny Goldstein, a Saturday Evening Girl who later went on to become the librarian of the West End Branch Library in Boston, 4 " offered a happy refuge and contrast. Here the doors of America literally opened up for them. They sought refuge from growing pains. They sought compatibil- ity and understanding and companionship. They groped for the oppor- tunity which America offered, without knowing and without under- standing. Thus they drifted into the Library, fortunately.., the Library offered a social haven. It was one of those psychological moments. A trinity of forces and elements-the need, the opportunity, the leader" (see fig. 1) [2, p. 22]. 4. Goldstein became the Branch Librarian of the West End in Boston in 1922. In 1925 she founded "Jewish Book Week in America," which eventually became "Jewish Book Month." Her collection of Judaica manuscript materials is located at the Boston Public Library. Goldstein remained branch librarian at the West End Library until her retirement in 1958.
198 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY There has been much scholarship in the past fifteen years on the life experiences of immigrant women that focuses on the intractability of their experience in urban communities during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.5 Limiting the discussion of contact with American culture to work, labor activism, or the streets, historians have written little about clubs and organizations, particularly those con- ducted at the many settlement houses and community organizations across the country, which catered to the intellectual lives of immigrants, the working class, and their children. This is partly because of the ab- sence of archival material that reflects the voices of nonelite women and girls. Karen J. Blair's work on the women's club movement [7] focuses almost exclusively on middle-class women's clubs, while Pris- cilla Murolo's recent scholarship on working girls' clubs [8] focuses primarily on postadolescent women and labor activism. Anne Ruggles Gere [9] offers a new look at women's club activities through a nu- anced analysis of the textual practices employed in a variety of club settings, including those of elite, working-class, immigrant, and minor- ity women. On the other hand, Kathy Peiss [10], and to a lesser degree, Elizabeth Ewen [6] both focus on dance halls, movies, and the streets as a major source of recreation for immigrant and working-class women and girls. Participation in the library clubs was a significant alternative to those leisure attractions. The clubs were a important venue for intel- lectual, social, professional, and economic advancement. Like the later Bryn Mawr Summer School for Women Workers (1921-38) and other worker education programs, education empowered and emboldened many working-class and immigrant women beyond society's expecta- tions. Research into alternative programs like the Saturday Evening Girls offer scholars the opportunity to reexamine the lives of immigrant and working-class women and girls and their intellectual aspirations. The S.E.G.s were overwhelmingly native born of immigrant parents, who often arrived in the late 1880s and early 1890s, though a significant number of S.E.G.s had older, foreign-born siblings.6 Many of the S.E.G.s ultimately became middle-class housewives, a status that repre- sented an enormous improvement over their mothers' lives. But the richness of their experience in the library clubs also enabled some of the S.E.G.s to pursue higher education and professional careers. Many 5. For a discussion of this phenomenon, see [3-6]. 6. The 1910 United States Census of Population for the North and West Ends of Boston has been examined to compile data on the S.E.G.s and their parents and family members. Of the sixty-five young women located in the census, 77 percent were native and born to immi- grant parents. They were overwhelmingly Russian Jews, at 78.5 percent, followed by 18.5 percent who were of Italian heritage. Over 90 percent of the S.E.G.'s parents were foreign born [11]. See also [1] for individual biographies of some of the women.
THE SATURDAY EVENING GIRLS 199 of the Saturday Evening Girls went on to inspire and educate others through civic service, social service careers, teaching, the arts, and phi- lanthropy. They became librarians, office and clerical workers, social workers, teachers, saleswomen, business owners, musicians, and artists. When the Saturday Evening Girls published a supplement to the S.E. G. News for a reunion in 1954, the women had been meeting formally and informally for fifty-five years. Many of them had become grandmothers, and in the bulletin they shared their memories and thoughts. This S.E. G. News supplement, the Cherry Tree Edition, included essays and biographical information from forty-three S.E.G.s [1]. Of the thirty- seven women who reported educational data for themselves, thirty-one, or 72 percent, graduated from at least high school. Twenty, or 54 per- cent of that group, took additional courses at colleges, universities, and other professional schools, including seven, or 19 percent, who gradua- ted from college. These women went to schools such as Simmons, Rad- cliffe, Harvard, Boston University, the Boston Conservatory, the New England Conservatory, the Museum School of Art, the Massachusetts Normal Art School, Boston Normal, and others. Only six, or 16 per- cent, reported graduating from grammar school and immediately go- ing to work in a family business or factory [1] .7 This initial small sam- pling surpassed the expectations for higher education for women at the time (1900-20s). From 1900 to 1920, the percentage of all women eighteen to twenty-one years of age attending college rose from 2.8 percent to 7.6 percent [12, pp. 63-64]. At 54 percent, the level of post- high school education for the S.E.G.s in this sample was far greater than what was found in the general population. For most immigrant families in the late nineteenth and early twenti- eth centuries, including those children who were native born of foreign-born parents, grammar school education was the norm. Ac- cording toJerry A. Jacobs and Margaret E. Greene's analysis of the 1910 U.S. census [13], immigrant teenagers were less likely to be enrolled in school after the age of fourteen, though younger children experienced school attendance at the same rate as native whites. Employment op- tions after the age of fourteen altered the decision to stay in school. Parental literacy, foreign birth, the ability to speak English, and paren- tal occupation also played a role in the persistence of education for children. "High school attendance remained low and high school com- 7. Thirty-two of the respondents reported having a total of sixty-seven children. Twenty-four of these S.E.G.s reported educational data for their children, for a total of fifty-two children, forty-seven of whom, or 90 percent, were enrolled in, or graduated (or assumed) from, college or other post-high school vocational or professional institutions. Their children became doctors, lawyers, librarians, artists, teachers, and more. See also [1].
200 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY pletion remained exceptional in 1910" [13, pp. 212-13]. According to Jacobs and Greene, enrollment by native whites in the ten-thirteen year-old group was 92.9 percent; byJews, 95.5 percent; and by Italians, 91.5 percent. In the following age group, fourteen-eighteen year-olds, typical high school ages, enrollment figures plunge dramatically to 59.1 percent for native whites, 47.4 percent for Jews, and 30.5 percent for Italians [13, p. 226]. Contrary to Jacobs and Greene's study, however, the situation in Boston may have been markedly different. According to a study conducted by the school committee in Boston in 1907, the percentage of all students completing elementary school was 50.3 per- cent, with 31.3 percent entering high school and only 11.5 percent completing a three-year course in high school [14, p. 38]. Though the study does not break down its sample by ethnic group, it is in this light then, that the S.E.G.'s successes can be seen as extraordinary.8 Progressive Era Boston By the middle of the nineteenth century, the North End of Boston had become an elaborate community of immigrants and working poor whose interests and needs varied greatly. Long a settlement site for immigrants, it was a densely populated area of approximately one hun- dred acres, of which only 70 percent was used for housing. Of the total residents of the North End in 1860, approximately fourteen thousand were Irish, with the remaining twelve thousand predominantly Anglo- Saxon, and a few hundred Jews, Italians, Portuguese, and Greeks [16, pp. 21-22]. The 1880s brought a new tide of immigration to the United States. Political, economic, and natural disasters in Italy, combined with economic and political pogroms in Russia and other Eastern European countries, resulted in mass migrations out of those areas to America. By 1895, the North End was crowded with mostly eastern European Jews and southern Italians. The majority of Irish and Anglo-Saxons had left the community for other neighborhoods in the Boston area, leav- ing the crowded tenements for the newer and poorer immigrants. Considered a neighborhood in itself by outsiders, those living within the community recognized that the North End was actually made up of several neighborhoods, all defined by racial, ethnic, regional, and religious identities. Of the approximately 23,800 residents of the North End in 1895, 32 percent were of Italian heritage, 28 percent Irish 8. The S.E.G.s represented a significant number of the graduates of the local girls' grammar school (Hancock) in the years 1902 through 1907 [15]. For graduation statistics of these years, please see table Al in the appendix.
THE SATURDAY EVENING GIRLS 201 (down from 61.5 percent fifteen years earlier), 26 percent Jewish, 5 percent Anglo, and 3.7 percent Portuguese. By 1900, the population of the North End had grown to 28,000, with Italians representing over 60 percent of the population. In 1920 the population had burgeoned to 40,000, 95 percent of whom were Italian. By then, the Jews, Irish, Portuguese, and other ethnic groups had moved out of the North End into other areas of Boston, including the West End, Roxbury, Dorches- ter, and Hyde Park [16, pp. 22-24].9 The consequences of unrestricted immigration in the late nine- teenth century into New England were manifold. Racial and ethnic groups crowded together in tenement neighborhoods where poverty was pervasive, and where immigrants were unfamiliar with the English language and unsure of American social and cultural customs and ex- pectations. Divided by race, class, language, and religion, many immi- grants kept within their own ethnic and racial spheres, separated by a street corner from another ethnic enclave. Residential segregation was a fact of life in the North End, with Italian families dominating certain streets, while Russian Jews dominated others, with some multiethnic border streets sprinkled about. Salem Street was one such street, popu- lated byJews and Italians, while Stillman Street housed mostlyJews and Hull Street mostly Italians. In 1910, at least thirty S.E.G.s lived on Salem Street alone, including four S.E.G. families who lived in an apartment building at 155 Salem Street [11]. Old, dilapidated housing, over- crowding, and inadequate sanitary conditions helped spread disease and ill health among families. Francis Rocchi, an S.E.G. who went on to run several businesses of her own in Portland, Oregon, lived on North Bennet Street, "in four crowded rooms with beds in every room, toilet in the cellar and plenty of bugs-a constant battle" [1, p. 23]. According to S.E.G. Sylvia Bacchini, the arrival in Boston from Eu- rope was a confusing, frightening and at times, a dangerous experi- ence: "It would be difficult to describe in detail a picture of the people pushing each other at the gang-plank to land in this promised land of health, wealth and prosperity" [17, p. 2]. The lengthy detention pro- cess and the examination of luggage and papers were just the begin- ning of the immigrants' reception in the land of opportunity. Trouble lurked for the "unwary 'Greenhorn,' " and, in particular, unsuspecting young girls, whom "kind gentlemen" sought to help. "If the girl knows the world, he may be told to attend to his own affairs, but on the other hand, simple and trusting aliens are often sadly misled" [17, p. 3]. 9. The advent of the railway and subway system in Boston enabled the growth of suburbs in Boston, as people could live outside the center of the city and still commute to jobs within the city.
202 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY A sense of urgency about the rampant overcrowding of the schools in eastern Massachusetts, resulting from the tremendous influx of im- migrants, was palpable during the last quarter of the nineteenth cen- tury and the first two decades of the twentieth. Heavily burdened with thousands of young immigrant children, speaking dozens of languages from eastern and southern Europe, educators scrambled to accommo- date and teach them. In horribly overcrowded schools, children strug- gled to learn English and the basics of compulsory elementary educa- tion. Boston schools suffered severe space shortages from the 1880s through 1910, creating unacceptable situations where children were turned away because of a lack of facilities [18, pp. 11-12]. Significant language barriers, poorly educated parents, and economic need also forced many children out of public schools and into the labor force prematurely. The reformers of the Progressive Era recognized the perils of over- crowded neighborhoods and the stress placed on cities and their resi- dents, both native born and immigrant. Through private and public programs and institutions, they sought to devise comprehensive ways of dealing with the many issues, needs, and problems of industrializa- tion and the economic destabilization of the inner cities. Typically, however, many reformers also viewed immigrants' poverty as a function of their traditions, customs, and culture. By teaching American customs and ways of living, they believed immigrants would soon find financial security and improve their quality of life [19, pp. 131-32]. Organiza- tions such as NBSIS sponsored many "Americanization" programs in their own facilities and public schools.'0 Viewed as agents of socializa- tion, these programs were also a means of promoting conformity to white Protestant middle-class values. It is clear that as the young S.E.G.s were pursuing intellectual stimula- tion, they were becoming Americanized. But the processes were com- plex and at times contradictory. According to Milton Gordon in Assimi- lation in American Life [20], in the late nineteenth century and early twentieth (before World War I) Americanization programs were mod- erate enough so that they showed some respect for immigrant culture. Throughout the period, however, there "were more prosaic instrumen- tal programs of instruction in the use of the English language, elemen- tary American history, the nature of American government, and so on" [20, pp. 100-101] that ultimately meant the abandonment of these connections to the immigrants' place of origin. Programs throughout 10. These programs often included classes in English and citizenship, where immigrants were taught the basics of American history, the principles of a democratic government, and civic responsibilities.
THE SATURDAY EVENING GIRLS 203 the city of Boston during this time period were no different. The NBSIS was, in some ways, particularly sensitive to the cultural sensibilities of its neighbors because of the large number of individual ethnic groups living within the area. Yet, their ultimate goal was economic, political, and educational-vocational assimilation. Although aware of the "pro- cess of American assimilation" in their lives, some S.E.G.s believed that they had "retained [their] originality and racial traditions," in addi- tion to white middle-class values and expectations [21, p. 2]. North Bennet Street Industrial School (NBSIS) and Educational Reform It was during this time period that NBSIS developed and refined a vari- ety of manual and industrial training programs to augment the public school programs in the city. Founded by Pauline Agassiz Shaw in the early 1880s, NBSIS represented a new trend in the development, use, and ideology of industrial and manual training during the late nine- teenth century."1 In 1880, Shaw had been asked by the Associated Chari- ties of Boston to open a kindergarten and nursery school at the North End Industrial Home, a charitable organization established for the benefit of the North End's immigrants, at 39 North Bennet Street. In- fluenced by Elizabeth Peabody, Mary Garland, and Rebecca Weston, Shaw had already opened two kindergartens in 1877, one in Jamaica Plain and one in Brookline."2 The Home provided classes in sewing and laundry to help poor women, particularly "widows, wives with sick husbands, and deserted wives" [23], learn necessary skills to earn extra income through piecework paid for by the Home. By 1881, Shaw main- tained control of programming at the Home, expanding and changing its vision to helping not only poor women but their children and hus- bands as well. Under the direction of Mary Hemenway, the Boston Cooking School opened a branch in the building. A workroom was outfitted in the basement for carpentry classes for boys, and a print shop, library, and a "kitchen garden, where young girls twelve to fifteen are instructed in housework," were also established [23]. By 1883 the laundry and piecework were discontinued in favor of more expanded manual training programs in woodworking, printing, clay modeling, 11. Pauline Agassiz Shaw was the daughter of the famous nineteenth-century naturalist, Louis Agassiz, and the stepdaughter of Elizabeth Cary Agassiz, founder of Radcliffe College for women, in Cambridge, Massachusetts. For more information on Shaw and her family, see [22]. 12. These women were pioneers in the kindergarten movement in the United States and founders of the Garland School for training kindergarten teachers in Boston.
204 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY and leatherwork. By 1885, Shaw's management of NBSIS allowed the Associated Charities to quietly relinquish control of all programming. By the turn of the century, Shaw's secular approach was instrumental in NBSIS's ability to reach into the community and offer its services to the many different cultures and religious groups living there."3 Soon, courses were developed in cooperation with local private and public schools in Boston. Completely supported by private donations, the school maintained programs for public school children throughout the early part of the twentieth century, defining a new phenomenon of joint public and private initiatives that provided some manner of educa- tion and support for overcrowded, underrepresented, poor communi- ties. It was through club work, however, that many new ideas of social reform were played out. In 1889, NBSIS reported that with the growing demand for clubs and classes, "there is opportunity for more work and more workers. More lives might be brightened and ennobled, more weary bodies might be rested and refreshed, more rough manners made gentle, and the work would prove its own reward" [25, p. 25]. It was often through clubs that reformers capitalized on opportunities for "social intercourse" and "good citizenship" [26, p. 24]. By the turn of the century, however, maintaining an adequate number of de- voted and reliable volunteers became increasingly difficult; older vol- unteers began to give way to young, unmarried middle- and upper-class women who were often not as philanthropic with their available time but were eager for more professional or paying positions. Through the newly emerging field of social work, college-trained professionals be- gan to replace the multitude of volunteers that had staffed many chari- table organizations throughout the nineteenth century. The NBSIS, for instance, actively pursued relationships with the emerging schools of social work in the Boston area, such as those at Simmons, Harvard, Boston University, Emerson, M.I.T., Wellesley, and Tufts, who used the North End location as a suitable site for the hands-on training of their schools' students. Radcliffe, the Winsor School, and the Women's Edu- cational and Industrial Union placed many young girls and women either as volunteers or paid workers. Nevertheless, it was through the multitude of literary, debate, and athletic clubs for boys and young men, and sewing, cooking, and a few literary clubs for girls and young women that reformers and immigrants often experienced their first cross-class and cross-cultural exchanges [271. 13. According to the NBSIS minutes of the Executive Committee, November 18, 1909, "We have counted upon and secured the support of Catholics and non-Catholics alike and have intentionally ignored the possibility of a religious question concerning our work" [24].
THE SATURDAY EVENING GIRLS 205 While most clubs for girls generally centered on sewing, cooking, and other domestic duties, some clubs began to emerge that addressed the intellectual needs of girls and young women. By the mid-to-late 1890s, NBSIS had made a commitment to providing a library facility for the neighborhood. It was through this expansion of the library and its reading rooms that a new class of clubs for girls and young women began to take hold and flourish, offering girls an alternative club atmo- sphere to the monolithic domestic skills training clubs. For Guerrier, Brown, and Storrow, providing a stimulating educa- tional program through the library clubs recognized and honored the intellectual life of women. For women, particularly working-class and immigrant women, intellectual advancement was not a universally ac- cepted concept. In an article in Charities, a social work magazine, the plight of the poor was seen largely the fault of poorly trained mothers: Nobody more than charity workers realize the great necessity for the training of girls in household duties. It would probably not be wide of the mark to say that a large number of cases of estrangement between husbands and wives among the poor is due to lack of ability on the part of the wife to make the home comfortable and attractive, to cook properly and to sew. If the home is to be the center and root of our civilization, it must be made a place worth while going to and spending time in. It is the girls who must be taught this lesson and aroused to the nobility of their calling ... The men and women of thought are realizing the faults of education that looked well to filling the head with facts. [28] By the turn of the century most of NBSIS's clubs for girls remained devoted to domestic activities, drama, music, and social entertainment. There were two embroidery clubs; several housekeeping clubs, includ- ing "Little Housekeepers" for girls aged twelve; assorted evening social clubs; the "Clover Club" for older Irish girls who were working; a "Cur- rent Events Club"; a "Miniature Music Club"; and the "Pauline Agassiz Shaw Club," which was established for teaching embroidery, beadwork, and machine stitching [29, p. 12]. There were only two literary clubs: the "Wiltse Club," a small club conducted by Sara Wiltse for young Jewish women; and the "Lily of the Arno Club," for Italian girls, which focused on Italian literature [30, pp. 9-10]. G. Stanley Hall, president of Clark University in Worcester, Massachusetts, prominent child psy- chologist and early childhood education proponent, believed that girls' education was ultimately dependent on their sex roles. The home should be served by every child, who should feel himself a useful and integral member of it with duties. Every girl should cook, sew, clean, pol- ish, and, perhaps, wash; have something to do with flowers, develop some do- mestic taste and pride, in place of the shame so often felt by high-school girls for their lowly homes for which their education often breeds distaste. They
206 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY should be reminded that too soft hands in the young suggest a soft brain; that hand and brain both grow and are educated together. The kitchen is the heart of the home; its industries, intelligently understood, are among the most edu- cational of all possible influences; and to overcome the alienation school often breeds for home life in the modern American girl is one of our most serious problems. [28] It is not surprising, then, that Guerrier, Storrow, and Brown were frustrated by the lack of interest in the intellectual advancement of young women. Guerrier had been deeply influenced by the great liter- ary figures of nineteenth-century New England, and there is no doubt that she was determined to share this with other young women. Born in 1870 in New Bedford, Massachusetts, Guerrier was the granddaugh- ter of Daniel Ricketson, a wealthy Quaker and active abolitionist who spent much of his time enjoying lively correspondence with prominent literary, social, and political leaders of his day. Guerrier's mother died when she was three years old, leaving her father, George Guerrier, grief-stricken and chaffing under the disapproving eye of his wife's fam- ily. With few resources of his own, Guerrier's father shuttled her from one relative to the next over the next ten years. Moving from the opu- lent parlors of her maternal grandfather's mansion in New Bedford and an aunt's drawing rooms in the middle-class South End of Boston to the poor household of a minister uncle and his family, Guerrier came to feel uncomfortable in both spheres. Only when she settled briefly with her mother's brother and sister, Walton and Anna Rick- etson, did she find a sense of peace, security, and belonging [31]. The Ricketson family had been intimate with the literary circle of Concord, Massachusetts, of the mid-nineteenth century. Henry David Thoreau, Ralph Waldo Emerson, Bronson Alcott, and other literary giants were close friends of Guerrier's maternal grandfather. When Daniel Ricketson passed away, his two surviving children, Walton and Anna, maintained many of those relationships. Anna's closest friends were Louisa May Alcott and her sister, Anna Alcott Pratt.14 When Guer- rier wrote her autobiography in her eighties, she vividly remembered visiting the Alcott home; meeting the author of Little Women and being shown "May's" room left a lifelong impression [31, p. 19].1' These women opened up a world of possibilities to Guerrier and offered her a model of womanhood that stretched beyond the domestic sphere to a world of independence, literature, and sisterhood. Guerrier attended the Vermont Methodist Seminary and Female 14. Louisa May Alcott wrote several poems dedicated to "Our Anna," in which she and her sister rejoiced "in [Anna's] tireless kindness and thoughtfulness and friendship" [32]. 15. Anna Pratt gave a pearl necklace to Edith, writing, "for my pearl was set on pleasing little Edith" [33].
THE SATURDAY EVENING GIRLS 207 College in Montpelier, Vermont, where she enjoyed literature, music, art, and sports, and where she was introduced to the works of the latest social theorists, includingJohn Ruskin [31, p. xxxi]. After graduating in 1891 with honors [34], Guerrier returned to Massachusetts and en- rolled at the Museum School of Boston's Museum of Fine Arts [35] but soon found her needs for money so urgent that she had to give up pursuit of full-time artistic training and find paid work.'6 With a letter of introduction from William Lloyd Garrison II (a friend of her father's), she secured a position at Shaw's day nursery at NBSIS in the North End. She continued to take evening courses at the Museum School and soon became close friends with a talented young artist named Edith Brown. Self-conscious of her poverty, Guerrier felt intimi- dated by the more "prosperous" looking students. Longing for com- panionship, she searched for "someone of my own age who did not look prosperous" [31, pp. 64-68]. During a perspective class at the Museum School in 1893, Guerrier met Brown. They moved in together and started a lifelong personal and professional relationship that would span forty years of dedication to each other until Brown's death in 1932. While working at the nursery at NBSIS, Guerrier was approached by Liliah Pingree, a close friend of Pauline Shaw's and a director of Shaw's various neighborhood nurseries [31, pp. 67-68].1' She asked Guerrier to lead several girls' clubs that were being organized in various settle- ment houses and to maintain the reading room at NBSIS. In many cities, associations and clubs were formed for working-class women and girls that focused on "physical, industrial, mental, and moral" improve- ment [38, p. 340]. These clubs, it was believed, supplied a "common ground of meeting for young women who have had the privileges of education, money and leisure, with those who have had the privileges of self-denying, hard-working lives, and the benefits are mutual" [38 p. 340]. Guerrier, however, lacked the privileges of "money and lei- sure" and thought herself fortunate to have "had the real adventure of being ill-clad, ill-fed, ill-sheltered.... I am grateful for this experi- ence, which makes it easier for me to get the point of view of the girl who is literally on her own" [31, p. 69]. Guerrier exemplified the grow- ing population of well-educated single women, caught between their middle- or upper-class family identity and the economic realities of 16. Edith had apparently been interested in becoming an artist since she was a child [36]. 17. Pingree was also an early proponent and supporter of the kindergarten movement in Boston, a member of the Boston School Committee from 1894 to 1906, and manager of the North Bennet Street Industrial School from 1883 to 1906 [37]. See also NBSIS Records.
208 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY needing to support themselves. Pingree, however, recognized Guer- rier's untapped abilities and promoted her on the first leg of her jour- ney in the emerging career of librarianship for women. The reading rooms at NBSIS had become so popular that Guerrier gave up all of her other club duties to work exclusively in the North End. In 1899, with the official opening of a Boston Public Library branch in the North End at NBSIS, daily deliveries of books were made to the Industrial School, which henceforth became known as Station W [39]. Guerrier's title was changed to custodian of the Station W of the Boston Public Library, and she was given a salary of forty dollars a month. Initially, however, Guerrier had been reluctant to choose li- brary work as a life's profession: I did not wish to be responsible for giving to young people some of the trash I myself had obtained from public libraries. This qualm had been silenced by logical reasoning. I felt there was not as much trash in a public library as there was on a newsstand. Furthermore, there was always the opportunity of quietly offering the best, whether it was accepted or not. Again, who was I to set myself up as an infallible judge of good or bad literature. Perhaps my tastes were not sufficiently catholic. After all, I had read much trash and forgotten it; other young people would be pretty sure to do the same thing. [31, p. 78]18 As head librarian, Guerrier continued directing several clubs in the library and was eager to transform them into something whereby young women could "find together the key to some secret garden in which we can profitably enjoy ourselves" [31, p. 68]. Burdened by the directive to "draw these girls in, from the perils of the street" [40, p. 4], Guerrier sought to organize the clubs along the same lines as the more literary and educational clubs that already existed for boys. These "perils" were a constant theme throughout the reform literature of the time period. Saloons, dance halls, and other "cheap" amusements were thought of as precursors to prostitution and the loss of morality. While the threat of prostitution and entrapment in white slavery was real for some vulnerable, single, poor, and immigrant women, middle-class ob- servers' uneasiness with the explicit or potential sexuality of these young women created a tension that manifested itself as an assumption that all poor, immigrant women needed to be morally and physically protected.'9 In fact, many young immigrant women were also con- cerned with projecting an image of middle-class respectability and "so- cial purity." The reality was that mostJewish and Italian parents would not allow their daughters out of the house in the evening without a chaperon, usually an older sibling (preferably male) or other relative. 18. Guerrier does not mention what type of literature she considered "trash." 19. For an expanded discussion of this point, see [41-42].
THE SATURDAY EVENING GIRLS 209 The reformers' language was, therefore, typical of the time period and the low expectations of moral character in immigrants but did not re- flect the reality of these young women's lives. The NBSIS felt, however, that girls were "sadly in need of every form of moral and mental enrichment" and that "strenuous effort" was made to introduce them to the joys of reading [40, pp. 12-13].2o What the reformers at NBSIS may have interpreted as resistance may have actually been an issue of opposition from parents, who were fearful of education and Americanization for their daughters. The younger generation often learned English and accepted American lifestyles more readily than their parents. Many older immigrants viewed Ameri- can culture as a threat to their own religious and cultural traditions. This view was particularly true for daughters, who were expected to remain under the control of their families until they married.2' For some Saturday Evening Girls, attending meetings meant defying their parents. According to one S.E.G. daughter, some girls had to hide their books from their parents, lest they be scolded and prevented from vis- iting the reading rooms at North Bennet Street [45]. Another S.E.G. wrote, "the tragic gap between the first and second generation is the high price of assimilation" [46, p. 2]. Despite NBSIS staff s protesta- tions that the "difficulty of leading the girls to read as seriously and continuously as the boys is not altogether overcome" [40, p. 5], they ignored their own statistics. In the Boy's Reading Rooms the average daily attendance from September 1897 to April 1898 was 97, and in the Girl's Reading Room, it was 110 [40, p. 8]. During the winter of 1901, the reading rooms at the library were "crowded to overflowing, and there is usually a crowd of children at the door, some of whom have to wait outside for an hour for a chance to come in and read quietly" [30, pp. 10-11]. Guerrier's efforts to interest more girls in reading had the effect of increasing the average daily attendance to 193 for girls (with a subsequent drop to sixty-four for boys) during the year, and the staff noted there was "a great need of a third reading room for the older girls" [30, pp. 10- I].22 Interest- ingly, by 1905, however, the boys' library contained over one thousand volumes, and the girls' contained only six hundred [51, p. 13]. 20. This is in direct contrast to many woman-centered reform organizations that actually as- sumed that reading and library rooms for women and girls were not only essential but much in demand by them. The Women's Educational and Industrial Union in Boston is a case in point. 21. There are many sources that describe this situation; see [3-6] and [43-441. 22. Under pressure from the trustees of NBSIS, Helen Storrow, and the community, the city of Boston eventually purchased a building for the purpose of establishing a permanent branch library in the North End in 1912 [47-50].
210 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY The Saturday Evening Girls and Other Library Clubs Although Guerrier had started the Saturday Evening Girls' Story Hour in 1899, the first mention of the group appears in North Bennet Street's annual report for 1901. Commenting on the success of the group, the report noted that the group enjoyed readings and talks on various subjects by prominent people of the Boston community and that they "occasionally ended up with chocolate or lemonade" [29, p. 11 ]. Goldstein later wrote of Guerrier's motivations for establishing the library clubs for girls and young women. In a poem delivered at the thirtieth reunion of the Saturday Evening Girls in 1929, Goldstein wrote that Guerrier believed "the thing of great value is not brawn- but the mind, She looked at the churches, she looked at the schools, She looked at the streets, she looked at the tools, She looked at the club rooms, some twenty or more, And beheld with amazement-only boys-boys galore" [52, p. 4]. Hoping to extend opportunities for entertainment and education for working-class and immigrant girls and young women in the after- noons and evenings after school, Guerrier worked ceaselessly, writing "letters by the hundreds" to entice interesting and noteworthy individ- uals to come speak to the Saturday Evening Girls' club [52, p. 4]. Ed- ward Everett Hale, Reverend Paul Revere Frothingham, Charles Eliot Norton, activists Philip Davis and Meyer Bloomfield, social reformers Vida Scudder and Robert Woods, and many doctors, lawyers, judges, librarians, artists, rabbis, clergy, performance artists, suffragists, busi- ness leaders, and writers spoke to the S.E.G. on a variety of classical and contemporary issues. The S.E.G.s and the other library club girls met weekly to "take an intelligent individual, as well as collective, interest in civic, social, and economic affairs" [53, p. 4]. The program included courses in "En- glish Literature, . . . Discussions on the fine art of living: work, recre- ation, study. . . Sociology, . . . City Government, . . . Economics, . . . all these subjects treated from three points of view, viz. Labor, Employer, Artists" [54, p. 3]. As the years passed, the library clubs expanded to include young girls from the fourth grade through high school and were also named after the days of the week that they met. By 1915 there were over 250 girls and young women in eight different library clubs. As the Saturday Evening Girls grew older and matured, they took over some of the responsibilities of conducting the other library club activi- ties. the Monday Afternoon Girls group was for eighth graders; the Monday Evening Girls was for third-and fourth-year high schoolers; the Tuesday Afternoon Girls was for seventh graders; the Wednesday After- noon Girls was for fifth and sixth graders; the Thursday Afternoon Girls
THE SATURDAY EVENING GIRLS 211 was for first- and second-year high schoolers; the Thursday Evening Girls was for high school seniors and some working girls; and the Friday Evening Girls was for eighteen to twenty year-old working young women. The goal of most young library club girls was ultimately to become a Saturday Evening Girl. In June of each year, the Friday Eve- ning Girls who were then over twenty years old were formally invited to join the S.E.G.s [55, p. 13]. Activities for the year 1915 are an example of the range of topics covered by the Library groups. The Monday Afternoon Girls studied Charles Dickens, "Comradeship," "Courtesy," "Loyalty," "Sincerity," and "School Visiting"; while the youngest groups studied Nathaniel Hawthorne's Tanglewood Tales, "The Prince and the Pauper," "The Lost Prince," and "Pinocchio." The Thursday Afternoon Girls "trav- eled in Europe ... [a] different place was visited each week, and they all hope some day to 'really go over.'" The Thursday Evening Girls "had a most interesting series of talks on Current Events and have heard many fine talks on the War, the Mexican Situation, Suffrage, and Preparedness." The Friday Evening Girls discussed "our President, the Kaiser, and Alice Freeman Palmer" [56, pp. 4-6]. Much of the pro- gramming reflected Guerrier, Storrow, and Brown's influence, and middle-class white women would have recognized some of these pro- grams as similar to their own club activities. For Vaine Casassa Bruno, however, membership in the S.E.G. Club became a substitute for a high school education she could not have: The S.E.G. talks that I have attended have helped me a great deal, in that I learned from them what other girls learned at high school, and I was thus given a general idea of the literature at different periods, civic and social problems in different countries, fine arts of living, etc.... Through the club I became connected with the Branch Public Library. During my work there I was able to help children and foreigners to read proper books, and to handle them properly-to make them better citizens and scholars as well as increasing my knowledge of books and authors. [57, p. 5] The Saturday Evening Girls, in addition to monitoring and conduct- ing many of the younger library club groups, spent the year investigat- ing educational, social, and community organizations to foster cooper- ation among the different agencies for "better housing conditions, better schools, better local and civic administration" [56, p. 7]. The special needs and circumstances of living in a poor immigrant commu- nity, however, often dictated the clubs' programming and the mem- bers' responses. Reflecting not only the leaders' interests, the program- ming also spoke to the realities of living in an urban community. A course on city government became vital as the S.E.G. became en- meshed in community efforts to force municipal bodies to respond to
212 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY a variety of urban issues, including sanitation, public health, education, and social services. These clubs for girls and young women became an important part of the Americanization process, not only because of the programs that focused on civic and educational agendas but also because of their self- governing organizational structures. Inspired by Guerrier, a governing body of ten members was elected yearly by the oldest group, the Satur- day Evening Girls. A house committee was formed that met on a weekly basis to generate policies and rules concerning the running of the club- house, and these were then voted on by the entire body of the club- house once a month [58, p. 5]. The girls and young women learned on a microlevel the concepts of a democratic government. They found discipline and confidence in a system whereby they could create an organization with rules and laws and could resolve problems and reach decisions based on a vote of the majority. By participating in the every- day running of the clubs, the members learned valuable lessons on responsibility and the use of power. This was particularly important for women and girls, who lacked opportunities-in the public sphere as well as the private sphere-to govern their own lives. It was as a result of her appointment to the library service that Guer- rier met Helen Osborne Storrow. Storrow was intrigued by Guerrier's work with the girls' clubs in the reading rooms at North Bennet Street. When they met at the turn of the century, Storrow was still a young woman, just emerging as an important philanthropic figure in the Bos- ton community. They shared an understanding and appreciation for the disadvantages facing young women and girls. For Storrow, this was the beginning of her own personal "female dominion," unfettered by other powerful feminists, a place within which she could define and develop her own personal vision for independent womanhood [59]. Although Storrow continued to improvise and establish new programs at North Bennet Street for both boys and girls, her involvement with the Saturday Evening Girls developed into a more personal and life- long relationship. Storrow had joined the Board of Managers of North Bennet Street in 1898, and was a member of the Board of Visitors of the Boston Public Library. A Quaker, Storrow was the granddaughter of Martha Coffin Wright and grandniece of Lucretia Coffin Mott, ardent abolitionists and suffragists who, together with Elizabeth Cady Stanton, were among the small group that organized the first women's rights convention in 1848 in Seneca Falls, New York. Storrow's father was a successful manu- facturer of farm equipment in Auburn, New York, and her mother, Eliza Wright Osborne, maintained her family's heritage of strong com- mitment to social and political reform [60]. Eliza's sister, Ellen Wright,
THE SATURDAY EVENING GIRLS 213 married William Lloyd Garrison II and was also a prominent liberal reformer in her own right. Storrow's brother, Thomas Mott Osbome, became an outspoken supporter of prison reform, gaining notoriety as a controversial warden of Sing Sing prison in New York [61, p. 1]. Although her mother was an active suffragist, Storrow shied away from any prominent position in the movement. No doubt she experi- enced both the deference and disdain accorded her family by their Auburn neighbors. Lucretia Mott and Martha Wright were both fre- quent visitors to the Osborne household, and Eliza often entertained many of the suffrage movement's leaders, including Susan B. Anthony and Anna Howard Shaw. Harriet Tubman, a close friend of Lucretia and Martha's, lived only a few doors down South Street in Auburn where Storrow and her family lived when she was a child. As a young woman, Storrow shared the idealism of a community of activist women. It was, perhaps, her childhood experiences observing the network of powerful feminists of the mid- to late nineteenth century who flowed in and out of her childhood home that taught Storrow the value of female relationships. "Among her gifts, Mrs. Storrow has the faculty of establishing a common interest," an acquaintance once wrote. "As a rule, women have less of camaraderie than men, but ... Mrs. Storrow has been able to draw it out" [62]. Helen Osborne marriedJamesJackson Storrow,Jr., a prominent Bos- ton lawyer and banker in 1891. Socially, politically, and financially se- cure, the Storrows continued her family's tradition of supporting social and political activism. They established or supported several charitable reform organizations, in addition to giving financial support to individ- ual young women and men in their pursuit of higher education [63]. Unlike his business partner, Henry Higginson, who helped found the Immigration Restriction League in 1894, James J. Storrow renounced nativism and "never doubted that America should remain the asylum for the downtrodden of the world" [64, p. 179]. Storrow's dedication to physical fitness and her experience working with the Saturday Eve- ning Girls were instrumental in her pioneering work as a leader of the Girl Scouts in Boston in its early days [61, pp. 13-15].23 As the founder of the Women's City Club of Boston in 1913, Storrow promoted pro- grams on suffrage, politics, reform, and more, often engaging leaders in the community to debate different sides of current issues. An enthu- siastic dancer, she helped found the U.S. branch of the English Folk Dancing Society and the Country Dance and Song Society of America. In the late 1 920s Storrow became a director of the Better Homes Associ- 23. Many thanks to Pat Ross, curator of the Girl Scout Museum, Cedar Hill, Patriots Trail Girl Scouts, Waltham, Massachusetts.
214 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY ation. She established Storrowton-a living museum of an eighteenth- and nineteenth-century New England village at the Eastern States Ex- position in Springfield, Massachusetts-in 1927 and completed it in 1930. Storrow also participated in relief efforts during both world wars. Her vast connections throughout the community and the country al- lowed her to elicit the participation of some of the foremost national and international reformers, politicians, and leaders in industry, art, and society, as well as their opponents, in special forums, courses of study, and speaking engagements [65].24 Storrow was extremely active during the first few years of her volun- teer service at NBSIS. She is mentioned or quoted quite often in the reports of board meetings. Most notably, she readily volunteered to organize, lead, or support various committees that oversaw the multi- tude of programs at the school, and she was often responsible for ini- tiating ideas and concepts for new programs, classes, clubs, and enter- tainment. She also reached out to members of Boston's social, artistic, and economic elite to become members of the school's advisory board or to offer services that in some manner supported the school and its programs. She was also instrumental in the establishment of the Boston Social Union, which was organized during the winter of 1904-5 at NBSIS to facilitate cooperation among the various social settlements, schools of social work, and charitable organizations in the city [66, p. 43]. Monthly meetings of prominent social workers and reformers in the city, including Woods, Mary Kenney O'Sullivan, Scudder, Mary Kehew, and others, were being held in North Bennet's Reading Rooms. It was no coincidence that the branch library at North Bennet had the largest selection of settlement and social work literature in the city.25 The Pottery and Other Club Activities For the first few years of 1900, the clubs, classes, and library at NBSIS expanded dramatically. The library was serving over eighty thousand requests a year, exhausting Guerrier and her small staff [69, pp. 93- 94].26 During 1906, Storrow sent Guerrier and Brown on a trip to Eu- 24. She received an honorary Master of Arts from Smith College and a Doctor of Humanities in 1942 from Boston University for her commitment to social reform, the Girl Scouts, and pioneering preservation efforts. 25. By April 1905 NBSIS reported that the "Committee on co-operation reported the result of two meetings of delegates of other organizations at which was formed the Social Union of the North and West Ends" [67-681. 26. The library committee felt "that Miss Guerrier's salary is inadequate, considering that she gives all the time and strength she has to her work" [69].
THE SATURDAY EVENING GIRLS 215 rope for a much-needed vacation [70]. During a stay in the Swiss Alps, the two women talked of ideas of starting an industry at which the young women in the library clubs could earn extra money. On visiting a "charming little pottery on the Lake of Thun," they realized the possibilities of starting their own pottery [71, p. 2]. "We spoke of mak- ing marmalade, or fruitcake, of hemming napkins and dishtowels, and finally, we spoke of pottery, of the charming peasant ware of Italy, of Holland, of Germany, and now of Switzerland. Since our club girls were almost all of peasant stock, why not start an art pottery and produce American peasant ware?" [31, p. 85].27 Guerrier, Brown, and Storrow recognized that the need of these young women to contribute to family income conflicted with the pursuit of education beyond grammar school. While reformers in Boston, and all over the country, were pro- viding educational, vocational, and Americanization programs, few were addressing the fact that many immigrant youths could not fully take advantage of these opportunities; their financial contribution to the family far outweighed any hopes of higher education. Establishing a commercial industry to provide financial resources, rather than just skills training, was a step toward resolving that problem. Through Guerrier's help, Brown first started teaching at NBSIS while still studying at the Museum School during the late 1890s. Brown was hired to teach drawing on a part-time basis to various clubs and classes of boys and girls, including Guerrier's Saturday Evening Girls' Club. Her talent, popularity with the students, and interest in the modeling department eventually won her a full-time position at the school [72, pp. 11-12]. Brown was familiar with the making of pottery and the operation of a kiln, and her artistic training and background obviously played a major role in the decision to start a pottery.28 It was not until 1908, however, that official pottery classes, as opposed to modeling, were conducted at NBSIS, and like the clay, wood, and stone modeling classes, these pottery classes were offered primarily for boys and young men [73]. Rarely, particularly talented young women or girls were allowed admittance to the modeling and pottery classes. In the many modeling classes conducted prior to 1910, only three girls 27. Guerrier's association of "peasant stock" with "peasant ware" was typical of the time period. Many differentiated these late nineteenth and early twentieth century eastern European and southern Italian immigrants as peasants, in direct contrast to the earlier northern and western European and northern Italian immigrants, who were often better educated and more financially secure. 28. The NBSIS had installed a potter's wheel in the modeling room in 1902 and a kiln in 1903. Edith Brown is first noted here as a teacher in "modeling," and she is last listed as a teacher in the report for the year ending August 31, 1907, which coincides with the establishment of the Paul Revere Pottery. See [29].
216 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY are listed; two of them, Albina Mangini and Cecilia Leverone, were enrolled in a class of twenty-six boys; the other, Rose Dondero, was the only girl in a class of thirty-four boys [74]. Interestingly, all three young women were Saturday Evening Girls who went on to successful careers as decorators at the Paul Revere Pottery. In the summer of 1907, with Storrow's approval and her donation of funds to purchase the equipment, the two Ediths started training in the specifics of pottery making. They hired a local potter and found a pottery chemist from the old Merrimac Pottery of Newburyport, Massa- chusetts, who "for a substantial consideration, parted with some of his formulas, which we found later on in a printed book of formulas in our own public library" [31, p. 86]. With great trepidation and excite- ment they fired their first "bright blue glazed tiles" in the cellar of Guerrier and Brown's Chestnut Hill home [58, p. 5]. By the summer of 1907, several S.E.G.s began to learn pottery making in Chestnut Hill. There they began to sign their pottery "S.E.G.," for Saturday Evening Girls, along with their initials; and the pottery works, or Bowl Shop as it was first known, was born. That fall, they moved the operations to West Gloucester with a plan to establish the pottery near the new S.E.G. Camp.' They quickly realized, however, that transportation was a proW lem-not only for equipment, clay, and other raw materials but also in the logistics of living there throughout the winter, which proved to be daunting [71]. No records exist that show what role, if any, NBSIS played in the establishment of the Paul Revere Pottery. In February 1908 a special meeting of the Board of Managers of North Bennet Street School was called to "hear an account of the work of the Library Department and Miss Guerrier's proposition for a pottery and bowl shop at the camp in West Gloucester" [76]. Held at Storrow's Beacon Street home, we can only speculate as to the discussion because the minutes of that meeting are no longer extant. We do know that NBSIS did not, appar- ently, consider this venture an opportunity the school ought to pursue or support. Interestingly, NBSIS's annual reports offer little recogni- tion to the Saturday Evening Girls' work with the Paul Revere Pottery. The annual report for 1909 stated clearly that the school's newly orga- nized pottery classes, which were specifically for boys, had been "main- tained primarily for its recreational and cultural value. Its connection 29. In 1906, Helen Storrow purchased an acre of land in West Gloucester, Massachusetts, where she built a cottage with fourteen bedrooms, a living room, and a kitchen for the club's working "girls" for much needed summer vacations [31, p. 80]. Seventy-five years later, Gertrude Friederman would remember that her two weeks at the S.E.G. camp were one of the "great times" of her life [75].
THE SATURDAY EVENING GIRLS 217 with industry is quite incidental" [77, p. 28]. By 1910, NBSIS claimed that "others have followed their lead in making pottery.... The Indus- trial School has again taken its place as a leader by showing others the possibilities in this field" [78, p. 32]. In its enthusiasm to celebrate its own accomplishments and to promote its vision of industrial training, NBSIS neglected to recognize the accomplishments of the Saturday Evening Girls. As a library group, the Saturday Evening Girls' activities had become an acceptable leisure activity. As a commercial venture, the S.E.G.s and their pottery works no longer fit into NBSIS's vision for the industrial training for girls and young women.' It is likely that there existed some level of tension between the two; for girls, classes in modeling at NBSIS remained elusive. As late as 1916, the school's executive committee vetoed a proposal to open the modeling program to girls [80].31 The prevailing attitude regarding the "most suitable" vocational training for elementary school and older girls was that of "two points of view . . . woman's relation to self support, and woman's relation to the home" [81, pp. 19-20]. During the winter of 1907, the Boston School Committee authorized fifty thirteen-year-old girls from the up- per grades of the Hancock School to come to the NBSIS for ten hours of industrial training every week. The NBSIS recognized the pressures of girls' familial obligations and financial needs, and resistance on the part of parents to the advantages of additional educational opportuni- ties. Although typical of the language of the time period, NBSIS's an- nual report for 1907 stated that this experiment was founded on the premise that "in the North End . . . (w)ith rare exceptions the girls leave school as early as the law permits. Whether they go at once into industrial or into home life, the training in hand and machine sewing, in domestic science and in textiles and design which we propose to give, will make a much needed connection between the school course and the life that follows" [82, p. 8]. By 1909, however, NBSIS reported that the experiment was not suc- cessful. "The class, on account of the age, mental capacity and develop- ment of the girls, and general attitude toward the work, was not a very encouraging one" [81, p. 19]. Because of the girls' lack of interest in this sort of "industrial" training, it was naturally assumed that they were intellectually not capable of developing the basic skills necessary 30. The S.E.G.s are mentioned again in the annual report for the school in 1912, but there was no discussion of their commercial venture, only their work with the library clubs [79, pp. 47-48]. 31. By 1918, however, the school was also offering classes in modeling, as well as printing, drafting, and telephone operating, in addition to its regular domestic skills training.
218 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY "for housekeeping and housefurnishing" [81, p. 20]. What may have been fun in a social club atmosphere may have taken on an entirely different meaning for these young girls when incorporated into a course of study. Cooking, sewing, cleaning, textiles, and design, how- ever, remained at the heart of the program. As one S.E.G. wryly noted, "the girls were the drudges in housework, and chore" [52, p. 4]. It appears then, that NBSIS was not an option for these women in their efforts to establish the pottery and train the S.E.G.s. Storrow, how- ever, was so enthusiastic about the pottery that by early 1908 she had bought a four-story brick house on Hull Street in the North End to house the pottery and the library clubs. The building was located oppo- site Copps Hill Burying ground, near the Old North Church where Paul Revere had hung his famous lantern, and henceforth the pottery became known as the Paul Revere Pottery [71, pp. 2-3]. Officially called the Library Club House, it quickly acquired the name "Hull House." The two Ediths moved into the fourth-floor apartment of this building, and for the next seven years the Saturday Evening Girls, the other library clubs, and the Paul Revere Pottery flourished under their direction. Storrow's financial and emotional commitment to the group propelled the pottery venture forward at a rapid pace. The pottery con- tinued to expand, gaining national recognition. The February 1912 edition of the Craftsman magazine noted that at the Fifth Exhibition of the National Society of Craftsmen in New York, "the most notable examples [of pottery] were the Paul Revere Pottery," propelling the modest venture into the international limelight [83]. Most Saturday Evening Girls and younger library club members, how- ever, just worked a few hours on Saturday mornings, if only to sweep, clean, pack, or assist in the pottery, to earn their weekly-monthly club dues, pay for summer camp, and earn a few extra dollars to help them pursue higher education [54, p. 3].32 A few worked either full-time or on a more regular part-time schedule [84]. Initially, the full-time work- ers earned three-four dollars per week, which quickly increased to ten, plus two weeks paid vacation, in addition to a hot lunch every day [85]. While they worked amid fresh flowers and bright light, the S.E.G.s were entertained by dramatic readings and soothing music performed by the daughters of some of Boston's social elite. According to an article in House Beautiful in 1912, "the price of arti- cles produced is fixed after careful consideration of the cost of produc- tion, including a fair living wage for the workers" [86]. In an undated 32. The club members were also responsible for raising the funds for their camp vacations. From 1913 to 1916 the cost to stay for a week at camp varied between approximately $5.50 and $6.20.
THE SATURDAY EVENING GIRLS 219 advertising brochure, prices for the pottery ranged from $.75 for a small vase to $2.50 for a small bowl to $7.00 for a large pitcher to $18.00 for a large bowl to $31.00 for a lamp to $50.00 for a large, beautifully decorated "Chrysanthemum" vase [87]. At these prices, the wares were only accessible to middle- and upper-class families. As a result, not only did Storrow subsidize the pottery works, but the S.E.G.s were expected to help raise funds as well. Throughout the history of the library clubs, the members performed plays, operettas, and folk dancing to raise funds for their club work. They performed at NBSIS, the open-air the- ater at the Storrow's home in Lincoln, and the Vendome Hotel and many other Boston locations. Isabella Stewart Gardner offered her pal- ace at Fenway Court on several occasions for their Shakespeare produc- tions. "Mrs. John L. Gardner opened Fenway Court in March . .. for the presentation of The Merchant of Venice by the Saturday Evening Girls Club. The patronesses were the leading women of Boston, and the funds raised are to be for the pottery" [86]. Forty years later, the Satur- day Evening Girls reminisced about how Mrs. Gardner "flew around behind the scenes and cautioned us North End actresses not to dare to touch the priceless tapestries," and about their "first glimpse of society ladies smoking-to us virtuous girls, a shocking glimpse of high life" [2, p. 29]. At the close of the evening, Gardner gave out small, six-inch bowls made by the pottery as party favors to her guests, and to the girls, she gave "cheap paper fans." 33 Their plays and other productions were an important social and fi- nancial component of the clubs. The plays varied from comedies like "Mrs. Wiggs of the Cabbage Patch" to serious Shakespearean drama. The funds they collected from public performances enabled them to purchase "real costumes" and ultimately allowed them to expand their club work to include more young women and girls. According to Cath- erine Casassa, regardless of "the fun, work, or money, the plays did more than anything else in bringing us together, making good friends, helping us understand each other, and developing in all a fine spirit of comradeship. Together with this growth came the mental develop- ment, the broadening of intellect, and the beginning of our acquain- tance with masterpieces in literature" [88, p. 7]. Shock and surprise often characterized the response of reformers and the native-born privileged classes to demonstrations of intelligence and eagerness to learn by immigrants and their children. Still, these 33. When I interviewed them (audio tapes in my possession), several descendants of S.E.G.s recalled their mothers telling them this. The Gardner Museum recently discovered several six-inch S.E.G. bowls, never used, of various colors and designs, on a top shelf in a kitchen cupboard.
220 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY attitudes informed the establishment of programs for education and training for immigrants and the poor, and also were used to social re- formers' advantage when trying to raise funds for programs. In the North End, groups of "visitors," or tourists, were invited to NBSIS to view the work done by the students. Exhibitions were held every year to showcase the school's programs and the individual craft pieces made by the students, not only to celebrate their achievements but also to raise badly needed funds. Although the students were proud of their work, there was some resentment over these expectations of inferiority. In an S.E.G. News editorial, S.E.G. Goldstein admonished social work- ers, reminding them that the "poor . .. instinctively resent being pa- tronized, investigated, meddled with, or put under a microscope as if they were some curious species of other life; for they, too, have intelli- gence" [89, p. 3]. In an interesting display of oppositional resistance, S.E.G. and Paul Revere Pottery artist Sarah Galner recalled that when tourists came to view the remarkable work these "illiterate . . . ignorant ... immigrant girls" [85] were doing at the pottery on Hull Street, the girls acted out by feigning ignorance of English and exhibited a general lack of intelligence, all for the visitors' benefit. This perfor- mance by the girls, though funny to them, apparently infuriated Stor- row. She may have clearly understood the irony of the S.E.G.s display; visitors ultimately walked away from their visit to the pottery with the image of the ignorant immigrant, an image that Storrow so desperately tried to dispel. For the girls, it may not have mattered; Storrow's vision and dedication to securing a future for them perhaps conflicted with their own ideas of identity, self-definition, and respect. While money was extremely important in running these clubs, volun- teer service ultimately made it all possible. Storrow taught folk dancing and provided continued inspiration and encouragement, while each S.E.G. and library club member contributed one hour per week of ser- vice, or "housetime," to the "Clubhouse." The S.E.G.s also ran a res- taurant and continuously performed in plays, folk dances, operas, and recitals. By late 1914, the Saturday Evening Girls not only maintained financial responsibility by pledging $8.00 each to support the clubs for the seven groups of younger girls and women [58, p. 6] but also person- ally conducted "school visiting" in conjunction with NBSIS to "keep in touch with our own girls who fall behind in school" [55, p. 13]. According to Goldstein, "the older girls are the big sisters and associate workers. We always put special emphasis in the work with our groups on the cultural side of life and let them also unconsciously as we did before them, learn to establish their own ideals and to think for them- selves" [90, p. 3]. Goldstein was one of the original Saturday Evening Girls who gath-
THE SATURDAY EVENING GIRLS 221 ered with Guerrier in the reading rooms of NBSIS on Saturday eve- nings in 1899. Born in Russia around 1886, Goldstein was the oldest of five siblings. Goldstein began working at age ten to help support her family. When she was thirteen, her father died; her hopes of becom- ing a doctor ended. She barely finished grammar school, and the S.E.G. club became her main intellectual influence. Under the tutelage of Guerrier, Goldstein became an assistant in the library. According to Goldstein, "[an] examination for the post paying $35 a month was advertised at the school and [she] won the post, the firstJewish girl in history to receive this appointment. A number of volunteer socialites had tried it previously and some suffered nervous breakdowns ... there was a gang of Italian and Jewish boys and girls who used the reading room and making them behave was not easy" [91]. In 1922, Goldstein was appointed head of the West End Branch of the Boston Public Li- brary, the largest branch library at that time. In 1925 she founded "Jew- ish Book Week in America," which eventually became "Jewish Book Month." She lectured across the nation on immigration, library work, and interreligious and interethnic cooperation, and she was particu- larly interested in Jewish literature. In 1954 she was made curator of Judaica of the Boston Public Library. Because of her support, her brother and three sisters were able to attend high school. Throughout her career she was particularly interested in working with the "foreign born" [92]. She was convinced that the library had "every advantage over [social and educational] agencies, because it is the most free from political and religious influences." Lacking "academic degrees," Goldstein spent her life pursuing "educational opportunities which America had to offer the economically handicapped, . . . in spite of tremendous odds and discouraging experiences" [92]. Similar to other S.E.G.s, Fanny triumphed "by constant sacrifice and persistent applica- tion [and] developed an appreciation for the mental luxuries of life from mere fragments of a slight education, and (pardon the seeming egotism) have advanced to positions of trust and responsibility" [93, p. 2]. From 1912 to 1917 the Saturday Evening Girls published a newspa- per entitled the S.E.G. News, of which Goldstein was editor in chief. The newspaper focused on contemporary issues related to immigra- tion, education, the library, philanthropy, democracy, employment op- portunities, literature, religion, community features, and social news, in addition to the basic subjects of literature, history, civics, economics, and social science. Guest contributors such as Storrow, Woods, and other business, political, educational, and reform leaders of the day often penned feature articles. The newspaper provided social news about the "girls," including engagements, marriages, elopements,
222 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY births, and updates on the activities at neighborhood settlements. Their "Market" section reported on shipments coming into the docks on Boston's waterfront, noting that higher prices meant good news for fishermen, farmers, and shippers. It printed book reviews and listed "interesting articles" in popular magazines; it offered outlooks on cer- tain career paths for young women, including social work, library work, secretarial and office work, retail, teaching, and nursing. Many of the young women were in favor of woman's suffrage, though they rarely wrote about it in the S.E.G. News. Both Guerrier and Brown were members of the Boston Equal Suffrage Association for Good Gov- ernment, and the "girls were being indoctrinated on the subject" [2, p. 27]. The NBSIS regularly hosted woman suffrage meetings. After a suffrage rally in Boston in 1913, one S.E.G. wrote, "I have been inter- ested in the Suffrage movement but not in the Militant Method and on hearing Mrs. Pankhurst, my views changed" [94, pp. 4-5] .3 For the most part, however, the newspaper avoided controversial issues such as woman's suffrage, trade unionism, and other political issues, though Goldstein's editorials were often highly charged political statements about women's roles in society, social workers, and life in an immigrant community. She did not hesitate to voice her opinions about other issues of interest to young women. In response to the criticism at the time that "education and social work among the poor retard mar- riages," Goldstein wrote, "the thought of a mere mate for society's sake alone to any girl of intellect and independence becomes obnoxious ... [and] the young woman, then, whom education has helped to be something more than a cat or a slave. . . is not selfish to remain single" [96, pp. 2-3]. In another editorial, Goldstein admonished social work- ers whose desire to "uplift" was derived from a sense of superiority: she argued that they "must teach people the things they want and need to know, and not the things which you think they ought to know" [89, p. 2]. In another editorial, Goldstein criticized reformers "addicted to the terrible hobby of 'Slumitis' " who spend their time making "micro- scopic studies ... of the children of the slums" [97, p. 1], but who ignored the voices of the children themselves. The S.E. G. News became that voice. As Gere points out in her study of literacy practices in Pro- gressive Era women's clubs, working-class women often employed "tex- tual strategies" that helped them "resist definitions of urbanization that featured them as problems to be solved" [9, p. 64]. With the excep- tion of guest contributors, the newspaper was written exclusively by the girls and young women of the various library clubs. The S.E.G.s 34. Emmiline Pankhurst, militant English suffragette, spoke at the Tremont Temple in Boston in November 1913; see [2, p. 27] and [95, p. 7].
THE SATURDAY EVENING GIRLS 223 published the newspaper in the hopes of having their voices heard as community members who had something to offer. Determined to make the newspaper "a medium of free speech and enlightenment on matters of importance in the North End" [98, p. 1], Goldstein summed up its importance to club members, "as a living voice of a living group, it is invaluable ... we merely intend it as a medium of spreading the knowledge and benefits of our experiences where they may perhaps prove useful . . . our experiences in the many years that we have been receiving the bounty of so-called philanthropists and social workers ought to mean something. Together we have doubtless made many mistakes and the impressions gained along with these experiences are, together, ones of joy and sorrow" [99, p. 2]. By 1914, after much lobbying by Guerrier and the community, a North End Branch Library was officially opened in the remodeled St. John's Church on North Bennet Street. Because of other philanthropic and community commitments competing for her attention, Storrow decided at this time that she would no longer support all the library clubs and the pottery; the responsibility for supporting and running the clubs was turned over to the Saturday Evening Girls.35 With the approval of the Board of Trustees of the Boston Public Library, the library clubs moved to the basement of the new branch library after Storrow paid for refurbishment of the space [100]. The S.E.G. and older library club members provided mentoring and guidance to younger members; they acted as living examples of the educational value of the library clubs and as role models for younger girls aspiring to something greater than the factory floor. Already self- governing, becoming self-supporting was the next step toward auton- omy. While on the one hand the S.E.G.s resisted conforming com- pletely to a white middle-class ideal of womanhood, they also embraced it. Convinced that they had not lost their ethnic traditions or identities in the process of Americanization, they found pride in having "grown from foreign little girls into American young women" [21, p. 2]. They thought that their work in the clubs had enabled them to do things for themselves, and they viewed Storrow, Guerrier, and Brown as the "ideal[s] of American womanhood" [21, p. 2]. When Storrow passed the financial responsibility of the clubs to the Saturday Evening Girls in 1914, they were determined to live up to her example. According to Goldstein, the S.E.G.s hoped to "pass the ideal on to others. We shall endeavor to be better friends, better daughters, better wives, bet- ter mothers; and always pure and simple women, who, years hence, will 35. JamesJackson Storrow offered to support the clubs for one year (through June 1915) to ensure a smooth transition; see [58, p. 5].
224 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY look with pride upon this Association of American Daughters of North End Immigrants" [21, P. 2]. By 1915 the expanding library clubs and the growing Paul Revere Pottery were outgrowing the house at 18 Hull Street. The need for additional production, designing, glazing, and firing spaces for the pot- tery precluded Hull Street as a viable option for the expansion; the pollution from the kilns was adding to the dirt and filth in an already highly congested area. During the summer of 1915, with the funds pro- vided from the sale of the building at 18 Hull Street, Guerrier and Brown moved the pottery to the nearby suburb of Brighton. Ultimately, the Paul Revere Pottery could not compete with mass-produced pot- tery, and its market remained limited. The overhead expenses that were charged to each piece of pottery priced them out of the mass market, and the pottery had to be continuously subsidized by Storrow. Women reformers, like Guerrier, Brown, and Storrow, who sup- ported the Saturday Evening Girls Club, were important to the lives of the thousands of immigrant families who crowded U.S. cities during the nineteenth century and early twentieth century. Their philan- thropic efforts, financial or personal, deeply affected the lives of many families, in ways that would carry through to succeeding generations. By providing the "inspiration for a college education here ... the op- portunity for a career there, [and] a ... livelihood" [101] for those associated with the Paul Revere Pottery, Guerrier, Brown, and Storrow helped some of the women of the North End move out of poverty and into the middle class.6 In the aftermath of World War I, as the S.E.G.s aged and moved out of the North End, the structure of the clubs weak- ened. The individual library clubs consolidated, and thereafter they were all identified as Saturday Evening Girls. For many, the clubs be- came the bridge "between Jew and gentile, between rich and poor," and they "truly felt [themselves] to be citizens of a great and good world" [102]. The bonds that were created motivated many S.E.G.s to continue meeting on an irregular basis for the next fifty years, finally voting to dissolve in June 1969 [103]. Brown, the artistic director of the pottery for twenty-five years, died in 1932 after a long illness. The instability of the pottery was exacer- bated by the Depression, and with the loss of Brown, the enthusiasm and inspiration was gone. The pottery finally discontinued its opera- tions in 1942. After serving as supervisor of circulation and supervisor of branch libraries, Guerrier retired from the Boston Public Library in 1940 with forty-six years of library service. Having served as a volunteer 36. See also [1] and [2] for further information about the "uplifting" of these women into the middle class, from their own perspectives.
THE SATURDAY EVENING GIRLS 225 director with the U.S. Food Administration during World War I, she went on to serve again, after her retirement, on the Committee for Public Safety during World War II.` In her autobiography, written in 1950 at the age of eighty, Guerrier wrote, "I could fill a book with the reminiscences of my friends around Hull Street, not one of whom lives there now. I have watched them emerge with pride and satisfaction. They serve on city committees and on educational boards, and are all for progress. They tell me the clubhouse meant much to them, I tell them it meant more to me" [31, p. 90]. In closing, she wrote, "I know some other worthwhile task is just around the corner, and I am waiting eagerly to welcome it" [31, p. 132]. She died in 1958 at the age of eighty-eight.' Helen Storrow died in 1944, after forty-five years of personal commit- ment to the S.E.G.s. Storrow was often impatient with her upper-class associates and their preference for poetry and philosophy to philan- thropy and other social activism [110]. Considered a "woman of many ideas and activities" [111], but entirely too democratic, Storrow was perhaps quietly tolerated by many of her upper-class acquaintances be- cause of her wealth, family connections, and commanding energy. Stor- row once wrote, "I expect to pass through this world but once. Any good, therefore, that I can do, or any kindness that I can show to any fellow creature, let me do it now. Let me not defer or neglect it, for I shall not pass this way again" [2, p. 1]. Conclusion The Saturday Evening Girls' Club and the other library clubs emerged from an environment that was indifferent and at times even hostile to the educational and personal aspirations of immigrant and working- class girls and women. As the young women of the clubs were being challenged intellectually, they were in turn challenging systems that had institutionalized low expectations of them as women and as immi- grants. Intellectual accomplishment and cultural and ethnic identities were merged, thus breaking down barriers that had traditionally pre- vented them from exploring educational and economic options. The S.E.G.s would not, therefore, simply accept vocational training for fac- tory jobs or domestic responsibilities; they wanted more, above and beyond expectations of their gender, class, and ethnic groups. In the 37. For more information on Guerrier's government work, see [104-105]. 38. For more information on Guerrier's career and other accomplishments, see [31] and [106-109].
226 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY process of accepting the more appealing alternative promoted by Guer- rier, Brown, and Storrow, the S.E.G.s became part of a modem move- ment toward greater options for women-educationally, politically, and economically. The S.E.G.s were surrounded, and perhaps even in- doctrinated, with modern liberal ideas, while at the same time they faced strong ethnic and old-world values and nineteenth-century Victo- rian ideals of women and their roles in the public and private spheres. The S.E.G.s demonstrated a determined resistance to the demands not only of industrialization but also of society's limited expectations for them as working-class women and as immigrants. According to Goldstein, "these girls were quite ordinary. In their ordinariness, they proved extraordinary" [2, p. 21]. Appendix TABLE Al PERCENTAGE OF S.E.G. GRADUATES FROM THE HANCOCK GRAMMAR SCHOOL, 1902-7 1902 1903 1904 1905 1906 1907 (N= 37) (N= 22) (N= 47) (N= 46) (N= 62) (N= 58) Number (%) 9 (25) 10 (45) 13 (28) 9 (20) 15 (24) 10 (17) Soum .-"Statistics," Documents of the School Commeite of the Ciy of Boston. Boston: Municipal Pfintng Office, 1908. REFERENCES 1. S.E.G. News, Cherry Tree Edition, 1954, Boston Public Library, North End Branch, Boston. 2. S.E.G. News, 1899-1952 Reunion Edition, 1952, Boston Public Library, North End Branch, Boston. 3. Seller, Maxine Schwartz. Immigrant Women. Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1981. 4. Weinberg, Sydney Stahl. The World of Our Mothers. New York: Schoken, 1988. 5. Smith, Judith. Family Connections. Albany, N.Y.: SUNY Press, 1985. 6. Ewen, Elizabeth. Immigrant Women in the Land of Dollars. New York: Monthly Review, 1985. 7. Blair, Karen J. The Clubwoman as Feminist: True Womanhood Redefined, 1868-1914. New York: Holmes & Meier, 1980. 8. Murolo, Priscilla. The Common Ground of Womanhood: Class Gender and Working Girl's Clubs, 1884-1928. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1997. 9. Gere, Anne Ruggles. Literacy and Cultural Work in U.S. Women's Clubs, 1880-1920. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1997. 10. Peiss, Kathy. Cheap Amusements: Working Women and Leisure in Turn of the Century New York. Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1986. 11. United States Bureau of the Census. Thirteenth Decenial Census of the United States, 1910, reels 615-16, Massachusetts, Suffolk County. 12. Solomon, Barbara Miller. In the Company of Educated Women: A History of Women and Higher Education in Amenca. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1985. 13. Jacobs,Jerry A., and Greene, Margaret E. "Race and Ethnicity, Social Class, and School-
THE SATURDAY EVENING GIRLS 227 ing." In After Ellis Island: Newcomers and Natives in the 1910 Census, edited by Susan Cotts Watkins, pp. 212-26. New York: Russell Sage, 1994. 14. "School Document No. 16-1907." In Annual Report of the School Committee of the City of Boston, 1907. Boston: Municipal Printing Office, 1907. 15. "Statistics." In Documents of the School Committee of the City of Boston. Boston: Municipal Printing Office, 1908. 16. De Marco, William. Ethnics and Enclaves: Boston's Italian North End. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1981. 17. Bacchini, Sylvia. "The Immigrant." S.E.G. News 3, no. 1, November 14, 1914, Boston Public Library, Fine Arts Department, Boston. 18. Lazerson, Martin. Origins of the Urban School: Public Education in Massachusetts, 1870-1915. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1971. 19. Rothman, DavidJ., and Sheila M., eds. Sources of the Anerican Social Tradition. Vol. 2. New York: Basic, 1975. 20. Gordon, Milton M. Assimilation in American Life: The Role of Race, Religion, and National Origin. New York: Oxford University Press, 1964. 21. Goldstein, Fanny. "The Voice of Appreciation." S.E.G. News 3, no. 2, December 12, 1914, Boston Public Library, Fine Arts Department, Boston. 22. Tharp, Louise Hall. Adventurous Alliance. Boston: Little, Brown, 1959. 23. "Report of the North Bennet Street Industrial Home," Records of North Bennet Street Industrial School, MC 269 (hereafter referred to as NBSIS Records), series 1.1.1. Schle- singer Library, Cambridge, Massachusetts. 24. Minutes of Executive Committee Meetings, November 18, 1909, Archives of the North Bennet Street School, North Bennet Street School, Boston. 25. Annual Report, 1888-89. NBSIS Records, series 1.1.1. 26. Annual Report for the Year 1904-1905, 25th anniversary ed., NBSIS Records, series 1.1.6. 27. Kingsbury, Susan, the Women's Educational and Industrial Union, to Dodd, Alvin, direc- tor, NBSIS organization, June 22, 1909, NBSIS Records, series 2, Aviii.32. 28. "Hands Need Training." Charities (August 23, 1902): 175. 29. Annual Report, November 1901 to November 1903, NBSIS Records, series 1.1.5. 30. Annual Report, April 1901, NBSIS Records, series 1.1.5. 31. Matson, Molly, ed. An Independent Woman: The Autobiography of Edith Guerier. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1992. 32. Alcott, Louisa May, to Ricketson, Anna. Anna Ricketson Papers, bms Am 1130.2, folders 1-3 and 17, Houghton Library, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts. 33. Pratt, Anna, to Ricketson, Anna, circa 1884. Anna Ricketson Papers, bms Am 1130.1, folder 5, Houghton Library, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts. 34. Graduation Program, Vermont Methodist Seminary and Female College, 1891, Rick- etson Collection, SG 12 series D folder 1, New Bedford Whaling Museum/Old Dart- mouth Historical Society, New Bedford, Massachusetts. 35. "Register of Pupils-School of Drawing and Painting, Museum of Fine Arts," September 1891, "Edith Guerrier," vertical file, School of the Museum of Fine Arts Archives, Boston. 36. The Massachusetts Normal Art School, 28 School Street, Boston (Commonwealth of Massachusetts, Department of Education), to George Guerrier, March 3, 1879, Ricketson/Guerrier Family papers, Liakos/Gentile Collection, series F., George P. Guerrier, 1865-1912, subseries 1, correspondence, 1865-1887, the Thoreau Society Ar- chives and Collections, Concord Free Public Library, Concord, Massachusetts. 37. "Class Register," and "The Garland Kindergarten Alumnae Association Register, 1873- 1923," Records of Garland Junior College, box 1, folder 1, series I, MS 104, Simmons College Archive, Boston.
228 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 38. Meyer, Annie Nathan. Women's Work in America. New York: Holt, 1891. 39. "Public Library of the City of Boston, Records of the Corporation," Trustees Records, vol. 6, p. 260, Boston Public Library, Boston. 40. Annual Report, 1897-1898, NBSIS Records, series 1.1.4. 41. Peiss, Kathy. "'Charity Girls' and City Pleasures: Historical Notes on Working Class Sexuality, 1880-1920." In Women and Power in American History, edited by Kathryn Kish Sklar and Thomas Dublin, pp. 88-100. Englewood Cliffs, NJ.: Prentice Hall, 1991. 42. Peiss, Kathy. "Gender Relations and Working Class Leisure: New York City, 1880-1920." In "To Toil the Live Long Day": America's Women at Work, 1780-1980, edited by Carol Groneman and Mary Beth Norton, pp. 98-111. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1987. 43. Carson, Mina. Settlent FolA Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1990. 44. Howe, Irving. The World of Our Fathers. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1976. 45. Adelson, Mildred. Personal interview with author March 13, 1995. 46. Goldstein, Fanny. "Editorial." S.E.G. News 4, no. 3, January 8, 1916, Boston Public Li- brary, Fine Arts Department, Boston. 47. Trustees Records, vol. 6, pp. 224, 256, 260, 403, Boston Public Library, Boston. 48. Trustees Records, vol. 7, pp. 126, 132, 346, Boston Public Library, Boston. 49. Trustees Records, vol. 8, p. 303, Boston Public Library, Boston. 50. Trustees Records, vol. 9, pp. 119, 185, 309, 311, 343, 448, Boston Public Library, Boston. 51. Annual Rport 1904-1905, NBSIS Records, series 1.1.6. 52. The Story of the Saturday Evening Girls, Reunion, December 12, 1929, Boston Public Li- brary, North End Branch, Boston. 53. Heiman, RebeccaG. "The Library Clubhouse." S.E.G. News 3, no. 1, November 14,1914, Boston Public Library, Fine Arts Department, Boston. 54. Goldstein, Fanny. "The Story of the S.E.G. in Storytelling." S.E.C. News 3, no. 7, May 8, 1915, Boston Public Library, Fine Arts Department, Boston. 55. Heiman, Rebecca G. "The Library Clubhouse Report, 1916-1917." S.E.G. News 5, no. 8, June 9, 1917, Boston Public Library, Fine Arts Department, Boston. 56. Heiman, Rebecca G. "Report of the Library Clubhouse, September 15, 1915 to May 1916." SS..G. News 4, no. 7,June 3, 1916, Boston Public Library, Fine Arts Department, Boston. 57. Bruno, Vaine C. "A Personal Letter." S.E.G. News 2, no. 1, November 8, 1913, Boston Athenaeum, Boston. 58. Guerrier, Edith. "A Brief Survey of the L.C.H. Group." S.E.G. News 3, no. 1, November 14, 1914, Boston Public Library, Fine Arts Department, Boston. 59. Muncy, Robyn. Creating a Femak Dominion in American Reform, 1890-1935. New York: Oxford University Press, 1991. 60. Tucker, Sheila. "Lithgow Osborne Recalls Past, Looks Ahead." Citizen Advertiser (Sep- tember 21, 1974): 12. 61. Ware, Leonard. Helen Osborme Storrow, 1864-1944: A Memoir, Helen Storrow vertical file, Schlesinger Library, Cambridge, Mass., 1970. 62. Bailie, Helen Tufts. Journal Entries, 1915-1916, January 2, 1915, Sophia Smith Collec- tion, Helen Tufts Bailie Papers, Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts. 63. Pearson, Henry Greenleaf. Son of New England:JamesJackson Storrow, 1864-1926. Boston: Todd, 1932. 64. Solomon, Barbara Miller. Anceston and Immigrants. Boston: Northeastem University Press, 1989. 65. Records of the Women's City Club of Boston, Manuscript Collection M-55, Schlesinger Library, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
THE SATURDAY EVENING GIRLS 229 66. "Report of the Meetings of the Board of Managers, May 1904-April 1907," December 16, 1904, p. 43, NBSIS Records, series 1.2.15. 67. "Report of the Meetings of the Board of Managers, May 1904-April 1907," April 20, 1905, p. 71, NBSIS Records, series 1.2.15. 68. Boston Transcript. December 27, 1905, n.p. Scrapbooks, Archives, North Bennet Street School, Boston. 69. "Report of the Meetings of the Board of Managers, May 1904-April 1907," October 20, 1905, NBSIS Records, series 1.2.15. 70. "Report of the Meetings of the Board of Managers, May 1904-April 1907," Friday, May 18, 1906, NBSIS Records, series 1.2.15. 71. The Story of the Paul Revere Pottery, n.d., Boston Public Library, Boston. 72. "Report of the Meetings of the Board of Managers, May 1904-April 1907," Sept. 16, 1904, pp. 11-12, NBSIS Records, series 1.2.15. 73. Card Index: Kiln Record, 1908, NBSIS Records, series 2Bi.126. 74. "School Registers," NBSIS Records, series 4.2.42. 75. Oral history interview with Gertrude Friederman Levowich by Levowich family members, circa 1988, author's private collection. 76. Postcard, Ricketson/Guerrier Family Papers, the Liakos/Gentile Collection, Thoreau Society, Lincoln, Massachusetts. 77. Annual Report, 1909-1910, NBSIS Records, series 1.1.8. 78. Annual Report, 1910-1911, NBSIS Records, series 1.1.9. 79. Annual Report, 1911-1912, NBSIS Records, series 1.1.10. 80. "Executive Committee Meeting Minutes," April 16, 1916, Archives, North Bennet Street School, Boston. 81. Annual Report, 1908-1909, NBSIS Records, series 1.1.7. 82. Annual Report, August 1907, NBSIS Records, series 1.1.6. 83. "Fifth Exhibition of the National Society of Craftsman." Craftsman 21 (February 1912): 562-67. 84. "A Social and Business Experiment in the Making of Pottery." Handicraft 3 (February 1911): 415-16. 85. S.E.G. Sarah Gainer Bloom, interview by Barbara Kramer, daughter of S.E.G. Ethel Ep- stein, spring of 1975, Kramer private collection. 86. Pendleton, Margaret. "Paul Revere Pottery." House Beautiful (August 1912): 74. 87. Undated Paul Revere Pottery brochure, circa 1920, author's private collection. 88. Carassa, Catherine. "The S.E.G. Dramatics." S.E.G. News 2, no. 4, February 14, 1914, Boston Athenaeum, Boston. 89. Goldstein, Fanny. "A Review of the S.E.G." S.E.G. News 3, no. 6, April 10, 1915, Boston Public Library, Fine Arts Department, Boston. 90. S.E.G. News 2, no. 5, March 14, 1914, Boston Public Library, Fine Arts Department, Boston. 91. Carberg, Warren. "In Library for Over 25 Years." Unidentified newspaper article, (circa 1934), n.d., n.p., Fanny Goldstein vertical file, West End Branch Library, Boston, Massa- chusetts. 92. Goldstein, Fanny, to Guggenheim Fellowship Committee, 1927. NBSIS Records, Series 2 Aix.44. 93. Goldstein, Fanny. "Editorial." S.E.G. News 4, no. 1, Boston Public Library, Fine Arts Department, Boston. 94. Goodman, Celia. "Mrs. Pankhurst at Tremont Temple." S.E.G. Newvs 2, no. 2, December 13, 1913, Boston Athenaeum, Boston. 95. Heiman, Rebecca G. "House Notes." S.E.G. News 2, no. 7, May 16, 1914, Boston Athe- naeum, Boston.
230 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 96. Goldstein, Fanny. "Editorial." S.E.G. News 4, no. 4, February 12, 1916, Boston Public Library, Fine Arts Department, Boston. 97. Goldstein, Fanny. "Editorial." S.E.G. News 4, no. 2, December 11, 1915, Boston Public Library, Fine Arts Department, Boston. 98. Goldstein, Fanny. "Editorial." S.E.G. News 2, no. 2, December 13, 1913, Boston Athe- naeum, Boston. 99. Goldstein, Fanny. "Editorial." S.E.G. News 2, no. 8, February 14, 1914, Boston Athe- naeum, Boston. 100. Trustees Records, vol. 10, p. 196, Boston Public Library, Boston. 101. Casassa, Catherine and Rose, to Guerrier, E., "Friendship Letters to Edith Guerrier from the S.E.G.," Sept. 20, 1950, Ricketson Collection, Mss 13, Sg. 12, vol. 1, series A, New Bedford Whaling Museum and Old Dartmouth Historical Society, New Bedford, Massa- chusetts. 102. Letter to Edith Guerrier from Annie Krop Adelson, "Friendship Letters to Edith Guer- rier from the S.E.G.," Sept. 20, 1950," Ricketson Collection, Mss 13, Sg. 12, vol. 1, series A, New Bedford Whaling Museum and Old Dartmouth Historical Society, New Bedford, Massachusetts. 103. Minutes of the Saturday Evening Girls' Meetings, June 12, 1969, private collection. 104. Clark, Kellie D., and Richardson, John V. Jr., "Edith Guerier: 'A Little [Warrior] Woman of New England,' 1870-1958," Joumnal of Govenment Information 28 (January/ February 2001): in press. 105. Guerrier, Edith. We Pldge AUegiance, A Librarian's Intimate Story of the United States Food Administration. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1941. 106. Boston Transcript, August 18, 1934, n.p., Edith Guerrier vertical file, West End Branch Library, Boston, Massachusetts. 107. Christian Science Monitor (February 16, 1954), n.p., Edith Guerrier vertical file, West End Branch Library, Boston, Massachusetts. 108. Usher, Sarah M. "In Memoriarn: Edith Guerrier." In The QOestion Mark. Boston: Boston Public Library Staff Association, 1958, pp. 3-4, Edith Guerrier vertical file, West End Branch Library, Boston, Massachusetts. 109. Beal, George Brinton. "Retired Hub Librarian: 52nd Anniversary Meeting of Group She Started to Make Girls Read Books." Boston Post Magazine 3 (February 1952): n.p., Edith Guerrier verticle file, West End Branch Library, Boston, Massachusetts. 110. Bryant, Louise Stevens, to Rose Kerr, December 31, 1944, Louise Stevens Bryant Papers, Sophia Smith Collection, Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts. 111. Bailie, Helen Tufts. Journal entries, August 8, 1916, Helen Tufts Bailie Papers, Sophia Smith Collection, Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts.