THE ALEXANDER TURNBULL LIBRARY OF WELLINGTON, NEW ZEALAND CLYDE R. H. TAYLOR T | NHE writer of this account is of the staff of this library, and recently traveled through the United States study- ing the more specialized libraries of the country. When the Turnbull Library was told of, librarians frequently expressed the wish that some information as to the resources of the insti- tution should be placed before scholars and librarians of Amer- ica and Europe, in order that research workers there may know where lie the primary study sources of Oceania. I think I am correct in saying that in its main field the Turn- bull Library is unexcelled; and, taken as a whole, its resources are such as to make both book-collector and librarian alike won- der that, in such a far-distant corner of the globe, one man could gather such treasures, of both the world about him and the older world whence his forebears had come. Alexander Horsburgh Turnbull was born at Wellington, the capital of New Zealand, in i868, and was educated at Dulwich College, England. His father was a wealthy merchant of New Zealand; and after completing his studies, Alexander entered the London office of the business, where he stayed till I890. During this period he discovered the love of books that re- mained all his life with undiminished ardor. Returning to New Zealand, he took control of the business and, at the same time, organized the channels through which he bought books for the next quarter-century, till his death in 19I8. It was thus from this distant outpost that the great collection was built up which is now the pride of the people of New Zea- land, to whom it was bequeathed upon its founder's death. It was opened to the public in I920, under the control of Mr. Johannes Carl Andersen, assisted by a small staff. As libraries are reckoned now, it is a small collection, number- I82
THE ALEXANDER TURNBULL LIBRARY I83 ing about seventy thousand volumes, of which some sixty thou. sand were gathered by Mr. Turnbull. These can be grouped into three broad classes-Pacific and New Zealand literature, rare books, and English classical literature. In the first group, the scope was made to include ethnology, anthropology, Pacific languages, folk lore and voyages, apart from the general sub- jects that would be expected in such a class. The rare books in- clude a few incunabula, mainly choice items, and a great num- ber of the choicest first editions of the sixteenth to the nine- teenth centuries in English literature, with special reference to drama and poetry. There is also representation of the finest printing from the fifteenth century to the present day, crowned by a complete set of the Kelmscott Press. The English-litera- ture material supplements much that is in the rare-book section, and is especially strong in the same fields-poetry and drama. The Pacific portion embraces the islands of that ocean, as well as Australia and New Zealand. It should be said here that the library of the Bernice P. Bishop Museum of Honolulu specializes in the former region too, just as the Mitchell Library of Sydney devotes itself to Australian records. The Turnbull Library covers both, though somewhat less extensively. Of Pa- cific languages, there are some five thousand volumes, in prac- tically every tongue and dialect of these many islands. Voyaging, both Pacific and otherwise, has had special atten- tion. Hakluyt and De Bry (this set from the Huth Library) head the list, followed by Linschoten, Purchas, Cook, Vancou- ver, Burney, Pinkerton, the Hakluyt Society, Dalrymple, Tas- man and others. This is supplemented by some fine manuscript material-logs of Cook and Vancouver (a larger group of Cook journals is in the Mitchell Library); of Alvaro de Mendaina's discovery of the Solomon Islands in i 566 (Gallego's manuscript which has been translated in the Hakluyt Society Volume of I9OI); the journal of Antoneli's survey of the coast of South America in 16o8 (used in Hakluyt Society Volume XXIII [I9o8]); also, many logs of whalers and early traders, as well as the manuscript journal of New Zealand's first missionary, Rev. Samuel Marsden, kept during his visit there in i8i9. The sec-
184 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY tion is supplemented with a fine collection of Antarctic explora- tion. The fields of Australasian literature-poetry and prose-are very full up to recent years, when economy became necessary. Flora and fauna have received equal attention, as have sport and art. (I fear most librarians think with this illogical associa- tion!) In the way of art, the library contains splendid works by early New Zealand artists, such as Heaphy (the New Zealand Company draftsman whose New Zealand scenes are very valu- able historically), Barraud (two hundred water colors), Hodg- kins, the founder of the Dunedin Art Society (fifty items), Sir William Fox, Kettle, Kinder, Swainson (the zo6logical writer), and others of lesser note. There are some hundreds of modern Australian etchings, including some fine ones by Meryon; and in addition, many hundreds of historic prints referring to the region. The gem of this portion of the library is a series of over six hundred etchings by some of the greatest masters of Europe, including some fifty by Rembrandt, as well as others by Diurer, Van Dyck, Rubens, Merian, etc. This collection was presented by Bishop Monrad, Prime Minister of Denmark, who once lived in New Zealand. There was once a great collection of Maori (New Zealand na- tive) antiques and works of art, but in 19I3 Mr. Turnbull trans- ferred these to the Dominion Museum of New Zealand, where they supplement the splendid specimens there. The Maori had a fine culture, and his race was probably one of the intellectually highest of all aboriginal races. While his tools were of nothing better than the beautiful pounamou (greenstone), his achieve- ment with them and the other materials at his hand was little short of marvelous. His religion, mythology, and tradition were all on a high plane and extremely well developed. I interpolate this brief allusion to explain Mr. Turnbull's interest in the Maori and the associated races of Polynesia, which bore fruit in a fine set of books on all phases of the subject. For the scholar who would work among the great of the Old
THE ALEXANDER TURNBULL LIBRARY I85 World, there are many books of prime importance, supported by a small proportion of manuscript material. The first group here is a collection of Miltoniana, which is reputed to be equal to any outside the British Museum and contains first editions of practically everything, including the Comus, Lycidas, and five title-pages of Paradise lost. There is an interesting manuscript of Walter Begley, the translator of the Novae Solymae, as well as a group of books from his collection. Other special collections are devoted to Defoe, Swinburne, and Browning (both Robert and Elizabeth B.). These are all rich in first editions, many with autograph associations, and in the case of Browning are made more significant by reason of manuscript material. Browning had a friend in New Zealand, Alfred Domett, one of the celebrated poets of the country (his best-known work is Ranoif and A.mohia, Browning's copy of which is in the library); and much of the correspondence between the two is here. An- other antipodean correspondent of Browning was R. Hengist Horne, and many of his letters find their place here, too. Other valuable manuscripts are in the Carlyle material. These include many by Carlyle himself, Miss Jewsbury, and Mrs. Jane Welch Carlyle. This collection came from the library of Gideon Mantell, the English geologist, who was a friend of Carlyle and of Miss Jewsbury, and whose son later went to New Zealand, becoming a minister of the Crown in the gov- ernment of the day. Among the general manuscripts there are letters from the following: Professor Silliman of Yale, Lyell the geologist (over two hundred in each case), Percy B. Shelley, Charles Dickens, Bulwer-Lytton, Napoleon, Conrad, Bentley (the nephew of the great scholar), Robert Buchanan, Oscar Wilde, and a host of others, apart from many of importance in Oceania. Most librarians feel a pride in the possession of some of the great monuments among books, and I cannot refrain from men- tioning a few among the greatest of these. Of the great printers, there are examples by Peter Schoeffer (Constitutions of Clement, on vellum, I47I), Erhardt Ratdolt (Euclid's geometry, of 1482),
i86 THE LIBRdRY QUARRTERLY Nicolaus Jenson (Plutarch's lives, 1478), Aldus Manutius (Hyp- nerotomachia Poliphili, 1499), Koberger (Nuremburg chronicle, 1492), as well as by Elzevir, Caslon, Baskerville, down to Wil- liam Morris (the Chaucer), and the better among his followers of later days, such as the Ashendene Press (the Morte d'/Irthur). There is a I798 Bristol edition of Wordsworth's Lyrical ballads; the first edition of Gulliver; (I implied Robinson Crusoe with Defoe above); The deserted village (both quarto and small octa- vo, which is earlier); an author-corrected first edition of Thom- son's Seasons, and an autographed Childe Harold. There is a Shelley's Queen Mab, a Keats's Endymion and Lamia, and, more interesting, a dictionary by Nathaniel Bailey (I751) with this manuscript inscription: "John Keats, from B. B." This is pre- sumably Benjamin Bailey, the friend of Keats. It is interesting to note that Bailey's dictionary was the precursor of Johnson's. I am unable to say if Benjamin was a descendant of Nathaniel. I must not forget the great "Doctor." The dictionary of I755 is there, beside the small volume of 1760, and most of the rarer books in the Johnson field,,including Boswell's Life and that proud author's other relatively insignificant works. Among the great dramatists, there are Shakespeare's second and fourth folios, as well as Rowe's edition of 1709; Beaumont and Fletcher folios, and the first quartos of Ben Jonson are be- side them. North's Plutarch of I579, Holinshed's Chronicles of I577, Boccaccio of I620, and Stowe's Survey, show the range of mate- rial that includes representative manuscript books as early as the twelfth century, and horae of Simon Vostre of the sixteenth. One could proceed at length upon such enumeration, but I have aimed to provide only an indication of the nature of this library set so far away in the southern seas, in a climate that preserves books well, and where there is a growing culture, and by this library the means of its fostering. This wealth in first editions, it should be pointed out, was a result of Turnbull's interest in bibliography; and his reference books in this field compose the finest group in New Zealand. But ere I leave this account, I feel that less than justice is
THE ALEXANDER TURNBULL LIBRARY I87 done if I do not mention the librarian who has cared for these treasures for the past fifteen years. This is Johannes Carl An- dersen, one of New Zealand's most eminent scholars-yet him- self not by birth of that country. He is a Dane, who came to New Zealand in the eighties as a child. He is largely self-edu- cated, and has taken pleasure in many studies, of which perhaps poetry and Maori folk lore are his favorites. He has written much in these and other fields, and opportunity has enabled him to use material that often was fast being lost. Here are some of his published works which show his many-sided activities: Songs unsung, The lamp of Psyche, Maori life in Aotea, Maori tales, Bird songs and New Zealand song birds, Maori stringfigures, Laws of verse, and Myths and legends of the Polynesians. Mr. Andersen is an editor of the 7ournal of the Polynesian So- ciety, and a Fellow of the New Zealand Branch of the Royal So- ciety. His interests are many, and his imprint upon the culture of our country inestimable and such as will be enduring. So, for the northern world-and to some extent for the south- ern too-I have given a suggestion, so that the student in the fields where the Turnbull Library is rich may know where to turn for the page that will enlighten him. Kia ora!