THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Volume XVI APRIL 1946 Number 2 THE AMERICAN LIBRARY ABROAD: A MEDIUM OF INTERNATIONAL INTELLECTUAL EXCHANGE RICHARD H. HEINDEL THE AMERICAN LIBRARY IN LONDON is country has pioneered in ex- panding library services for its own public. It turned naturally and wisely to exploring the uses of li- braries as an instrument in an interna- tional program. The American Library in London, conceived in August and established in December, I942, by the Office of War Information in the United States Embassy, was the first official li- brary outside continental United States. (It has been preceded by the privately managed American Library in Paris, 1920, and the Benjamin Franklin Li- brary, opened in Mexico City, April 13, I942, through a grant to the American Library Association by the Department of State.) Thus it became a pilot project for other Office of War Information li- braries and information centers through- out the world. It was the first library energetically open to the public in any embassy anywhere in the world. NVhen the Office of War Information went out of existence, the American Li- brary in London, along with other infor- mational services, was transferred to the jurisdiction of the Department of State. Assistant Secretary Benton now places an objective of sixty-five library centers high in the program of international in- formation and cultural affairs. In Janu- ary, 1946, a Division of Libraries and Institutes was established in the Depart- ment of State. The objectives of these outpost libraries have been the same. They deal in facts and solidly docu- mented explanations on the assumption that the more the truth about America is known and understood, the better for all concerned. In varying degrees, depend- ing on their origins, adaptability to foreign situations, management, size, and experience, they blend the familiar characteristics of reading-rooms, public and special libraries, reference centers, and information offices. The American Library in London now has among its constant users all branches of the United States government and all British and other government agencies and subdivisions in Great Britain. It has built relations with about eight hundred organizations and societies and three hundred and fifty business firms. It has worked through and with about a hun- dred and seventy-five libraries. It has touched most of the schools-larger pri- vate schools, training colleges, on through to the universities, with some regard for regional coverage. 93
94 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY THE LIBRARY' S REIATIONSHIP WITH THE BRITISH PRESS By systematic use a very large portion of the American Library collection has become the basis of printed comment. Perhaps in England more than anywhere else, it has been shown how much library material can become source material for current comment if some effort is made to assist the whole range of publications to whose use it can be adapted. One dare not undervalue the significance of such spontaneous comment, especially since the Library has no branches and since the Office of War Information did almost no mass distribution of its own within the British Isles. Nearly all the daily, the Sunday, and, to a lesser extent, the provincial press and magazines, including the trade and technical press, have become regular clients of the Library, in spite of the fact that, because of a division of labor with other sections of the British Division of the Office of War Information, certain areas are not directly cultivated by the Library staff. The Library does not write special articles or make extensive, origi- nal research reports-it blends and sug- gests the raw materials. The office record of printed comment is unsystematic and incomplete because nothing short of a cumbersome and ex- pensive clipping service would give ade- quate coverage. Some of the items issued, for example, through the News Division turn up in print several steps removed from the Library and are difficult to document. Nor is it easy to ascertain the use made of Library materials by au- thors who have drawn on these resources for their books or by agencies charged with preparing publications for Europe. The staff must rely on imagination, spot checks on British newspapers and pe- riodicals, and correspondence to appraise the trends. Perhaps it should be explained, before proceeding further, that the staff ex- amines nearly every page and item which comes into the Library with this question in mind: What four or five persons in Great Britain should be notified immedi- ately that such and such is here, and who can make the most use of it? Often, but not exclusively, this assists the publications which put some value on news, on fresh- ness. And this is true especially where so much print never reaches the cables or where many items are missed and hence remain for some time unique or rare. All of this may seem like dull work. It is not. A thorough examination of the whole process becomes an appraisal of intellectual cross-currents, as exciting as being on crowded cross-roads of life and mind. Flowing in is the wealth of Ameri- can life in print, sifted by such vagaries as the Atlantic passage, war, wartime shipping, and budgets. And one works within the British community, which never lends itself to easy explanations. The raw materials with which we work are books, magazines, and documents published in the United States. Each item has its own peculiarities, and each class of publication its own more general characteristics. It is not that one has to make translations, but rather adjust- ments for use. And questions continually come up. What will critics do about American books not yet generally avail- able? Do the British specialists already know the American specialized maga- zines? Do they know the general maga- zines that might occasionally be of greater interest to them? Where do hear- ings before Congress fit in with the ponderous monographs? There is the cold fact or information or experience, un- altered in.the text, clear, and subject to
THE AMERICAN LIBRARY ABROAD 95 international consideration-but where does it stand in its country of origin? Irrespective of such matters, which can be explored, there is always the prob- lem of using the diversified materials wisely, especially those records which the United States produces normally for its own use or enjoyment-to record its life, experience, achievements, its critical explorations. No one country can absorb all of another country, not even its print. One fundamental question, now that we are interested in the free flow of data and in the understanding overseas of our country, is whether we should be ner- vously concerned with our domestic out- put lest it completely mislead the world or be interpreted to mean what we think we do not mean. On the basis of our ex- perience in England, the answer is that we need not be unduly concerned-cer- tainly not to the extent of making pot- boilers for export. We ought not to trim and cut, and especially not to tailor to suit the whimsies of foreign countries. One may have to alter the sound track of our movies, but not the printed page. Nothing that has happened in England need lead us to censor ourselves severely in order to contribute our share to the total international flow of data; at the most, it has indicated some areas in which we could usefully add to our na- tional output. THE RANGE OF SUBJECTS AND TYPES OF DOCUMENTATION Surrounded by a pocket of Americana, in an American embassy, one is forced to muse on developments in the homeland. To what extent has the war forced or re- tarded the expression or cultivation of fields of knowledge? Clearly some ground has continued to be plowed that England had to neglect after long years of war. But the output remains varied-confus- ing, satisfying, annoying, slightly biased, slightly strident here and there. Much man-power, even thought-power, still goes into expression. New experiences are being put into print. Censorship at home has not been such as to cause misgivings overseas. More than any other country, we air our dirty linen and show how we are washing it. There is still a luxurious padding upon original research and thought. The work of the years of I939-42 is still creeping into print. One becomes proud of the vigor shown. Often the appeal is sufficient to draw the emphasis away from science, technology, economics, and American opinions to- ward thought, belles-lettres, general lit- erature, even sociology. Very often the commonplace is not commonplace when exported. The very local, unheralded item may have a place just as important as the best-seller. The well-thumbed desk handbook may be a great discovery in foreign parts. The wares are good; and they are getting better. No student of comparative history would hazard the guess that everything has universal meaning or relevance. But the wares make the pur- veyor proud, especially in a community in which one can also be proud of the na- tive products. The chances seem good that in the vast quantity from an articu- late country there will be many items of quality that strike a response beyond our boundaries. And, at the worst, some- times what is meaningless in content is suggestive in format. The American book output is not out of line with the trends of interest in Eng- land. Indeed, given the opportunity, cer- tain books could probably swamp the British market, in spite of many ob- stacles, because the native books have been delayed by the shortage of paper or
96 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY of authors. Moreover, the American university presses and many of our or- ganizations and institutions seem to have a wider range and a greater wealth in output. This is one way of saying that in a pinch one seems able to find an Ameri- can book on any subject or area of life- a fact which makes it easier to share our experience and which frequently leads to fruitful foreign appraisal. A book once launched is very much like an idea. No one can quite ascertain the result. It may not be known at all abroad, or it may, regardless of merit, contribute more abroad than at home. In the two and a half years since the Library began, probably no book as in- fluential as Das Kapital or The Origin of Species or the Institutes has passed through the mechanism. Yet we may be wrong in making this judgment. With- out overemphasizing the value of cur- rent products (or accepting publishers' blurbs), we must admit the possibility that in their applicability to this genera- tion, in their bearing upon important events, some of them may turn out to be works of comparable stature. One observation is reaffirmed by work overseas, namely, that American scholar- ship, writing ability, and good publish- ing, with few exceptions, have not got together to produce the short, broad- gauged, expert, well-illustrated, easily translatable exposition of any aspect of American life or thought. Our magazines will hold their own and so will the heavy monographs and the "basic" histories running to 550 pages and, more and more, the pamphlets; but there is a gap in the middle zone, the ioo-page region, which would help the foreigners to begin and which surely would not harm the domestic population. (An exception can be made, perhaps, by citing some of our textbooks used for collateral reading, but it is not very complimentary to rely solely on material addressed to juveniles; juvenility is not the same as brevity or simplicity.) There is a definite lack of short but adult books on, for example, American agriculture, sports, rivers, his- tory, medical progress, clubs, birds, music, literature, lakes, states, politics, courts, eating habits, women, or any of the five hundred industries. If our con- cern with explanation overseas forces the growth of this mature distillation and writing, we shall be lucky. Here and there, now and then, some subjects are covered more fully in Ameri- can writings. This is true of certain fields of science and technology, of fuller ex- planations of industry and social life, and of the detailed study of mass educa- tion and communications. Sometimes a problem met with early in the United States has produced a useful account for London as a center of an empire-the T.V.A., many portions of agricultural bibliography, race relations, and the like. Sometimes it would seem that an unduly large portion of our sociological studies never escape from the specific problem into a broader social context, but this does not necessarily displease the expert. Our simple technical hand- books, as well as many of our school textbooks, equipped with various teach- ing devices, are sometimes suggestive. Clearly, great credit accrues to the United States, as our native publishing industry and scholarship widen their coverage of knowledge of other coun- tries. It should not have to be repeated that overseas it is just as important in our contribution to know not only the rivers of America but what the people on those rivers write about rivers of the world. This may explain why such items as the two-volume Eminent Chinese of the Ch'ing Period or The Letters of Mary
THE AMERICAN LIBRARY ABROAD 97 W. Shelley or The Scholar and the Future of the Research Library or English Social History (written by an eminent English historian but available first to the Ameri- can public) can interest the daily press of London, and in a context which stimu- lates further exploration of whatever is in the American Library. General and trade and technical peri- odicals form the two major classes of the six hundred American magazines re- ceived at the Library. Both reflect less wartime austerity in size, staff, content, and illustrations than do comparable British periodicals. Naturally, the general, more popular, magazines are used constantly for back- ground data and for special articles. Many of our popular magazines in native editions are well known here, especially the National Geographic, but are not so widely available as in peacetime. In this sense the Library's copies have a premi- um value, and much can be done to draw these magazines to the attention of journalists, editors, and others who often find them of important professional interest in carrying on their own jobs. It is probably true that American magazines are being cited more fre- quently, within copyright limitations. In both classes there has been an in- crease in requests for exchange copies. Very often the flow of these magazines to important editorial points in England is not so comprehensive as one might ex- pect; hence the increased value of work- ing with a wide range of such periodicals in one place. There are many American magazines of both classes which do not have "opposite numbers" in England; but this does not imply that there is not an important, even though small, audi- ence for such journals. The presence of this variety of magazines also encourages and helps British writers to judge pos- sible American outlets for their products. Generally the aim has been to ac- quaint more of the British public with the variety of the American periodical output. Perhaps higher returns have come from directing attention to maga- zines that do not have mass circulation at home and do not seem to be sufficient- ly well known in England. In this cate- gory one could mention: Saturday Review of Literature, Federal Reserve Bulletin, Foreign Commerce Weekly, Business Week, Hospital Corps Quarterly, Public Opinion Quarterly, American Literature, National Parent-Teacher, School and So- ciety, Monthly Labor Review, Infantry Journal, Survey Graphic, Book Review Digest, Books A broad, Journal of Home Economics, Editor and Publisher, Public Administration Review, and, indeed, nearly all the specialized journals in every field. Often conscientious students of Amer- ican opinion have not seen a sufficient sampling of our magazines of controversy and opinion. British editors of religious periodicals do not always see even their denominational counterparts. Our pub- lications in the social field offer outlets that do not exist in England at the mo- ment; this may make less easy the formal reporting of the contents of such jour- nals, but the long-term influence is great even though such social reporting is not yet so highly specialized in Great Britain in any one or two magazines. Our trade journals have an added appeal because they seem to reflect the fuller reporting which is often described by foreigners as a special characteristic of American industry. American magazines represent a very rich mine that requires more digging than can be expected even from the for- eigner who is enthusiastic or personally
98 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY committed to following the world out- put in certain subjects or types of maga- zines. Abstracting may help a few, but someone like a traffic manager, with few prejudices and a personal touch, has here a job to do for some years to come. Special overseas editions, at their most expensive development, would be pos- sible for only a very small part of the American output. Britons and Ameri- cans not concerned with publishers' gymkhanas can, nevertheless, foresee no contusions from any improvement in circulation. Even at home the range and location of official publications of the federal government are bewildering; if to this we add the many significant items from the forty-eight states, we have a major problem of unfreezing frozen documents. Yet in these official publications, of which the Library has a fair sample, are recorded many of the most important aspects of our life in a rich, though some- times forbidding, way. If we recall the endless possibilities of "Extension of Remarks" in the Congressional Record, there is almost no subject which is not covered. The scope has remained wider than that of the publications of His Majesty's Stationery Office under war circumstances. The federal documents are not copyrighted, which means great- er freedom of use overseas. They are also very frank-to the extent that one. must be cautious in countries where libel laws are strict. It is quite true, also, that, unlike those of some other countries, our official publications are so varied that these documents cannot always be described as statements of policy. More often they are the preliminaries for the conclusions. They are in many ways the public tutor of a vast and democratic country. The existence of the publications of the Na- tional Resources Planning Board is still an important fact, despite the death of the issuing body. As at home but, of course, to a greater degree, many types of documents have been practically un- used in England: hearings before Con- gress, court reports, our intelligence re- ports on other countries, and so on. There are often news and human in- terest in these documents, which vary from one page to a few thousands. They are not always so statistical as alleged- witness the Marshall report on the Army and the first report by the Direc- tor of War Mobilization. But a traffic manager is needed here even more than with magazines. It would be too much to say that one could have a good library composed solely of our official publications, but it would not be useless. We have not been in the habit of making these inexpensive documents easy for the American to buy; it has been different in England, where the population is accustomed to have the official publications offered for sale through official shops as well as through booksellers. This makes even more in- teresting the arrangement whereby His Majesty's Stationery Office acts as a sales agent for the publications of the Government Printing Office. But more relevant to the topic of this essay is the fact that from time to time during the last two years the Stationery Office has reprinted United States official publica- tions-ten to date. Now and then, where the reprint has been wanted for a smaller or more specialized audience, the reprinting has been done by an as- sociation-for example, the report on interregional highways, which was issued in England by the Cement and Concrete Association. There is every reason to believe that several of these documents have sold more widely in Great Britain
THE AMERICAN LIBRARY ABROAD than in the United States! This sales and reprinting agreement has empha- sized in the information program the use of the normal, not the ad hoc, govern- ment document. Perforce the news significance of many of these documents when issued in the United States is missed by foreign cor- respondents, who, anyway, could not cable in great detail. The editor and the journalist often prefer the full text for study, and it has happened frequently that, with a little regard for local needs, publications as much as two years old have been brought to light. One could cite many examples, such as the various Temporary National Economic Com- mittee Hearings and Monographs, which have only now received the study they merit. Obviously, there is a rush for any item which has been mentioned in cables from the United States, and this is usual- ly an opportune time to draw attention to several other documents which have not been so honored. This clearly illus- trates the point that the fuller the ex- amination of such documents in print at home, the more probable it is that such documents will ultimately receive at- tention abroad. Hence, anything which expedites the sharing of the federal docu- mentation with the whole American public sooner or later makes the dis- semination overseas that much easier. Also, the cabling of full texts, wherever possible, should be encouraged; but there are obvious limitations to this process. Quite frankly, with the exception pos- sibly of the daily weather charts, prac- tically nothing issued by the federal and state governments should be considered as too local to be of possible interest. (And even the daily weather charts which happen to drift in can put reality into the classroom study of the United States!) The Bureau of Labor Statistics, for example, has prepared studies on various communities and the impact of the war on such communities as an aid to local planning groups; these, on first sight, seem very local indeed, yet they show how federal resources can help and, when the communities under study are matched with communities with similar problems in Great Britain, or with in- dustrial specialities, trade and local journals will squeeze space for comment. The wide range and hidden wealth of unofficial pamphlets, documents, reports, and the like require even more attention and are more difficult to use fully. Gen- erally, these categories have never been handled by commercial channels because of little hope of profit, and it is difficult to see any improvement in the future. Whether pamphleteering has increased and improved in the United States dur- ing the war may be a question, but cer- tainly much of the life of America is put into this form and into many organiza- tional reports and limited near-print editions. One might presume that American pamphlets and particularly organiza- tional reports would have some circula- tion because of the natural interest of corresponding groups or organizations in England. And there is a great value if contact between such groups can be es- tablished outside of the Library. Here we are citing primarily those vast num- bers of publications which transcend the group for which they were written in the United States. Many of our book- lets and pamphlets are examples of the vast enlightenment or convincing process that must go on in a democracy, and these often are important for both meth- od and content. There are wide areas of publications
I00 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY which are difficult to follow in the Unit- ed States, even with such an' index as the Vertical File Service or various trade- catalog services; but this is not a reason to suppose that special attention should not be drawn to such items overseas. It is often the ten-page mimeograph re- port that, properly handled, results in a healthful two-way exchange. And the pamphlet, often more easily understood abroad than a book and sometimes more adaptable for translation, should not be snubbed merely because it is as difficult for a library to handle as a book. Also, without trying to estimate their num- bers, not many annual reports of our more national organizations are so bar- ren of interest as not to strike a response, given some special care. Many of these publications are either free or very in- expensive and hence are not given much care by commercial agents. In using such documentation, full explanations are frequently needed to guide the foreign users to place such pub- lications in true perspective. This is a heavy responsibility because of the great variety of issuing agencies. Yet this very variety of purpose, size, rep- resentation, and methods is one reason for the world significance of American life, and the process of explanation can become a practical way to approach American history. Further, once there is a fair number of overseas libraries, the home servicing base gets more returns for the pains taken to canvass this field. And the issuing agencies themselves should attempt to meet legitimate over- seas interests. THE RANGE OF BRITISH PUBLICATIONS Before discussing the wartime peculi- arities of the British publications, let us first look at the general characteristics as they affect the work we have been trying to do. There is not much language difficulty. There is a national daily press which tends to obscure the very impor- tant role of the "provincials." The press is a free press. There is a great variety, which may not, however, include certain specialities for which the United States has become well known. The printing and publishing industry, which has its ups and downs as does ours, is a proud one and perhaps is much more conscious of the importance of overseas readers. The tenor of much of the publishing is slightly different from ours because of the libel laws. The industry, even in normal times, would seem to achieve its output with fewer persons and lower costs in all branches of the business. But it is the severe print and staff shortage coincident with the war that is important. This, coupled with an ab- normality of communications, has been the principal wartime influence which conditions this aspect of our work. These factors are at work in newspapers, peri- odicals, and books, in house organs, members' bulletins, and the like. The print shortage means that news- papers economize carefully on what could normally be turned into back- ground and feature material. Magazines cannot always do justice to data which otherwise would appeal to them. Book publishers cannot let themselves get excited by a wide variety of books they would like to import or publish. Both the staff shortages and the abnormality of communications tend, however, to increase the value of whatever the Li- brary can do in spotting and circulating information. In addition, the Library must have some knowledge of the edi- torial preferences and readers' interests. This is more important than a close scrutiny of audited circulations-where they exist. The writers and free-lance
THE AMERICAN LIBRARY ABROAD ioi journalists, as well as the editors, can be helped by the Library. So far as our own work is concerned, we must sense the diffusion and pulling power of the various outlets. Often that appraisal must lead us to suggest data which do not, at first sight, seem directly of interest to this or that outlet. For ex- ample, a substantial study on housing by a trade-union may be wanted for evalua- tion by an architectural, a general labor, a trade-union, or an adult-education paper. And even under peacetime com- munications, one can be fairly certain that such an item does not reach over- seas the entire professional audience which desires to know. Obviously, the London daily press is interested in cabled information from their own correspondents or the press agencies or the News Division, which works closely with the Library. Often the News Division can supplement its cabled output by general releases to the press based on documentation which comes by mail. On occasion, as with Willkie's One World, the press is in- formed that a complete text is available for consultation in the Library. There are always limitations on what can be brought by cable by any agency, in war or peace; and this would indicate that the Library can always perform certain ''news'' roles as far as the daily press is concerned. Over and above the refer- ence queries-the answers to which filter into print-that are but a part of the daily Library routine, the press has browsed through the Library, or has been informed of certain new accessions, and both of these activities will net ever increasing results as the papers gain more space and specialties. The Sunday press, which is based in London, does not differ much in this respect except that perhaps it will al- ways be more receptive to data which can make or help features. Except to the extent that Library data reach the pro- vincial press through agency releases, the Library's service to that portion of the press must be done in a more inti- mate way, usually by correspondence. But here there is always an x-quantity of service that may be performed of a type which illustrates, further, the ac- tive role of interpretation which is en- couraged on the part of editors and writers who have adequate data before them. There are a few columnists who write for a string of provincial papers. One of them, "Augur," has constantly referred to our books and documents, and, where it has seemed possible for us to cope with the demand, he has asked readers to get in touch with us by way of their local libraries. Our lending by post has often proved its value in print. The general weekly, monthly, and quarterly magazines have different needs. Some have mass circulation, oth- ers have very little. They are more likely to benefit by the breadth of the docu- mentation available. Here is where a specimen selection of publications on some topic often results in a basic ar- ticle. The technique of spotting special- ized information does not profit so much as with the trade and technical press. It is in this latter field that much has been accomplished. These journals often edi- torialize more than do similar American magazines, so that such data are used for something more than technical ab- stracting or reporting. Such use also stimulates the requests for illustrations. I would not care to discuss the relative diffusion power of the general magazines and those magazines which appeal to specialized audiences. Some British ob- servers lament what they call the weak power and status of these general maga-
102 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY zines, especially those of opinion. They say the weeklies, the monthlies, and the quarterlies have slipped. New magazines are always being planned. Some of them seem to represent a combination of ap- peals which closely resembles that of certain American magazines, and, as in the field of social work previously men- tioned, they may conceivably furnish new outlets for American items that at the moment are not easily marked for special attention. There is a tradition, which has some merits, that magazines will not review books (our reference copies) which are not given to them as review copies or are not available to purchasers immedi- ately in quantity. With shipping and shortages what they are, this is a most serious block to an appraisal of the American output. American publishers and their British literary or publishing agents often have good commercial rea- sons for not wishing a preliminary listing or noting that such and such an item exists, even though experts and other consumers might want this knowledge. One must remember, however, that, even under conditions of normal sup- ply, the greater percentage of American books will not be published in England or even imported in any quantity. And many of these are "news" and vital to the flow of knowledge and to the projec- tion of the United States and should not go unnoted. For each item that suffers in remain- ing unpublished or unimported be- cause of some preliminary appraisal which might be critical-to state one of the strongest arguments for this tradi- tion-one could adduce a hundred con- trary examples which would have bene- fited commercially both British and American principals, to say nothing of the general public. Obviously, there are good reasons, if one can manage, to have a spare copy or so to help in this proc- ess, which may often take the form of encouraging interested editors or re- viewers to apply for review copies di- rectly through established channels. Where appropriate, some of these books are treated as "news" or a basis for comments rather than as formal re- views which may or may not (usually not) come later. This technique lessens the irritations of the readers who, we are told, would rather not know a book exists if they cannot get it and safeguards editors who think they might be sued for commenting on something not sent di- rectly by the issuing agent for comment. Perhaps the wide range of our collec- tion is most useful to British literary agents, book importers, and publishers who serve in a long-term way. So long as our collection is up to date and compre- hensive (perhaps more so with nonfiction than with fiction, which tends to have more momentum of its own), all such persons have a wider area upon which to exercise choice and discrimination and to calculate profit. This applies both to well-established firms with impressive lists and long connections with the Unit- ed States and to newer firms which, no doubt, may have more need for guidance. The selection of books for publishing overseas (or translation) has always seemed a haphazard process, governed by many motives and factors; and any- thing which can assist or stimulate, even modestly, will help both the industry and the public, nay, even the creative writer, on both sides of the Atlantic. Thus, the Library helps provide stim- ulation for more American books with Bntish imprints. But this is not its only service to the book trade. In the books by British authors, in yearbooks, in revisions of encyclopedias and standard
THE AMERICAN LIBRARY ABROAD 103 reference books, the use of our collection often tums up in acknowledgments, pref- aces, and footnotes. We need not labor this point, because all libraries of any significance attempt to give special help to the writer. There are association bulletins, house organs, wall newspapers, abstracts, and bibliographies which are often more important than their appearance would suggest. For example, the editor of a confidential mimeographed bulletin which goes to at least fifty leading ex- ecutives draws heavily and wisely on our resources, and his advice brings re- quests to us for borrowing, and to his own office for spare copies, from every part of the British Isles. This particular bulletin did much to convey ideas (those which were public property, not secrets) to benefit the joint war effort. Hansard, which is like our Congressional Record, contains the proceedings of Parliament, where one may often find American items referred to by Members in question-time or debate. Where Members on their own initiative do cite some document or book, the general response would show that this is an important bibliographical citation. Because of the foreign-language press in England, much of the Library ma- terial has become familiar to Conti- nental editors and readers, who, often for the first time, have been brought into touch with the American output. One might mention the Biuletyn of the As- sociation of Polish Technicians in Great Britain. Sometimes, because of the facili- ties of London as a communications center, press agencies, travelers, and others have carried by print the infor- mation they found in this Library into India, Egypt, New South Wales, Switz- erland, Sweden, and West Africa. In all these activities connected with these many outlets, copyright and the proprieties have been maintained. THE ROLE OF THE LIBRARY AND TRENDS IN ITS USE This institution can be described in part as a special library for the British community; it could have been merely a reading-room or a lending library. With- in limits it attempts to give to the com- ponents of the community the same at- tention as a company library may give to its directors. Naturally, there are limitations to the amount of personal service, but common sense would dic- tate that the press which serves this na- tion should get high priority. As one organism in a framework of international information programs and intellectual co-operation, no one can minimize the practical working base that a library can give to real and reciprocal co-operation. It can be something of a common meet- ing-ground appealing to all types and tastes. Likewise, every effort is directed to- ward stimulating an active native in- terest in the documentation and not to- ward pauperizing by doing detailed re- search or other chores which other people are paid to do. It might be impressive if we could give countless items to editors and the like; it might be alleviating if we re-wrote here and there; but certainly the end result is better if we have en- couraged and helped others to put this documentation into their native chan- nels in their own idiom, and sometimes by ways which have been not usual but certainly not dishonest. In time these methods might recapture something of the universal world of information which the Encyclopedists dreamed of and which some early scientists tried to con- vey by handwritten correspondence. There might even in time be devices
104 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY such as the microcards (books and docu- ments co-operatively classified on cards with the text photographed on the re- verse side), which could cope with the problems of copyright and research and the wealth of print all at one stroke. We have tried by reading, conversa- tions, hints, and rumors to gain some indication of the fields of interest of the British publications and those who write for them. We have tried to watch in- coming additions with their possible in- terests in mind and have, without bur- densome insistence, drawn these items to their attention. We have watched for news pegs. In short, as information specialists we have conceived of our job as that of an editor or reader for a great chain of publications and the library collection as a vast reservoir of "manu- scripts" which are seeking readers. American and other readers of an analysis such as this are always strongly curious about the trends of inquiries- who wants this or that information, and why. Two and a half years' experience in the Library has indicated several gen- eral trends which I shall try to sum- marize briefly. Documentation is being referred to for increasingly serious purposes. The proportion of elementary questions has declined rapidly. Persons who are be- coming at home with publications which they had never used express surprise and some regrets for their previous oversight. Presumably, this may have happened because some of the data have possessed a scarcity value which evokes a response even in a tough-skinned jour- nalist. Almost without exception, users of all shades of opinion have examined and used this material within a frame- work of good journalism and professional integrity, even though the item in ques- tion may have been counter to their- or our staff's-opinions or knowledge. Great Britain has had a coalition gov- ernment. But I doubt whether this has any bearing on what I have observed- that we are used about equally by the Conservative, Labour, and Liberal press. The subject fields of military affairs, industry, economics, education, science, international relations, politics, and American opinions have attracted more attention than art or music or literature, but not much more than the very broad aspects of American life which might be classified as history. A few persons are averse to using American documen- tation, but I do not detect any common charateristics among them; they may be professional people or they may be free-lancers; they may be poor or rich, radical or conservative. There is another thing that awakens interest in American life, and that is the periodic examnination of social questions in Parliament and public. A debate on housing or education or health insur- ance in Parliament starts a great many questions as to how we deal with these matters in America. To say that one cannot predict with assurance the tenor of the conclusions that will be drawn by British commenta- tors with American data before them is not to say that an information program is haphazard. The dynamic influence of sound information is justified in the long run. If we define the impact of the United States so as to include (i) the knowledge of, or interest in, the United States; (2) the opinions and attitudes about the United States; and (3) the imitation, modification, or use of the American experience, we may apply this analysis more limitedly to the role of American
THE AMERICAN LIBRARY ABROAD I05 printed matter. The use of the data may stress now one, now another, of the three aspects. Further, no matter what the composite effect may be, a full critical examination of these data, or assistance toward it, cannot but be useful to Ameri- cans. To give a sensible total picture of the printed uses would require an explana- tion which would come close to being a longish essay in British intellectual his- tory. Let us, rather, try to set down a few illustrations-not necessarily the most exciting, the most significant, or the most convincing. By tearing apart the reference copy of Stettinius' Lend-Lease, photostating, farming out the chapters to editors by agreement, and announcing on the news tape the whereabouts of the complete edition, the British press was able to give ample coverage to this volume on the date of its publication in the United States. There are probably more books than we imagine which could, with profit to the public, be given such attention. Historians may well withhold judg- ment on Hoffman and Grattan's News of the Nation, a newspaper history of the United States, but I must select one com- ment from a famous press club: "You will not be surprised to hear that it has excited keen interest among our mem- bers. I have come across no one who has seen anything of the sort before, and the verdict is that it is an astonishing piece of work.... We wonder how British history would fit into such a scheme." Might we not expect in time, with adap- tation and improvement, some results stemming from this, even though the club member may be wrong in saying no one in England has tried this technique? The editor of a British hospital jour- nal, not a regular subscriber, writes thus of the special hospital number of the Journal of the American Medical Asso- ciation dropped on his desk: "A most wonderfully informative number. In- deed, American hospital papers have always excited my greatest admiration- and envy ! I think your country provides a grand yardstick for the common good in this branch of the press.;' Two years ago, a few copies of the U.S. Public Health Code for eating and drinking establishments attracted at- tention because it fitted in with random observations made by American soldiers; recently one of these copies turned up as a feature in a daily newspaper which aimed at connecting it with some current local comment regarding the improve- ment of pubs. The fact that the State Department has begun to explain its foreign policies by radio and leaflets has in itself pro- voked interest among journalists. The Evening Standard of May i6 says this: "To those responsible for the Conserva- tive Party's ineffectual propaganda leaf- lets, I recommend a study of some pamphlets just issued in America by the State Department ... . Obviously the pamphlets are the work of very compe- tent experts in publicity. Perhaps the Conservative Party will take the hint." This sort of conclusion is, of course, not of our making! Many items elicit a comment similar to that in Fairplay (February 8, I945) regarding an investigation by the In- dustrial Hazards Division of the Bureau of Labor Statistics-"pursued with typical trans-Atlantic thoroughness," although it should be noted that this phrase may have derogatory overtones. Generally there is a majority which would agree with the British and Colonial Printer (March 22, 1945)--" the quality
io6 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY of American technical literature always is excellent." In I941 the Department of Agricul- ture published Family Expenditures for Furnishings and Equipment. This can still be news, and worth banner head- lines, if the "opposite numbers" have not seen it. Thus, the Furnishing World, for August, I944, to whom this was shown: America is a go-ahead nation. Most of us recognize this fact--some of us grudgingly- but do we ever ask ourselves why this is so? .... The fact is that America owes a great deal of her progressiveness to these very ideas, and one of the most important of them is the continual survey she makes of individual industries..... If this could be done in such a widely scattered and widely populated country as America, why can't it be done in this country? Then follow six pages devoted to the gist of the survey. Often there is a call for action. The Model Railway News (February, I944) in its leader states: "We have lately been privileged to see what is described as a 'Teacher's Kit, Railroad Transporta- tion'; and, to make use of a vulgarism, we must say it is a real eye-opener..... We strongly commend the idea of this scheme to the attention of our own edu- cational authorities." Frequently those who have no in- terest in the United States find mirrored in her documents a core of experience which has meaning for specialists or practical men immersed in professional subjects or interested in the affairs of other countries. It must be repeated that often the best contribution is the service which transcends specific data about the United States. If the most recent article on Brazil's sugar industry appears by American hands in the Foreign Commerce Weekly and that arti- cle is reprinted with due acknowledg- ment, at least three nations are bene- fited. This does not mean that the in- tention is to present the United States as an interpreter and an information service for other countries; rather, the emphasis is on the value of knowledge in general, whatever its source. True, this cannot be a priority purpose of our or- ganization. In fact, it need not be pro- claimed at all so long as the staff has imagination as to the range of the proce- dures which make effective the principal and stated purposes. British correspondents in the United States, like their American counter- parts, are not always awake to dramatic news stories released by various govern- ment departments. A mimeographed United States Treasury release on the capture of some international "drug barons," issued in Washington, drifted to us by post one month later. One of the London Sunday papers treated it as sensational news and a scoop two weeks later; I am afraid they prodded their correspondent in New York to dig more carefully thereafter. The footnote to this, it should be added, was that the story also gave some hints as to the efficiency of our law-enforcement officers. When a Member of Parliament criti- cized on February i6, 1944, "There is no mention of Infant Care, which is a pub- lication of the American Children's Bureau," he started a train of events which placed a copy of this publication in every important quarter in the British Isles. On November 28, i944, a Member of Parliament asked the Minister of Labour "if, in the preparation of the booklet advising Service men on de- mobilisation and kindred matters, cog- nisance will be taken of the U.S. War Department Pamphlet No. 2I1-4, 'Going Back to Civilian Life,' published on gth March last; and if he will ensure that
THE AMERICAN LIBRARY ABROAD 107 the British booklet will be at least as comprehensive and easy to understand as the American counterpart." Some of the technical manuals pro- duced by our War Department might just as well be marked "secret," be- cause they are usually an unknown quantity to civilians. Editors have been glad to see these. I am certain consider- able good was done for Anglo-American relations by getting long notices on TM lo-406, which was another name for "Cooking Dehydrated Foods" ! But enough of these illustrations. There are two general observations in conclusion. Judging from the few appraisals one can find, the American people cannot yet be fully aware of the overseas influences exerted by the printed matter which is so familiar to them. The influences will differ in every quarter of the globe. In a community as sturdy and sophisticated as Great Britain, one can be certain there will be healthy absorption, not an addled overabsorption, for mutual ad- vantage. The second point is that libraries (or should we stress the human element: librarians?) can view the years ahead with a renewed sense of imagination, service, and vigor. Granted this, they can claim to be one of the proudest and liveliest of the works of man.