Children and youth are important users of the public library system (Howard 2011a), and, in recent years, libraries have employed systematic efforts to boost, in particular, the participation of children and youth in library programming (Jones and Waddle 2002; Rothbauer, Walter, and Weibel 2011). In part, these efforts respond to research findings suggesting that youth use of the public library is relatively low, with estimates indicating that about one-third of youth visit the library only one or fewer times in a given year (Howard 2011a). Investigating how and why children and teens use public library services has been identified as an important focus for library research (Walter 2003). Although some work has been conducted on this topic (e.g., Walter and Markey 1997; Howard 2011a), there is still little known about characteristics of children and youth who do (and alternatively who do not) elect to participate in library-based programs, as the data typically collected by public library systems tend to be restricted to general program outputs (e.g., the number of youth who sign up for various programs, the number of youth who complete a given program). Despite pressure from external agencies for institutional accountability over the past decade to expand outputs to include user outcome data collection measures (Howard 2011b; Lance et al. 2011), the more defining characteristics of those served still need to be examined. For instance, it is not clear whether the children and youth who elect to participate in public library programming are those who are highly motivated to read or perhaps are more capable readers than children and youth who do not participate. Results of a recent survey of Canadian teens’ (n = 249) perceptions of the public library did suggest that youth who made little or no use of the public library (few if any visits over a year) tended to be less active readers than youth who used the library more often (Walter and Markey 1997; Howard 2011a). Findings such as these, as rare as they are in the library sciences literature, suggest the importance of learning more about the children and youth who do elect to participate in public library programming. The purpose of the study reported here was to further our understanding of the characteristics of children and youth who elect to participate in library-based programming, focusing our efforts on one of the most common library-based programs: the summer reading club (SRC). Literature Review SRCs are particularly useful to study, as they not only are one of the most ubiquitous library programs available to children and youth but also are intended to provide an important mechanism for boosting reading achievement among American children and youth, offering a resource for maintaining or improving reading activities within the summer months when school is out of session. At present, despite the implementation of numerous efforts to improve reading achievement among American children and youth, about one in three students cannot read at even very basic levels according to the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES 2010). These data show that children in the United States do not generally fare well with respect to reading and that some subgroups of children are particularly disadvantaged. For instance, about 50 percent of black and Hispanic fourth graders do not read at basic levels, as compared to 22 percent of white students. Fourth graders who scored below the 25th percentile on this national assessment of reading were likely to be poor (74 percent received free/reduced lunch at school). Research on how public library programs can be used to promote the reading achievement and activities of children and youth is a welcome complement to research on reading programs implemented within public schools. To date, very few, if any, school reform efforts have been able to address the problem of summer learning loss, or the “summer slide,” which refers to the well-documented decline in reading achievement that occurs during summer vacation (Borman and Boulay 2004). In general, American youth spend about three weeks less, on average, in school as compared to their international counterparts, which makes summer learning loss a “uniquely American issue” (Wiseman and Baker 2004). Community-based summer reading programs, such as those offered in library settings (referred to as SRCs in this article), warrant special attention for their potential to stem summer learning loss by increasing children and youth participation in reading activities over the months of summer. There is little doubt that SRCs are a valuable community resource, as shown by the large number of participants in these programs nationally (Balsen and Moore 2010). However, there is little scientific evidence showing that SRCs do, in fact, exert their intended positive impacts on promoting children and youth reading achievement (and reducing summer learning loss). That is, while there have been some recent attempts to investigate the impact of summer reading programs, there are many anecdotes and overly stated findings in the literature related to the importance and effects of such programs (e.g., Roman, Carran, and Fiore 2010; Celano and Neuman 2011; Lyons 2011), as few (if any) carefully controlled studies of SRCs have been conducted that permit causal inferences to be made regarding effects. Several recent experimental studies have sought to determine whether summer reading programs do have positive impacts on children and youth, but all of these have involved school-based programs developed and tested by researchers, not programs implemented by public libraries. In such programs, students typically do not choose to participate; rather, their caregivers consent for them to participate in the larger research activity that involves intact classes or grades of students. Thus, the characteristics of children and youth in these studies, and their reasons for participating in such summer programs, are possibly quite different from library-based summer reading clubs. Nonetheless, findings from such works are relevant to consider. The studies by James S. Kim and colleagues (Kim 2006, 2007; Kim and White 2008; Kim and Guryan 2010), involving in total about 1,800 first through fifth graders, have experimentally tested the effects of summer reading programs in which students received one book per week over an eight- or ten-week program. Programs were implemented in students’ schools just prior to summer vacation. In all studies, the reading attitudes, activities, and achievement of students participating in the summer programs were compared against those of students randomly assigned to a control condition (delayed treatment in which the program was implemented later in the fall). Although this body of work suggests that participation in summer reading programs improved students’ reading activities (those in the program tended to read more than those not in the program), none of the studies showed a positive effect of summer reading programs on students’ reading achievement. Moreover, these studies generally focused on high-risk children and youth, who do not wholly represent the patronage of library-based SRCs. Empirical research that improves our understanding of summer reading programs, including study of who accesses these programs and why, is very limited. The research described above by Kim and colleagues represented experimental summer reading programs implemented in public schools, and their programs differed in important ways from those available within libraries. For instance, the children studied by Kim et al. were in select grades (largely first through fifth grade). Participants in library-based SRCs represent a much broader range, to serve infants through adults. An additional distinction between library-based SRCs and the school-based reading programs studied by Kim and colleagues is that participants in SRCs self-select into such programs: they must enroll independently, visit the library on their own to select books, and track their own reading activities. For young children, it is possible that primary caregivers may be the ones electing to enroll a SRC participant; however, in such instances, the child’s caregiver is electing to enroll a child in the SRC, which would not likely be the case for a school-based reading program. Given such features of SRCs, we might expect that the children and youth who elect to participate in these programs exhibit certain characteristics that lead them to select into such programs; for instance, the children and youth who participate in SRCs might be very motivated to read and/or may be particularly good readers. At the same time, they might live in homes in which reading activities are prioritized. Nonetheless, it is important to point out that for SRCs to have their maximum impact, it would be ideal if they also elicited participation of children and youth who are not particularly motivated to read and who may need practice reading because they struggle in this area. This study was conducted to improve our understanding of who participates in library-based SRCs as well as why they participate. As research findings have shown, only a minority of youth visits the public library often (Howard 2011a), and we might also presume that only a minority of children and youth elects to participate in SRCs. Who are these youngsters and what motivates them to take advantage of this important community resource? To address this question, we sought to learn more about the children and youth (ages birth to seventeen years) who enrolled in a SRC available in the public library system within a large urban Midwest community with a well-established SRC. With respect to learning about more about who participates, we purposefully select two sets of characteristics regarding children and youth to examine, namely, basic demographics and home environment. For the former—demographic characteristics—we examined children and youth with respect to their age, gender, race/ethnicity, caregiver educational attainment (as an index of socioeconomic status), home language, and perceived reading competence, each of which has been shown in prior research to be associated with reading achievement and/or reading activity among children and youth (e.g., McKenna and Kear 1990; NCES 2010). For the latter—home environment—we examined three features of children’s households: caregiver expectations, home atmosphere, and literacy environment. Our focus on these three features of children’s households was motivated as follows. First, caregiver expectations are considered one of the most important features of the home environment with respect to child/youth academic achievement; caregiver expectations refer to the manner and extent to which caregivers communicate their aspirations regarding their children’s academic performance and educationally related future outcomes (e.g., participation in postsecondary schooling). There is strong evidence showing that high caregiver expectations are associated with improved academic achievement among children and youth (Fan and Chen 2001). Second, the home atmosphere refers to the overall patterns of a household, in terms of predictability and organization. Homes are considered chaotic when routines are unpredictable, disorderly, and disorganized, and such household patterns are associated with underachievement in reading among children (Johnson et al. 2008). Third, the literacy environment of the home refers to the extent to which literacy-related materials (e.g., books, magazines) are available within a child’s home and how often these are used by children and adults (Frijters, Barron, and Brunello 2000). The home literacy environment is particularly influential to the early reading development of young children (under age seven), as children at these ages are not participating in formal reading instruction and thus typically rely on home literacy resources to facilitate their early reading skills. With respect to learning more about why child and youth elect to participate in SRC, we also selected several characteristics of children and youth to study related to motivation. The impact of youth motivation and reading attitudes on their reading achievement (Petscher 2010), coupled with the fact that reading attitudes tend to decline significantly from the elementary grades into high school (McKenna, Kear, and Ellsworth 1995), has challenged researchers to better understand how motivation might elicit more participation in reading activities by children and youth. In this study, we examined children and youth participating in SRC using expectancy-value theory as a framework. Expectancy-value theory (Eccles 1983; Wigfield and Eccles 1992, 2000) explains that motivation to complete a task is driven by two internal forces, the belief that one can achieve the goal (expectancy) and how much successfully completing the task is worth to them (task value). A student with high expectancy for success or a high value placed on the task will theoretically be more motivated to engage in the activity. We also looked at other possible motivational reasons for engaging in reading. In particular, extrinsic motivation stimulates participation because of a tangible reward. Generally, external motivators can have strong negative effects on reading attitudes and achievement. While extrinsic motivators can lead to a short-term outcome (e.g., paying a child to clean her room), these do not typically change behaviors over the long term (e.g., upon cleaning her room, the child is not motivated to continue keeping her room clean in the long term, as there is no intrinsic value to the task). On the contrary, intrinsic motivators can lead to long-term changes in behavior, as an individual is motivated to engage in a task because it is internally satisfying and rewarding. Allan Wigfield and John T. Guthrie (1997) provide a detailed discussion of how intrinsic and extrinsic motivators are tied to literacy outcomes. Many schools and libraries use extrinsic motivators to promote youth’s participation in reading activities as a way to boost achievement; however, there may be other reasons why students participate or options for enticing participation. We thus sought to learn the reasons for children and youth participation in SRC. The Study Setting and Participants This descriptive study was conducted during the summer of 2011 as part of the Columbus (Ohio) Metropolitan Library’s (CML) Summer Reading Club. Columbus is the largest city in Ohio (population of about 800,000) and the state capital. According to US census data, it is a racially and ethnically diverse city, with 61 percent of the population white, 28 percent black, and 6 percent of Latino/Hispanic descent; 13 percent of households speak a language other than English. It is also a relatively educated city, with 87 percent of adults having a high school diploma and 32 percent holding a bachelor’s degree. The CML’s Summer Reading Club is one of the largest and longest continually running programs of its kind and is an established part of the Columbus metropolitan community. In the year prior to the study year, about 59,000 children and youth participated in the club, which is a no-cost voluntary eight-week self-reported reading program that began in 1937. To participate, persons register online by a specified date or in person at any one of the twenty-one local branches of CML. Once registered through a local library, each of the participants receives a reading record that features a game board with twelve circles. The participant earns spaces by spending time reading. Once the participants have read for an hour, they can fill in one of the circles and receive a sticker. Each circle represents one hour of reading. At specific intervals (four hours, eight hours, and twelve hours), participants reflect on their reading by answering a question, and this earns tangible prizes. The participants visit the local library to receive their prizes. It should be noted that enrollment in SRC does not necessarily constitute active participation or completion of the program. The CML, like some other library systems, tracks “participation” through a proxy system associated with the collection of the prizes. Because of the sheer volume of participants in the CML’s SRC across its twenty-one branches, we purposefully selected five branches of the library (25 percent of branch locations) in which to embed this study. The five branches were selected to provide a representative subset of locations from which findings could adequately generalize to the larger CML organization and, ideally, to libraries across the nation. In selecting these five branches, the following procedures were followed. First, the main library was included, as it is the flagship of the organization and serves a large number of children and youth from the inner city core (e.g., nearly 4,000 children/youth participated in the 2010 summer reading club). Second, additional sites were selected to capture (a) one suburban branch, (b) one urban branch, and (c) two mixed branches. To select these sites, each CML branch was coded as suburban, urban, or mixed (sitting between the urban core and suburbs). Administrators within the CML were consulted to ensure the accuracy of these typology designations. After establishing typologies for each CML branch, the additional four branches were selected in the following way. For the suburban branch, of which there are four in total, the branches were rank-ordered based on the number of persons who participated in the 2010 summer reading club; we then selected a branch at the 50th percentile in terms of numbers served for participation in the study. For the urban branch, of which there are seven in total, sites were similarly rank-ordered, and a branch at the 50th percentile in terms of participants was selected. Finally, for the mixed branches, of which there are nine, the same procedure was followed to select two branches. All of the five branches selected for participation agreed to implement the study activities during implementation of the 2011 SRC. Participation restriction to one large metropolitan library system also served to help control for some of the known variations in SRC programs that exist across the country, such as differences in the quality or quantity of reward incentives or the amount of reading expected. Procedures The primary study activity employed in this research was collection of a comprehensive intake questionnaire by participants upon registration for the summer 2011 SRC at one of the five branches selected for involvement. Administration of the questionnaire was implemented in a two-week registration window within which the majority of SRC participants self-enroll at the start of the summer program. (Although participants are permitted to enroll prior to the official start and can continue to enroll for several weeks, for the purposes of this study, we only solicited study participants during a fourteen-day period.) To administer the questionnaire, the following procedures were employed by public library staff. First, completion of the study questionnaire was solicited only from persons enrolling in person in the SRC at a targeted branch location. (Persons who enrolled in the SRC via online processes were not candidates for this study, as we elected for library staff to discuss in person the questionnaire with potential participants.) Those eligible were between the ages of birth and seventeen years. For the birth to seven-year-old registrants, caretakers were asked to complete the questionnaire on behalf of their children, whereas those registering who were between the ages of eight and seventeen years were asked to complete the questionnaire on their own. Second, completion of the questionnaire was solicited only from persons following completion of the initial standard SRC enrollment procedures. This procedure was followed so that completion of the questionnaire was considered to be discretionary upon the registrant and not a requirement of enrollment. To solicit completion of the questionnaire, children and youth (or the caregivers of those seven years and under) were asked to consider completing a questionnaire so that CML could learn more about those who elect to participate in the SRC. Tracking of those declining to participate in the study was not collected by the libraries. Those who agreed to do so were provided a paper version of the questionnaire or were able to complete the questionnaire online contingent upon a library’s computer availability. The number of questionnaires completed online versus on paper was not tracked; however, based on feedback from senior library personnel, a shortage of computers across library sites resulted in the majority of the questionnaires being hand-entered postadministration. Following data collection, the two age-band pre- and post- questionnaires were exported into Excel comma-delimited files and subsequently SPSS. Analyses of the data for the present purposes were approved by the university’s internal review board. Measures The primary measure required for this research was a questionnaire developed from extant sources to examine the following characteristics of children and youth: demographics (age, gender, race/ethnicity, caregiver educational attainment, home language, and perceived reading competence), home environment (caregiver expectations, home atmosphere, and literacy environment), and motivation (task value and reasons for participating). Two parallel forms of the study questionnaire were generated: one to be completed by caregivers of children between the ages of birth and seven years, and the other to be completed by children and youth ages eight and older. The former questionnaire, completed by caregivers, had several items related to the home environment that were excluded from the latter questionnaire for reasons discussed below. Demographics The questionnaire included seven items focused on age, gender, race/ethnicity, caregiver educational attainment (five categories ranging from “did not complete high school” to “attended graduate school” for both the mother and the father), home language, and perceived reading competence. The latter, included to represent participants’ perceptions of their own reading abilities, which could not be directly assessed, was measured by two items. Children/youth (or their caregivers) were asked to respond to the statements “How good are you [is your child] at reading?” and “Compared to other students/children, how well do you expect [your child] to do in reading next year?” based on a five-point scale (1 = not at all good, 5 = very good for the first item; 1 = much worse than other students, 5 = much better than other students). The items were drawn from an established measure designed to capture children and adolescents’ values and motivation related to reading and achievement (Eccles and Wigfield 1995). Home Environment Five items related to the home environment were included on the questionnaire completed by those eight and older, as well as an additional seven items for those completed by caregivers of younger children. Caregiver expectations regarding their children and youth were assessed using three items drawn from prior research by Sharon E. Paulson (1994) on parental involvement; the child/youth (or caregiver) statements (e.g., “My primary caregiver thinks that getting ahead in life is important”) were responded to on a five-point scale (1 = never, 5 = always). Home atmosphere was addressed using two items drawn from a well-validated questionnaire that examines the extent to which a home environment is orderly versus chaotic (Matheny et al. 1995); the child/youth (or caregiver) responded to each statement (e.g., “The atmosphere in my house is calm”) on a five-point scale (1 = definitely not true, 5 = definitely true). Finally, the literacy environment of homes was examined using seven items; these were included only in the caregiver questionnaire completed for children between birth and seven years enrolling in the SRC. The literacy environment of the home environment is influential to young children’s literacy growth until the time they enter school, at which time the environment of the school becomes more influential. For these items, caregivers were asked to respond to one item indicating the approximate number of books owned by the child (1–5 books, 6–10, 11–15, 16–20, 21–25, 26–30, 31–35, 36 or more) as well as six questions about specific home literacy activities (e.g., “How often does a family member read a book to the child”) on a frequency-estimation scale ( 1 = hardly ever, 2 = once or twice a month, 3 = once or twice a week, 4 = once a day, and 5 = two or more times a day) that were adapted from the Literacy Habits measure (Paris et al. 2004). Motivation Eight items related to the task value of the expectancy-value theory motivation were included on the questionnaire completed by those eight and older, with seven of these same items included on the questionnaire completed by caregivers of younger children. Three components of task-value motivation were measured using items adapted from Eccles and Wigfield (1995): two items measured intrinsic interest (e.g., “How much do you [does your child] like reading?” on a five-point scale from 1 = not very much to 5 = very much), three items measured attainment utility (e.g., “How important is it to you [to your child] to get good grades [do well] in reading?” on a five-point scale from 1 = not worthwhile at all to 5 = very worthwhile), and either one or two items measured extrinsic utility (“How useful is reading to your [child’s] life when not in school?” on a five-point scale of 1 = not useful at all to 5 = very useful), with the second item (“How useful is reading for what you want to do after you graduate?” on a five-point scale of 1 = not worthwhile at all to 5 = very worthwhile) included only on the questionnaire completed by those eight and older. An item asking students why they signed up for SRC was also included. Children/youth (or their caregivers) were invited to select all applicable reasons from a list that included enrolling to get the prize, enrolling to practice reading, enrolling due to parental encouragement, enrolling due to school encouragement to sign up, and fulfilling a school requirement. This item identified possible extrinsic motivators. Results: Who Participates in SRC? As reported by their parent/caregiver, 31 percent of children in the younger sample were between zero and four years of age, 14 percent were age five, 24 percent were age six, and 26 percent were age seven. The majority (67 percent) of the older children and youth reported being between age eight and thirteen (11 percent, eight; 14 percent, nine; 13 percent, nineteen; 16 percent, eleven; 13 percent, twelve; 11 percent, thirteen) while the remainder of this older sample reported being age fourteen (8 percent), age fifteen (5 percent), age sixteen (3 percent), or age seventeen (5 percent). Additional demographic characteristics for children and youth participating in SRC are presented in table 1. With respect to gender, the results indicate approximately equal numbers of males (48 percent) and females (52 percent) for younger children participating in SRC, but more females (63 percent) than males (37 percent) for older children and youth participating in SRC. Participation in SRC was seen across a variety of races/ethnicities for both the younger and older samples. These percentages largely mirrored the racial/ethnic composition of Columbus in general (62 percent white, 28 percent black, 6 percent Hispanic/Latino, 4 percent Asian, 0.4 percent Native American/Pacific Islander, 3 percent multiracial; US Bureau of the Census 2010c), although SRC participants were slightly more diverse (46 percent nonwhite for the younger sample and 53 percent nonwhite for the older sample vs. 41 percent nonwhite for Columbus overall). The majority of the younger and older samples (96 percent and 95 percent, respectively) spoke English at home. Spanish and Somali were other languages frequently spoken by children and youth (n = 29, 4 percent for Spanish, and n = 7, 1 percent for Somali across both samples). A variety of other languages were spoken by thirty-two children (4 percent). Children and youth demonstrated a range of family socioeconomic levels, as measured by parent levels of education. The majority of children and youth had parents who completed high school, and at least a quarter had parents who obtained college degrees. Table 1.  Demographic Characteristics and Perceived Reading Competence of Children and Youth in the Younger and Older Samples Younger Sample(Children) Older Sample(Youth) N % n N % n Female 246 52.0 129 480 62.7 307 Race and ethnicity: White 246 53.2 132 487 46.7 229 Black 246 26.2 65 487 29.6 145 Hispanic/Latino 246 4.8 12 487 4.5 22 Asian 246 1.6 2 487 3.3 16 Native American/Pacific Islander 246 .8 2 487 2.4 12 Multiracial 246 12.5 31 487 12.9 63 Language: English only 248 89.5 220 489 89.2 437 English plus other language(s) 248 6.9 17 489 5.7 28 Maternal education level: Did not finish high school 243 7.7 19 477 8.0 39 High school graduate 243 18.1 45 477 18.4 90 Completed some college 243 25.0 62 477 16.1 79 College graduate 243 28.2 70 477 27.8 136 Attended graduate school 243 12.5 31 477 11.2 55 Do not know 243 6.5 16 477 15.9 78 Paternal education level: Did not finish high school 244 13.7 34 481 11.0 54 High school graduate 244 23.0 57 481 19.8 97 Completed some college 244 21.4 53 481 14.9 73 College graduate 244 23.4 58 481 17.3 85 Attended graduate school 244 7.3 18 481 10.6 52 Do not know 244 9.7 24 481 24.5 120 N M SD N M SD Perceived competence 243 3.56 1.10 489 4.17 .84 Note. N = total number of responses to the question; n = number giving this response to the question; M = score on the issue examined (scale 1–5); SD = standard deviation of M. See text for wording of the questions and for construction of M. Perceived reading competence results in table 1 are based on the average of the two perceived reading competence survey items, with a scale of 1 = low competence to 5 = high competence. The results indicate that children and youth consistently rated themselves as better than average in terms of reading skill. The older participants, in particular, tended to perceive themselves as highly competent readers (268 gave a rating of 5 [high competence], 144 gave a rating of 4, sixty-five of 3, nine of 2, and three of 1 [low competence]). For the younger sample, which potentially included nonreaders and beginner readers, seventy-five gave themselves a rating of 5 (high competence), seventy-six of 4, fifty-three of 3, thirty-one of 2, and eight of 1 (low competence). As these numbers indicate, very few children or youth participating in SRC perceived themselves as having poor reading skills. Results characterizing the homes of children and youth participating in SRC are presented in table 2. Caregiver expectations were averaged across the three relevant survey items and coded on a scale of 1 = low caregiver expectations to 5 = high caregiver expectations. Both children and youth indicated that their caregivers held high expectations, with very few indicating that their caregivers had low expectations. Home atmosphere ratings were averaged across the two CHAOS survey items, with one item reverse-coded to create a scale in which 1 = chaotic/disorganized atmosphere and 5 = calm/organized atmosphere. Although the average child or youth rated their home relatively calm and organized, figure 1 shows greater variability for this measure with some SRC participants indicating that their homes were more chaotic or disorganized. Results characterizing the home literacy environments of younger children participating in SRC are also presented in table 2. Frequency of home reading behaviors were coded on a scale of 1 = hardly ever, 2 = once or twice a month, 3 = once or twice a week, 4 = once a day, and 5 = two or more times a day. Results indicate that most children were from homes in which reading was emphasized, with caregivers and children reading books, on average, weekly to daily. The average frequency of buying books or visiting the library was slightly lower, occurring on a monthly to weekly basis, but the majority of the younger children (54 percent) owned at least thirty-six books. The additional book ownership percentages are thirty-one to thirty-five books (4.8 percent), twenty-six to thirty books (6.5 percent), twenty-one to twenty-five books (6.9), sixteen to twenty books (5.2), eleven to fifteen books (5.6), six to ten books (4.8), one to five books (10.1). These results indicate that most children experienced rather rich home literacy environments. Similar to results for home atmosphere, however, there was variability in these scores with some children in homes that placed less emphasis on reading (see fig. 2) or owned fewer than six books (10 percent). Table 2.  Home Characteristics of Children and Youth in the Younger and Older Samples Younger Sample(Children) Older Sample(Youth) N M SD N M SD Caregiver expectations 243 4.73 .49 487 4.67 .57 Home atmosphere 242 3.86 1.00 488 3.67 1.00 Literacy environment:*  How often does:   Caregiver read to self 241 3.71 1.27   Family member(s) read aloud to child 236 3.72 1.15   Child look at books by self 231 4.15 1.03   Child ask to be read to 233 3.82 1.22   Caregiver buy new or used books 237 2.30 1.00   Family member(s) go to library 238 2.62 .93 Note. N = total number of responses to question; M = score on the issue examined (scale 1–5); SD = standard deviation of M. See text for wording of the questions and for construction of M. * Home literacy environment was assessed only for the younger sample. Figure 1.  Frequency of home atmosphere ratings (averaged across items) for children and youth participating in SRCs. Figure 2.  Frequency of home literacy environment behaviors for children participating in SRCs Results: Why Do Children and Youth Participate in SRC? Results concerning children and youth’s task value and extrinsic motivations for participating in SRC are presented in table 3. Task-value results are based on the average of all task-value motivation survey items, with a scale of 1 = low task value to 5 = high task value. As evidenced by the high averages that appear in table 3, the vast majority of children and youth reported a high task value for reading. Importantly, when asked specifically to identify extrinsic motivators that led to their participation, most younger (71 percent) and older participants (64 percent) indicated a desire to practice their reading skills. Obtaining the SRC prize, parent encouragement, and school encouragement were also cited as extrinsic reasons for participating in SRC. The results may reflect more of the younger children participating due to parental, rather than school, encouragement, but the opposite pattern was observed for the older sample (i.e., more school encouragement than parent encouragement). Few children or youth indicated that they were required by their schools to participate in SRC. Table 3.  Motivation of Children and Youth in the Younger and Older Samples Younger Sample(Children) Older Sample(Youth) N M SD N M SD Task value 246 4.50 .66 490 4.42 .61 N % n N % n Reasons for participating:*  Get prize 248 35.5 88 490 37.1 182  Practice reading 248 71.4 177 490 63.5 311  Parent encouragement 248 17.7 44 490 38.0 186  School encouragement 248 53.6 133 490 18.6 91  School requirement 248 2.0 5 490 8.4 41 Note. N = total number responses to the question; M = score on the issue examined (scale 1–5); SD = standard deviation of M; n = number giving this response to question. See the text for wording of questions and calculation of M. * Reasons for participating categories were not mutually exclusive. Discussion and Conclusion The most recent report of public library trends, released by the Institute of Museum and Library Services (IMLS) in October of 2011 (based on 2009 findings), indicated that public library visits totaled 1.59 billion, with 2.21 billion in circulations of library materials. About one-third of circulations involved children’s materials, indicating that children are active constituents in public library programming (Miller et al. 2011). Moreover, for communities that receive library services, these data indicate that the total number of children’s program attendance for fiscal year 2009 was 207.3 per 1,000 of the population (Miller et al. 2011). These library patronages, circulation, and other aggregate information outputs pertaining to libraries, while important to documenting and informing policy, still leave a significant gap in the library science research literature—namely, our understanding of the defining characteristics of communities, families, and children who are served by public libraries. For example, according to the American Library Association’s January 2011 Harris Poll conducted by telephone within the United States, there was an 84 percent net agreement among the 1,012 adults age eighteen or older that the public library is important to their family’s education (ALA 2011). While the 2011 poll does not provide additional details related to how the library contributes to a perceived level of importance, public libraries have historically supported literacy and education through children and youth services programs (e.g., after-school homework centers, book clubs, and summer reading programs). The collection of library inputs (or the quantification of a library’s raw materials or potential to meet user needs) and outputs (actual use of library services and collections) will be substantially enriched with findings from research investigations that collect more user and defining user information. Through a collaborative partnership between researchers at a land-grant university and the public library recipient of the 2011 National Medal for Museum and Library Service award, this study contributes a unique and expanded understanding of the characteristics of children and youth who elect to participate in library-based programming, namely, the summer reading program. Findings of this work suggest that children and youth who participate in SRCs tend to like reading (or being read to), value the effort needed to become advanced readers, and hold a belief that reading is important. The children and youth also tend to reside in homes in which their primary caregiver has high expectations for their future and hold a belief that getting ahead in life is always important. In addition, the majority of the participants find it easy to get to a library, enjoy attending summer reading club, and definitely anticipate going to SRC next year. Finally, the participants largely seem to elect to participate because they value reading and the opportunity to practice reading over the summer—and not the extrinsic motivators they receive as part of participating. Consequently, the findings suggest that provision of special rewards and materials to participants—such as prizes and certificates—may not be particularly crucial for attracting children and youth to summer reading clubs. Such data provide us the opportunity to draw inferences about children and youth who are participating in summer reading clubs across the United States and, at least tentatively so, about those children and youth who are not electing to participate in such programs and thus might be targeted through special enrollment activities. Before making such inferences, we do want to note that these should be interpreted with caution. Regarding the first inference—generalizing our findings to those of the broader population of children and youth—we must point out that not all participants in the targeted SRC elected to complete our questionnaire. It might be that the children and youth who completed the study questionnaire differed in important ways from the larger population of children and youth enrolling in this SRC. While employing a representative subset of the Columbus Metropolitan Library locations permits these findings to be adequately generalized to the larger CML organization, there may still be unique characteristics related to participants who self-selected to participate in this study. For example, perhaps the willing participants had a higher degree of reading confidence and motivation that influenced participation. Because the library system involved in this study does not have defining data on the population of children and youth who participate in the SRC with respect to race/ethnicity, socioeconomic status (SES), and other variables examined in this study, we cannot ensure that our findings appropriately generalize; we note this as a limitation of this study. At the same time, using our data to make inferences about who does not participate in SRCs also presents some limitations. To learn about children and youth who do not elect to participate in SRCs would involve wholly different methods than those used here and would present a special set of challenges. However, because there is a good deal in the extant literature about some of the variables investigated in the present study, we can make some reasonable inferences. First, with respect to gender, there was an overrepresentation of females (63 percent) among the youth who participated in the SRC. In the United States, there are 104.7 males per 100 females under eighteen years of age (US Bureau of the Census 2010b). Thus, it appears that males are underrepresented among youth who participate in the SRC, which is aligned with other research showing that males may be less motivated to read than females (Wigfield and Guthrie 1997). Second, about 25 percent of the children enrolling in the SRC came from low-SES households, based on maternal education (household in which primary female caregiver has high school as highest level of education). In the state of Ohio, in which this study was conducted, about 23 percent of children under eighteen years of age reside in low-SES households; these data suggest that children from low-SES homes may be adequately represented in SRC programming (US Bureau of the Census 2010a). Third, the vast majority of children and youth enrolled in the SRC perceived themselves to be good readers; yet, about one-third of children are characterized as poor readers based on national estimates (NCES 2011), suggesting that good readers may be overrepresented and the level of reading proficiency may be overestimated among participants in SRC. This is one of the risks of using self-reported data. Finally, not all caregivers have high expectations for their children’s future (Fan and Chen 2001), yet the children and youth in this study came primarily from homes in which their caregivers had very strong aspirations for their future. Thus, we might speculate that children in homes in which caregivers hold high aspirations for their children are overrepresented among SRC participants. Obviously, our speculations are not particularly surprising. To participate in a SRC involves effort and interest, and as such, it likely attracts participants who are motivated to read and who are good at the task. These motivated reading characteristics are also in keeping with a recent Pew Library Project report of library card patrons, age sixteen and older, having more engaged reading characteristics (Zickuhr 2012). A great challenge for public library programs is ensuring that children, youth, and families who might not characterize the typical participant have the opportunity and interest to participate. Expanding participation would be particularly important if SRCs are to help stem the summer learning slide experienced by children and youth who may be less motivated or have less home support to read or otherwise focus on literacy during the summer months. Indeed, while findings from this study reflect that prize incentives were not the primary reason for SRC participation, this may not be the case for poor readers. As libraries systematically explore ways to bring SRC to all children and youth, and not only those particularly motivated or equipped to participate, collaborative research studies, such as this, may help launch conversations that inform programming and policy decisions related to youth services. There are several key limitations of the present study that present some important directions for future research. First, it is unclear whether results can generalize beyond the type of SRC studied and the community in which this work was conducted. A larger scale study that looks more broadly at child and youth participation in SRCs of various types and in numerous locations would make a compelling contribution to the literature. Second, as we noted, the present work does not necessarily help us learn about who does not participate in SRCs; rather, it tells us to learn more about children and youth who do elect to participate. Libraries desire to broaden access to their programs and materials and to reach those who might most benefit from their services. Alternative approaches for learning about who does not participate in SRCs should be considered in future work. Finally, the present study did not examine whether children who enrolled in the SRC completed the program as intended. This is a very interesting endeavor for future research. As important as it is to learn about who does and does not enroll in SRCs across the nation’s libraries, it is also essential to ensure that these programs have their desired effects on children and youth: to provide them access to reading materials over the summer months and, ideally, to enhance their reading skills and motivation to read.