"The Visible College" ELIZABETH S. AVERSA, editor AIDS Awareness in the LIS Classroom and School Ellen Gay Detlefsen and Jeffrey T. Huber In response to several perceived in- cidents of possible stereotyping and discrimination, the senate of the School of Library and Information Science of the University of Pittsburgh established a Committee on Prejudi- cial Awareness in the fall of 1989 and charged the committee with taking ac- tions to arouse the collective con- sciousness on issues such as AIDS awareness, racism, sexual harass- ment, and ageism. The committee chose to develop and exhibit a bibliog- raphy on AIDS awareness as its first enterprise. The committee believed that, with an excess of 124,000 reported cases of AIDS and 76,000 reported AIDS- related deaths in the United States alone, library and information science professionals could not afford to ig- nore the epidemic. The constellation of diseases and opportunistic infec- tions known as AIDS was and is taking its toll on this profession as well; sev- eral SLIS graduates as well as other talented information professionals were already lost to the disease. Al- though the devastation resulting from the disease seemed evident, many peo- ple apparently remain unaware of the facts surrounding AIDS. Two basic facts are of paramount importance: AIDS does not discriminate by race, creed, color, age, or sexual orienta- tion, and for now, education remains the weapon of choice to combat the epidemic. In an effort to educate SLIS stu- dents, staff, and faculty, the exhibit was mounted in the foyer of the SLIS Library. It contained copies of the works cited in the bibliography and made good use of the free and quite "catchy" posters from the National AIDS Information Clearinghouse and other local and national health agen- cies. The committee also identified several films that could be used in con- junction with the exhibit and bibliog- raphy to introduce the issues of AIDS awareness and to emphasize the role of education as the only "cure." The materials used in the display and bibliographical handout also formed the bases for short units in three classes; the bibliography plus a film were used in the health sciences course to introduce those future health professionals to the personal and pro- fessional AIDS-related concerns of health care workers, and the posters and brochures from the National AIDS Information Clearinghouse and the Surgeon General were used as top- ical examples in the course on govern- ment information. The exhibit itself, together with the brochure, were used in a class discussion in a core course on resources to illustrate the issue of Ellen G. Detlefsen is an Associate Professor of the School of Library and Information Science, University of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Jeffrey T. Huber is a doctoral student, also at the Uni- versity of Pittsburgh. Fall/Winter 1991 237
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science providing public displays and infor- mation on possibly controversial sub- jects. In addition to the exhibit, the com- mittee prepared a brief bibliography as a starting point for AIDS educa- tion. The items chosen for the bibliog- raphy and display reflect a wide range of approaches to AIDS information - political, artistic, scientific, biographi- cal, popular, and scholarly - in an ef- fort to cite something for almost every- one, regardless of subject field or prior level of knowledge. In retrospect, a ti- tle or two from the growing group of materials about AIDS for children and young adults should also have been included. The handout was dedicated in this fashion: This bibliography is presented in memory of those members of the SLIS community who have died from AIDS and in recogni- tion of the thousands who, throughout the world, are currently living and dying with AIDS. The bibliography that followed listed these items: Daedalus: Journal of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. V.I 18, no. 2-3 (Spring- Summer, 1989). Cambridge, Mass.: American Academy of Arts and Sciences. In these two issues of Daedulus, entitled " Living with AIDS" and ' ' Living with AIDS: II," various scholars discuss social aspects of the AIDS pandemic. The series of articles focuses on AIDS as a phenomenon of the 1980s with little hope for a cure in the near future. Howard, Billy. Epitaphs for the Liv- ing: Words and Images in the Time of AIDS; with an introduction by Lonnie D. Kliever. Dallas, Tex.: Southern Methodist University Pr., 1989. This book is a photo essay on per- sons with AIDS (PWAs) that depicts the ravages taken by the disease on the human body and soul. Howard has managed to capture the essence of the AIDS epidemic in a series of photo- graphs coupled with comments writ- ten by the individual describing life with AIDS. The room for personal growth often associated with an AIDS diagnosis is made apparent in this art- ful work. Peabody, Barbara. The Screaming Room: A Mother's Journal of Her Son's Struggle with AIDS: A True Story of Love, Dedication, and Courage. San Diego, Ca- lif.: Oak Tree Publishers, 1986. This journal details the course of the AIDS virus for an individual PWA and its effect on his mother as the pri- mary caregiver. Peabody' s journal is based on her own life with her son Pe- ter Vom Lehn. The Screaming Room draws the reader into a most personal perspective of the AIDS epidemic and exposes the disease in a very human light. Shuts, Randy. And the Band Played On: Politics, People, and the AIDS Epi- demic. New York: St. Martin's, 1987. Shilts presents a gripping and jour- nalistic account of the history of the AIDS epidemic. Through a series of case studies, he exposes the politics in- volved in the government, scientific community, and local community ap- proach to addressing the necessity for AIDS research and education. Sontag, Susan. AIDS and Its Meta- phors. New York: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux, 1989. Sontag explores the stigmatization associated with AIDS through the myths and metaphors that surround the disease. In her extended essay, she shows how the disease is likened to a viral invasion, the plague, or the scourge. The myths and metaphors that surround AIDS perpetuate sexual stereotypes, paranoia, and ho- mophobia. The Science of AIDS: Readings from Sci- entific American Magazine. New York: W. H. Freeman, 1989. This series of articles originally ap- peared in the October 1988 issue of Scientific American. Various scientists contribute their research and work in 238 Volume 32, Numbers 3/4
"The Visible College" an effort to explain the science behind both the Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) and the AIDS epidemic. Notes 1 . The committee members were the two au- thors - Detlefsen, who teaches courses on health and government information, and Huber, whose dissertation work focuses on AIDS infor- mation - and the Head of the SLIS Library, Elizabeth Mahoney. 2. For the complete series of posters, call 1- 800-458-5231, or write to the National AIDS Information Clearinghouse, P.O. Box 6003, Rockville, MD 20850, and asked to be placed on the mailing list for posters, brochures, and quarterly calendar of conferences. The NAIC also provides telephone reference services for questions relating to AIDS. 3. These films include Too Little, Too Late (Fanlight Productions, 1989) and Overcoming Ir- rational Fear of AIDS: A Coping Strategy for Health Care Providers (Carle Foundation, 1986). The catalog of the media collection of Pittsburgh's Western Psychiatric Institute and Clinic Li- brary lists a wide variety of excellent media sources of AIDS; copies of the 1990 WPIC me- dia catalog are available for $14 from Patricia Reavis, A/V & Reference Librarian, WPIC Li- brary, University of Pittsburgh School of Medi- cine, 3811 O'Hara Street, Pittsburgh, PA 15213. 4. Titles such as Children and the AIDS Virus by Rosmarie Hausherr (Houghton-Mifflin/ Clarion, 1989) and the YA novel entitled Night Kites by M. E. Kerr (Harper Junior, 1986) would probably have been most useful. Educators and library school students who would like to write about teaching methodol- ogy, review relevant books, abstract articles, or comment on specific teaching methods are invited to send their contributions to Elizabeth Aversa, College of Library and Information Services, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742. Contributions should be 1,000-1,500 words. Fall/Winter 1991 239