Introduction Historians of reading commonly adopt classical economic—or market— models to explain the spread of reading materials in the West. The best articulated and most influential is Robert Darnton’s “communications circuit” [1, p. 31].3 Such theories separate the structural functions of textual production and consumption and tend to depict readers as at the final, receiving stage of a production process, only tenuously connected to the writers at the beginning. Thus, they set up a distinction between authoritative print producers (writers and publishers) and comparatively passive consumers (readers). By contrast, other scholars, anxious to emphasize reader agency, focus on reading resistance, sometimes employing a poaching metaphor, especially for “ordinary” readers of popular materials who may have left no personal record of their encounters with texts. In this article I assess the contributions of these two theoretical approaches. I suggest that since the first focuses primarily on structural factors in the commercial circulation of books and the second primarily looks at individual readers, neither can make a link between structural accounts involving, say, gender, race and class, and the agency of individual readers. Both also dichotomize the acts of reading and writing and marginalize the many noncommercial sites where later nineteenth‐ and twentieth‐century readers encountered texts. While recognizing that market models and resistance approaches have given rise to much illuminating work, I suggest that we can overcome some of their limitations by paying more focused attention to institutional sites of reading. Using organizations as a middle layer of analysis can bridge the gap between structure and agency and between macro and micro views. These sites (which include noncommercial organizations such as schools and churches as well as commercial organizations such as mail‐order houses) are also spaces where activities of reading and writing may intersect, since they provide opportunities for individuals to both produce and consume texts. Finally, by adopting an institutional view, researchers can incorporate “thick description” in a way that adds richness and nuance to their understanding of the acts of reading and writing by those nonelite groups for whom individual records are scant. 3.  This work originally appeared in Daedalus 111, no. 3 (Summer 1982): 65–83. Market Models Darnton’s communications circuit presents a bird’s‐eye or societal‐level view of a market‐centered print world that sees participants in terms of large‐scale categories occupying distinct and separate nodes on the circuit: authors, publishers, printers, readers, and so on. One of the many strengths of Darnton’s model is that it extends the limited tripartite framework of textual production, distribution, and reception that print‐culture historians have also commonly used [2, pp. 558–59; 3, p. 12]. Both this simpler tripartite view and the more elaborate communications circuit draw on a transmissions theory of communications to depict texts as messages that move mostly in one direction from authors and publishers (senders) to readers (receivers). By providing links between producers, distributors, and receivers, Joan Shelley Rubin argues, Darnton’s model gives researchers a way to conceive of overlapping or connected roles that cross these structures. After all, she notes, readers may actually occupy a variety of roles in the communications circuit. While some may be “ordinary members of the broad educated public,” others may be “literary critics, teachers, librarians or ministers who are involved in dissemination as well as function as an audience that influences production” [2, pp. 557–58]. However, in recognizing the dangers of a tripartite model that theoretically segregates what are often overlapping functions, Rubin may be crediting the communication circuit model with too much explanatory power. Indeed, overlap might be seen as a modification of the model rather than an integral feature of it. In Darnton’s system, readers and writers are separated from each other by the mostly one‐directional flow of print (writers at the beginning, readers at the end), although he does provide for a weak feedback loop by which readers have the capability to respond to authors (perhaps through fan mail, letters to publishers, or even the exercise of purchasing power). By treating the various print‐culture elements as discrete boxes on a circuit that resembles a wiring diagram, the communications circuit does not try to account for the ways in which the elements actually relate to one another. Thus, although Darnton posits movement of texts and describes his elements as “links,” the model does not specify the ways in which those links are achieved in historical reality. Indeed, the model provides no hint as to the activities undertaken at the nodes themselves. Again drawing on the metaphor of the wiring diagram, each node is conceived of as a “black box,” the operations of which are not specified in terms of the circuit as a whole.4 Directional arrows encourage us to imagine the nodes in terms of inputs and outputs; an author’s output is a publisher’s input, for instance. To figure out what is going on inside each of the boxes (how input is transformed into output) or how the relationship between the boxes is achieved in historical reality, we have to step outside the metaphor of the circuit. Underlying the communication circuit is the assumption that the relationship between the nodes on the circuit, and the character of the activities within the nodes, are primarily commercial and based on the pursuit of profit. The character of much printing and publishing as a business has been firmly established at least since the Enlightenment, and many book historians have cast the story of eighteenth‐, nineteenth‐, and twentieth‐century print culture in terms of print‐culture capitalism—a system in which the demand for and supply of texts are seen as separate economic activities carried out by distinct groups of consumers and producers [4]. A view that conceives of print culture primarily in terms of a publishing market encourages scholars to conceptualize supply and demand in terms of producers and production (authors, editors, artists, publishers, publication) and consumers and consumption (readers and the act of reading). In the idealized classical theory of demand and supply, consumption is the sphere of numerous individuals who act independently to exercise rational choice. Ideally, producers, too, are numerous, each controlling only part of the market supply. However, even during the nineteenth century, economic theorists could not ignore the fact that the production side of this ideal picture failed to meet their expectations, as the effects of market concentration, monopoly, and price fixing in many industries (including publishing) became only too obvious. As many commentators have pointed out, the commerce of publishing underwent a profound change as a result of publishing mergers, as well as the growth of mass marketing practices, in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries [5, p. 22]. New genres of print arose, including popular magazines, newspapers, and cheap paperback books, along with innovative marketing ploys such as mail‐order book clubs and increasingly sophisticated forms of advertising [6–8]. Commentators see this large‐scale textual production and distribution as a key feature of print culture during this period and also characterize it as a time in which readers (consumers) found themselves at the receiving end of a large‐scale industrial process. In the face of the concentrated power of the major publishing houses, how could scholars imagine individual readers as other than powerless, economically weak, and dispersed? Generalizing from the eighteenth‐ and nineteenth‐century growth of the literary marketplace, the communications circuit represents a macro approach that enables the researcher to envisage a unified print culture consisting of elements that exercise the conceptually separate functions of producing, distributing, and consuming. Darnton describes the circuit as a “general model for analyzing the way books come into being and spread through society” and claims that with “minor adjustments, it should apply to all periods in the history of the printed book” [1, p. 30]. But as he points out, “Models have a way of freezing human beings out of history” [1, p. 32]. In other words, such models tend to emphasize social structure at the expense of the actions of individuals.5 The model also leaves little space for thinking about communication in nonfunctionalist, nonmarket terms: communication as ritual, for example, or as James Carey puts it, as that “symbolic process whereby reality is produced, maintained, repaired and transformed” [9, p. 23]. A common criticism of functionalist theories in general is that they fail to explain or take account of social conflict.6 They present participants as playing roles that support the smooth operation of “the system” but provide little room for individual interpretation or for acts that do not conform to mainstream norms. Sociological theories that emphasize structure are particularly open to this criticism. In the field of print‐culture history, some scholars unhappy with the characterization of readers as en bloc passive and powerless have adopted some variation of conflict theory: Pierre Bourdieu’s theory of how cultural capital contributes to class stratification and reproduction, for example [10].7 Others have launched a counteroffensive (strongly influenced by Foucault) that emphasizes the power of readerly agency by drawing heavily on the notion of reader resistance.8 However, a difficulty facing theories that focus on human agency is that of providing theoretical space for social structure, a concept that few would want to dispense with entirely. As sociologist David Walsh explains, “every conception of social structure must ultimately reduce to what people do in society, yet society always consists of particular and institutionalized forms of the organization of these actions” [13, pp. 32–33]. The structure‐agency dichotomy is related to what sociologists call the macro‐micro dilemma—how descriptions and explanations of specific circumstances can be explained in terms of big‐picture metatheories like those of, say, Gramsci and Foucault that employ overarching explanatory dimensions such as class, race, and gender. Darnton developed his communications circuit theory at a time when print‐culture history was new and struggling to establish its legitimacy as a field of scholarship. Darnton’s own research is impressively microhistorical; never does he himself “freeze” individual people out of the stories he tells. Yet perhaps because book historians rarely reflect in print on their research methodologies (unlike, say, sociologists), his communications circuit theory continues to stand out as one of the few successful efforts to make explicit underlying assumptions about the material conditions by which texts arrived in readers’ hands.9 Some historians have attempted to adjust the communications circuit (see, e.g., [16, p. 14]) but have so far failed to eclipse Darnton’s original version. 4.  In electrical engineering, the contents of the black box itself are unknown and can only be specified in terms of its inputs and outputs. 5.  To overcome this, Darnton advocates close scrutiny of each of the model’s elements at particular points in time and space. Darnton himself offers, by way of illustration, a case study of one particular element in the circuit—the “bookseller link” in eighteenth‐century France [1, p. 32]. 6.  For conflict theorists like Karl Marx and Antonio Gramsci, a key problem in sociology is to account for social stratification and differentials in the distribution of power and resources. 7.  Traditionally, stratification has referred to class theories, but stratification by other dimensions, including gender, race, and age, is of course also of interest to print‐culture historians. See also the discussion in [11, pp. 22–24]. 8.  The pervasiveness of the concept of resistance is illustrated by the introduction to a recently published volume of collected essays; for example, the editors comment, “Not all of the readers’ acts examined in this collection are resistant,” as though they had to explain the absence of resistance [12, p. ix]. 9.  Joan Shelley Rubin’s essay [2] is a welcome exception to this lack of reflexivity. For overviews of theories and methods in print‐culture history, see also [14, 15]. Reader Resistance Shortly after Darnton’s communications circuit theory first appeared, Michel de Certeau’s L’Invention du Quotidien was published in English under the title The Practice of Everyday Life [17]. Along with Roger Chartier’s theory of appropriation, de Certeau’s conceptualization of the reader as poacher has been immensely influential, especially among literary scholars eager to emphasize reader agency and at the same time keen to move away from the close textual rigors of the New Criticism and into the expansive world of cultural history. “Cultural consumption, whether popular or not,” writes Chartier in an effort to break down the consumer‐producer dichotomy, “is at the same time a form of production, which creates ways of using that cannot be limited to the intentions of those who produce” [18, p. 234]. However, de Certeau seems to reinforce the distinction between writers and readers. In The Practice of Everyday Life, he describes reading as a process that “transforms another person’s property into a space borrowed for a moment by a transient.” The reader “insinuates into another person’s text the ruses of pleasure and appropriation: he poaches on it, is transported into it, pluralizes himself in it” [17, p. xxi]. In what is arguably the book’s most famous passage, he states, “Far from being writers—founders of their own place, heirs of the peasants of earlier ages now working on the soil of language, diggers of wells and builders of houses—readers are travelers; they move across lands belonging to someone else, like nomads poaching their way across fields they did not write, despoiling the wealth of Egypt to enjoy it themselves” [17, p. 174]. Poaching in the work of de Certeau’s many admirers becomes a metaphor for striking back against oppressive systems that envisage print production, distribution, and reception in structurally top‐down terms and instead supposedly provides theoretical space for ordinary readers to exercise agency.10 But as even these brief passages make clear, de Certeau separates and contrasts the acts of reading and writing, implicitly supporting the economic concept of the producers of texts occupying a separate category from that of consumers. Moreover, in describing readers as poachers, he underscores their inferior and relatively powerless state compared with that of authors and publishers as the owners of the poached objects—the textual rabbits, pheasant, and deer. Indeed, in asserting the authority of writers over printed texts, analysts like de Certeau mirror a conception of poaching in which, historically, poaching is defined by game laws: social systems that define as illegitimate hunting activities that indigenous peoples have practiced since time immemorial and that expropriate their hunting rights. Into the concept of reader poaching is built the understanding that ownership of the “territory” of books and reading is vested, although perhaps in an exploitative fashion, in an elite group of writers. Use of words like “despoil” underlines the illegitimacy of poaching through reading. In the case of game poaching, it is clear that poachers generally know that what they are doing is illegal, even though they may justify or rationalize it as resistance. For the poaching analogy to be valid, resisting readers themselves must demonstrate not only an awareness of an authoritatively determined hierarchy of reading but also defiance in the face of that authority. To understand the implications of poaching and its usefulness in eliciting the meaning of being a reader, historians need to look both at elite, authoritative discourse on reading and at the actual practices, descriptions, and justifications of real, historical individuals and groups who assume a reading identity at specific points in time and place. Resistance may be a useful concept to apply to readers but needs to be applied selectively. Not all the reading of “ordinary” or nonelite readers can be assumed to be resistant, and far less should researchers indiscriminately describe their reading as poaching. These notions of resistance, appropriation, and, above all, poaching, carry other disadvantages too. Although in de Certeau’s original formulation all reading is seen as a kind of poaching, scholars have come to apply the term selectively to a particular set of ordinary readers. This discrimination is telling. In their zeal to recover reader agency, “professional” readers in the academy have adopted and adapted de Certeau’s poaching simile as especially apt for a particular subset of other readers—readers who (unlike their implied selves) are especially heavy consumers of mass‐produced, popular texts, particularly genre fiction and comics. The result is a kind of poaching squared, in which academic readers themselves appropriate the reading of the alleged poachers. In her work on the compilation of scrapbooks, Ellen Gruber Garvey criticizes poaching as a suitable metaphor for what scrapbook compilers do, on the grounds that its connotations are too masculine for a practice so often engaged in by women [24, pp. 207–8]. She suggests as an alternative the idea of “gleaning,” pointing to biblical references that support the right of the poor to sift through for their personal use the last leavings of the harvest. Gleaning seems a particularly appropriate way to describe the careful and largely idiosyncratic selection processes involved in the production of personal scrapbooks that were designed exclusively for the satisfaction of the compiler and perhaps her friends and family. To describe reading in more general terms, however, gleaning is not necessarily an improvement on poaching. Although it lacks the connotations of illegality that attach to poaching, gleaning is by definition a marginal operation performed after the main action (the harvest) is over, and the gleaners themselves are relatively powerless with respect to the landowner over whose fields they scavenge. 10.  For examples of works in the history of books and reading that make use of de Certeau’s poaching metaphor, see [19–21]. Writers on popular culture include [22, 23]. Bridging the Gap: Organizations A fundamental theoretical and methodological problem arises from the gap between two levels of analysis. How can descriptions and explanations at the societal level—“the big picture”—mesh with those of individual people living their everyday lives? How do individual agents and social structures confront and influence each other? This problem—a form of the macro‐micro dilemma—is evident in contemporary print‐culture studies. Societal influences may be cast in terms of macrorelational dimensions such as class, gender, race, religion, ethnicity, and sexual orientation. Yet the close, empirical work of book studies takes place at the micro level of individual actors—this writer, these readers, this text, here, there, at specific points in time and space. How can the specific outcomes of individual actions be satisfactorily described—let alone explained—in terms of metatheoretical concepts such as power and discourse? By what actual mechanisms do these translations take place? A number of scholars influential in the study of print culture have proposed midlevel concepts that can potentially bridge the gap between the individual and society. Readers are not alone, they point out. Stanley Fish has introduced the concept of the “interpretive” community of those who share cultural assumptions about the meanings of texts, while Benedict Anderson posits “imagined” communities of those reading the same printed texts but never meeting face‐to‐face [25, 26]. Encouraging researchers to think of reading as constituting a cluster of social and cultural activities that take place among groups in a variety of contexts, sociologist Elizabeth Long draws attention to the “social infrastructure of reading” [27, p. 190]. Turning to the methods of ethnography, some print‐culture historians have adopted Clifford Geertz’s famous phrase “thick description” as common currency [28].11 Geertz originally appropriated the idea of thick description from the philosopher Gilbert Ryle, who likened it to “a many‐layered sandwich” [29, p. 482]. What Ryle thought of as layers in a sandwich, Geertz called the “sort of piled up structures of inference and implication through which an ethnographer is continually trying to pick his way” [28, p. 7]. Although all these recommendations suggest illuminating ways of envisaging a middle layer of analysis, a problem for print‐culture scholars remains: how are we to operationalize this concept in research? For a prescription that is both theoretically and operationally useful, historians of reading can turn to the work of sociologist Paul DiMaggio, who recommended organizations—what he calls the “meso” level of analysis—as major sites at which individuals actually encounter the structures of the wider society. Role theory is one way to envisage this interaction. Organizational roles, seen in cultural and relational terms as both “institutional typifications” and “locations in relational networks” can create a bridge between the micro and macro levels of analysis, he argued [30, p. 76].12 Following DiMaggio’s advice, print‐culture historians (especially those of later nineteenth‐ and twentieth‐century America) can use the analysis of social institutions to uncover the missing middle layer between structure and agency. During this period, noncommercial as well as commercial organizations played a growing part in the development of reading as a widespread cultural practice in the United States, as reading spread not randomly from individual to individual but along increasingly well‐defined grooves or pathways that formed layered networks of print. Some of these networks were visible, such as the railroads (and later the highways) that carried printed materials—books, newspapers, magazines, manuals, and pamphlets—to the communities that bordered the tracks and roadways. The networked character of other channels lacked such an obvious physical dimension and yet was no less real or material, as public and private organizations took advantage of technological innovations, new channels of distribution, falling production prices, and widespread literacy to establish, maintain, and promote their activities and identities through print. The significance of literary commercial organizations such as publishing houses and book clubs is obvious, but other commercial organizations such as banks, insurance companies, and retail merchandising outlets (both stores and mail‐order catalogs) also embedded print production and consumption into their daily operations in the shape of annual and other reports, rules, regulations, and advertising. In the developing public sphere, government agencies, schools, and libraries not only used print as a means of communicating shared ideas but also actively encouraged participating groups and individuals to read as a means to active citizenship, self‐improvement, and moral worthiness. In 1792, for example, passage of the Post Office Act, which awarded a generous subsidy (if anything, an antimarket concept) to the mailing of newspapers at the expense of private communication, was a vital factor in the astonishing spread of newspapers in the early republic [31, p. 7; 32, p. 66]. Churches and voluntary organizations, too, formed networks for the exchange of printed materials and to communicate information to their sometimes widely dispersed members. Institutions of print less obvious to modern eyes were government‐sponsored organizations such as the agricultural extension system, and social service organizations such as settlement houses and the YMCA. Many of these organizations operated outside the mainstream commercial market and yet were enormously influential. In the late nineteenth century, for instance, Roman Catholics formed a parallel print culture in which parishes rather than mainstream (Protestant) commercial companies formed channels of circulation [33, pp. 122–26]. In a contemporary example, readers of the immensely popular Left Behind series of books, depicting a post “Rapture” world, often share their books through nonmarket channels. In the lives of these readers, too, churches are key print‐culture elements [34]. Whether commercial or not, bureaucratic features that undergirded their claims to power and influence characterized all of these organizations to some extent.13 Max Weber’s ideal type of bureaucracy, with its clear definition of responsibility among officials, hierarchical organization of work and offices, recruitment of personnel based on technical criteria, and government of work by rules (not just arbitrary relationships), clearly defined emerging social institutions such as libraries, schools, the agricultural extension agencies, women’s clubs, and churches. Positions in organizations included those that provided an income, such as editor, minister, teacher, librarian, home economist, extension worker, radio homemaker, and those that did not—book club participant, scout leader, women’s club member, or library patron. These institutions’ record‐keeping and textual‐production practices make them particularly amenable to study by historians of print culture. For example, the retention by archivists of postal account books has helped historians to recover the newspaper subscription choices of private individuals [32, p. 103]. Other government‐sponsored organizations such as the agricultural extension agency or the rural school system routinely provided access to standard forms of print that included informational genres such as pamphlets, leaflets, textbooks, and reference books. Schools and libraries provided students with opportunities to read for pleasure and cultural self‐development. Organizational analysis can also complicate the reader‐writer dichotomy. As Ronald J. Zboray and Mary Saracino Zboray point out, in the antebellum period a much greater number of ordinary people than the conventional picture presents participated in print culture through the social sharing of literary texts. This social dissemination “far outweighed market distribution,” they argue, through such organizations as literary societies, local lyceums, and the common school [35, p. xxiv]. Later in the century, too, large numbers of ordinary men and women frequently wrote for others like themselves in the columns of local newspapers and farm journals, a practice that continued well into the twentieth century.14 Official sites of reading were also sites of writing. Mary Kelley shows how, even in the early nineteenth century, young women who attended female academies and seminaries and who belonged to literary societies learned to write for each other and for publication. Their activities blended reading and writing in an effort not only to shape their own development but also to influence public opinion [37]. As the century wore on, institutional opportunities for writing expanded. In the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, extension‐sponsored homemakers’ clubs channeled reading materials to rural women and also provided related cultural opportunities in the form of writing and performing plays and keeping journals. At school, students and teachers worked on writing assignments that grew more complex as students advanced through the system. Increasing numbers of college‐educated men and women joined professions (including nonliterary occupations such as lawyers, clergy, professors, engineers, and physicians) in which they exercised their expertise through encounters with texts as readers and writers [35, p. 199]. As actors occupying organizational roles, ordinary Americans who left no personal records may emerge through what are sometimes considered to be dry, bureaucratic documents. Progressive Era librarian Lutie Stearns, for instance, greatly influenced public library development not only in her native Wisconsin but nationally, through her speeches at professional conferences and journal articles. A founder of the Wisconsin Free Library Commission [WFLC]), Stearns, between 1896 and 1914, helped found 150 public libraries and oversaw the administration of 1,400 traveling libraries and fourteen county traveling library systems [38, p. 437]. Unpublished institutional records of the WFLC can be found in the archives of the Wisconsin Historical Society. Yet no mention of Stearns appears in the archives catalog. Only with the knowledge that Stearns occupied the organizational position of Library Visitor in charge of the traveling libraries can the scholar track down her extraordinarily vivid and detailed official biweekly reports—institutional documents in which her own voice still sounds clear and strong a century later. It is her organizational activities, as represented in these documents, that allow us to place Stearns as an individual actor in the broader scene of women’s participation in Progressive Era print culture. 11.  In [28, p. 24], Clifford Geertz argued, “The whole point of semiotic approach to culture is … to aid us in gaining access to the conceptual world in which our subjects live so that we can, in some extended sense of the term, converse with them.” 12.  At a macroanalytical level, sociologists study “events or structures that are more long lasting, embrace more people, and are more spatially extensive than relatively micro levels.” By contrast, micro levels of analysis consider individual people and small groups acting on the world in the context of their everyday lives [28, pp. 94, 86]. 13.  In the early twentieth century, sociologist Max Weber explained the distribution and exercise of power and authority by reference to three bases of legitimation: charismatic, which rested on the power of personality, and the special qualities of the leader; traditional, as, for example, in feudalism; and third, rational‐legal, of which bureaucracy, which he saw emerging from the transformation of western economic systems to industrialism, was the highest form. 14.  Farm and county newspapers relied particularly on the writings of reader‐contributors. For example, membership of a group of farm women columnists that called themselves the Press Columnists of Iowa peaked in the 1950s and persisted well into the later decades of the century [36]. Reading, Writing, and Control Bringing organizations into close focus helps scholars see both how some people attempted to control the reading of others and how some readers resisted these efforts. Although it is probably true that all reading cultures construct hierarchies of good and bad reading, the specific boundaries set around the textual field and the nature of the groups who attempt to set those boundaries vary over time and space. An extensive literature describes the stratification of reading during the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries and explains this at least in part as an attempt to control the chaos resulting from the publishing explosion that accompanied the industrialization of print production and distribution, as well as the spread of mass literacy.15 For the last two centuries, educational experts, librarians, and other cultural authorities have held to a reading ideology that posited contrasts between worthwhile reading as an exercise in reason that served to inform or instruct and reading that evoked passion and aimed to amuse or divert. Throughout the nineteenth century, reading fiction was an especially contested practice in the developing public institutions of the school and library. Those librarians who joined the debate over “the fiction problem” fell into three categories. Although a small minority called for total abstinence, most argued for a reluctant tolerance, commenting that taxpayers had a right to determine how their tax dollars be spent.16 Yet others pointed out advantages to fiction. Writing in 1879, Samuel S. Green supported even “sensational” fiction if it gave “young persons a taste for reading” [43, pp. 348–49]. Any reading, this argument implied, was better than none at all, especially if it encouraged people to progress up the literary ladder. Moreover, the poor were likely to need the diversions that an entertaining book could supply. Library leaders’ reading ideology was thus embedded in an underlying matrix of class relationships in the urbanizing world of late nineteenth‐century America.17 Gender relations, too, contributed to leading librarians’ construction of the ideal reader. Middle class women have long been assumed to be the principal readers of fiction (although actual evidence suggests that men too read novels in large numbers) [33, pp. 104–11]. Moreover, librarianship is a profession stratified by gender: early public library leaders were all men, and even today, although women predominate in clerical and middle management jobs, men still occupy executive positions in disproportionate numbers. The strictures of late nineteenth‐century library leaders aimed not only at counteracting supposed female reading patterns by controlling what books and magazines libraries collected, but also at shaping the professional practices of the—mostly—women who actually came into face‐to‐face contact with patrons.18 During the early twentieth century, Progressive Era reformers inserted a new value for “information” as an objective commodity into professional discourse and public consciousness. Whereas nineteenth‐century thought held that the “best” reading involved sustained, thoughtful engagement with texts (whether nonfiction or the “better class” of fiction), by the end of the twentieth century the concept of information had taken hold in the American imagination as a focus of public policy, as well as a source of corporate and personal advantage. Information became separated from reading as ease, speed, and quantity of access took precedence over the formerly valued sustained engagement with texts. Sometimes these categories of print presented separate and competing justifications for claims on community resources, as officials stressed the value of information in contrast to that of “stories.” At the same time, these distinctions were not necessarily clear to all readers. When a schoolchild or a homemaker read a historical novel, was she reading for pleasure or information [45, p. 111]?19 Did readers draw a line between reading for self‐improvement and reading for fun, and if so, where? In the minds of individual readers, as well as of those who helped shape their reading, the boundaries between literature, stories, information, and trash blurred and shifted, depending on circumstances of time and space. As children in 1950s rural Wisconsin, Marlene and Delores eagerly engaged in comic book reading, of which they knew their parents, teachers, and local librarians disapproved. Later, however, a more liberal policy was adopted. “Some people’s philosophy was if [the children] were reading a comic book they were reading junk,” said Delores. “But I let them read that book. If you were learning to read, what difference … if it’s a comic book, because that might get you interested in reading something else” [47, p. 278]. Over time, the children’s resistance to official reading values transformed into accordance as, during the next few decades, librarians dropped much of their opposition to the reading of popular fiction, to the extent that a popular textbook used in library education at the turn of the twenty‐first century proclaims, “Never apologize for your reading tastes” [48, p. xii]. Analyzing organizations can also reveal how certain voices are privileged. During the nineteenth and much of the twentieth century, the range of organizations in which women, African Americans, Native Americans, Asians, and even white Americans of eastern and southern European descent could participate was restricted. Native Americans found themselves excluded by law, custom, and distance, segregated as they often were on remote reservations that lacked amenities considered basic elsewhere. Asian immigrants, forbidden citizenship until the 1950s, were subject to many of the same legal and cultural constraints and were similarly neglected by public sector workers such as librarians. Federal and state laws and local customs systematically excluded black Americans from full participation even in tax‐supported organizations such as public schools, universities, and public libraries. In parts of the country where Jim Crow laws mandated segregated accommodations, schools, libraries, and extension facilities were always vastly inferior to those on offer to whites.20 In the North, too, access to technically unsegregated organizations was patchy and uncertain. African Americans organized voluntary organizations, including colleges, universities, churches, and self‐help groups, often very successfully. But these tended to lack financial and other resources. The cultures of print established and sustained by most mainstream organizations operated in an inescapably racist world—one in which the significance of culturally constructed racial difference was so taken for granted that it went unremarked, at least by the white majority. The popular novels that public library patrons of all ages found on the library shelves at the turn of the twentieth century would have done little to shake acceptance of the belief that the racial and ethnic ordering of American society was anything but natural and appropriate.21 In this respect, the print culture fostered by publicly sponsored organizations such as libraries and the extension service meshed well with that of the commercial publishers of best‐selling novels to sustain a general acceptance of white superiority. Through texts, racism was built into the very fabric of the institutions that were developing at that time—including those, like public libraries, that ostensibly supported republican principles of democratization. Women’s role as civilizers fit well into a contemporary reform discourse that called for “Americanizing” immigrants and “uplifting” blacks—groups of people seen as a matter of course as naturally primitive, culturally and racially inferior, and in need of philanthropic (and later professional) aid. Working class people, too, were seen as uncivilized by reformers, who explained their poverty as resulting from individual deficiencies such as laziness, sin, and ignorance rather than from group conditions related to structural factors such as economic exploitation. Thus, nineteenth‐century reading‐related ideologies that appealed to the need to “civilize” immigrants, the poor, and people of color made deeply racist assumptions that embedded themselves in the organizational discourse of librarians and teachers in ways that persisted throughout the twentieth century.22 Individual resistance in the form of textual appropriation is not the only kind of resistance: readers also engaged in organized and self‐conscious collective rejection of mainstream values and policies. Although some organizations provided opportunities for the powerful to exercise control, others provided the context within which marginalized people rejected the conditions of their oppression, both as individuals and in groups. Organizational analysis can uncover the historical instances in which working men and women joined unions and wrote for the labor press, immigrants founded associations and published newspapers in their native languages, and African Americans formed literary societies and read and wrote poems, stories, and articles that they shared with one another. In mid‐twentieth‐century Des Moines, Iowa, a group of black women took advantage of the segregated branch of the Young Women’s Christian Association to form a book club in which they read not only popular novels and best sellers of the day but also books on race by W. E. B. Du Bois, Walter White, librarian Nella Larsen, and sociologists E. Franklin Frazier and Allison Davis. For these women—whose activities might have gone unnoticed by historians but for their organizational association—the segregated space of the quasi‐official “Y” provided space to resist the restrictions of mainstream print culture [51].23 Organizations that had no links with officialdom also played a significant role in the print culture of millions. As Tony Michels has shown, in the early twentieth century, Russian‐speaking Jewish intellectuals living in New York learned Yiddish specifically in order to write and publish Yiddish newspapers and periodicals that presented a socialist agenda, as well as literary works [52]. These newspapers circulated not only all over the United States but also in eastern Europe and czarist Russia, where censorship restricted native publications. Many of these intellectuals published in Yiddish primarily out of political conviction, whereas to earn a living, they also wrote and published in English. The New York Yiddish press was just one example of the many ethnic publishing efforts, some of which defined their goals in opposition with rather than conformity to mainstream anglophone publishing. Resistance can take place at the organizational as well as the individual level and can involve writing as well as reading. 15.  For an overview, see [14]. See also [39]. 16.  William Kite of the Germantown (Pennsylvania) Free Public Library is the most well‐known example of those rejecting fiction. See [40]. But although Kite is a much‐cited example of this extreme viewpoint, Esther Jane Carrier comments that in fact he was the only librarian who actually called for total abstinence [41, p. 363]. In 1883 Mellen Chamberlain wrote, “We may believe that the trustees have no right to expend the public money for the mere amusement of the people; but, if the people think differently, trustees must yield to their wishes or leave” [42, p. 209]. 17.  Values clashed between those who cast patrons primarily as students or strivers and those who felt obliged to meet the taxpayers’ demands. While the former stressed transforming immigrants into “American citizens” and promoting social mobility, from the latter position it was but a small step to defining the reader as consumer, a contradiction that inheres in library rhetoric to this day. For a discussion of this contradiction in the context of early twentieth‐century public library development, see [43]. 18.  For example, as Abigail A. Van Slyck points out, Carnegie libraries were designed in such a way as to provide midlevel librarians (mostly women) with little or no control over their work space, in contrast to the upper‐level managers (usually men) who could expect a private office [44, pp. 165–73]. 19.  See also [46, p. 785]. 20.  Between the two world wars, researchers were beginning to draw attention to the dismal record of public library service to African Americans, especially in the rural South [49, pp. 32–34]. 21.  In a 1933 article, Sterling Brown concluded from a survey of depictions of African Americans in popular literature that “the Negro has met with as great injustice in American literature as he has in American life” and listed seven common stereotypes: the contented slave, the wretched freeman, the comic Negro, the brute Negro, the tragic mulatto, the local‐color Negro, and the exotic primitive (quoted in [50, p. 541]). 22.  For ways in which nineteenth‐ and twentieth‐century library cataloging and classification systems reproduced social hierarchies based on gender and race, see [50]. 23.  The records of the Book Lovers Club are located within the institutional records of the YWCA of Greater Des Moines, at Iowa Women’s Archives, University of Iowa. Conclusion Market models and resistance approaches have provided valuable frameworks for envisaging print culture in terms, on the one hand, of large‐scale capitalist structures and, on the other, of individual acts of appropriation through reading. Yet they also carry disadvantages. According to both, print capitalism produced not only books but also readers—a “mass readership”—on a large scale. According to this theory, most Americans participated in print culture only on the receiving end of cultural influence, as readers. A small elite, the conventional wisdom goes, participated as both readers and writers, occupying positions of influence (either as communications producers or as literary landlords) by virtue of their activities as published authors. In both models, the market for print mediates the relationship of the literary elite to the reading masses. Yet this dichotomized picture of readers and writers occupying separate social spaces is misleading. While it is true that over the course of the nineteenth century, a relatively small number of authors (in comparison to the number of readers) developed a professional relationship with profitable publishers as the producers of literary goods in the mass market, this far from describes the whole picture of print culture in America at the time. Just as this dichotomy presents an oversimplified view of print culture, so my depiction of print‐culture scholarship as falling into one camp or the other is also far too neat. Some influential works highlight other models, such as William Gilmore’s study of reading in rural New England that blends ecology and mentalité [53] or David Paul Nord’s work on the history of journalism that enlists the concept of community, imagined and otherwise [54]. Richard Brown employs the eighteenth‐century metaphor of diffusion [55]. Yet even works that specifically focus on institutional aspects of print culture, such as Mary Kelley’s excellent Learning to Stand and Speak, and on women and the shaping of print culture in the early and antebellum republic, may not specifically highlight organizations as a unit of analysis. “Nearly all of the early Republic’s women writers made their own way into print,” Kelley argues. “Burgeoning economic opportunity, heightened social mobility, increased literacy, and an expansive literary marketplace brought thousands of women into the world of print between the American Revolution and the Civil War” [37, pp. 56–57]. One wonders why the growth of women’s formal and informal educational organizations does not appear in this list of enabling factors. After all, “increased literacy” can be achieved extra‐institutionally. The history of print culture in the United States has been dominated by scholars of the colonial, early republic, and antebellum periods, while the period after 1876 has received much less attention (although this is changing) [15, p. 7]. Perhaps because of this concentration on the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, a period often defined in terms of the rise of industrial capitalism, the concept of market has gained considerable power over scholars’ imaginations, while institutions and organizations—phenomena that played an increasingly important part in American life as the nineteenth century progressed—have received less theoretical notice. It is unlikely that any model in the history of reading can have universal application, and treating organizations as a missing middle layer may be most appropriate for that period in American history when they gained such dominance: the latter half of the nineteenth century and the twentieth century. Paying conscious attention to them encourages us to complicate the print‐culture scene in several ways. First, it helps us broaden our ideas of what kinds of texts to study. Along with those books and magazines that were commercially successful and thus more readily available to historians, print‐culture scholarship can encompass a greater variety of material forms, including newspapers, periodicals, manuals, advertising, school and college texts, and all sorts of ephemera that, despite their lack of commercial relevance, had great significance in the lives of millions of Americans. Second, it points to the ways in which macro categories such as race, gender, and class can affect the distribution of power as well as the acts of individuals who use print to both exercise and resist that power. Third, organizational analysis allows researchers to blur the conceptual boundary between reading and writing, to show how many so‐called ordinary Americans participated in print culture both as readers and as writers. Not only does this encourage us to conceive of readers as active and far from powerless, but it demonstrates that the concept of reader resistance only makes sense if applied selectively. In some organizations, resistance and conformity go hand in hand and perhaps inevitably so. We cannot assume that simply because mid‐twentieth‐century cultural authorities condemned comics, romances, mysteries, and westerns, actual readers of such literature were necessarily exercising consistent resistance to official reading ideologies. Other organizations were explicitly devoted to counteracting the norms of mainstream society; the act of joining could itself be a sign of resistance. Fourth, recognizing the role of noncommercial as well as commercial organizations in providing opportunities for writing as well as reading helps us to move beyond the language of textual production and consumption. Combining the ethnographer’s attention to thick description with the theoretical focus on the meso, or middle, layer of analysis permits us to discern the activities of readers and writers within the same organizational spaces and to recognize the overlap between reading and writing, not only for well‐known authors whose histories as readers and writers are relatively easily recoverable, but also for the millions of ordinary readers and writers for whom the technologies and practices of literacy were an indispensable but often taken‐for‐granted part of their everyday lives. Finally, as the example of Lutie Stearns shows, an organizational focus permits scholars to build up thick description by bringing to their attention primary sources that individual analysis could possibly overlook. Collections of institutional records that include minutes of meetings, memos, correspondence, work diaries, lists of publications, postal records, and, in the case of libraries, accessions and circulation records, are rich repositories of primary source materials on print culture. As actors occupying organizational roles, ordinary Americans who left no personal records may emerge through what are sometimes considered to be dry, bureaucratic documents.