TRENDS AND DEVELOPMENTS IN HIGHER EDUCATION CARTER DAVIDSON rf-9HIE small liberal arts college dom- mated the scene of American high- , er education for the first two cen- turies, from the founding of Harvard in 1636 until the Civil War. In the 1840's there was a grand total of 12,000 stu- dents in a hundred small colleges, none of them with more than 500 students. For twenty years before the Civil War the percentage of young men of college age who were actually attending college declined noticeably, and the war itself wrote "finis" to the story of many an institution. The war ended, the nation realized it had come of age and looked about for new forms to embody its new aspirations. Great Britain had lost favor because of her partisanship during the conflict, and the new European power, Germany, conqueror of Austria and led by the impressive Bismarck, was begin- ning to dominate the scene; as a result, it was to the German universities of Ber- lin, Munich, Leipzig, Bonn, Freiburg, Heidelberg, Marburg, Jena, Gbttingen, or Erlangen rather than to the British Oxford or Cambridge that America turned for her models. In the German universities the stress was upon re- search, scholarship, and professional preparation for law or medicine or the- ology rather than upon the old liberal arts. As a result, America turned to the university pattern for her new higher education. In 1868 Cornell University, under Andrew D. White and partly financed by the federal government through the Land-Grant College Act of Senator Mor- nIll, opened with colleges of engineering, agriculture, and mechanic arts. In 1869 Charles W. Eliot became president of Harvard, and during his forty-year term gave this oldest college its present uni- versity structure. In 1875 Vanderbilt University opened its doors in Nashville, with schools of law, medicine, and en- gineering as well as liberal arts. The Johns Hopkins University, begun in 1876 under president Daniel Coit Gil- man, at first had no undergraduate col- lege at all but admitted only to the pro- fessional and graduate schools of a Ger- man type. In 1889 Clark University opened, under president G. Stanley Hall, as a graduate school of psychology. The year 1891 saw the west move into the field with Stanford University, led by an experimental ichthyologist, David Starr Jordan, and with sufficient money to employ the greatest scholars of the day. In this respect its main rival was the University of Chicago, re-established with the Rockefeller wealth and presided over by a great scholar of Hebrew, Wil- liam Rainey Harper. While these new universities were coming into being, many of the older eastern colleges, such as Yale and Columbia, were also under- going a gradual conversion to the uni- versity idea and form. By the beginning of the twentieth century the university was dominant in the American picture. The last fifty years have seen tremen- dous growth in the size of the student bodies, from slightly over two hundred thousand to over two million students, of whom more than half are in our 121 universities, and less than a quarter in 453 separate liberal arts colleges. Many 275
276 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY of the largest universities are state in- stitutions, but the largest of all is pri- vately controlled and financed. Today the private liberal arts college has man- aged to hold its place by emphasizing the social and intellectual values of the intimate relations in a smaller student body. In curriculum and general educa- tional philosophy, however, the univer- sities still dominate the scene. And what are the major emphases which are now given in our American higher education? I should like to develop them under four main headings: culture, character, com- petence, and citizenship. The alliteration may help to tie them together. The university of today is what it has been for seven centuries-a treasure house of culture. It is living proof that we are not the first who have trod this planet and that each age, race, nation, and outstanding individual has left some gift which we of today can make part of our own heritage. As Albert Einstein has told us, all things exist in a fourth dimension, of time; it is a function of education to help us to exist in time-in the riches of the past, the problems of the present, and the hopes of the future. We stand knee-deep in the river of hu- man experience, knowing that much has flowed past before we came, that it continues on throughout our lives and probably will flow on in the future. It is this consciousness of our heritage from the past which sets man apart from the other members of the animal kingdom; in many ways the bees and the ants may be our social superiors, but in this re- spect they have not developed. Because this heritage is what glorifies the human being, it is well that we call its study the "humanities. " A university operates upon at least three levels-instruction, research, and services. In the area of the humanities the purpose of instruction is to enable the student to enter into his cultural inheritance. This can be achieved by the student partly through absorption, partly through creation. He can absorb the experience of history, the wisdom of philosophy, and the vicarious emotions and adventures of literature through reading. Through the techniques of teaching, students can be trained to read rapidly, accurately, and with critical appreciation. During the early stages the books can be prescribed or recommended by the faculty, so that the best of our cultural heritage will be known; but as the student gains maturity, he should be given more and more freedom of choice. At times I fear that reading for en- joyment has become one of the lost arts. Children have so many other forms of recreation to compete for their time- sports in the afternoons, television in the evenings, trips on the week ends-that they have little opportunity to establish the reading habit. I recall happily the rainy afternoons and the long evenings which I spent reading through all the children's books on the shelves of the branch library near my home. On my twelfth birthday I received gifts in the form of cash, which I carried proudly to the downtown secondhand bookstore and invested, after a day of browsing, in a twenty-volume complete set of Sir Walter Scott and a thirty-volume com- plete set of Charles Dickens. And during the next two years I read them all. When I was thirteen I secured an advertis- ing pamphlet of the Globe-Wernicke Company entitled "The World's Best Books," and I was naive enough to be- lieve that it was my duty to read them all. Listed in the pamphlet were the titles of the "Harvard Classics"; and, since my father had the set in our library
TRENDS AND DEVELOPMENTS IN HIGHER EDUCATION 277 at home, I started with Volume I and proceeded on through the five-foot shelf. This was very heavy reading for a teen- ager, but I plowed ahead, often without comprehension; this is why I say that the immature reader should be helped in his selection of books. On the other hand, I built up the habit of voluminous read- ing which has stood me in good stead all my life. Of course, some of the books were trivial, such as Horatio Alger's suc- cess stories or the adventures of Tom Swift, Frank Merriwell, and the Rover Boys; but I learned many of the facts of history from Henty and Joseph Altsheler, and they led me on to Steven- son, Dumas, Hugo, Thackeray, and others of high quality. When I arrived at college, the habit of reading was so ingrained that I dropped in every day for an hour in the Farnsworth Room of the Widener Library and read my way straight through the beautifully bound sets of Clemens, Shaw, and Galsworthy. To this day I can resist the blandish- ments of radio and television if I can have a good book waiting in my study, and I thank my lucky stars that I was allowed to become an ardent reader when I was a child. I suppose it is never too late to mend, and our college education should give every encouragement to leisure reading, but it is best if begun early. It has been said that the best uni- versity is a collection of books, and cer- tainly the college library provided the gold mine in which the students, aided by the faculty, can dig for the riches of our civilization. Although our culture is largely con- tained in books, it is also in music and art and must be heard and seen. Higher education must provide opportunities for listening to the best in music and drama, and in sufficient quantities to make a lasting impression. Perhaps radio's chief contribution to our civiliza- tion is the tremendous rise in music ap- preciation which it has brought about. If color television can do the same serv- ice for our appreciation of painting and its allied arts, may the day be hastened. But it is not well enough that we teach enjoyment; we must teach the skills of creation as well. The creative technique of philosophy is meditation and thought; of literature it is writing; of music it is singing or playing an in- strument or composing; of dramatics it is acting; of the graphic and plastic arts it is drawing and painting and sculpture. "What!" exclaims the skeptic, "are we expected to make accomplished artists in a dozen fields?" Of course not. But G. K. Chesterton, in one of his charac- teristic paradoxes, advised "VWhatever is worth doing is worth doing poorly." By this I take him to mean that even though we may never acquire any real skill, we should try our hand at a number of creative tasks, in order that we may truly appreciate art when it is well done. And in the process we may at least learn to write clear and effective English prose. Ability to write correctly in one's own native tongue is a cultural goal which we have a right to demand of every col- lege graduate. So far I have spoken only of the in- structional function of a university in the humanities. The faculty in these departments must also carry on research into our cultural-heritage, to provide new light upon the past. For many years, under the powerful influence of the new sciences, research in the humanities aped the scientific techniques and jargon, and nothing was acceptable unless it was "philology" or "archeology" or "musi- cology." Today, however, there is a strong interest in rhetorical analysis, aesthetic criticism, and examination of
278 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY art in artistic terms. Some of our gradu- ate schools are permitting students to present a novel or play or symphony in place of the traditional doctoral research dissertation. Faculty members of our universities are expected to work in our research libraries and studios and to direct other workers in the production of books and paintings and operas, which, in turn, become a part of our cul- tural heritage. The service function of the university to the humanities is carried on by the university library or libraries, by the museums, and by the public perform- ances of theater, orchestra, or chorus. Administrators are accustomed to hear groans about the high expense of adding thousands of books each year to the li- braries or of maintaining museums, with their manifold services; but how can a university become a true treasure house of culture if it has neither books nor artifacts? We will all agree that, par- ticularly in our larger cities, students and faculty should make use of the agen- cies of culture which exist away from the campus, and the university should sup- plement rather than merely duplicate. The colleges of New York City, for ex- ample, can never hope to rival the col- lection of the Metropolitan Museum of Art or the music of the Philharmonic and the Metropolitan Opera or the pro- fessional theater of Broadway; therefore, they should bring their students in touch with the best where it is and spend their own funds to develop other areas. The cultural function of higher educa- tion has been central for seven centuries; the same is true of its purpose as a build- er and strengthener of character. The earliest universities were established as an arn of the church; a major reason was the preparation of a learned clergy. Religion was taken for granted as the binding element in all education. When the first American colleges were founded and for many years thereafter, the presi- dents were ordained ministers, who pre- sided over the daily worship services, taught the required Senior course in Christian ethics, and looked to the healthful spiritual growth of every stu- dent. The entire atmosphere of the col- lege was such that it assumed that the character of the individual would be strengthened by living there for four years. The growing secularization of our universities during the past century has shifted the focus upon character de- velopment from a religious to a psycho- logical center. Instead of piety and self- sacrifice, we now talk of self-realization, self-fulfilment, self-reliance, self-respect and self-government (in the personal rather than the political sense). Yet there is dissatisfaction with a merely biological interpretation of individual differences. As Dean Theodore Blegen said recently at a conference in Albany, "Man is not a blood-powered adjunct to a tractor." In their recent report on preparation for medical school in liberal arts colleges, Deans Severinghaus, Car- man, and Cadbury applauded a growing ''concern for moral values . . personal and social responsibility . . . ethical and moral problems ... service to one's fellow man." The question is: What can the college do about character? Liberal education is by definition the education of free men, preparation for freedom. But freedom has no meaning unless man has a choice, and when we make a choice we exercise our sense of values. Professor George Counts, in his recent book, Education and American Civilization, states the issue thus: The essence of any civilization is found in its values, in its preferences, its moral commit-
TRENDS AND DEVELOPMENTS IN HIGHER EDUCATION 279 ments, its esthetic judgments, its deepest loyalties, its conception of the good life, its standards of excellence, its measures of success, its teachings regarding the things for which and by which men should live, and, if need be, die. The issue at stake in the coming years is nothing less than the birth, the death, and the survival of values. The character of a man, therefore, might be said to be determined by his set of values. Differences in personality have always demanded an explanation from the scholars, from the theory of the medieval physiologists of the four hu- mors-red blood or sanguis, if dominant, makes the sanguine, cheerful, healthy man; phlegm in excess makes him phleg- matic, apathetic, sluggish; yellow bile, or choler, makes a man choleric, irascible, wrathful; and black bile, or melan choler, brings on melancholy, dejection, gloom own to the Freudian types and the Gestalt of modern psychology. The idea that personality and char- acter are determined by the value-pat- tern suggests a possible function for edu- cation at the university level. Let us provide a character H-bomb to offset the military H-bomb now terrifying the earth. Perhaps society will be helped if our graduates can be taught honesty, humility, humanity, and humor in col- lege classrooms. The study of mathe- matics, experiments in the laboratory, the taking of examinations, should con- vince us that cheating robs only our- selves; as Polonius told Laertes, "To thine own self be true, and it must fol- low as the night the day, thou canst not then be false to any man."2 Humility or lack of conceit should come from a realization of our ignorance. Let us assume that a student entering the university has knowledge equivalent to a circle with diameter X; at every point on the circumference of that circle he should be conscious of an area of ig- norance outside the circle. Four years later we hope the circle he knows has grown to diameter 2X; but the circum- ference has also doubled, and his admis- sion of ignorance should be increased. The man who knows the most, the great scholar, should be the most humble be- cause he is most conscious of the areas of the unknown. By "humanity" I mean consideration of the effects of what we do upon others. Christianity preaches that the individual human soul is the highest value in the sight of God, democracy that the individ- ual human being and his rights take precedence over the superstate. Sym- pathy with the hopes and troubles of others becomes a virtue when it leads to the alleviation of suffering. When I ask for humor as a character trait, I am seeking not for the comic cutup or the senseless giggler but for the ability to see life in its proper pro- portions, to recognize incongruity, and to help restore balance and sanity, often with the sauce of a kindly smile. We Americans have great respect for these good-humor men, the Mark Twains and the Will Rogerses, for they help to give us character as a nation. The careful study of literature, both tragedy and comedy, should help us develop both humanity and humor. The old college curriculum combined instruction in the humanities with in- doctrination in the principles of morality and character. Latin and Greek gave ample excuse for philosophy, and every event in history offered a problem in ethics. Culture and character, therefore, have gone hand in hand. Research at the universities in character has, however, been little developed. The only depart- ments to interest themselves have been religion and psychology, and much of their research has been tangential. Here
280 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY is an area of great opportunity. Psy- chiatry deals with the pathology of char- acter, and educational psychology has limited itself too strictly to the elemen- tary and secondary levels. We need re- search in the growth of character among mature normal men and women. The early college contented itself with a curriculum built chiefly around culture and character. Actual training for the professions of medicine and law was se- cured by "reading" in a doctor's or lawyer's office. But during the second quarter of the nineteenth century en- gineering and law and medicine began to establish schools and curriculums, and eventually many of these schools be- came affiliated with universities. Nor- mal schools grew into teachers' colleges; the Morrill Act of 1862 set up schools of agriculture, mostly in connection with state colleges and universities; and dur- ing the past century there has been a steady growth in the number and size of "professional" schools of business, phar- macy, music, journalism, nursing, ar- chitecture, forestry, veterinary medicine, osteopathy, optometry, dentistry, social work, and library science. All these oc- cupations now call themselves "profes- sions" because their vocational training is given at the college or postcollege lev- el, but the educational program pre- scribed for the degree is designed not so much for culture or character as for com- petence. If we engage a dentist to work on our teeth or an architect to build our house, we may be happy to know that he is steeped in the literary and artistic heritage of the human race, and we hope that he is honest and humane, but we insist that he know the techniques of his trade. The medieval curriculum of grammar, logic, rhetoric, arithmetic, geometry, music, and astronomy was constructed for the needs of a leisure-class society and the priesthood. Today America really has no leisure class, though we all may be striving to reach that level on retirement. In this country we ex- pect every man or woman to pull his own weight in the boat, regardless of inherited wealth. Every man works for self-respect, even if he does not need to work for a living. The sons of John D. Rockefeller, Jr., provide an excellent example of Americans at work. With such an emphasis upon competence at some useful occupation, it is natural that vocational programs should domi- nate higher education. Of the approxi- mately 500,000 degrees granted in the United States in 1950, only 150,000 were in the liberal arts; the other 350,000 were earned in professional schools at the undergraduate and graduate levels. And it would be safe to say that most of the degrees in liberal arts were intended for use as tickets of admission to business or teaching or scientific work or home economics or to graduate schools. Certainly there is nothing low or ve- nial in vocational motivation. Edu- cators should welcome motivation to study, almost without regard to source. The vision of a professional diploma at the end may carry the student through many a subject which in itself has little intrinsic interest for him. Even if the vocational drive lasts for only a short time, it may perform a valuable func- tion-especially if it is succeeded by another and stronger drive. Many a student shifts his sights from one pro- fession to another, particularly during his undergraduate career, and there is no harm done; actually, his education is probably broader as a result. In the area of vocational and profes- sional competence, the university has many functions. First of all, it helps to
TRENDS AND DEVELOPMENTS IN HIGHER EDUCATION 281 select and sift the suitable candidates for the various professions. Tests of voca- tional interest and aptitude have been developed to a point where they are very helpful, but they must be supplemented by academic records, general mental ability tests, and personal interviews. Certain professional schools are much stiffer in their entrance requirements than others, partly because the profes- sion places an arbitrary limitation on numbers. Some professions demand from two to four years of liberal arts training before admission to the study of the craft, whereas others include the train- ing in the undergraduate years. The logic of these differentiations is sometimes hard to perceive. In the teaching of the professions, the question is constantly asked: Can a man be a good teacher without also being a good practitioner? The desire to combine theory with practice has led to a con- siderable movement back and forth be- tween the classroom and the professional office. In medical schools, for example, only a few members of the clinical fac- ulty are full-time teachers, and these few practice medicine or surgery in order that they may show to the students the latest techniques. Many teachers in the business school or engineering school spend a day or two each week and their summer vacations with a corporation on a retainer basis. If held within reason- able bounds, this practice should be en- couraged. Sabbatical years are frequent- ly used to refresh the professor's ac- quaintance with the harsh facts of the "world outside." Members of the pro- fession, through their guild organiza- tions, are inclined to demand a share in the planning of the curriculum and in the accrediting of the schools them- selves. This has produced some upgrad- ing of faculty and teaching but has also proved a millstone around the neck of the universities; there is a strong move- ment under way to simplify and unify the whole accrediting process. It is in the professions, the field of competence, that the research function of the universities has mushroomed to fantastic proportions. In at least two great engineering colleges the budget for research exceeds the entire budget for the remainder of the institution; and a similar proportion or lack of proportion prevails in the budgets of medical schools, colleges of agriculture, and de- partments of physics or chemistry. In 1950, over $222,000,000 was spent on organized research, mostly in the sci- ences. Now that the federal government has discovered the research abilities of university faculties, most of this re- search money comes from Washington. The recently established National Sci- ence Foundation is merely another step in the same direction. Even the private foundations show a preference for the professional schools when they make. grants for investigations. And it must be admitted that this constant stimulus from public and private sources has pro- duced amazing results. Most of the re- cent Nobel prize winners in science have been university professors, and our medi- cal schools have produced some of the magical cures of our day. In like manner, university services are also very heavy in the professional fields. University hospitals, medical clinics for diagnosis and treatment, short refresher courses for business executives or teach- ers, practicing law institutes, and the burgeoning enterprise of adult education and extension courses have become an important part of many universities. Just as Uncle Sam has found universities helpful, so the professional men desire to maintain a continuing relationship of
282 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY mutual assistance with their own or the nearest school. This can be built into a healthy relationship for both. Culture, character, competence-and, finally, citizenship. Once it was assumed that literacy was all that is required for good citizenship, but today we realize that propaganda works twice as effec- tively on those who can read. There are no more desert islands where we can es- cape from the world's problems, no Brigadoons which can remain unchanged for a century while the earth rolls on. When Andrei Vishinsky, in an address to the United Nations Assembly, as- serted that communism would win the world, not with bombs and industrial production, but with the idea and in- spiring concept of a communist society, he was hurling a challenge to the univer- sities of the XVestern world. Can we teach our people to believe ardently in our democratic social philosophy, which places individual man and his rights at the heart of America, and at the same time to work with and for our repub- lican form of government, with the checks of legislative and judicial and executive branches and the balances of federal and state and local community responsibilities? Have we the faith for survival? Our colleges can and must teach good citizenship in part in the class- room. By the study of history, from the Greek city-states to contemporary America, we can teach how man has gradually won his freedoms from the oppressors. In economics we can show how nineteenth-century free enterprise, with its pitfalls of exploitation and mo- nopoly, has in twentieth-century Ameri- ca evolved "past socialism and commu- nism," in the phrase of Frederick Lewis Allen, to an economy characterized by the desire for service to the public, a rising standard of living, widely dis- tributed ownership of corporations, and the channeling of wealth back into so- ciety through foundations such as the Rockefeller, Carnegie, Ford, Mellon, Kellogg, or Kresge. In our courses in political science we can reveal how the American Constitution has been tested in wars and peace for one hundred and sixty-five years and has proved flexible and durable beyond any other. Governor Thomas Dewey in a recent speech in- sisted that our schools should see that every student knows where the strategic materials of the world are located, what government controls them, and why America must keep a world of friends. Yes, in our classrooms our university fac- ulties can teach geopolitics and foreign languages as a channel of understanding, and all the social sciences, like sociology and anthropology and social psychology, can contribute to our understanding and faith in democratic republicanism. But this is not enough. Recent experi- ence in various parts of the world has proved painfully that learning to live in freedom is a slow process and cannot be taught from books. To produce gradu- ates with a belief in democracy, our uni- versities must themselves be filled with the democratic spirit. To prepare men and women to debate and argue on pub- lic issues, we must encourage debate and free discussion on the campus. As Mark Van Doren pointed out recently, children cannot be convinced by argument; this is a characteristic of mature minds, and universities must bring about the steady maturing of student minds. Much of this maturing must be emotional rather than rational; our universities must help students find safe and positive outlets for their emotions, must cultivate sym- pathy with the emotions of others, and, above all, must lead to a mature control
TRENDS AND DEVELOPMENTS IN HIGHER EDUCATION 283 of the emotions by the intellect, so that our feelings aid rather than destroy our judgment. It has often been said that man is unfit to govern others until he can govern himself. If life on our cam- puses is democratic, the foreign students studying here by the thousands will take back to their native lands something of the flavor of democratic living. In like manner, travel abroad can do much to give Americans perspective on their own civil'ization. Research into the problems of Ameri- can economics and into the complexities of public administration provides an- other challenge to higher education. Dur- ing political campaigns the words "brain trust" may be used by the party out of power with vituperative effect, but no national administration today can pos- sibly function without the expert serv- ices of economists and other social sci- entists from university faculties. It is just and right that our universities should be service stations for the nation. In like manner, universities become the civic centers for their communities. Professors are the consultants to mu- nicipal bureaus and state officials. The college buildings house public meetings and forums where important issues are discussed. The more the university builds itself into the life of the city, state, and nation, the more truly it is perform- ing its proper function. If the Gothic cathedral was the flower of the Middle Ages, can we not hope that the American college is the flower of modem America? Culture, character, competence, and citizenship as the objectives of the mod- em university combine the best of the old and the new-and that has been the dream of the teacher since the dawn of civilization.