I.  Introduction The dialogue and deliberations that are essential to a democratic society rely on freedom of access to information and on the exchange of information between different social groups (small worlds). In a democratic society with a diverse population, small worlds have a wide range of opinions, as well as their own beliefs about information. Democratic deliberation relies on the free exchange of information between small worlds, including access to meaningful information for members of small worlds to form views and openness to views of other small worlds. In terms of the deliberation of political and social issues, diversity of opinion can help to ensure that all sides of an issue are considered and that decisions reflect this diversity of viewpoints. However, policy developments in the United States following September 11, 2001, through legislation and executive orders, threaten to affect democratic deliberation negatively. By limiting access to meaningful information related to social and political issues, and also by limiting the ability of certain small worlds to articulate or exchange their viewpoints, these policy developments have significant potential to alter the access and exchange of information. Libraries, based in their established role as providers of diverse sources of information, have the potential to serve as guardians of information access and exchange between small worlds in spite of these recent policy developments. II.  Access to and Exchange of Information across Small Worlds This article draws on the concept of “small worlds,” social environments within which individuals live and work, linked by a set of common interests and expectations, as well as by a shared set of information needs and behaviors and often—though not always—by geographic proximity and similar economic status [1]. Within such small worlds, most everyday activities, including those related to the exchange of information and access to information, are often taken for granted and considered to be part of “the way things are.” Because a society as a whole is comprised of a vast and diverse array of such small worlds, and because the success or failure of a deliberative democratic society depends, in large part, on the possibility of open interaction between these worlds, it is necessary to define not only small worlds themselves but also the interlocking concepts of information access and information exchange. Historically, American libraries have served as repositories at which patrons could find information of all kinds, from consumer information to recreational reading materials. In addition, both federal and state governments, through extensive publishing programs, have made the provision of information a fundamental part of their missions, with the federal government beginning to disseminate printed information to citizens in the 1810s [2]. Information access, thus, can be defined as the presence of a robust system through which information is made available to citizens and others, with storage facilities ranging from physical libraries to digital databases, yoked with mechanisms for finding specific types of information stored in such facilities. Much of the library and information research literature focuses on issues related to information access, often dealing specifically with what has been called “information‐seeking behavior”—the ways in which users actively and purposefully use information systems of various types to find answers to specific information needs. However, in a social context, the mere availability of information does not account for the full spectrum of information behavior, which also includes information use, information avoidance, and—most significant for the discussion at hand—information exchange [3]. That is, people not only actively seek out information available in official access points such as libraries, databases, and archives but also exchange information with one another [4]. Because small worlds are constituted, in part, by a shared set of information needs and interests, such exchange is a fundamental part of people’s daily activities and behaviors, part of the basic fabric of social interaction within small worlds. However, in a complex society—and particularly in a healthy deliberative democracy—the exchange of information takes place not only within homogeneous small worlds but also across and between multiple small worlds. Individuals who are members of multiple small worlds in their work and living environments can act as conduits or gatekeepers, passing information from one context to another. By means of such processes, small worlds can both maintain their own integrity through their ability to articulate their beliefs and values if they choose to do so and become informed about (and inform) other small worlds. This active exchange between small worlds is essential for creating and maintaining an informed and knowledgeable populace in which support for information exchange works hand in hand with strong support for information access in the best interests of freedom of expression and democratic dialogue. III.  Information Access, Information Exchange, and the Foundations of Deliberative Democracy Freedom of expression is vital to democratic dialogue. However, it is not, in and of itself, sufficient to promote deliberative democracy. For democratic dialogue to have meaning, it must be based on meaningful information about the political and social issues at hand. Democracies “rest on the assumption that citizens can govern themselves because they are informed” [5, p. 215]. To be informed about issues, citizens must be able to have access to relevant information to inform and shape the dialogue. The availability and free flow of information are “indispensable tool[s] of self‐governance in a democratic society” [6, p. 12]. In the United States, the progress toward making the democratic process more inclusive can be seen as paralleling increases in information access in society [7]. As such, access to and exchange of information create the foundation for freedom of expression and subsequent democratic dialogue. In 1969, the Supreme Court explicitly stated, “The Constitution protects the right to receive information and ideas” [8, p. 564]. Although often an unspoken element of the freedom of expression, this right to receive and to have access to information cannot be taken for granted. Without this protected right to access and receive information, the overall right of free expression could be diminished, as could the social and political value of the speech that does occur [9–11]. Reduced access to information threatens to result in a reduction in the quality and meaning of free expression and democratic dialogue. Historian Isaiah Berlin has noted that freedom of expression does not necessarily lead to an increase in meaningful philosophical, political, or social dialogue [12]. A reason for this seeming disconnect may be the fact that an increase in freedom of expression may not have been accompanied by a similar increase in access to relevant information. “When any avenues of political expression are closed, government by consent of the governed may be foreclosed. If any information or opinion is denied expression, the formation of public policy has not been founded on a consideration of all points of view; as a result, the will of the majority cannot really be known” [13, p. xix]. Thus, if interaction and exchange across and between multiple small worlds—all points of view—are limited or actively cut off, democracy suffers. Consistent exposure to one viewpoint about a political issue tends to limit both understanding of the political issue itself and understanding of the issue within the functioning of the political process [14]. It is in the best interests of a healthy democracy, then, to foster the pathways through which information may be accessed and exchanged between all constituent local and national small worlds, including those reflecting diverse (and sometimes conflicting) ethnic, international, economic, religious, and political traditions. The ability to access and exchange meaningful information related to social and political issues has been a driving force behind some of the most prominent institutions in American culture. A prime example is the public library. For many in the revolutionary generation of Americans, most notably Benjamin Franklin, diffusion of knowledge through social organizations was seen as a way to prevent the elite from having hegemony over education and learning [15, 16]. Though fostering access to and exchange of diverse information sources has not always been the central role of public libraries in the United States [17, 18], such a role became increasingly important over the course of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries as the public library became both a place of access to meaningful social and political information and a place for members of a community to exchange viewpoints on such information. This evolution of the role of the library has paralleled its development from being conceived as a simple repository of texts to being thought of as a marketplace of ideas [19]. Libraries have come to be seen as playing several essential roles in democratic society that involve the access and exchange of information—making government and political information available, preserving historical information related to governance, providing education on democratic notions, and creating a public space for exchange of political views [16]. The public access and exchange are enhanced by the citizens’ “communal ownership and use of information” in public libraries [20, p. 257]. Certain boundaries, such as intellectual property rights and the mission of a library, do place some constraints on information access and exchange in libraries [21]. Overall, however, public libraries are often seen as, and often view themselves as, “a sanctuary for the First Amendment” [22, p. 140]. Because of this role, libraries have been at the center of many government efforts, past and present, to regulate or monitor information access and exchange by citizens. In 1939, spurred by the negative effects of the turmoil in Europe and Asia on free speech, freedom of the press, and availability of information in those regions of the world, the American Library Association (ALA) began to work actively to ensure access to information from a range of perspectives and to foster the articulation of diverse views [15, 23]. As the world was going to war, librarians began to take the professional stance that “a full range of information must be available to the voting public” from the library and that the library was a place to foster intellectual freedom [24, p. 29]. This open, intellectually inclusive stance was codified in ALA manifestos such as the Library Bill of Rights and the Freedom to Read Statement. Over time, many librarians and patrons developed the belief that censorship, stifling expression, or limiting access to information was antithetical to the mission of public libraries [23, 24]. Libraries, thus, can be seen as models of equitable access in at least two ways. First, they function (historically and currently) as repositories in which texts and other information resources are kept for the use of patrons, with little limitation based on political beliefs or ethnic and national origins. Similarly, by providing meeting spaces for a diverse set of organizations and cultural groups—representatives, often, of their constituent small worlds—they provide a forum for open expression of ideas. In other words, while various small worlds may be radically different from one another, with widely divergent social norms and beliefs, the mission of libraries in the United States has been to provide a place where they can both make their information available to other small worlds through their exercise of free expression and find information about those other worlds if they so choose. In this sense, libraries function as exemplars of information access and exchange and as true gatekeepers between multiple small worlds. It is no accident, then, that librarians have often been at the forefront in battling restrictions on information access and exchange by government organizations, social activists, segregationists, and censors, among many others [23, 25, 26]. Ultimately, such principled defiance cemented the social status of public libraries as places of free inquiry. It has also helped the public library take on a role as a public and social entity that is uniquely tolerant of divergent ideas and expressions. IV.  The Political and Social Dimensions of Information Access and Exchange in U.S. History through 2001 The vision of the framers of the U.S. Constitution for a civic republican government was “radical, egalitarian, and democratic in its implications” [27, p. xi], based on a conception of government centered on “the belief that the people were the source of all authority and power” [28, p. 122]. This emphasis on the government working for the people, over time, has been extended to the belief that the “government does not conduct the business of the people behind closed doors” [6, p. 4]. Access to government information has become an essential element of democratic self‐governance. In governance in the United States, it became accepted that judicial, administrative, and legislative materials and proceedings generally would be made available to the members of the public [29]. The unique perspective of the United States in terms of information access and exchange has led to the current situation in which many nations, which otherwise have legal protections similar to those of the United States, do not provide similar protections for the expression of minority or fringe viewpoints, particularly unpopular ones [30]. However, the ability to access and exchange information has been a political issue throughout the history of the United States, with the federal government at various times seeking to inhibit the right of the citizens to access certain types of information. Information access has often become involved in politics at times of national crisis. There is a historical tendency of the U.S. federal government to meet threats to national security with an immediate legislative response [31]. Such responses, though appealing to patriotism and a natural desire to address a threat, “create a diversion from the real issues that must be resolved” [32, pp. 685–86]. Often, these responses include altering how information can be accessed or what information the citizenry can access. Responses to threats to the nation have frequently resulted in the government working to hold more information away from the public [33]. However, it is in times of national crisis that “new attitudes and initiatives to end excessive secrecy and promote public dialogue on critical national issues” become most important for the nation to function as a deliberative democracy [33, p. 218]. A.  Intelligence Gathering and Limitations on Access and Exchange of Information In 1798, only ten years after the drafting of the Constitution, Congress passed the Alien and Sedition Acts, which were intended to curtail what information could be discussed in public and in the press about government policies [34, 35]. The laws were the result of members of the legislative and executive branches too closely identifying opinions about themselves as opinions about the government as a whole at a time when tensions with several European powers, particularly England, were rising. It was the first legislative action in the United States in which those “in power [were] disposed to think of themselves not as a party that has taken the reins of the government but as the government itself” [34, p. 87]. “By identifying their administration with the government and the government with the Constitution, the Federalists construed criticism of the administration as opposition to the government and an attempt to subvert the Constitution” [35, p. 177]. The laws were polarizing, with supporters like Representative Fisher Zames declaring that “zeal is now better than logic” and detractors like Representative, and future Secretary of State and Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, John Marshall decrying the laws as “calculated to create, unnecessarily, discontents and jealousies at a time when our very existence, as a nation, may depend on our union” [36, p. 244]. Few prosecutions occurred under these laws, and they did not survive for many years. The laws did, however, signal that the federal government would be willing to try to control democratic discourse by filtering information access and exchange. During times of actual hostilities, these tendencies have repeatedly become more pronounced. “History is replete with examples of governmental efforts to suppress speech on the grounds that emergency measures are necessary for survival that in retrospect appear panicky, disingenuous, or silly” [6, p. 319]. Access to information about certain viewpoints during the Civil War, the two world wars, and times of active labor disputes has been limited. For those who tried to access or exchange such information, the results could be most unpleasant. For example, during World War I, the Supreme Court repeatedly upheld laws that sent people to jail for expressing certain viewpoints, such as promoting pacifism [37–40]. The cold war, however, may have produced the most sustained period of federal government attempts to limit information access and exchange. The McCarthy‐era oppression of freedom of information access and exchange paralleled major social changes—shifting population demographics, economic factors, and a fear of external forces (i.e., communism) [41, 42]. One of the main reactions to these social changes was the limitation of access to information related to socialist and communist perspectives. Activities meant to limit information access and exchange included investigations, intimidations, and inquiries into the reading habits of library patrons. The hearings conducted by Senator Joseph R. McCarthy are perhaps the most infamous example of these activities; as chair of the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, McCarthy annually held over a hundred hearings with hundreds of witnesses [43]. Each of these hearings “start out reasonably enough, but soon descend into paranoia, conspiracy theory, and merciless badgering of witnesses,” with refusal to answer a question being seen as an admission of guilt [43, p. 465]. Under J. Edgar Hoover, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) accumulated files on about 10 million Americans from the 1940s to the 1970s [44–48]. Most of the files were on ordinary citizens—usually educated, often members of racial or religious minorities—who supported or were suspected of supporting causes of pacifism, socialism, communism, civil rights, integration, feminism, antifascism, anticolonialism, and antilynching, among others. Much of the content of these files focused on information‐related activities, such as what they read and with whom they communicated. Many prominent Americans, including those in appendix 1 below, had detailed FBI files as a result of their political beliefs and related information behaviors [2, 44–46, 49]. Under Hoover, the FBI also actively chased after Americans involved in postsecondary education. The FBI gathered massive amounts of information about the political beliefs and personal information behaviors of students, staff, faculty, and administrators at colleges and universities around the country, often with the open cooperation of the presidents of the schools [50]. Later investigations have found that many of the items reported in these files as actual facts were incorrect, including whole files attributing all of the contents of the file to the wrong individual [44, 49, 50]. In 1954, U.S. Attorney General Herbert Brownell ordered the FBI to conduct covert, warrantless searches and seizures whenever FBI agents believed national security might be involved [51]. These investigations used intrusive surveillance techniques on individuals and groups with little or no relevance to the concerns of national security. The subjects of such investigations included average citizens, journalists, White House policy advisers, congressional staff members, members of Congress, civil rights organizers, feminists, antiwar protesters, student groups, and the Democratic Party [51–53]. President Richard Nixon authorized similar activities for personal reasons, using wiretaps on the phones of reporters, government officials, and political adversaries [54]. The FBI was not the only federal agency gathering large amounts of data about citizens during this time period, as the Central Intelligence Agency, the National Security Agency, and U.S. Army Intelligence were conducting their own separate investigations [53]. The Central Intelligence Agency, for example, maintained files on more than ten thousand Americans, in direct contradiction of the law that barred it from collecting information about U.S. citizens [55]. Beginning in the McCarthy era and continuing until the end of the cold war, government agencies attempted to get information about patron activities in the library [26]. During the cold war, the FBI ran a program that became known as the Library Awareness Program in an effort to discover any reading habits of library patrons that might be cause for security concern. In particular, the FBI targeted libraries that served communities with high populations of immigrant, educated, or liberal residents [26, 56]. The Library Awareness Program was based primarily on intimidation and appeals to patriotism. An agent would approach a librarian, display a badge, appeal to patriotic sentiments, and request help in preventing the spread of sensitive but publicly available information [57, 58]. All of these activities served to limit the speech that citizens could access and exchange through dialogue in public and in the press, as few people were willing to risk being put on public trial for reading about or discussing pacifism, socialism, or communism. Further, the FBI, by monitoring patron reading habits, hindered viable avenues to access information about these and many other topics in forums such as public libraries. The overall tactics of these investigations often skirted or openly flouted the law. The twenty‐five‐year investigation of physicist Albert Einstein, an outspoken critic of racial discrimination, fascism, the arms race, colonialism, and many other forms of social injustice, offers many insights into how these investigations were conducted. Einstein’s mail was opened, his travels were monitored, his phone was tapped, his visitors and their license plate numbers were recorded, his home and offices were searched, and the events he attended were tracked for two and a half decades [44]. However, the FBI never got a warrant or any other sort of court approval for its activities [44]. That these violations of Einstein’s constitutional rights are known is due to his personal celebrity. To truly grasp the scope and impact of these activities, the violations of Einstein’s constitutional rights have to be magnified by every other individual investigated in the same time period for his or her personal beliefs and information behaviors. In reaction to such activities, the Senate formed a special committee to investigate and determine an appropriate response [53, 59]. This Senate committee found that, among many other activities, U.S. intelligence agencies had opened hundreds of thousands of first‐class letters; maintained lists of twenty‐six thousand citizens to be rounded up in a national emergency; and used a program called the Counter Intelligence Program (COINTELPRO) to torment subjects of investigations by encouraging their employers to fire them, the Internal Revenue Service to audit them, and their spouses to leave them [53]. Inspired by the suggestions in a Supreme Court opinion that Congress should create separate standards and procedures for surveillance for intelligence purposes and surveillance for criminal investigations [60], the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act (FISA) [61] was passed in 1978 after six years of debate and negotiation. Congress designed FISA to establish meaningful checks on intelligence investigations related to national security, intending to eliminate many of the law enforcement behaviors detailed above [61]. B.  Freedom of Information Prior to the passage of FISA, Congress created a significant new law protecting and promoting information access and exchange. Under the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) [62], federal agencies were required to release records to the public upon request, except for those records that are specifically exempted from disclosure or excluded from the act’s coverage [63]. This act created the presumption that the records of federal agencies and departments of the executive branch of the U.S. government are accessible to the public. When the FOIA became law on July 4, 1966, those seeking information were no longer required to show a need for the information. The “need to know” standard was replaced with a “right to know” standard. The act provides that any U.S. citizen has a right, enforceable in federal court, to access the records of any federal agency, except those documents that are exempt from disclosure by one of nine exemptions that are specified in the FOIA. Appendix 2 summarizes these exceptions to the FOIA. In order to use one of these exemptions to deny a request for information, the government has the burden to justify a need for the secrecy. Under the FOIA, federal agencies are accountable for disclosure of the information they collect and produce. While the FOIA does not guarantee that citizens have an absolute right to access all government documents, the law provides the right to request records from the government and receive a response to the request. If a request is denied, the agency must explain the reason for the denial. The requester has the right to appeal a denial and the right to challenge a denial in federal court. The U.S. Supreme Court has held that the exemptions were intended by Congress to be “exclusive” and “must be narrowly construed” by agencies [64, p. 361]. The Supreme Court has also determined that an agency has the authority to construe the exemptions as discretionary rather than mandatory in circumstances when no foreseeable harm could result from disclosure of the requested information [65]. The FOIA was intended to ensure the open flow of information from the government to the people, making citizens well informed of the policies and activities of the federal government. The act made the United States the world leader in government openness, setting the standard for freedom of information in democracies [66]. Since its passage, the FOIA has dramatically increased the amount of information the American public has about the activities of its representative federal government [67]. Prior to the events of September 11, 2001, the policy for implementing the FOIA had been expanded in the Clinton administration to make records available whenever possible, releasing them so long as there was no “foreseeable harm” from the release of the information [68]. Before 2001, the government was primarily focused on the creation of an FOIA policy that would protect secrecy of vital national interests while maximizing the availability of all other public information [68, 69]. Though the years between the foundation of the republic and 2001 were filled with much social and political upheaval, progress was made toward the institutionalization of open access and exchange of information through legislation such as the FOIA [6]. Much of this progress relates to the great social importance accorded to the First Amendment of the Constitution, which guarantees freedom of speech and expression by the public and by the press. The Supreme Court has noted that there is “practically universal agreement” that the primary intent of the First Amendment is “to protect the free discussion of governmental affairs” [70, p. 838]. As democracy has matured in the United States, the inclusion of the widest multiplicity of voices possible has become increasingly important in democratic deliberation. In 1944, legendary American jurist Learned Hand admonished, “The spirit of liberty is the spirit which seeks to understand the minds of other men and women” [71, pp. 189–90]. Such openness to varying views includes the ability to access and exchange information related to diverse opinions. Although the parameters of the First Amendment have constantly been debated throughout the nation’s history, the guarantees of freedom of expression have been at the heart of deliberative democracy in the United States. V.  The Great Divide: The Policy Environment of Information Access and Exchange after 2001 The terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, in New York and Washington, DC, had tremendous social and political repercussions in the United States. One of the more expansive repercussions was the crystallization of the federal government’s altered view of permissible access to and exchange of information. The attacks encouraged the Bush administration to begin reshaping the general roles of information access and exchange in political and social arenas. The types and amounts of information that can be accessed and the places (educational settings, libraries, government, and media) in which people access and exchange information have changed in specific ways, as have the types and amounts of information that the government can access about individuals’ information behaviors. As a result, the government has increased its ability to withhold information from citizen access and exchange, while it has increased its ability to monitor the information accessed and exchanged by an individual. A.  Loomings Before we delve into the policy instruments that established these changes, some examples will help to frame an understanding of their wide impacts on information access and exchange. Since the passage of the USA PATRIOT Act [72], the federal government has placed restrictions on access to much scientific information and limited or eliminated access to a wide array of information in print format and on government Web sites [73–75]. Many libraries have been ordered, with little or no explanation, to remove documents from their collections [75–77]. Three specific examples are worth relating in detail; each demonstrates ways in which these new federal laws and regulations are curbing the access and exchange of information. The first example shows prevention of information access, while the other two show attempts to inhibit information exchange. In August 2003, a professor of international law at Loyola University Law School attempted to use the U.S. National Archives to conduct her research but was denied access to thirty‐year‐old documents that she had been using in her research for the past seven years [78]. The archives staff admitted that the declassified documents would otherwise be available except for the USA PATRIOT Act, which was interpreted to prevent the documents from being viewed because they might contain information about important U.S. citizens. When the professor countered that the information in the documents related to people who were primarily dead and not likely doing the same things they were doing in the early 1970s, the professor was threatened with arrest [78]. In fall 2003, the Drake University chapter of the National Lawyers Guild sponsored a conference on the law and the war in Iraq, with the content of the conference challenging the legality of the war. In February 2004, the Department of Justice served the university with a grand jury subpoena to disclose names of members of the campus chapter of the National Lawyers Guild (and all documents of said campus organization), the names of attendees of the conference, and other campus security information [79]. The government gave no explanation for the orders. A gag order was placed on the university administration and the people involved from discussing the situation; the gag order was so broad, in fact, that one of the faculty members who was served had to get court permission to show the subpoena to her lawyer. The subpoenas were later quashed with little comment from the Department of Justice, other than claims that the matter was not related to the political view of the conference attendees [79]. In a similar time frame, U.S. Army intelligence officers investigated a conference on Islam and women’s issues (entitled “Islam and the Law: The Question of Sexism”) at the law school of the University of Texas at Austin; the officers went without identification to scrutinize any “Middle Eastern–looking men” [80, 81]. They then questioned attendees without a court order, even though the conference did not discuss any issues related to war or terrorism. The army officials admitted they passed information along to the FBI and the CIA, though the army later said that these staff members might have been out of line in their investigation [81]. The changes in information access and exchange have emanated from a mélange of laws, executive orders, and regulations ostensibly related to national security, including the USA PATRIOT Act and its revisions to FISA and to the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act [82], the Homeland Security Act [83], and three orders from the executive branch [84–86]. Paralleling these curtailments of information access and exchange related to national security is the implementation of the Children’s Internet Protection Act [87], which is designed to limit certain types of information accessed through the Internet, though its effects are further reaching. B.  The USA PATRIOT Act The USA PATRIOT Act not only opens the door for the restriction of types of information available to citizens; it also increases the ability of the government to monitor the information behaviors of its citizens [76]. Although designed to protect the security of the nation and its citizens, restrictions on information behaviors such as those contained within the USA PATRIOT Act can “compromise cherished freedoms the American people both enjoy and celebrate as part of our national identity” [88, p. 1653]. The USA PATRIOT Act reflects the inherent tension between the First and Fourth Amendments of the Constitution. The former guarantees the right to free speech and the right to be free from unreasonable government searches and seizures, while the latter embodies the government’s preeminent desire to protect national security [52, 77, 88–99]. Though some of the more controversial clauses of the act have sunset provisions, meaning that they will cease to be law at a certain point unless Congress takes action to retain them, the president and many members of Congress have already called for the removal of these sunset provisions [100, 101]. As a collection of modifications to other legislation, the USA PATRIOT Act alters many statutes related to access and exchange of information, including FISA, the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act [102], the Right to Financial Privacy Act [103], the Electronic Communications Privacy Act [104], the Cable Communications Policy Act [105], the Federal Pen Register and Trap and Trace Statute [106], and the Federal Wiretap Statute [107]. The act enables a range of surveillance and intelligence‐gathering activities historically deemed legally questionable or impermissible [99]. The act has also been used as the basis of a wide range of regulations related to information access and exchange. For example, the act serves as the basis of a series of regulations that limit the amount of information available on many government Web sites [73, 74, 76]. Appendix 3 details a number of the major laws modified by the USA PATRIOT Act that affect information access and exchange. The provisions of the USA PATRIOT Act greatly expand the abilities of federal law enforcement agencies to conduct FISA investigations in circumstances in which they would not previously have been permitted and to collect personal information from sources as diverse as electronic communications, voice mail, and any physical or electronic form of record [76]. The USA PATRIOT Act also significantly expands the meaning of a record that can be collected under FISA, so that a record can be any tangible item that contains information, such as physical or electronic versions of books, records, papers, and documents. As a result of the changes made by the USA PATRIOT Act, any intelligence investigation that occurs regarding the information behaviors of an individual may be much more extensive than it would have previously been. Any physical or electronic record kept by a library, school, bookstore, business, or other entity can now be requested as a record in FISA investigations. The USA PATRIOT Act allows for the use of FISA to investigate an increased number of information behaviors, including what information an individual accesses and exchanges. FISA now includes expanded surveillance of electronic and voice mail communications, including the origin, content, and destination of telephone calls, voice mail messages, e‐mail messages, and other electronic transactions. Information can also be gathered through the use of electronic devices such as roving wiretaps, pen registers, and trap and trace devices. The USA PATRIOT Act even allows for increased sharing of information between agencies, so that information collected might be used by multiple law enforcement agencies. Conversely, the secrecy clause of the act prohibits discussion of investigations by persons or organizations being investigated, except with individuals necessary to comply with the investigation and legal counsel. The Department of Justice is also trying to extend the powers of the USA PATRIOT Act to newer technologies as they become commonly used. For example, the Department of Justice recently announced that it wants to extend surveillance to Voice over Internet Protocols (VOIP), asking the Federal Communication Commission to order all Internet providers to alter technology used for VOIP so that communications can be more easily monitored [108]. Another outgrowth of the USA PATRIOT Act, in conjunction with the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996, that relates to information access and exchange is the limitation on the ability of international students to take certain types of classes from institutions of higher education in the United States. International students wishing to study in the United States now face having their academic lives, such as courses taken, grades, major area of study, and much else, as well as much information about their extracurricular time, logged by their school into a government tracking system [109]. The changes in the law not only limit the participation of international students in certain types of courses but also limit the number of distance education courses they can take. Along with misjudging the differences between education in physical and virtual environments, this policy limits the educational options and, thereby, the ability to access and exchange information in their fields of study for many international students in the United States [109]. C.  The Homeland Security Act The alterations to information access and exchange created by the USA PATRIOT Act are closely related to other alterations resulting from the Homeland Security Act (HSA) [83]. The HSA creates avenues by which holders of personal information, such as retailers, Internet service providers, or even libraries, can voluntarily submit information about people to the government without warrant or probable cause. It also provides means for citizens to report one another for suspicious activity. The HSA opens the door for extensive government mining of data, including personal records, e‐mails, and corporate records, to look for suspicious activity. The implications for information access and exchange are profound. As with the USA PATRIOT Act, the HSA simultaneously increases the amount of data the government has about individual citizens while decreasing the availability of government information to citizens. The act limits what can be requested through FOIA and allows the government to prevent access to unclassified government information that is sensitive, though the law does not define what sensitive includes. The HSA also allows businesses to classify their own information, regardless of the reason, as critical infrastructure information, which is both off‐limits to the public and cannot be held against the company. Hypothetically, a computer company can list software flaws or a construction company can list problems with the design of a bridge as critical infrastructure information and may be blameless for any subsequent problems. D.  Executive Orders and Other Acts A number of executive orders since 2001 have added to the growing list of new constraints on the access and exchange of information. In October 2001, the Department of Justice issued an order, affirming a White House position calling for limitations on information released under FOIA, that assured agencies when they “decide to withhold records, in whole or in part, the Department of Justice will defend [their] decisions” in most cases [84, p. 1]. In March 2002, the White House issued a memo instructing agencies to interpret FOIA as having an unstated exception for “sensitive but unclassified” information, which was explained as information that might be related to security or public safety [85]. The language of FOIA, however, does not actually provide a basis for a concept of “sensitive but unclassified” [62], meaning that the administration has established a reason for withholding information that contradicts the intent of FOIA. In May 2003, the president issued an executive order that eliminates the presumption of disclosure of information for FOIA requests, limits access to executive documents from current and previous administrations, postpones automatic declassifications of documents, protects foreign government information from release, and allows for the reclassification of previously released information [86]. Since 2001, there have also been a number of unsuccessful attempts by the federal government to alter information access and exchange. The Total Information Awareness program, which was intended to unify virtually every database in the United States so it could be mined for personal information about citizens, was crippled by Congress’s refusal to fund it [110]. The Department of Justice created two new proposed laws (known as Patriot II and the Victory Act) intended to further the powers created under the USA PATRIOT Act, though both faced widespread criticism from many policy experts and many politicians when the texts of the proposed laws became publicly known [76]. Key components of Patriot II and the Victory Act, however, are being introduced individually in Congress. One further major legal development since 2001 related to information access and exchange is the implementation of the Children’s Internet Protection Act (CIPA) [87]. The act was originally passed in 1998, but its constitutionality was upheld only in 2003. It is intended to prevent minors from being able to access through computers in public libraries certain types of online content that are considered potentially harmful to young minds. The breadth of what is covered by the law (i.e., all computers in a library) and the inadequacy of the technology that is used to filter Internet content, however, make CIPA a limitation on access to a greater range of information than the law is meant to cover [11, 111–112]. Libraries that must comply with CIPA may be reducing the ability of all patrons, not just children, to access a range of online content, much of which is not covered by the law, including some political texts [111]. CIPA may also serve to limit the willingness of patrons to use the Internet for information activities and may cause library staff to become monitors of online access and exchange of information [11, 112]. VI.  Across the Great Divide: Information and Small Worlds in the USA PATRIOT Era As we have noted elsewhere [109], the USA PATRIOT Act, through its Student Exchange Visitor Information System (SEVIS) provisions, has had a major impact on the world of higher education and, in particular, on the small worlds of international students and scholars. International students and scholars represent a poignant group through which to analyze these changes to information access and exchange among small worlds, as certain laws have singled them out by creating special limitations on their information activities. In the guise of limiting the number of potential terrorists posing as students, SEVIS will maintain oversight of nearly 550,000 international students in the United States, using an Internet‐based information‐gathering system [113]. It has been suggested by David Ward, president of the American Council on Education, that SEVIS and related regulations may cause permanent damage to the United States’ long‐standing role as the “destination of choice” for international students [114]. Indeed, the National Association of Foreign Student Advisors estimates that 15–30 percent of international students who would otherwise have studied in the United States will, as a result of SEVIS, choose to go elsewhere [115]. Colleges and universities in the United States have already seen “a massive decrease in the number of students from Muslim states, scores of foreign faculty being unable to teach courses, [and] scientific research projects becoming delayed or derailed” [116, p. 10]. The loss of such large numbers of international students and scholars has the potential to hinder the future development of many academic disciplines in the United States, such as engineering, computing, and the hard sciences [116–119]. Further—and central to the discussion at hand—such a loss will also reduce the diversity of small worlds in the academy, silencing many potentially important voices that have previously been part of our national dialogue and, thus, important contributors to deliberative democracy itself. In terms of information access and exchange, establishing such restrictions on the ability of international voices to be heard in our national dialogue has several troubling implications. The limitations placed on international students and scholars have already had a serious negative impact on numerous major research projects, including work on HIV, the West Nile virus, leukemia, particle physics, meteorology, cancer, computer science, and theoretical physics [119]. As a result, SEVIS has not only denied international students’ and scholars’ access to higher education in the United States but also hindered the formation of whatever new information might have come out of these research projects and so undeniably impeded access to new information on these issues for all members of society. There have also been comparable efforts on the part of the U.S. federal government to hinder the publication and dissemination of information originating from scholars from certain countries. For example, in 2002, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), in response to an Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) order, issued a statement announcing that member benefits and services could not be made available to engineers in embargoed countries such as Iran, Cuba, and Sudan. Further, all editorial decisions regarding peer review and editing of manuscripts from those countries were made subject to OFAC review. While this issue was ultimately resolved in the IEEE’s favor in April 2004, the application of an economic embargo effectively limited the ability of the IEEE to benefit from the expertise of an important community of international scholars for more than two years [120]. Changes in U.S. federal policies not only have a negative impact on international students and scholars but also actively constrain U.S. academics and research in certain areas. Researchers who are U.S. citizens have also faced limitations on information access and exchange under the new security laws. A physicist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) had been researching government claims involving certain weapons systems and found that some of the claims were untrue. When this professor made some of the declassified documents related to his research, the contents of which had already been discussed in the news media, available on his Web site, the federal government threatened to withdraw funding from MIT unless the documents were taken off‐line [44]. Similarly, the Federation of American Scientists (FAS) has become the subject of ongoing monitoring by the Department of the Army because FAS made declassified Army documents of scientific interest available on its Web site [121]. Concurrently, such constraints have been pursued not only with the assertions that they are necessary to protect the nation against terrorism but also on the grounds that they are needed to protect the intellectual property rights of major corporations such as the music and movie industries, often at the expense of long‐standing “fair use” provisions of American copyright law and equitable access to information [122]. One widely publicized case involving the 1998 Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) [123]—which was enacted to block both the circumvention of copyright protection devices and the development of circumvention devices—centered on a computer science professor at Princeton University. A team led by this professor, in response to an open invitation by the Secure Digital Music Initiative (SDMI) to test the security of copyright protection technologies, attempted to present the findings of their research—which demonstrated clear flaws in those technologies—at the 2001 International Information Hiding Workshop Conference. However, as the Electronic Frontier Foundation notes, “Just prior to the conference, the Princeton Professor received a letter … from the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) and the … SDMI that threatened a lawsuit against [the research] team and their universities and the workshop organizers if the paper was published” [124, n.p.]. In response, the researchers brought suit not only against the RIAA and the SDMI but also against Attorney General John Ashcroft. Although the research findings were ultimately published and this lawsuit was dismissed and “assurances” were issued by both industry and government representatives that the DMCA was never meant to constrain academic research [125], such occurrences have the potential to have a further chilling effect on information access and exchange by scholars. If equitable access to information and open information exchange within and between multiple small worlds are essential to the sustenance of deliberative democracy, such trends—making it difficult or impossible for international students and scholars to participate in the creation and exchange of new information resources and suggestions that certain types of research are now “off‐limits” to all scholars—may have serious implications beyond their obvious impact on specific small worlds. Indeed, rather than promoting open exchange between groups, these trends may have the dangerous effect of polarizing groups, with certain small worlds labeled as inherently dangerous and untrustworthy, regardless of the quality of information and research that they may produce. In addition, if certain types of research are to be deemed off‐limits or beyond the limits of acceptability, entire areas of research in fields related to information and information technology may be short‐circuited, and an information vacuum may take the place of the robust and information‐rich world fostered by equitable access and open exchange. In other words, policies that limit international students’ and scholars’ access to higher education in the United States, and policies that impede other research in the name of national security or control over intellectual property rights, do nothing to safeguard our liberties. Rather, they threaten to impoverish us all. These changes to information access and exchange for students and scholars are but one of innumerable examples of the ways in which the post‐9/11 legal changes have altered how individuals and small worlds in the United States interact with information. The impacts on one small world, due to the limitations on the ability to share and create new information, have ramifications for all small worlds and, as such, for the entire society. To appreciate the implications of limiting access and exchange of information between small worlds, the ramifications of these legal changes have to be considered for each of the small worlds that comprise society in the United States. By establishing new barriers between small worlds, the legal changes serve to hamper the innumerable roles of information access and exchange in the daily functioning of a deliberative democracy. VII.  Exhuming McCarthy: The Social Significance of Policy Changes to Information Access and Exchange between Small Worlds Changes to the social roles of information have far‐reaching consequences in contemporary society, particularly since information is at the heart of many actions of the government. The legal landscape “has become filled with laws and regulations dealing with information and communication,” as more than “600 bills dealing with the Internet alone were on the table during the 107th Congress” [126, p. 153]. Information issues now take up more time in congressional hearings than do many other social issues, such as civil rights, gender equity, and the environment [127]. The legal activity related to information is not always meant to promote growth and adoption of new technologies related to information. New information and communication technologies often compel government to alter policies to fit the new technical environment. The printing press fueled not only freedom of expression among citizens but also censorship of the printed word by governments [128]. Less than a decade ago, ironically, the rise of the Internet led to discussions that new information and communication technologies might result in reduced government regulation of information access and exchange [129]. As is the case with freedom of expression and censorship, most issues of information are very much social issues. Information is often mistakenly regarded as just a technical issue without serious human or social consequences [127]. “Information policy stands between the development of new information technologies and their actual impact on various classes” [130, p. 178]. The ways in which information policy is shaped by the law determines how citizens can use information and how information about them can be used. The USA PATRIOT Act and related recent alterations to information policy raise many questions about the new social roles for information. The problems raised by these changes are perhaps typified by the situation created for students and scholars attempting to study and carry on their research in the United States. Following the passage of the USA PATRIOT Act, the Office of the Attorney General revised its guidelines to permit the FBI to conduct surveillance in public places and to collect publicly available information about individuals who were not suspected of criminal activity [53, 131]. In July 2004, the U.S. Department of Justice issued a report that detailed the uses of the USA PATRIOT Act and other new powers [132]. The report notes that three of the four greatest impacts of the act relate to information: greater information sharing between law enforcement agencies, increased avenues for collecting information, and the ability to include new information technologies in investigations. The report describes the act as having provided the tools needed “to mount an effective, coordinated campaign against our nation’s terrorist enemies” [132, p. 1]. Following this assertion, however, the report includes many examples of uses of the new powers that have seemingly little to do with terrorism, including mail fraud, interfering with police radio signals, distribution of child pornography, child molestation, kidnapping, sexual assault, credit card fraud over the Internet, and computer hacking. Although these are social ills that need to be addressed by law enforcement, such criminal acts are not likely to be terrorist activities. Rather than providing reassurance that the sweeping new powers provided by the act are being used as they were ostensibly intended in the pursuit of terrorists, the Department of Justice is, by its own admission, using the powers in all types of investigations. This revelation serves to drive home the importance of the changes to the roles of information that have occurred. These changes in the law may have permanently altered the role of information in society. The impact of these laws is not limited to the United States either, as a number of other nations have adopted laws based directly on the USA PATRIOT Act [133]. The potential expansion of such conceptions of information, without the knowledge of the public, may be an ongoing issue. For example, although Congress explicitly decided not to fund the Total Information Awareness program, several government agencies, including the Department of Defense, may be pursuing other programs with similar goals to mine data about U.S. citizens [110]. Proposed laws related to limiting information access and exchange continue to proliferate; as of September 2004, more than thirty pieces of proposed legislation in Congress were directly related to expansions of intelligence‐gathering activities [134]. The Intelligence Reform Act, passed in December 2004, will likely expand concerns regarding information access and exchange, as the act is designed to further facilitate collection of information by the government [135]. These limitations on information access also serve to create the possibility that other governments, through information‐sharing agreements, may become more knowledgeable about political issues in a nation than that nation’s citizens [136]. During the height of the cold war, many leaders embraced “the belief that the survival of an open society depends upon concealment, and that the protection of rights in the general justifies their abrogation in the particular” [137, p. 99]. This type of thinking inspired many cold war–era presidents to authorize or allow surveillance of many Americans based on their information behaviors [138]. A similar attitude is central to the post‐9/11 laws that have changed the roles of information access and exchange in society. The criticisms of such cold war activities carry equal significance when applied to the recent limitations on information access and exchange. In reaction to Hoover’s activities, U.S. Representative Maury Maverick observed, “Un‐American is simply something that somebody else does not agree to” [139, p. 22]. Another commentator noted that McCarthyism had created an atmosphere “not too far from the point where an individual will hear the voice of the enemy from the lips of every friend who disagrees with him about politics or economics and will see the enemy’s hand in every printed page that is not in accord with his own ideas” [140, p. 1128]. Similarly, Einstein warned, “Reactionary politicians have managed to instill suspicion of all intellectual efforts into the public by dangling before their eyes a danger from without” [44, p. 239]. VIII.  The Future of Information Access and Exchange in a Deliberative Democracy Historian Robert Conquest has noted, “The more people are made properly aware of what happened in this century, and in previous centuries, the more likely they are to appraise present‐day prospects in a sensible manner” [141, p. 217]. Whether the current situation represents a period of limitations that will pass, as did the limitations of the cold war, or whether the current situation is the beginning of a new standard for information in the United States remains an unanswered question of great magnitude. If the answer is the latter, then the United States has entered an era in which the concepts of information access and exchange as elements of deliberative democracy, and subsequently the role of the First Amendment, have been permanently changed. Considering the permanence of these changes is especially salient in light of the fact that George W. Bush has “presided over the most sweeping redesign of U.S. grand strategy since the presidency of Franklin D. Roosevelt” [142, p. 2]. Though the reasons for such changes will inevitably be justified as protecting national security, the ultimate changes to democratic deliberation that could result from these changes cannot be ignored. Soon after the founding of the United States, Thomas Jefferson wrote, “I would rather be exposed to the inconveniences attending too much liberty than those attending too small a degree of it” [143, p. 187]. To restructure the role of information access and exchange in a deliberative democracy is dangerously close to restructuring the democracy itself. Democracy relies on “reasoned public discussion of political questions” [144, p. 224], and it can exist only when the citizens actively engage in dialogue on important social and political issues [145]. As such, “the first obligation of citizenship” is to discuss these issues [146, p. 6]. A reasoned discussion of political and social issues is based on deliberation, the thoughtful weighing of various approaches to solving a problem [147]. Democratic governments encourage diversity of opinions as a natural product of democracy, and, within such forms of government, citizens must be able to accept the existence of differing opinions from their own [144]. Fostering deliberative democratic discourse necessitates allowing the expression of all possible views, as silencing any particular view implies that one specific viewpoint is correct. As John Stuart Mill observed, “All silencing of discussion is an assumption of infallibility” [148, p. 21]. A key characteristic of democratic governance is the active involvement of citizens in the open process of deliberation regarding political matters and governmental affairs [6]. Ongoing diversity of viewpoint is, as such, even built into the legislative process in the democratic government. The everyday exchange of and exposure to differing opinions advance democratic governance, as these allow people to think about issues in ways they would not otherwise, helping members of the society become aware of alternatives and able to make better judgments and providing members of the government with new knowledge and perspectives [149]. In the United States, the tradition of open political discourse dates back to the founding of the country and the formulation of its Constitution. “In waging revolution and making constitutions, the leading men of the revolutionary generation had learned to do business with each other through discussion and concession, and had grown somewhat self‐conscious and justifiably proud of their flair for compromise” [34, p. 76]. The framers were careful to design the Constitution so it would function to encourage political discussion rather than fostering hegemonic domination (the dreaded “tyranny of majority”) of a particular view on an issue [150]. Political differences help to define American democracy and preserve it while so many other nations have failed—“factional differences taught the Americans to argue, polemicize, legislate, and on occasion make compromises” [34, p. 47]. In a democratic form of government, a multiplicity of views from numerous small worlds on any subject is inevitable and is central to the process of democratic political deliberation and to the success of the government itself [151]. A democracy should respond “to political disagreements not simply by majority rule but also by attempting to create institutions that will ensure reflection and reason giving” [152, p. 239]. Public libraries have the ability to foster this reflection and reason giving for individuals and groups with divergent views on important issues by providing resources for investigation and a forum for exchange of information between small worlds. In this current climate of increasing control of information access and increasing collection of information about citizens by the government, the role of the public library in preserving access to information takes on greater importance. These changes in policy have forced public librarians into a difficult situation—protecting the information access and exchange of patrons to the greatest extent possible without impeding law enforcement activities [77, 153, 154]. Further, as more information is available online and less is created in print form, the sources through which digital information is accessed have to be trusted by the user [155]. The public library is one place that is culturally ingrained as a trusted source of free and open information access and exchange. Due to changes in the law since 9/11, however, public librarians may be working harder than ever to protect information access and exchange. Public libraries also play an important role in the diversity of information that can be accessed and exchanged. “The very success of democratic public space lies in its embrace of conflict and plurality” [156, p. 5]. In contemporary society, public libraries are places where all ages mix, where patrons from numerous small worlds all find public space and services they seek, where materials are available in a range of languages and formats, and where patrons encounter and interact with people from other small worlds. All of these functions serve to foster and enhance deliberative democratic dialogue between members of many different small worlds. These traditional roles of the public library have taken on greater significance over the past few years, as the library is a place where members of diverse small worlds are able to access and exchange a wide range of information. Information access and exchange lie at the heart of deliberative democracy. In a policy environment that is redefining the role of information in society, public libraries must continue to fulfill their mission of promoting free and open information access and exchange in order to protect and promote access and exchange of information between small worlds, facilitating and fueling deliberative democracy.