THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Volume XII APRIL 1942 Number 2 A NOTE ON THE THEORY OF BOOK SELECTION HERBERT GOLDHOR I A N INCREASING amount of attention, reflected in the growth of the literature, is being devoted to the theory of book selection in libraries. Many of the pertinent investigations were not undertaken with the sole or principal aim of contributing to the formulation of such a theory, but they have so served. The librarian who has kept abreast of pro- fessional studies and has pondered on their implications in this connection will be aware of the broad outlines of the theory that is being evolved. This paper represents not an attempt at the presentation of the whole theory but only a tentative elabora- tion of certain important points in it which the author feels have not been clearly explained and of whose significance there has been too little appreciation hitherto.' If there is one idea more basic to the theory of book selection than any other, it is this: Librarians have long selected books I Those who are familiar with the work of Dr. Douglas Waples will recognize the great influence it has had on the preparation of this note. The best sources that can be cited for background to the present paper are James H. Wellard, Book selection: its principles andpractice (London: Grafton, 1937), esp. pp. 102-13; and Douglas Waples, Bernard Berelson, and Franklyn R. Bradshaw, Whaot reading does to people (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, I940), esp. chap. iii, "Distribution of publications," PP. 44-6I. I51
I52 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY according to literary criteria, while the reading situations with which they are concerned are to be understood only in sociologi- cal and psychological terms. The main question that the book selector must consider is: "What happens to people when they read?". From this question of the effects of reading, the whole theory flows. A good way to begin the consideration of what happens to people when they read is to look at the unit combination with which we are concerned-the individual and the publication he is reading. In every situation in which an individual reads print three factors are always present: (I) the reader with certain personal characteristics;2 (2) the publication, with a certain content and style; and (3) the goal (or goals) sought by the act of reading, which reflects the reader's personal wants as stimulated and modified by his present social environment.3 These three more immediate factors occupy the foreground. In the background, more remote and indirect in their influence, are two other factors that must be considered in explaining the communication of ideas by print. These are (i) the author-his purposes, characteristics, and the social forces at work upon him-and (2) the previous social conditions and environmental influences that explain why the reader seeks the effects that he does seek.4 Broadly speaking, the analysis of the author can be subsumed under the study of the publication and the analysis of the reader's background under the study of the reader. Tech- nically, these second-rank factors should be treated separately. The extent to which the reader obtains the desired effect de- 2 For evidence on the association of readers' traits with the quality and quantity of reading see Robert A. Miller, "The relation of reading characteristics to social indexes," American journal of sociology, XLI (I 936), 73 8-56. 3 To be precise, a reader's goal is one of his personal characteristics; but the indi- vidual's purpose in reading is such an important factor and is so clearly dissimilar from the other persopal traits of the reader (e.g., age, sex, education, and occupation) that clarity in analysis is facilitated by setting up a separate category for it. 4 Such influences can cover a wide range, e.g., seeing a movie based on a book, the closing of the plant in which the reader works, the entry of the nation into war, etc. In selecting books for the library, only those factors can be considered that affect groups of people; the readers' adviser, however, in selecting books for a particular reader, will need to know about the relevant personal factors influencing that indi- vidual. See below, n. So.
A NOTE ON THE THEORY OF BOOK SELECTION I53 scribes the efficacy with which a given type of publication pro- duces that effect on such an individual. The reader's purpose is often not the same as the effect produced upon him by his read- ing; the more nearly identical are purpose and effect, the more successfully was this publication selected for this reader, as- suming that purposive selection and not random choice was involved. To borrow the figure of the "economic man" from classical economic theory, each "economic reader," ideally, is conscious of his own traits, identifies his desires, and proceeds to that print-distributing agency which is best suited to his purpose, wherefrom he selects, or is helped to select, the most appropriate publication.S Actually, of course, the process is far less painfully conscious and less rational, but this figure of the "economic reader" brings out the final factor needed to explain the individ- ual reading situation-the distributing mechanism whereby print and readers are brought together.6 Every time a publication is read, some means of distribution is involved. The distributing agency may be identical with the author, as when a commercial firm writes, prints, and mails out a piece of advertising copy; or with the reader, as when he selects his reading from his personal library. Sometimes the dis- tribution is entirely informal, as when publications are borrowed from friends, read in doctors' offices, or received unsolicited by mail or by hand. But generally the distributing unit is a sepa- rate agency formally organized for the purpose, for example, bookstores, rental libraries, public libraries, or newsstands. It is this last broad group that is meant when any reference is made hereafter to print-distributing agencies. In considering the functions of the organized agency, there are certain differences that can be distinguished between selec- 5 The most purposeful readers in this connection are scholars. For a study of the extent to which they will go in the search for their material see Douglas Waples, "Bel- gian scholars and their libraries," Library quarterly, X (1940), 231-63. 6 For a full development of this brief and highly simplified statement of the factors involved in the individual reading situation see Waples, Berelson, and Bradshaw, op. cit.; and for a critique of the assumptions on which their analysis is based see Hans Muller, "Two major approaches to the social psychology of reading," Library quarterly, XII (1942), 1-28,
'54 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY tion to fit the individual reader's needs and the chronologically earlier and necessarily previous process of "institutional" selec- tion involving the policies and procedures by which agencies, formally organized for the distribution of print, decide on the types and kinds of publications they shall stock and make avail- able to their patrons.7 This institutional book selection, as distinguished from the process whereby the individual reader chooses from a given col- lection, is the general topic for consideration here. The justifica- tion for the separation of institutional book selection from book selection for the individual reader and the necessity for analyz- ing the former apart from the latter spring from the fact that the two processes, though related and similar in many respects, turn on essentially different bases. The process of institutional book selection operates with full attention to the individual reading situations which are ex- pected to result from the functioning of the institution. The agency seeks to avoid selecting publications that will not be used by the people it hopes to reach. It either plans to sell the materials it stocks or hopes to rent them out or to circulate them gratis or to allow them to be used only on the premises. When- ever a distributing agency selects publications for its shelves, it does so for a purpose; and that purpose can be thought of in terms of the individual reading situations which the agency aims to encourage and help consummate. Agencies differ widely in the degree to which they recognize the factors involved in book selection for the individual. Yet the more clearly the agency understands the nature of the read- ing situations it aims to satisfy, the more successful will it be in selecting books for its own purchase and in achieving its basic goal-whether that goal is to make a profit, as in the case of a bookstore, or to build up the best possible collection in a subject field, as in the case of a university departmental library. 7 An even earlier stage of selection is found in the process by which publishers deter- mine, from among the manuscripts submitted to them, those which they shall publish. The present-day attempts to rationalize that process indicate the need for the same kind of criteria that this paper undertakes to explore for the middle stage, that of institution- al selection.
A NOTE ON THE THEORY OF BOOK SELECTION Ig5 But in the process of institutional selection itself the three main factors found in the individual reading situation-the reader, the publication, and the effect desired-are not all dup- licated. It is chiefly with regard to the third factor-the pur- poses of reading, or the effects which it is desired to produce by reading-that there spring the differences between the selection of print by institutions and the process of book selection for the individual. One reader can express an infinite diversity of purposes in reading at different times and in different places, subject only to the limits imposed, first, by his own background-his education, experience, and maturity-and, second, by the range of publica- tions of which he is aware or to which he has access. Because of the wide diversity of purposes expressed by individual readers, print-distributing agencies have generally found it necessary to limit the area of readers' wants to which they will address them- selves.8 This delimitation follows two lines. First of all, each agency will devote its efforts to meeting those requests of readers which are in closest harmony with its main objectives. Thus a rental library strives to make as large a profit as possible; with this goal in mind, the proprietor is able to decide whether to serve those individuals who seek the knowledge to be had from a study of higher mathematics, in place of or in addition to those who seek relaxation in the reading of detective stories. The con- creteness of this agency's goal offers a sharp criterion by which to identify the readers' desires it shall attempt to meet.9 A second basis for exclusion is found in the desire to avoid competition with other agencies in the same geographical area. J The best evidence that different kinds of people secure different kinds of publica- tions from different sources is to be found in Ralph E. Ellsworth, "The distribution of books and magazines in selected communities" (unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Gradu- ate Library School, University of Chicago, 1937); and in Douglas Waples, People and print: social aspects of reading in the depression (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1937). 9 Similarly the reading wants to which school and college libraries will attend are likely to be clearly defined because of the dominance of the institution's teaching objec- tives (see Edward A. Wight and Leon Carnovsky, "The library," Reading in general education: an exploratory study, ed. William S. Gray [Washington, D.C.: American Council on Education, 19401, PP. 425-27).
I56 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Once an agency has decided what type of readers' wants are most directly associated with its own goals, it soon finds that an important factor affecting the efficiency of its operation-in terms of those goals-is the presence of other agencies in the same area and with substantially the same objectives.!o In the case of profit-making agencies, this means that there is economic competition between bookstores, for instance, where- by each strives to build up its own body of steady patrons, either by doing a better job of fitting print to readers or by nar- rowing the field of readers' needs with which it deals and thus specializing itself out of competition, e.g., the "rare-book" store. In the case of print-distributing agencies that are noncommer- cial, this delimitation of the field of readers' needs recognizes the wastefulness of duplication; thus the main research libraries in a city may agree on a program of co-operative buying and the as- signment of special fields of subject knowledge for emphasis by each (cf. the agreement of this kind in the city of Chicago be- tween the John Crerar, Chicago Public, and Newberry librar- ies)."" Such agreements represent a tendency toward specializa- tion in defining the particular purposes of readers on which each agency will concentrate. It should be noted that sometimes the two bases of delimita- tion may take effect in the reverse order. This occurs, for in- stance, when there is a bookstore in a town but no public li- brary. The bookstore can be expected to assume broad objec- tives in terms of readers' requests, even though it may mean that some of the services offered produce no direct profit. With the establishment of a public library in the community, the bookstore will abandon those services that the library can per- form more efficiently and will reformulate its criteria for stock- ing publications on the narrower base of readers' needs that it now strives to meet under its reduced program. tc From the point of view of the inidividual agency, an important characteristic of this second basis is that, for the most part, it lies outside its control-as compared with the first basis, the determination of its own objectives. See below, p. I 59. 1x Carleton B. Joeckel and Leon Carnovsky, A metropolitan library in action: a sur- vey of the Chicago Public Library (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1940), pp. 391-93.
a NOTE ON THE THEORY OF BOOK SELECTION 157 In short, the objectives of a print-distributing agency serve to indicate (a) the wants of readers it wishes to serve and (b) those wants which it has no interest in meeting. The institution which will now be considered in this regard is the public library, though there is no reason why analyses, similar to that which follows; cannot be made for any agency formally organized for the distribution of print. II What we are now concerned with, then, is a statement of the factors that should be considered in the selection of print for public libraries-an example of the general area of institutional book selection. If one looks at contemporary practice in this matter of public library book selection, he cannot but be im- pressed by the number of assumptions on which current pro- cedure rests and the extent to which they are unrecognized by the practitioners. One of the major evils which flows from this situation-be- cause of the failure to recognize the relationship of the book- selection process to the individual reading situations that the library wants to encourage-is the concept that the library's collection should be "well-rounded."2 The term is vague and open to numerous interpretations, but presumably what most librarians mean when they seek to make their collections "well- rounded" is that, first of all, there be some material on every branch of knowledge and creative composition"3 and that, sec- ond, purchases be apportioned among all the possible fields ac- cording to a rough, subjectively estimated composite of the 12 "Every library collection should be built up .... so that certain classes will not be overemphasized and others neglected. The needs of the library exist and should be met, as well as the needs of its readers" (Helen E. Haines, Living with books: the art of book selection [New York: Columbia University Press, 1935], p. i6). '3 Lionel R. McColvin states that "the public library is a universal provider, that it must embrace, as far as possible, all knowledge and activity" (The theory of book selection for public libraries [London: Grafton, 1925], p. x8). "It is normally desirable to pro- vide an initial stock of wide general appeal and to expand it as future demand indicates" (W. A. Munford, Three thousand booksfor a publiC library: some significant and repre- sentative worksfor a basic stock [London: Grafton, I939], p. 6).
I58 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY amount of literature published in each field,'4 the distribution of previous circulation between the various classes of the Dewey system,'s and what the librarian's experience indicates to him, in a general way, the registered reading public is likely to re- quest.'6 Not only is the goal of a "well-rounded" collection of ques- tionable practicability, if indeed it is desirable at all, but an entirely different approach to the whole problem of book selec- tion for the library is called for when the implicit assumptions underlying the practice of book selection are made explicit and when the essential factors basic to book-selection policy are pointed out and recognized. The approach so suggested will start with the library's patrons, actual and potential, whereas the older concept starts with the book collection. It will limit itself to those wants of readers which the library wishes de- liberately to develop and encourage and, of this group, to those which it is best able to meet; whereas the older concept strives to take account of as many interests as possible. It will em- phasize the individual reading situation, striving to bring the right book into contact with the right person at the right time; whereas the older concept emphasizes the building of the book collection as such, in which all and sundry may stumble or pick their way through the great (and not so great) books of the world. To summarize what has been said so far, it was pointed out that the three most important elements in the individual read- ing situation are the predispositions of readers, the characteris- tics of publications, and the effects sought in reading. The proc- ess of institutional book selection must of necessity be fashioned to accord with these ultimate factors; and the greater the degree 14 Haines offers as a "principle" of book selection the injunction: "Keep abreast of the changing currents of thought and opinion, and give adequate representation to the scientific, social and intellectual forces that are shaping the modern world" (op. cit., P. 34). is See Francis K. W. Drury, Book selection (Chicago: American Library Association, 1930), pp. 12-13- i6 McColvin, op. cit., p. 62. For evidence of the unreliability of this last factor see Douglas Waples and Ralph W. Tyler, What people want to read about (Chicago: Ameri- can Library Association and University of Chicago Press, 193I), esp. pp. 41-47.
A NOTE ON THE THEORY OF BOOK SELECTION ISx to which this fact is recognized, the greater the extent to which institutional book selection is a rationalized, conscious, and effective process. In the light of this, the three main elements for consideration by a public library in determining its book- selection policies are: (i) the predispositions of its public, (2) the characteristics of available publications, and (3) the objec- tives of the institution. Of these, the third will be discussed first. It would be difficult to overemphasize the importance of the institution's objectives in this connection. To put the matter in the context supplied above, it should be remembered that, though the reading wants of even one individual are theoretical- ly infinite in scope and diversity, each print-distributing agency must delimit the sphere of readers' requests to which it will address itself. The necessity for this delimitation arises from the demand for increased efficiency in administration and service, which can best be achieved by specialization of function. The delimitation itself is set by the terms of the institution's objec- tives and occurs along two lines: first, those desires of readers will be -served which most closely conform to the main objec- tives of the institution in question and, second, attention will be focused on those wants in this group which can be better served by the institution than by similar agencies holding more or less the same general objectives.'7 The inability of librarians to state the wants of readers for which they purchase books strongly underlines the weaknesses that result from the lack of clearly defined institutional objec- tives (compare the definiteness with which a special library can state the factors which decide its purchases). An appreciation of the bases on which institutional book selection proceeds will throw light on the appropriateness of the various objectives that a public library can consider for itself; thus the flow of influence is not all onre way. '7 In connection with this point see, on the one hand, the proposal for regional co- operation between libraries in the delimitation of objectives, in Wellard, op. cit., pp. 176-S88; and, on the other hand, the recommendation that the public library no longer buy fiction of the type duplicated by the typical radio serial drama, in Frances Henne, "Library-radio relationships," Library quarterly, XI (1941), 476-94.
x6o THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY The sources of contemporary public library objectives can be found in such factors as the social origins of the institution, the convictions of the chief librarian and the trustees, the general social milieu, etc.,8 The currently accepted objectives can be summed up, with a fair degree of adequacy for our purposes, as information, recreation, and gducation. Information and recre- ation themselves warrant critical investigation, but they have certain standard denotations; while education is such a diffuse term and, in view of the current emphasis on adult education, is of such importance that our attention here can best be concen- trated on it. The cardinal weakness with "education" as an objective, so far as guidance in book selection is concerned, is that it offers little help to the library's book selectors in pointing to the spe- cific wants of individual readers which the library can attempt to meet.'9 This objective may serve satisfactorily if one accepts the concept of the "well-rounded" book collection; it is de- cidedly deficient when the library strives to fit specific books to individual readers with particular needs. An objective, of course, can be arbitrarily sharpened; the- oretically the librarian and the trustees are at liberty to set up any objective they see fit. They could also define it so rigidly as to make it a technically efficient guide to book selection. As op- posed to such arbitrary action, however, it is suggested that a body of factual information, useful for indicating possible and practicable objectives, should be secured by a study of the ac- tual use which patrons make of the library's book collection. On the basis of existing evidence 20admittedly incomplete is Wellard, op. cit., pp. 3-68; Carleton B. Joeckel, The government of the American public library (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1935), pp. I-I9; Arnold K. Bor- den, "The sociological beginnings of the library movement," Library quarterly, I (x 93 I), 278-82; Lowell Martin, "The American public library as a social institution," Library quarterly, VII (1937), 546-63; and Clarence E. Sherman, "The definition of library ob- jectives," in Current issues in library administration, ed. Carleton B. Joeckel (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1939), pp. 22-46. g9 "The province and purpose of the public library is to provide for every person the education obtainable through reading" (Haines, op. cit., p. i6). 20 William C. Haygood, Who uses the public library (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1938), pp. 29-36; and Helen L. Butler, "An inquiry into the statements of mo- tives by readers," Library quarterly, X (1940), I-49.
a NOTE ON THE THEORY OF BOOK SELECTION i6i one might hypothesize that three major uses which people make of the public library account for the overwhelming bulk of satis- factions so derived. These three uses are for instrumental pur- poses, for respite, and for reinforcement.21 The instrumental use of the library corresponds in large part to the current objective of providing an information service but has a broader scope. Whenever an individual reads print in or- der to secure "fuller knowledge of a practical problem and greater competence to deal with it,"22 his reading serves him directly as a means of accomplishing a certain result. Examples of instrumental use would include the determination of the mar- ket price of a particular stock, the use of a cake recipe, the checking of a chemical formula against laws and principles laid down in a textbook, the study of the career opportunities in nursing, etc. Similarly, the use of public library books for respite roughly approximates the objective "recreation," though again it is something more than that.23 Reading for respite would cover such uses of print as reading for vicarious adventure or for stimulus to the imagination or for relief from tension. Examples of reading for respite are provided by the scholars who pursue highly intellectual ho)bbies as a change from their usual work, the vast bulk of detective and western story fans, and the con- valescents who read voraciously for no other reason than to fill up. their time. Reading for reinforcement is not easily explained without a 21 It is easy to appear precise in dealing with this question, and the reader should not be deceived. All that one can say with surety is that certain broad effects can be isolated. In Waples, Berelson, and Bradshaw (op. cit., chap. vi, "The effects of reading," pp, 101-33), five major effects are distinguished-instrumental, increased self-esteem, rein- forcement (and its opposite, conversion), aesthetic enjoyment, and respite. The present writer construes the effect of reinforcement in a sqmewhat different light so as to in- clude the second effect above, increased self-esteem; and aesthetic enjoyment is dis- counted as quantitatively unimportant in the use of public library materials. 22 Ibid. p. 13, 2i From one point of view, all reading whatsoever can be thought of as providing respite in the sense that the activity required in reading constitutes a relief from bore- dom or a variation from previous activity and will not be continued beyond the point at which such return fails to overbalance the deterrents involved in the expenditure of energy in the physiological process of reading. In this paper, however, respite is being used in a narrower sense as explained in the text.
i62 THE LIBRA!RY QUARTERLY consideration of the place of reading as a medium of communica- tion. According to one theory of psychology, at least, humans have various basic drives, e.g., sex, hunger, and the avoidance of pain, and corresponding basic needs which they attempt to satisfy as well as they can. In a complex society like our own such satisfactions cannot be secured without help from others, a situation that demands an organized system of communications between individuals. In the course of time various mediums of communication have been developed-conversation, print, the radio, and the motion picture. Of these, conversation is the most used.24 Since reading is only an alternative method of securing satis- factions,25 it is obvious that it will not be used except when it is found to be superior for this purpose to other mediums of com- munication. From this point of view, to urge reading for its own sake is no different than to recommend conversation as such.26 But reading does possess, in addition, certain unique values. Because of the peculiar characteristics of print (e.g., it can be more accurately aimed at the predispositions of minority groups than are the movies; it can be more selective in its appeal than is the radio; and it can disseminate widely the work of the most effective writers, while conversation at best is limited to a relatively small group), it is superior to variant forms of com- munication in offering people the opportunity to be told, for in- stance, that they represent values or possess traits more de- sirable than those attaching to other groups in the population or in offering people the opportunity to identify themselves in their imagination with individuals having such superior stand- ing.27 24 See William Albig, Public opinion (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1939), esp. chap. iii, "Communication," pp. 26-52. 25 For an analytical comparison of reading with other mediums of communication with regard to its usefulness in the learning process see Edgar Dale, "Relation of read- ing to other forms of learning," in Reading in general education, ed. Gray, pp. 45-76. 26 "Like other forms of experience, however, reading may produce undesirable as well as desirable reactions, and negative as well as positive personalities" (William S. Gray, "Reading and factors influencing reading efficiency," in Reading in general educa- tion, ed. Gray, p. 3I). 27 Waples, Berelson, and Bradshaw, op. cit., pp. 9I-94.
a NOTE ON THE THEORY OF BOOK SELECTION I63 A stenographer may thus turn to stories of romance to find vicariously the emotional satisfactions she craves and is unable to secure in the real world about her. For this purpose, in some respects, books are superior to conversation, for few of her ac- quaintances are likely to be able or willing to build a word pic- ture suited to her needs; to the radio, for she need observe no set schedule; and to the motion picture, for she can re-read any passage at will. It is possible that this same generalization holds true, in an entirely different area, for political radicals and con- servatives; though pubjic libraries supply the literature of both sides, few individuals take advantage of the availability of the opposing literature to read it and be converted. In other words, the radicals read the radical literature, and the conservatives the conservative literature, because each group thus secures the soothing experience of finding that the authQr's attitudes agree with their own predispositions.28 When print is so used, the effect is a reinforcement of the reader's self-esteem, a strengthening of his self-confidence, and a lulling of incipient doubts as to the correctness of his position. Such a use of print is directly antithetical to that which educa- tion demands. A comprehensive statement of the nature of education is quite beyond this author's purpose and would lead far from the subject of this paper. But there is one important characteristic of education that is relevant. Successful education may be said to involve a relationship between the teacher and the student of such a kind that the mind of the latter is led in a certain direc- tion; in this sense, education can be thought of as a series of planned experiences such that the reaction patterns of the stu- dent are altered in a way that the instructor wishes, by his ex- 28 The reasonableness of this hypothesis is supported in part by the existing evidence that people like to read about subjects that concern themselves, and such interests vary directly with certain objective social characteristics of the readers (see Waples and Tyler, op. cit., esp. pp. xxiii-xxiv and I 5-30). Furthermore, Waples and Berelson found that the most important influence that determined agreement or disagreement with political campaign arguments encountered in print vas the predispositions of the indi- vidual voters (see Douglas Waples and Bernard Berelson, "Public communications and public opinion," in their "Public communications and public opinions" [Chicago: Graduate Library School, University of Chicago, 1941], pp. I-76 [mimeographed]).
i64 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY posure to certain experiences and not to others." It is this char- acteristic of education that requires of every curriculum a clear statement of the goals to be sought. It may be objected that to require this element in every edu- cational situation makes for too narrow a definition. If the term is to mean anything, however, it must be defined rigorously to distinguish it from such allied terms as learning and knowledge and training3o and to differentiate it from the concept of educa- tion that would identify it with all of life.31 This factor of change on the part of the pupil, directed and purposive change and other than that due solely to growth, is possibly the sine qua non of true education. This makes education a painful process, for it involves the acquisition of strange new patterns of thought, if not also the destruction of existing and therefore pleasantly familiar patterns. Education as thus defined is not a common occurrence; it is found most often in the family relations of a child to his par- ents, where the well-nigh perfect combination of circumstances occurs. The parents know clearly the goal they wish to achieve (e.g., the inculcation of proper eating habits), they have control over the child's behavior, and they have numerous occasions to instil the lesson and equally numerous occasions to test the pupil's mastery of it. Outside the family, education occurs most often in the school,32 though not all that takes place in the school is education in this sense. It rarely occurs elsewhere in any systematic fashion. Thus it is that the teacher and the school have always been of 29 A classical statement of the concept of education, from this point of view, is to be found in John Adams, The evolution of educational theory (London: Macmillan, I9I 2), esp. chap. i, "The nature and scope of educational theory," pp. I-40. 30 See Abrah'am Flexner, "'The gates of excellence': a plea for distinction between education and training," 7ournal of adult education, IV ( 932), 5-7. 3I See Ruth Kotinsky, Adult education and the social scene (New York: Appleton- Century, 1933), especially the Foreword by William H. Kilpatrick, pp. v-vi, and chap. ii, "Schooling as life, and life as education," pp. 30-69. 32 For a statement on the use, in the school, of specific titles to produce changes in students' thinking see Leroy H. Buckingham, "The development of social attitudes through literature," School and society, LII ( I940), 446-54.
a NOTE ON THE THEORY OF BOOK SELECTION i65 great social importance. The story of Socrates illustrates the influence that can be wielded by an effective teacher, and the dictators of our day have learned the lesson well. In a demo- cratic society the teachers have a certain amount of freedom to decide the direction in which they will lead their students. The public library, however, is in a poor position to accom- plish any great amount of education in this sense.33 It has no power to compel people to read; it cannot force the patrons it does secure to read the materials that it feels are "best" for them; it has no staff of pedagogues and no opportunity to super- vise the reading of its patrons, since the use of library books is typically a solitary, voluntary process that takes place outside the library; and it can administer no testing program to deter- mine how well it has succeeded in "educating" a reader to a cer- tain point of view. Not only does the library lack the powers and facilities to con- duct education but librarians strenuously disavow the posses- sion of any fixed goals toward which they would lead their pa- trons.34 They maintain that whatever changes occur in readers are for the readers themselves to decide. It is as though they posted a sign: "THIS LIBRARY ASSUMES NO RESPONSIBILITY FOR WHAT HAPPENS TO YOU AS A RESULT OF READING THESE BOOKS. Librarians seek thus to delegate to readers the responsibility that teachers assume in relation to students. And yet, as a mat- ter of fact, the library is not completely neutral, because it too exposes people to selected experiences by making available on its shelves the works of certain authors and not of others. But the difference is that the library's materials are not purposely selected with an eye to the individual reading situations that will result or in line with clearly defined and practicable goals; 33 It is possible that what librarians mean when they speak of education as an objective of the library is really covered for the most part by the purely instrumental use of books (see Wellard, op. cit., pp. 76-79). 34 Conspicuous for their deviation from this accepted pattern are the suggestions found in Leon Carnovsky, "Community analysis and the practice of book selection," in The practice of book selection, ed. Louis R. Wilson (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1940), pp. 2o-39; and Bernard Berelson, "The myth of library impartiality," Wilson bulletin, XIII (1938), 87-90.
i66 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY on the contrary, as under the concept of the "well-rounded" collection, the library in effect educates in all directions.35 There has been a great deal said about adult education and readers' advisory work, but it must be admitted that the num- ber of people so reached constitutes but a fraction of those who come to the library for other purposes.36 And of those who do use the adult education facilities of our libraries, few indeed seek education that involves directed change. Materials on welding, the history of Greek architecture, how to write business letters -these are worthy interests beyond question, but they are not education in the sense of purposively guided change. The probability is that the bulk of our public library patrons seek clarification and reinforcement in their thinking rather than the unsettling experience of education. While the school has an obligation laid on it by society to direct the education of youth so as to mold their thinking in line with the mores of the race and to develop in them the mental equipment they will need to carry on civilization,37 the library is under no such obli- gation. Analysis of the conditions under which it operates shows that the public library is unsuited to accomplish any great amount of real education; analysis of the actual functioning of the public library reveals that an important use to which people are putting its resources is that of reading for reinforcement. Where education results in breaking down existing patterns of thought and to that extent unsettling the individual, reading for reinforcement involves a cementing of those patterns and the re- assurance to the individual of the worth-whileness of his place in society. Consider what would happen if all that we read did violence to our established attitudes, or if every conversation we had involved the presentation of a point of view sharply chal- lenging our own. Children live in a world of immediate gratifi- cations; with maturity and education, the length of time during 35 Cf. Grace Kelley, "The democratic function of public libraries," Library quarterly, IV (1934), I-IS. 36Joeckel and Carnovsky, op. cit.) pp. 346-So. 37 National Education Association, The unique function of education in American democracy (Washington, D.C.: Educational Policies Commission, 1937).
a NOTE ON THE THEORY OF BOQK SELECTION I67 which no reinforcement need be secured can be extended and a more remote substituted for a more immediate return. But the need for such reinforcement is still present; and surely if society is willing to support schools to change the direction of thinking, it will find it advisable to support libraries for their influence, among other things, in reinforcing the personalities and thought-processes so established. This is not a plea for "reinforcement" as against any other goal of library activity. But it is an attempt to point out the probable dominance of that effect of reading, here called "rein- forcement," in the area which is presumably covered for the most part by the currently accepted library objective of "edu- cation." If the hypothesis is verified-that reinforcement is the dominant effect of reading sought by public library patrons- then it will be necessary for librarians to orient whatever objec- tive they choose to set up in this area from that fact. Such an objective may find its place at any point in the range from the intensification of reinforcement to the opposite extreme of edu- cation as defined above. "Education" is a noble and'high-sounding term. "In America education is and has always been the magic word."38 And edu- cation is a vital necessity in society. If we wish to establish it as an objective of our libraries, we should do so only with a full realization of the present situation and of the difficulties in our road. It is possible, perhaps, for the public library to become in fact as well as in name an educational institution, but we need to implement that objective far better than we have done in the past, for our performance to approach our goal. In public library administration objectives lead to policies, policies to programs, and programs result in uses of print by individual readers. The natural tendency is to formulate objec- tives, policies, and programs with increasing deference to uses. If we seriously go to work to establish education as an objective of the public library, we face the task of replacing certain uses of print with certain other uses and of forcing the day-to-day uses 38 Alvin Johnson, The public library-a people's university (New York: American Association for Adult Education, 1938), p. 46.
i68 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY of library materials to accord with the programs and policies that spring from our objective. III In any case, whatever objectives a librarian sets for his insti- tution, this analysis of their role in the process of book selection would be equally valid. The degree to which the book-selection process can contribute to the achievement of the goals set up will depend on the clarity, fulness, and explicitness with which they are stated and the extent to which they are feasible and in accord with the facts as to the library's position in the life of the community. The function of the library's objectives in the proc- ess of book selection, on the other hand, is that of delimiting the field of readers' wants to which the institution will address itself. Given a complete statement of the institution's objectives, the operation of the process of book selection depends upon knowledge of the two other factors involved-the reader and the publication. The library must have data on the psychological and sociological traits of the people it attempts to serve, that is, its patrons both actual and potential.39 This is to be secured through periodic community analyses and reading studies.40 This whole approach of the psychosociological study of the people of a community is in flat opposition to the assumption, underlying present public library book-selection practice,,that 39 Waples, Berelson, and Bradshaw, op. cit., chap. v, "The readers' predispositions," pp. 82-Ioo. For evidence on which are the most important reader characteristics see Waples and Tyler, op. cit., pp. 1 22-47. A characteristic of the reader which is of prime importance to the library is the level of his reading ability; for a good introduction to the physiology of reading see Guy T. Buswell, How adults read ("Supplementary educa- tional monographs," No. 45 [Chicago: University of Chicago Press, I9371). 40 No adequately comprehensive and systematic community analysis has yet been made for library purposes. Frui tful suggestions in that direction will be found in general works on the social survey (see also Wellard, op. cit., pp. 92-lOI and i2o-62;. Haygood, op. cit.; Helen A. Ridgway, "Community studies in reading. 1II. Reading habits of adult non-users of the public library," Library quarterly, VI 11936], 1-33; and Lowell Martin, "Public library provision of books about social problems," Library quarterly, IX [X939], 249-72). Joeckel and Carnovsky suggest the use of an ingenious registration system that would make a large amount of data available at once on library patrons (op. Cit., pp. 387-88). A modification of this system is being tried out now in a branch of the Chicago Public Library (see Lowell Martin, "Outline of experimentation in the South Chicago Branch Library" [Chicago: Chicago Public Library, 1940], pp. 30-15 [mimeographed]).
a NOTE ON THE THEORY OF BOOK SELECTION I69 the library's collection should be built to meet and answer pres- ent interests of readers.4" This latter policy is faulty in that it limits itself for the most part only to those readers registered with the library and ignores the readers in the community who are not so registered, not to speak of those who are nonreaders at present.42 But, more important, it is faulty in assuming that what people read is determined by what they are interested in. It seems clear that in reality the determining factors are accessi- bility and readability, with subject interest a poor third.43 The identification of the subjects on which most reading is being done or on which most people say they would like to read should be a minor aspect of a library's study of its community and of the reading done therein; more important are data on the other print-distributing agencies in the area and on the predis- positions and socioeconomic status (e.g., sex, age, education, occupation) of the popvlation.44 Such data will indicate of themselves the subjects to which the threshhold of receptivity 41 In the Graduate Library School Institute of I939 Carnovsky objected to this same aspect of present book-selection practice and suggested that it be replaced by selection that would bring to library shelves only publications that supplied the truth. To put this in the terms used here, he was in effect setting up an objective for the library; such an objective could be served by the process of book selection described above, though- like the objective of "education"-it might be implemented less easily than other possible objectives (Carnovsky, op. Cit., pp. 27-34; see also his "The evaluation of pub- lic library facilities," in Library trends, ed. Louis R. Wilson [Chicago: University of Chicago Press, I9371, pp. 301-9). 42 Ridgway, op. cit. 43 Leon Carnovsky, "Measurements in library service," in Current issues in library administration, ed. Joeckel, p. 244; Leon Carnovsky, "A study of the relationship be- tween reading interest and actual reading," Library quarterly, IV (i934), 76-I Io; Harold A. Anderson, "Reading interests and tastes," in Reading in general education, ed. Gray, esp. pp. 242-49; Douglas Waples, "Communitystudies in reading. I. Reading in the lower east side," Library quartrly, III (I933), I8-I9, and "The relation of subject interests to actual reading," ibid., 11 (1932), 42-70; and Ethel L. Cornell, "The voluntary read- ing of high school pupils," ?L.f. bulletin, XXV (1941), 295-300. 44 That the social characteristics of population groups are closely associated with and probably the determinants of social behavior is becoming increasingly clear. For evi- dence on the association of these characteristics with reading behavior see Miller, op. cit. He suggests indeed that reading itself may serve as a reliable social characteristic. The I940 study of Sandusky, Ohio, conducted by the Office of Radio Research of Columbia University, has produced evidence on the association of such traits as economic status, age, religion, and rural-urban residence with voting behavior in that community (see Paul F. Lazarsfeld [ed.], "How the voter makes up his mind" [to be published by the University of Chicago Press]).
170 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY is low; but, more to the point, they will indicate what types and kinds of print are needed within any one subject field to produce certain specified effects on these readers. And that, after all, is the heart of the problem. As for the factor of the publications that are available, there is need for a continuing process of analysis of the content of new books. This content analysis need not be so refined and com- plete as would be necessary in the case of a research study that used this technique, but neither should it be as haphazard, unformed, and unconscious a process as present book-selection practice involves. It is possible, given the stated objectives of the library and knowing the important facts about the patrons, to set up a number of categories by which to analyze the con- tent, style, authorship, etc., of a piece of print.4s These categories must be worked over until meaningful relations are found be- tween them and the traits of the library's patrons. They will then serve to guide the librarian in purchasing those items which, in view of the characteristics of his patrons, will best help him satisfy those needs and secure those effects which conform to the library's objectives. All three bases of institutional book selection are in need of serious investigation by students of li- brarianship, but the one that needs most attention first is this matter of content analysis.46 45 By I940 Columbia University's Readability Laboratory had laid plans for and started work on a basic analytical bibliography (to be supplemented by a current serv- ice for new books), in an attempt to describe specific titles in terms that relate to various, closely defined groups of readers. The major emphasis in the analysis is apparently to be on readability, i.e., stylistic analysis. This is the first large-scale project to consider the evaluation of specific books by nonliterary standards. See the "Memorandum on estimating readability, prepared by the Readability Laboratory of Teachers College, Columbia University, for examination by members of the A.L.A. Subcommittee on Readable Books," unpublished exhibit from the minutes of the November 29, I940, meeting of the Subcommittee. 46There are three major classes of references here, characterized by decreasing directness of application. I. For an explanation of the theory of content analysis see Waples, Berelson, and Bradshaw, op. cit., chap. iv, "The content of publications," pp. 62-8i, and Appen. B, "Notes on content analysis," pp. I4$-57; Waples, People and print, pp. 3o-36; and Waples and Berelson, "What the voters were told," in their "Public communications and public opinions," pp. I-77. 11. Most attention so far has been given to content analysis in relation to the level of reading difficulty represented by the publication (see William S. Gray and Bernice E.
a NOTE ON THE THEORY OF BOOK SELECTION 171 The development of each of the three basic factors-library objectives, community analyses and reading studies, and con- tent analysis-is to be made in terms that are significant for the others. The content analysis should be based on the known characteristics of the readers and nonreaders.47 The community survey should seek data relevant to the institution's objectives. And those objectives should have their basis in existing rela- tionships between readers and public library materials. Once the development of these three factors has been well started by the institution, it will mean that the analysis of new publications goes on currently, regular studies are made on the reading and readers (and nonreaders) in the community, and the library's objectives are being constantly refined, clarified, and retranslated into operational terms. When these things are being done as a matter of current practice and are properly in- tegrated (e.g., by a formal statement of the library's book-selec- tion policy and procedure), the institutional process of book selection so carried on should better serve to carry out the li- brary's objectives in the community than would any other policy of book selection.48 If one looks at this institutional process of book selection from the functional point of view, it might be described in some such Leary, What maker a book readable [Chicago: University of Chicago Press, I935]). A corrective to the point of view there expressed is to be found in Mabel E. Jackman, "The relation between maturity of content and simplicity of style in selected books of fiction," Library quarterly, XI (i94I), 302-27. III. Students who investigate the problem of content analysis from the point of view of library book selection will find valuable suggestions, especially as to techniques, in the work of educators in evaluating textbooks for use in the schools. 47 "The concept of readability can be sensibly discussed only in terms of the par- ticular reader. Nothing is ever readable in general. The intelligibility of anything in print depends upon the person who is trying to read it; upon his reading skill, his knowl- edge of the subject, and his interest in it at the moment" (from the digest of Lyman Bryson's remarks at the I940 convention of the American Association for Adult Educa- tion, 7ournal of adult education, XII [19401, 529). 48 Possibilities for further investigation lie in a comparison of the process of institu- tional book selection with that of curriculum construction. Because of the extent to which the school men have carried their analysis of curriculum construction, there is an abundant literature, from which librarians can learn much (see W. W. Charters, Cur- riculum construction [New York: Macmillan, I924]; Henry Harap, The t chnique of cur- ritulum making [New York: Macmillan, 1928]; and H. E. Caswell and D. S. Campbell, Curriculum development [New York: American Book Co., 1935]).
172 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY terms as these.49 The announcements and reviews of new publi- cations are scanned by the book-selecting staff, and those titles are ordered which appear to offer a possible contribution in furthering any one of the library's objectives among any sub- stantial group of patrons possessing certain psychosociological characteristics in common. Thus the public library in a small town would probably ignore the publications of the Brookings Institution but might buy the popular digests of them in the form of Public affairs pamphlets. Once the material was received, it would be examined by one or more staff members and a record of the analysis made. Un- less this analysis, when viewed against the known characteris- tics of the community, indicated that the publication would serve to meet a want of any group of these people (as defined by their distinguishing traits)50 which conforms to one of the insti- tution's stated objectives, the item should not be purchased. Any objective will have to be shifted in its main emphasis from time to time, new data on the people of the community will be absorbed, and the categories for the analysis of publications sharpened and adapted to these changes; but the process as such will be the same. Probably no library will be able to buy all the books that it finds can pass this test, but to determine which of these books to select is merely a matter of identifying those items that most nearly hit the center of the target-to produce a desired effect on a given type of reader. Other considerations that would be 49 It should be emphasized that the theory of institutional book selection is not yet so well established that one can readily draw up practical procedures to put that theory into operation. The devising of such procedures is a second and later step than the development and statement of the theory itself. It is with this latter aspect that this note is primarily concerned. Furthermore, such procedures must be fashioned so as to accord with the particular circumstances of the individual library and can be left to the ingenuity of practicing librarians once the theory itself has been demonstrated to be sound. What is offered here, in regard to practical procedures, is only for purposes of illustration. so Note that groups, not individuals, are to be considered. This is so because groups represent relatively permanent categories among which individual readers can and do shift; but while an individual is one of a group, he tends to read much the same material and for the same reasons as do his fellows in the group. Thus it is that, though indi- viduals and not groups do the reading, institutional book selection is for the group and not for the individual (see Waples and Tyler, op. cit., pp. Xix-xx, I 22-47, and 172-86).
a NOTE ON THE THEORY OF BOOK SELECTION 173 involved in applying the library's objectives are fairly obvious. For example, does a book that is being considered for purchase duplicate material already in the library? Is it readily obtain- able elsewhere in the community? For how large a group of pa- trons is it likely to be useful? It might be objected that this institutional process of book selection is entirely too complicated and difficult to make it worth while for most public libraries to adopt. To this, three things can be said. First, this very process as described above is going on in every public library in America today-but without the implications of the assumptions on which it rests being rec- ognized as such. Every librarian who selects books has vaguely in mind the general purpose of the institution, the general char- acteristics of the readers served (usually ignoring the non- readers), and the general nature of the publication under con- sideration. If this were not so, it would be difficult to explain why the Denver Public Library has not built up its holdings on marine architecture, why the Newark Public Library Business Branch does not have a fiction collection, and why the New York Public Library does not stock the pulp literature that can be secured on the newsstand outside its doors. Since the process is going on under the surface, to call for an awareness of the situation, a self-consciousness as to what is being done, is to seek to make the criteria involved more objec- tive, more precise, and more definite and to substitute valid generalizations for vague generalities. This is the first step in science-to uncover assumptions and to make clear what it is that you are trying to do and how you propose to go about it. Second, the full development of the book-selection process described here is important not alone for the selection of mate- rials for the library's shelves; it is also a fundamental of ade- quate reader's guidance, i.e., the selection of books for a particu- lar reader from what is available in the institution. It was pointed out before that the whole process of institutional book selection must be focused on the individual reading situations that the library seeks to encourage. The interrelationship be- tween the two ends of the activity appears even more close
T74 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY when one examines its actual operation. Much of the data on reading and readers will be secured through the readers' ad- visers, and to them the content analysis of the publications selected will be as the breath of life.s' And this- is as it should be, for if the results sought by institutional book selection are in terms of individual reading situations, then the role of the readers' adviser in directly influencing the latter process turns on the data used and decisions made in connection with the former. And, finally, to justify the present state of book-selection practice in our public libraries is to ignore the dangers that lie in a policy of drift by a social institution that takes no steps to align its activities with the dominant trends of its age. This in- stitutional process of book selection not only demands a con- crete statement by the librarian as to the objectives he seeks to achieve (in itself a desirable by-product) but also contributes to the formation of that statement by the light it throws on the reading situation that the library faces in its community. But, most important of all, this institutional aspect of book selection is designed to make effective the objectives set up for a library in the only sense that a public library can be effective, and that is in terms of the reading satisfactions that it is able to effect in its community. These are the potential contributions that an able and effective process of institutional book selec- tion can offer. Si See Jennie M. Flexner, "New experiences with books," 7ournal of adult education, VII (1935), 413-14-