THE LARGE CITY LIBRARY FROM THE VIEWPOINT OF THE SUBURBAN LIBRARY LESTER L. STOFFEL LONG before the Civil War, population began to overflow city bounda- ries. Brooklyn was considered New York City's "bedroom" as early as 1845. One year later William Cullen Bryant observed that suburbs had be- gun to develop outside of Chicago. Sub- urban development has always been limited by available transportation fa- cilities, and the patterns formed on the suburban maps of the United States have been the result of the patterns of transportation. In the beginning, the suburbanite lived within walking dis- tance of a trolley line or a railroad depot. Evidence of two major population trends now commonly recognized ap- peared as early as 1900. These are the migration from farm to central city and from central city to the outskirts. The automobile, of course, intensified the migration. Currently, 68 per cent of the nation's population lives in metropoli- tan areas,1 and this figure is expected to reach 80 per cent by 1980.2 The 1950's have been described by Hauser as "the decade of suburban boom and central-city bust."3 He pre- dicts, by 1980, 100 million suburban- ites as opposed to 70 million central city residents.4 The shopping center and the one-story factory became an important part of the suburban scene following World War II; shopping centers now occupy as much total land area as the nation's central business districts.5 Part- ly as a result of this, 300 thousand few- er people visited Manhattan during a twenty-four hour period in the 60's than ten years previously.6 As suburbia expands outward, thea- ters, churches, restaurants, hotels, art galleries, and social clubs are creating substitutes in the suburbs.7 The truck, the automobile, and the expressways they travel have released the manufacturer from restricting his selection of a site for his new plant to areas within range of public transpor- tation. Better white-collar workers, ac- cording to Gruen, can be hired at lower wages in suburban office buildings with parking facilities. Suburban industrial parks have offered attractions to indus- try in ever greater numbers. Industry historically has hurdled the outer ring of population and first created prob- lems for Chicago between 1894 and 1915. According to a report by the Uni- versity of Chicago Center for Urban Studies, "During the 1950's, Chicago's 1 Chicago Sun Times, July 10, 1967, p. 3. 2Emerson Greenaway, "The Effect of Urbaniza- tion on Metropolitan Libraries," in Problems of Library Services in Metropolitan Areas, report of a seminar directed by Dorothy Bendix (Philadel- phia: Drexel Press, 1966), p. 13. 'Philip M. Hauser and Martin Taitel, "Popula- tion Trends-Prologue to Library Development," Library Trends (July, 1961), 10:20. ' Ibid., p. 23. 1f Robert A. Futterman, The Future of Our Cities (Garden City, N.J.: Doubleday & Co., 1961), pp. 66-67. 6 Victor Gruen, The Heart of Our Cities, The Urban Crisis: Diagnosis and Cure (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1964), p. 88. 7Ibid., p. 79. 90
VIEWPOINT OF THE SUBURBAN LIBRARY 91 central city transportation advantages were reduced, many of its multistory industrial buildings became obsolete, and industrial decentralization was made the order of the day. The 1950's forecast an ominous future for the inner city."8 After 1947, Chicago's industrial employment leveled off and subsequent- ly began to decline. According to the Ncw York Times, "a wave of anxiety beset New York's city government last February with announcements by three major companies that they intended to move headquarters or branches out of New York."9 What is "the suburb"? It has been variously described as where the aver- age American lives, as the typical way of life, where the desires and demands of chlildren predominate, where con- formity and togetherness reign, where the opinion leader is caught in a "hot- bed of participation," the home of "the organization man," a melting pot of ex- ecutives, managers, and white-collar workers-until recently the white white- collar workers. Suburbanites are com- muters who usually own their own homes with access to some open space. Many became suburbanites to have a place for their children to play and "to hear the birds sing." The suburb is the compromise of modern metropolitan living, with the rural small town life of the past. There are also industrial suburbs where people work rather than live, slum suburbs, race track suburbs, and honky-tonk suburbs-of night clubs, amusement parks, and used car lots. More important to our subject, sub- urbs are political entities, in many cases provincial and in the larger metropoli- tan view antiquated. In their drive for independence from the city, they foster an alienation between city dweller and suburbanite. According to Wood, "The justification of suburban legal inde- pendence rests on the classic belief in grassroots democracy, our long-stand- ing conviction that small political units represent the purest expression of pop- ular rule, that the government closest to home is best. The defense of subur- ban autonomy is that no voter is a face- less member in a political rally, but an individual citizen who knows his elected officials, can judge their performance personally and hold them accounta- ble."'0 It is easy to conceive of a single met- ropolitan area with one government as a natural result of modern technology. But the attitude of the suburbanite who, having left the city, is determined, with or without justification, to main- tain his independence from it is a factor of considerable importance. Because of the suburbanite's convic- tion that the small organization pro- vides the best management of public affairs, suburbia is also hundreds of lo- cal governments serving as a refuge for those who want to partake of the ad- vantages of the city while living apart from it and attempting to ignore its problems. Each suburban government maintains its own independence and en- acts its own ordinances, holds its own elections, zones its land, grants build- ing permits, fixes speed limits, provides its own health and welfare and public library services, raises its own taxes. Its 8 Center for Urban Studies, University of Chi- cago, Mid-Chicago Economic Development Study, Vol. II, Technical Analysis and Findings, Economic Development of Mid-Chicago (Chicago: Mayor's Committee for Economic and Cultural Develop- ment, 1966), p. 3. 'New York Times, July 9, 1967, p. 32. 0 Robert C. Wood, Suburbia, Its People and Their Politics (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1959), p. 12.
92 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY fire department may be well run or op- erated by volunteers; its fires are put out with varying degrees of efficiency. Its police forces may be poorly equipped or highly professional, and they may jealously compete or casually co-oper- ate. One suburb's water supply may be adequate for summer-lawn watering, while another requires strict rationing. Within this framework, the suburbanite is said to be "breeding a whole genera- tion that will never have known the city at all." What about the suburban public li- brary? The Suburban Library System of Illinois embraces a community of au- tonomous public libraries that can be analyzed. The Suburban Library Sys- tem serves a population of 951,810. About one-third of the total population has no public library service of its own. The average population served by a member library is less than 14,000. In fact, twenty-five of the forty-seven member libraries serve less than 10,000 people, with the largest serving about 61,000; the smallest, 737. It is estimat- ed that ten years hence the system will include eighty-eight member libraries. The book collections of the libraries total less than 900,000 volumes, rang- ing from literally 0 to 128,000 volumes. The largest library added less than 7,000 volumes to its collection last year. The level of personnel can be illus- trated by the fact that only nine of the forty-seven member libraries are being administered by holders of a graduate library degree. The average library is open only thirty-eight hours per week. The tax rate levied for library pur- poses varies from a low of .039 per cent to .160 per cent on an equalized as- sessed valuation ranging from 9.5 mil- lion dollars to 212 million dollars. The smallest community in population is the fourth highest in assessed valuation. Since only eleven libraries are cur- rently members of the regional book processing center, it is conceivable that at a given moment employees in thirty- six libraries are reading the same book review and ordering the same book, which will be cataloged, classified, and physically processed when it arrives in thirty-six separate locations. The Suburban Library System is only one of several library networks recently established in the Illinois por- tion of the Chicago Standard Metro- politan Statistical Area. The North Suburban Library System, the DuPage County Library System, and portions of two others duplicate, in many ways, the characteristics of the Suburban Li- brary System which includes only the western and southern Chicago suburbs. Since the 1800's, the Chicago sub- urbs have been independently holding referenda to establish libraries, electing library boards, levying taxes for opera- tion, hiring administrators, erecting buildings, purchasing books and sup- plies, reporting, accounting and audit- ing their separate expenditures of funds -all of this activity, for the most part, resulting in library service that fails to reach minimum standards. The growth of the suburban sprawl at the expense of the central city raises serious questions for the future of li- brary service. With the exodus of those who are able to pay taxes and their replacement by those who are not, with the movement of retail establishments and industry to suburbia, the tax base of the large city is being eroded. These sources of tax funds are relocating in hundreds of separate small taxing dis- tricts, resulting in a fragmentation of
VIEWPOINT OF THE SUBURBAN LIBRARY 93 the metropolitan area's tax base. The Chicago Metropolitan Statistical Area contains 1,060 separate governmental jurisdictions of which 995 have property taxing powers." In the Philadelphia Metropolitan Statistical Area, 705 of 963 jurisdictions have property taxing powers.'2 There is increasing recognition that our local governmental units are anti- quated and not equipped to combat area-wide problems. Elections have been held to consolidate city and county governments. Area-wide planning, though still not popular among subur- banites, is becoming a recognized neces- sity. Government consolidation is not developing at a rapid rate, however, and it is doubtful that suburbia will readily abandon its firmly held desire for in- dependent local government. The most promising solution to date appears to be the creation of special units to handle specific problems such as sanitation, water supply, and library service. The organization of networks of li- brary systems, in New York and else- where, is evidence that public libraries acknowledge their interdependence and are willing to join in co-operative en- deavors. The systems being created by closely populated and growing suburban communities show promise of becom- ing the strongest and most effective of these special units. And well they might. With the movement to the suburbs has come an increasing sophistication of demands on the suburban library ill- equipped to meet them. One recourse is to join with neighbors in the same pre- dicament. However, the suburban li- brarian who believes co-operative fed- eration will answer all the problems is deluding himself, for the historic refer- ence and research resource is the large city library with its collection of up- ward of 1,000,000 volumes. Large city library book collections containing many indispensable out-of-print books cannot be recreated any more than can the treasures of the large city art mu- seums. Just as many suburbs depend on the central city for their water supply, all suburban public libraries are de- pendent on the central city for subject collections in depth. Although the total number of volumes held by suburban libraries may equal or exceed the num- ber held by the city library, duplication among their collections may result in a smaller number of titles than are held by most large city libraries. The subur- ban libraries must continue to depend on the large city collection regardless of co-operative federation among them- selves. Co-operation between large city li- braries and others in the metropolitan area exists to a degree. According to one suburban librarian, the Los Angeles Public Library "is a restrained colossus which is not only a leader among public libraries in the nation, but also is one which has aided the development of independent libraries within its immedi- ate scope of influence. It is committed to co-operate with other libraries in the area; and where it has been allowed to work with these other libraries, it has been helpful rather than overwhelming, as it well could have been." On Febru- ary 1, 1967, the Detroit Public Library began giving free borrower's cards for the first time in one hundred years to residents outside the city. The Chicago U U.S. Bureau of the Census, Census of Govern- ments: 1962, Vol. I, Governmental Organization. Prepared under the supervision of Allen D. Manvel (Washington: U.S. Department of Commerce, Bu- reau of the Census, 1963), p. 124. ' Ibid., p. 174.
94 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Public Library has held this policy since before the turn of the century. About two years ago, the New York Pub- lic Library Circulation Department adopted a policy of letting any resident of New York State use his library card when visiting the city, or issuing a New York Public Library card to permit regular use of the library. Suburban use of the large city library for reference and other purposes has been going on for years and is growing with the in- creased student use of public libraries. The Cleveland Public Library and the Cuyahoga County Public Library have been leaders in a metropolitan area study and in the development of a uniform salary scale for the area librar- ies. The Enoch Pratt Free Library is engaged in two co-operative programs- County Services and Metropolitan Maryland Library Service. County Services, established by written con- tract in 1960, combines into one service system all of the state's county librar- ies. Metropolitan Maryland Library Service, begun in January, 1965, is a co-operative program involving the seven metropolitan area counties and Baltimore City and is entirely sup- ported by federal Library Services and Construction Act funds. Not all the participants sign a contract, but each files an annual application for funds with the Division of Library Extension. The Enoch Pratt Free Library receives compensation for its part in the recip- rocal borrowing program as well as an annual payment of $50,000 to be used in strengthening the reference collec- tions and capabilities of the library. The M1etropolitan Maryland Lib'rary Service program serves as an excellent example of a co-operative program be- tween the large city library and subur- ban areas. Agreements on the method of operation, avail- ability of collections, and formula for distribu- tion of funds were made by [the participating libraries] on data which were incomplete and, in some cases, not available with no reliable predictions of the probable impact of the pro- jected arrangements. The willingness of these units to experiment with opening their services to all was based largely on a recognized need to make available to metropolitan residents all metropolitan public library resources.... None of these negative factors with their immediate effects were viewed as important enough to outweigh the long-range advantages of metro- politan cooperation.'3 This was possible because the admin- istrators of at least some of the libraries involved had been holding regular meet- ings since 1961 "to define and discuss mutual concerns and to work towards mutually advantageous solutions."'4 A climate of acceptance of metropolitan service resulted from the mutual re- spect and trust established by these meetings. Reciprocal borrowing privileges were first limited to adult books and were later extended to include children's books. Daily truck delivery to send and return books and films from the Pratt Library has expedited the use of ma- terials. During the first year of opera- tion, a two-week study of use patterns was made. Over 80 per cent of the books borrowed by non-residents were pro- vided by Pratt. The problems encoun- tered did not require changes in services or regulations. The Metropolitan Maryland Library Service program is complemented by the County Services program. Under the latter the counties are linked by teletype, thus providing rapid com- 13 Maryland State Department of Education, Di- vision of Library Extension, ". . . Where the Action Is . . . ," Maryland School Bulletin (September, 1966), 40:11. '4Ibid.
VIEWPOINT OF THE SUBURBAN LIBRARY 95 munication. Pratt Library staff book reviews are transmitted to all county libraries, and ambiguous interlibrary loan requests can be clarified through this communication system. In spite of these and other examples of co-operation which might be listed, the degree of co-operation between the historic resource center and the suburbs is still minimal when measured against the need as seen from the suburbs. What is the suburban librarian's at- titude toward the large city library? In an effort to sample the viewpoint from the suburban libraries, letters were written to thirty suburban librarians. Replies were received from twenty. They were asked whether, in their opin- ion, the large city library is fulfilling its responsibilities; how the proximity of the library affects their libraries' policies; and, finally, what they see as the future relationship between the suburban libraries and the large city library. Statistical tabulation of an informal survey of such a small sample is not feasible. But the attitudes of the subur- ban librarians can be detected, though they vary considerably even within the same metropolitan area. With very few exceptions, these suburban librarians recognize their de- pendence on the large city library and acknowledge the effect of the proximity of its collection on their book selection policies. One exception states: "Policies that govern my library are not in any way influenced by the proximity of the [metropolitan] library. We are develop- ing our own resources as though this library were the only resource available to the community. This, of course, is only to insure the highest ideals; in practice we borrow heavily from the State Library." On the other hand, most replies re- lating to the feeling of dependence were similar to one suburban librarian's comments: "While it is tempting to take the large city library for granted, its very existence makes the [suburban librarian's] job easier. It is not neces- sary to stock expensive and infrequently used materials. He can concentrate on the more popular and put more money in a circulating collection than would otherwise be possible." Another stated: "I feel very strongly that we too little appreciate the value of a metropolitan library." Most suburban librarians acknowl- edge, with gratitude, the co-operative efforts already in existence. "Our prin- cipal call is for interloan of books. We have had excellent co-operation," states one. "Children's librarian meetings have been open to suburban librarians for years," writes another. One librarian is grateful for being able to attend the city library's book discussion meetings and to seek the advice of its subject specialists. After giving credit where due, how- ever, the suburban librarians strongly voice the opinion that the large city li- brary is not fulfilling its responsibilities as they see them from the suburbs. The problems as seen from the suburbs nat- urally vary among metropolitan areas. While one metropolitan library is praised for excellent co-operation in in- terloan of materials, another is accused of "the lack of co-operation on the basic idea of exchange of materials," which the suburban librarian calls "the shame of our metropolitan area." One non- Maryland suburban librarian does not think "any of the metropolitan public libraries, except for Enoch Pratt, are fulfilling their professional library re- sponsibilities to the metropolitan area."
96 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY A few large libraries were subjected to severe criticism. An example from one suburb should be enough. "Before the [large city library] can play any posi- tive role in relation to suburban librar- ies, it must itself become a progressive modern institution, with an enlightened book selection policy, truly superior re- sources, and a determination to meet the needs of its patrons." The suburban librarian does not ig- nore his own responsibilities. One, in criticizing the metropolitan library, sums up by writing. "Who's to blame- ours collectively!" Another shares the blame between suburb and large city equally: "Often [suburban] librarians are too involved in a jealous, competi- tive or a resentful, snubbed attitude to- wards the big city library and are un- able to look for help towards a more co- operative relationship. Big city libraries are just as much to blame. Most of them have very great shortcomings. The librarians tend to be defensive. They do not feel in a position to lead and they don't want to be asked to." Leadership was the characteristic most frequently stated as lacking in big city librarians. Could this be a change in attitude? Did the suburban librarian of ten or twenty years ago look to the large city library for leadership? One correspondent pointed out attempts on the part of the city library to offer lead- ership in the 40's and 50's. The at- tempts were not very welcome at that time. The suburban librarian now seeks leadership from the metropolitan li- brary in several ways. He wants the city library to be "a cultural force com- manding the respect of the citizenry at large," "a good example," "a model for suburban library boards." He wants the large library to build better materials collections and share them by serving the patron through the suburban li- brary. Interloan was described various- ly as a "moral obligation" and a "pro- fessional responsibility." He admits interloan of books in a metropolitan situation is largely a one-way matter. All the suburban librarians who an- swered agree that the metropolitan li- brary should be reimbursed for the cost of such sharing, but there is justifiable concern whether anyone, including the big city librarian, knows what the costs actually are. State and federal funds were the only sources of funds men- tioned to meet the costs. Next to the desire for leadership from the city library, the suburban li- brarians most frequently mention the desperate need for communication. One summed it up: "It is important that both the suburban librarian and the di- rector of the central library be willing to communicate with each other, to sit down and talk things over and not be inaccessible one to the other." A recent study of New York State library systems draws attention to some of the problems facing the large city libraries: For the most part, one sees these city libraries hard pressed to maintain traditional services at a sound level in the face of limited funds, ris- ing costs, unstable community conditions, the increasing scope of reader interests and of ma- terials being published and the rising demands of a high school and college group that lacks adequate resources within their own institu- tions. Fresh approaches and new programs, whether for the underprivileged or for a grow- ing cultural elite or for the business commu- nity, are few and far between.'5 15 State Education Department Division of Eval- uation, Emerging Library Systems, the 1963-66 Evaluation of the New York State Public Library Systems (Albany: University of the State of New York, 1967), p. x-6.
VIEWPOINT OF THE SUBURBAN LIBRARY 97 The professional staff shortage can be added to this already formidable list of problems. Except for the fact that many problems are similar, though on a much larger scale, to those facing suburban libraries, it is doubtful that suburban librarians are aware of their pervasiveness in large city library op- erations. Conceivably size may be con- fused, in the minds of some, with afflu- ence. There is evidence, however, of an at- tempt by the suburban librarians to un- derstand the problems of the large city library. Two believed their city librar- ies had so many problems that they probably "are not interested in acquir- ing any more . . . by extending serv- ice." One perceptive suburban librarian wrote: "I think the questions involved are rather difficult for either the city or suburban librarian to answer, if neither has had experience in both libraries. Not all the problems of the city library are known to the suburban librarian and vice versa." Communication be- tween the two would go far toward bet- ter understanding on the part of both. The suburban librarians saw hope for better relationships with the large city library in the future. Although most of their ideas are not original, some may bear repeating. "Coopera- tion," according to one suburbanite, "will have to become the by-word." A metropolitan area-wide borrower's card, an efficient and practical communica- tion system, union lists, book catalogs, daily delivery, centralized processing, advice of big city library specialists, the large city library pioneering in projects and sharing experience and knowledge are among those mentioned. Financing such projects by state rather than fed- eral funds seemed more likely to the suburban librarian. There is a wide variation of interli- brary loan policies among the large city libraries. Some libraries are very liberal. Others may be liberal to distant bor- rowing libraries, but refuse this service to nearby suburban libraries. Chicago, for example, will lend to libraries only beyond a fifty-mile radius. A study of New York State library systems indi- cates interlibrary loan to be the most successful device for extending physical accessibility of materials. In the north- ern part of the state alone, interlibrary loans increased 200 per cent in seven years. Very few libraries (other than strong central libraries) drew more than 10 per cent of their users from beyond a ten-mile radius. Lack of staff skills, inadequate bibliographic tools, and the long interval between request and receipt are problems involved in interlibrary loan which have so far de- fied solution. The New York study in- dicates that getting to the reader the precise materials he needs is the prob- lem that has received the least atten- tion."6 Martin and Bowler in their Cali- fornia study indicate the problem of mounting demand on the few strong collections and suggest the channeling of requests through systems headquar- ters before forwarding them to the city library.'7 St. John, while admitting an accurate determination has been impos- sible, suggests that the cost of an inter- library loan may range from $7.50 to $10.00.18 Obviously, the interlibrary loan prob- lem is only one of many which affect service to residents of metropolitan Ibid. 17 Lowell A. Martin and Roberta Bowler, Public Library Service Equal to the Challenge of Calif or- nia: a Report to the State Librarian (Sacramento: California State Library, 1965). 18Emerging Library Systems, op. cit. (see n. 15 above), p. vi-21.
98 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY areas. The library profession has not attacked even this problem with the vigor which is called for to provide equal library service to all. The publi- cation explosion continues, student use of libraries without regard to political boundaries increases, the educational level of the population rises, technology accelerates in development, the popula- tion grows and migrates beyond the service limits of the city library. These pressures are forcing the library pro- fession to seek a co-ordinated approach. Meier looks forward "to a day, perhaps a decade or so hence, when it would be economical to construct a documenta- tion system for a metropolis that is as physically integrated as the banking system is now becoming.' There have been a number of recent proposals for a co-ordinated approach to metropolitan area library problems. Goldhor suggests a Metropolitan Li- brary Service Agency (MELSA) for the Minneapolis-St. Paul metropolitan area. MELSA would be a governmental unit serving the existing libraries in- cluding the smaller ones, but created only by the larger public library sys- tems of the area. Under the control of a lay board, with an advisory commit- tee of librarians, this agency would do whatever its member libraries wanted; this includes such possibilities as joint book selection with subject specializa- tion, central reference service, research and experimentation, central ordering, cataloging and processing, data proc- essing, and daily delivery. The pro- posed financing of MELSA is through service charges, state and federal grants, an assessment to be paid by the libraries represented on the governing board, and double the assessment on members whose budgets fall below a specified per capita amount.20 Martin and Bowler propose Reader Subject Center Libraries for California "wherever 200,000 or more people live within driving distance [one-half hour] in metropolitan areas.""2 Nelson Asso- ciates recommend for New York "for cataloging and acquisitions, one center . . . to meet all the public library needs of the state, including those of New York City."22 They state that "the New York City systems would achieve sub- stantial savings in operating expenses for cataloging and acquisitions if they chose to participate in a statewide scheme."23 Although existing regions may not have the opportunity to plan library service before the metropolitan area is developed, the experience of Columbia City, Maryland, after it has developed its plan for joint village, school, and public libraries and established a non- profit corporation to administer public communication and information serv- ices, may point the way toward some solutions. The formation of co-operative sub- urban library systems is making subur- ban librarians and boards increasingly 19Richard L. Meier, "The Library: An Instru- ment for Metropolitan Communications," in Ralph W. Conant (ed.), The Public Library and the City: Symposium on Library Functions in the Changing Metropolis, Dedham, Mass., 1963 (Cambridge, Mass.: M.I.T. Press, 1965), p. 86. 'Herbert Goldhor, A Plan for the Development of Public Library Service in the Minneapolis- St. Paul Metropolitan Area (Unpublished report, Graduate School of Library Science, University of Illinois, Urbana, 1966). 'Martin and Bowler, op. cit. (see n. 17 above), p. 73. ' Nelson Associates, Inc., in collaboration with the Theodore Stein Company, Centralized Process- ing for the Public Libraries of New York State; a Survey Conducted for the New York State Li- brary (New York: Nelson Associates, Inc., 1966), p.1. 2 Ibid., p. 34.
VIEWPOINT OF THE SUBURBAN LIBRARY 99 aware of their interdependence with the city library. The creation of federated suburban systems is developing leader- ship and the ability of suburbia to speak through a few representative leaders. A dialogue between the subur- ban library and the historic reference library is now possible. On the other hand, the large city li- brary with its users migrating to the suburbs and its tax base eroded will find it increasingly necessary to take part in the dialogue. The need for con- centrated federal and state financial support of the historic resource center is now at hand. Suburban backing of adequate support will be required. The suburbs and the city have a vital part to play in library service of the future. They are now "more equal." The sub- urban systems will not be strong enough to stand alone. The large city library is no longer strong enough to do without the help of the suburban systems. In recognizing their interdependence, they can work together more effectively. State libraries too are beginning to recognize the need for co-ordinated ef- fort in metropolitan area service. Lowell Martin suggests a statewide library structure of five related levels of serv- ice and interlibrary use of resources, along with abolishing the limitations on use imposed by governmental jurisdic- tions. Included in the New York, Illi- nois, Pennsylvania, and Massachusetts system organizations are attempts to solve some of these problems on a state- wide basis. It is apparent that the prob- lems of metropolitan areas deserve top priority at the present stage of public library development. To provide a beginning to a co-ordi- nated approach, the administrator of each large city library should provide the leadership that the suburban librar- ians apparently now seek. Regularly scheduled meetings called by the large city library with representatives of the suburban libraries (system heads where they exist) would provide a beginning to the establishment of communications, with a consequent improvement in un- derstanding each other's problems. To- gether they can form a powerful group in lobbying and otherwise convincing state governments of the seriousness of metropolitan area library problems and their solutions. Federal, state, or foundation funds should be sought to finance a research and development staff to work with and for the co-ordinating group. Although many state plans for use of LSCA funds include funds for studies and re- search, there is little evidence that they are being used on metropolitan area problems. Conant suggests that highly compe- tent research and management teams be established by groups of co-operat- ing libraries. Among the functions of these teams would be the proposing "of network library systems, intergovern- mental agreements, and other arrange- ments among autonomous libraries across jurisdictional and functional lines."24 Perhaps each large city library could concentrate its research on a different set of metropolitan library problems, the findings shared with due regard for area differences. Stalley has said, "If private corporations spend five to eight percent of their funds for research and development, what should government and public service agencies spend when the endeavor is not a material product 24 Ralph W. Conant, "Sociological and Institu- tional Changes in American Life, Their Implica- tions for the Library," ALA Bulletin (May, 1967), 61:535.
100 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY but human growth and development, as complicated and difficult an end to pur- sue as is imaginable?"25 The suburban librarian's view of the large city library differs as much as the level of suburban library service. Sub- urbia includes librarians who have thought little about the relationship as well as some who have some grasp of the problems besetting the large city li- brary. Suburban librarians are them- selves facing problems that, in their view, require the assistance of their large neighbor. Suburban librarians, if they were not ready in the past, are now impatient to get on with the job of working with the big city librarian to- ward realistically solving the problems of co-ordinated service. Greenaway admits that although "much of the state leadership exists in the local library, yet too often the city library is too independent and not suffi- ciently cooperative in solving statewide problems."26 This paper may appropriately con- clude with two quotations from the re- cent evaluation of the New York State public library systems: Barriers to further progress in cooperation and coordination fall into three major categories: (1) those which are a manifestation of some aspect of unwillingness to subordinate any seg- ment of one's own library operation or library type to a larger authority or cause, (2) the complexity and difficulty of knowing precisely where and how to move into the actual job, and (3) money. In all of these areas statewide planning, leadership, and support are essential. A bold and imaginative plan enlists support.27 If a single trend stands out most clearly as a development of present times, it is probably the condition which someone has characterized as "calculated interdependence." No agency or individual operates alone or independently any longer. The keynote of social progress lies, in fact, in successfully relating individual efforts to mutual or overlapping interests. Nor is it enough to depend on the formal and casual co- operation of the past, based on courtesy and goodwill. Courtesy and goodwill are no less precious qualities than they have ever been, but the institutional cooperation of today must be systematic, organized, and based on the larger interests of society. In a public service endeavor such as public libraries, this is not only a moral dictum; it is a form of enlight- ened self-interest and the key to survival.28 25 Marshall Stalley, "The Implications of Urban- ization for Education," in Problems of Library Services in Metropolitan Areas, report of a seminar directed by Dorothy Bendix (Philadelphia: Drexel Press, 1966), p. 11. ' Greenaway, op. cit. (see n. 2 above), p. 17. 'Emerging Library Systems, op. cit. (see n. 15 above), p. xii-8. `8 Ibid., p. xii-6.