PV Library History without Walls Clio's Decalogue Revamp'd for the Untenur'd . . .' James V. Carmichael, Jr. The neglect of library history is taken for granted, even if it is undeserved, and even if proposals have been regularly advanced for improving its status. One of the most prevalent salvos proposed focuses on interdisciplinarity and publishing outside the field of librarianship . Few if any writers have addressed the problem of how the novice professor with a genuine research interest in library history can meet the requirements of tenure by pursuing a low-status specialty, endure the rigors and expense of historical research, and gain the respect of peers, while at the same time promoting the value of the subject outside the field. This article suggests that in order to survive as library historians and library educators, some of the conventional wisdom sur- rounding tenure tactics may need to be disregarded or modified. The Professional Dilemma Occasionally, in social situations where library historians are asked what they "do," they may skirt past subsidiary job descriptions (and, if they are neophytes in library education, the horrors of the tenure process), hold their breath a mo- ment, exhale slowly, and say casually, "I write for a living." This confession is good for morale, like a new suit, since part of the historian's soul needs the exercise of self-disclosure. Unlike would-be novelists, who rarely share plot ideas, library historians typically use social situations as occasions for unburdening themselves of their latest discoveries. They educate the listener in librarianship as well as library his- tory - and if they don't clear the room in the process - may even develop a nebu- lous reputation as a raconteur. No one remembers the burning message in their diatribes or the point of the amusing turn-of-the-century gossip, but even practicing librarians will invariably be charmed by the music in such bellicose names as LeNoir Dimmit, Vera Jessie Snook, May Fidelia Boudinot, Mary Utopia Rothrock, Phineas Winsor, or Mrs. Delia Foreacre Sneed.2 Listeners will remember the laughter provoked by the story about what really happened to the slush fund on the day the head cataloger cussed out her superior, or the particulars of the acerbic comments made about a recalcitrant director by one of her employees, even if the histo- rian would much prefer that they also remember the facts that the recalcitrant director built ten branches, achieved ra- cial integration in a southern library, or Fall 1995 309
310 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science About the Author James V. Carmichael, Jr. is Associate Professor, Department of Library and Information Studies, University of North Carolina at Greensboro. championed the cause of African Americans in Memphis. Library histori- ans hope laypersons will think, "Aren't libraries an interesting mirror of soci- ety?" even if they are usually short- changed with, "What a hoot!" Publishers represent a different or- der of "listener," and the ranks of aca- deme still another. Several years ago, I queried a group of library biographers about research problems they encoun- tered in conducting their research.3 Among 102 individuals, not one person mentioned the difficulty of getting pub- lished, although to be fair, over a third of the works represented by these authors were essays in the Dictionary of American Library Biography and many had written nothing else in the bio- graphical vein. In other words, few li- brary biographers had dedicated their research energies exclusively or exten- sively to library history, apparently be- cause of the difficulty, time, and expense associated with travel to re- positories and interview sites. These barriers notwithstanding, the greatest psychological hurdle full-time histori- ans had to overcome was the indiffer- ence or antipathy of their peers towards library history. While it may be argued that little of universal application or sex appeal has been written in library his- tory, relatively few graduates of LIS pro- grams seem impressed with the need for library history (until, that is, a centen- ary celebration occurs at their library and they need a brochure in a hurry to promote fund-raising) or with the appli- cability of that history to present con- cerns. As library historian Robert S. Martin has remarked informally many times, all research is to some extent historical, whatever the subject or methodology applied (e.g., case stud- ies - historical and otherwise - and cer- tainly any literature review). Positivists regularly deride the large quantity of library survey research and the paucity of experimental research, even though library historians remind them that sur- vey research serves to inform future re- searchers of conditions at a given moment in time.4 Other disciplines, even "marginal" ones, do not seem to experience the curious ahistoricity in which librarians mask their professional insecurities. Elementary school teachers, for exam- ple, have to earmark the writings of Horace Mann and John Dewey, whisk through some basic tenets of philoso- phy, and understand whence came the diversity problems under which schools are still staggering. Medical stu- dents must memorize the pantheon of professional heroes and heroines - what Sydney Pierce calls "dead Ger- mans."5 The library profession's terminal illness, if indeed it is in a state of decline, results from a long-term staff infection of low status. This has been part of librari- anship for so many years that library edu- cators assume as a matter of course that students will matriculate with incipient symptoms of the malady. The remedies proposed by library education have been fairly generic - more management and administrative courses, more emphasis on marketing, more cognitive psychol- Volume 36, Number 4
Library History without Walls 31 1 ogy, and more technology, with less em- phasis on book arts and bibliography, philosophy, and, of course, library his- tory. When was the last time a library educator suggested library history as a salvo for low professional self-esteem? Psychotherapists seem reconciled to the fact that patients must accept the bad as well as the good about them- selves before any degree of self-worth can be achieved, but not librarians, who, to judge from their thin skins, seem to sense a nervous breakdown waiting behind every loss of face. Librarians have learned to venerate computer scientists, corporate mag- nates, and management gurus, but very few can name the founders of the ALA, the first ten ALA presidents, the first female ALA president, or the first li- brary to offer specialized services to im- migrants.6 Library educators were quick to embrace the wider implica- tions of cybernetics for information sci- ence and those of cognitive psychology for user behavior, even if they perhaps too readily delegated the codex to the realm of "alternate" information tech- nology at the very moment the history of reading became a hot topic in several fields and reader-response theory was reaching full swing. It is a shame that some librarians could not be distracted from technology long enough to notice that youth constituted the largest group of readers in municipal libraries.7 Li- brarians are quick to assimilate the new and are loath to engage in basic redefi- nition and reinterpretation of the famil- iar.8 How many library educators, for example, inform students that Melvil Dewey's innovations in office equip- ment revolutionized the insurance and banking industries?9 Some professors are still reluctant to draw the obvious comparison between the history of com- puter technology with that of the type- writer, although it is clear that the type- writer has had a significant impact on the library curriculum and practice (consider the demise of "library hand"). The Publishing Dilemma Publishers approach library history from a different angle; namely, how many copies will it sell? Tommie Dora Barker's now obscure survey of south- ern library conditions, Libraries of the South (1936), was printed in an edition of 550 copies, and the ALA and the Carnegie Corporation distributed many of them for free. Perhaps those days of paper munificence are gone forever, al- though that contention would be hard to prove by the number of publisher's catalogs, newsletters, and advertising trash hauled to the recycling dump every week. When I finished my historical dis- sertation and turned it over to the univer- sity publisher at hand, it was apparently so unimportant that it remained in the editor's office for a year, unread and for- gotten, until it was finally returned with a note that made no mention of the quality of the content but rather speculated on probable sales figures and declined fur- ther consideration. Books by some of our most distin- guished, entertaining, and engaging his- torians have sold well below the four hundred-copy mark, which means that libraries are no longer buying library history.10 In the not-too-distant past, li- braries could be counted on to buy li- brary history, biography, and even autobiography. Many library historians assemble their own collections of "clas- sic" titles from discards bearing the stamps of public and academic libraries of all sizes. Librarians apparently used to have an interest in learning about themselves, even before the 1950s and Fall 1995
312 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 1960s, when the ground rules for writing credible library history were redefined by writers like Bill Williamson, Ed Holley, Phyllis Dain, Philip Kalisch, and Laurel Grotzinger. Thus it is not just a publishing crisis that library historians are currently experiencing, but a lack of professional support. One regularly hears these days that the university press market for library history has dried up, but the recent publi- cation of Joanne Passet's history of female librarians of the West, under the imprint of the University of New Mexico, proves that theories of victimization do not always obtain.11 Distressing, however, is recent an- ecdotal evidence obtained by e-mail messages from two fellow library histo- rians who recounted horror stories of rejections by publishers who should have been grateful to add two major contributions to the field. These authors have all the necessary elements to reach a wider audience - thorough research, incisive analysis, narrative power, compelling themes, and rele- vance. One of them, an award-winning author, was told to recast his history to current problems and transform his tome - the result of five years of labor - into a manual for practitioners. After some reflection, he posted this message: "I just really don't want to do that. I mean, these are my people, I'm telling their story, and if that's not good enough for [a New York publisher], to hell with them." The other historian, who wrote a mesmerizing biography of a librarian intimately and prominently associated with all aspects of an academic institu- tion that maintains a flourishing univer- sity press, intertwining highly relevant themes of racism, anti-Semitism, and McCarthyism into his narrative, was told perfunctorily that said press was not interested in the subject. So much for institutional gratitude. Professional wisdom, to judge from the recent host of angry letters in the official organ of the ALA12 and from the dean of one of the profession's leading LIS programs,13 would argue that re- search into social issues (most of which have quite complex historical antece- dents) is tangential rather than funda- mental to the professional mission of librarianship, although library history receives no explicit mention in this dis- course. In my case, ironically, publish- ers and editors have routinely counseled me to recast my historical findings on Southern female librarians in terms that would sell to a wider audi- ence - namely, race, gender, class, and region. The view that librarianship - with its great current emphasis on tech- nology - should aim at technological expertise to the exclusion of social rele- vance or advocacy seems short-sighted, since a glance at almost any mainstream scholarly publisher's catalog will fea- ture prominently the subjects of race or ethnic studies, women's studies, gender studies, social studies, or even gay and lesbian studies (e.g., Haworth Press, Sage Publications - certainly not pub- lishers to sniff at). Indisputably, market forces don't create all of the publishing problems of professional historians. Moreover, some of these authors be- come quite famous. Consider Barbara Melosh's history of nursing, which was incorporated into the film Sentimental Women Need Not Apply.14 To para- phrase Shakespeare, "Our fault is not in our [lack of] stars, but in ourselves." The Decalogue: Countering Conventional Wisdom On the other hand, library historians are in a unique position to address the more concrete problem of disciplinary insu- Volume 36, Number 4
Library History without Walls 3 1 3 larity in their research, even if, in aca- deme, they may have to violate some of the ground rules for obtaining tenure. While academe talks a good game of collegiality and the commerce of ideas at the university, centers that support interdisciplinary study sometimes serve functions of administrative con- venience outside of elite research insti- tutions. Little practical advice is available to the assistant professor who seeks to pursue library history while earning the respect of his or her col- leagues; indeed, at some institutions the assistant professor would appar- ently be well advised to abandon it entirely without the support of a dean or department chair. There are never- theless practical ways to encourage publication of library history outside the field of librarianship, encourage in- terdisciplinarity, and at the same time foster the careers of recent entrants into the mercurial realms of academe. Here then, are ten guidelines for the unten- ured novice, a reworking of Clio's Deca- logue for the library historian. 1. First, for an assistant professor, historical projects should start small. The monolithic tome is a fine pipe-dream for most, and a possibility for those with a con- tract and a manuscript in hand, but tenure committees like numbers. Therefore, it is circumspect to pub- lish in small chunks. If tenure com- mittees indeed like numbers, the historian might aim for the journal market. By including one or two refereed articles a year, library his- torians will be able to fulfill tenure requirements while indulging their historical passion. Save mono- graphs until after promotion to as- sociate professor. 2. Second, use every opportunity - pub- lic service talks, dinner speeches, workshops, and classes - to incor- porate historical components. Such practice is healthy for the intellectual arteries and enlight- ening for the audience, and the seeds of these efforts may blossom into an article later. Moreover, such exercises also keep the histo- rian flexible and stave off writer's block. Remember that librarians and nonlibrarians alike prefer to be entertained while they are be- ing exhorted. 3. Third, library historians should fa- miliarize themselves with related literature outside the field. Are li- brary historians aware that the 1994 Popular Culture Conference in Chi- cago had four sessions on libraries? Consider the fields and subfields with which librarianship has a "natural" socio-historical affinity by virtue of being a "feminized" field (nursing, teaching, and social work). History of Education Quar- terly, in which Passet has publish- ed, 5 presents only one such promising venue. Library histori- ans of every stripe need to be re- minded that however intrinsically interesting their topics are, they also have a bearing on the current problems of libraries, publishers, and society. Librarians, educators, and laypersons can benefit from the Depression-era experiences of librarians, for example, for perhaps in no other period have resources been more scant nor ideas and ex- perimentation more prolific. What are the recurrent problems? Do li- brary historians have the courage and the talent to remind their peers that they are reinventing the wheel? Can they convince practitioners of the similarities and differences be- Fall 1995
314 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science tween modern situations and those of the past? As an excellent exam- ple, Kathleen Molz's recent 'The Public Library Inquiry" should be required reading, not only for every library historian, but for every li- brary student. It explains as per- haps no other discussion does why the LIS profession eventually be- came disenchanted with the aims (and means) of social science re- search.16 4. In writing, restrain the impulse to recount every anecdote or to load manuscripts with tables, charts, and diagrams. (Photographs are good, however, if the publisher doesn't admonish the writer about additional publishing costs when such materials are submitted.) It is I not true that all publishers and readers shrink at the historian's penchant for footnotes, although some editors balk at discursive footnotes and some are edgy about them, (again) because of costs. Some publishers don't like dense postmodernist theoretical jargon, while others demand it as academic lingua franca. This does not mean that all library historians have to dress like the emperor. Familiarity with current trends in research methodology is helpful, however, as is an acquaintance with buz- zwords, although no verbal fanci- ness will hide the lack of a sustained narrative. 5. (Almost) never say no: Yes, Virginia, there is a Saint Jerome, and he doesn't place opportunities in the historian's path for nothing. Elitism and academic snobbery serve a purpose in doctoral pro- grams, and methodological rigor and eloquence will always be desir- able, especially for the annual quota of refereed journal articles, but there are many ways in which narrative talents can be adapted to a more local market. If library his- torians write only for the refereed journal market, they lose publish- ing opportunities unique to the his- torical field - the state, regional, or city historical journal, for example, which operates by editorial caveat rather than the blind referee pro- cess, but may nevertheless be use- ful to historians. (Exceptions to this rule might be major editorial as- signments - the rule being, don't of- fer to ride herd over a bunch of authors - and book reviews that are entirely foreign to the writer's per- sonal research interests). 5. Use public speaking engagements to develop ideas for publications. While due to the rather severe standards of tenure, many writers blanche at invitations to speak at civic or similar associations, such occasions can force historians to market their goods for publication both within and outside the field of librarianship. Some of the organi- zations I have tapped to good effect reflect a personal research bias to- ward regional studies and gender studies, but any library historian could compose a similar list based upon the geographical or other spe- cial characteristics of a given sub- ject. My own list includes The Colonial Dames, The United Daughters of the Confederacy, and The Daughters of the American Revolution, where subjects covered included images of the South in southern literature; the history of etiquette with particular reference to the southern states; and Christ- mas celebrations in the Confeder- acy. Other organizations on the list Volume 36, Number 4
Library History without Waiis 3 1 5 (although one hears little about them in doctoral programs) include LIS alumni associations, Beta Phi Mu, student associations, Rotari- ans, the American Educational Studies Association, the campus Women's Studies Forum, the cam- pus Gay and Lesbian Student Asso- ciation, the state (regional) library association, the county library as- sociation, the staff association at the local public library, and the American Association of Univer- sity Women. It's important to enlist the emotional support of the dean or department chair in these ven- tures, and unhealthy to work for a program that won't support them. 7. Also, identify a colleague who is not a historian to read and edit your work - say, a bibliometrician or a survey researcher. If one hates all faculty outside the LIS program, or only speaks to them at faculty sen- ate meetings, this suggestion may stick in the craw. Also, talk to LIS faculty with different interests. In a recent review, Wayne Wiegand reminisced about his relationship with Mike Harris at the University of Kentucky and their early-morn- ing think tanks in which each served as sounding board for the other's ideas. I have three col- leagues with whom I share my work and emerging ideas - one is a sur- vey researcher and a school librar- ian, another is an education professor specializing in postmod- ern analysis of oral history narra- tives, and a third is a historian of women's education. I also routinely dispatch manuscripts to library his- torians and others who I think "may be interested in the subject, and the feedback is more than worth the price of copying and postage. 8. Communicate regularly with other library historians via e-mail about their work. It is easy for library school faculty to forget what they have been doing by the time they collapse at ALISE. Casual phone calls to other historical researchers are usually appreciated, and well worth the cost. Find out what dis- cussion groups and listservs apply even remotely to the subject at hand, and begin dreaming of the day when electronic publications will be deemed worthy of consid- eration for tenure. After tenure, accept out-of-town speaking en- gagements only if travel and boarding costs are covered by the host institution. Of course, such invitations are flattering, but bank- ruptcy isn't fun. 9. Practice applying for grants. Al- though any given research proposal may fail due to factors other than quality - for example, a bias against historical projects, or against li- brary history - someone will even- tually be awarded the grant, and you might be pleasantly surprised. Meanwhile, be prepared to pay for research trips out of pocket: histo- rians often do this kind of crazy thing, even though other academics may scoff at such extravagance. If tax deductions are itemized, re- search expenses can provide a boon at year-end. 10. Most important, whatever and for whomever you write, aim for high quality and muster a maximum of editorial counsel. Writing an article on Southern female librarians for a state historical journal aimed at seventh-grade history students may present a challenge equally as great as that of writing for one of "the big ten" journals. With only one thou- Fall 1995
316 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science sand words to make their point, his- torians need to avoid the litany of multisyllabic expostulations by which academics typically signal their credentials. Imagine trying to explain basic concepts like femini- zation of the library profession in a way that eleven- or twelve-year- olds can understand (no mean chal- lenge) while maintaining the narrative drift of the story. Preach- ing to the unconverted is an exer- cise recommended to all library historians, and the more bizarre the audience, the better. Conclusion: Beyond Victimization To return to the publishing quandary, the efforts of library historians have been underappreciated, perhaps, by the profession at large, and in recent times, by publishers who can no longer afford to subsidize all of our literary efforts merely because they are dense with scholarship. What is being demanded is relevance to the canonical debate, to contemporary social concerns, and to contemporary library and educational problems. Making those connections re- quires creativity and a vision of librari- anship at once ubiquitous and omniscient. Rewriting a completed manuscript to incorporate new theories and broad interdisciplinary perspec- tives may be more daunting than the years of effort devoted to primary re- search, plus the painful catharsis of the first few drafts. Any glance at the bibli- ographies of library history published in the Library History Round Table Newsletter, however, should convince even the most reluctant and hidebound library historian that the parameters of our subdiscipline are being broadened, not only in the pages of such unlikely library publications as the Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Cataloging and Classifica- tion Quarterly, but also by many univer- sity presses, commercial publishers, and journals in the fields of literature, history, publishing, education, social history, and philosophy. Moreover, many writers are published abroad, which presents still other opportunities for library historians to explore "a li- brary [history] without walls." In closing, it is worth mentioning that library historians are not alone in feeling underappreciated in their ef- forts. A recent New Yorker profile de- scribed the plight of award-winning southern novelist James Wilcox ("Mod- ern Baptists"), a writer's writer whose novels have been compared favorably to Faulkner's, although poor sales and publisher's skepticism have kept him in poverty.17 The case of William Kennedy [Ironweed) also inevitably comes to mind. Shall we blame the victim (the writer) for lack of a market, or trust to luck and admit that, like the novelist, some library historians write library history because they have to write li- brary history? Library historians as a group have more often operated by the principle of attraction than by promo- tion. As academics, if they want more respect for their findings within the profession, they may have to renounce library history entirely; if they want to attract a wide range of casual interest, they run the risk of spreading them- selves thin in other fields; if they simply want to make a big splash, let them scout out a homegrown Fawn Brodie, and be prepared for all the unpleasant- ness and adrenaline that controversy entails. If they really want to write li- brary history, however, they will do it however small their audience; they will Volume 36, Number 4
Library History without Walls 3 1 7 routinely trade the price of a summer vacation for a pile of photocopies and a few anecdotes; they will sacrifice cita- tion counts to panache, color, and the telling quote; and they will pay homage to Clio for the privilege of working in the nethersphere where serendipity and science converge. References and Notes 1. "Clio's Decalogue, or The Ten Command- ments of the Muse," a list of editorial cave- ats distributed for years by emeritus southern historian George Brown Tindall of The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill to his students, stems from the "acerbic comments on student papers, usually beginning Thou shalt not . . .' made by historian William Hesseltine of The University of Wisconsin-Madison, and transmitted to Tindall by Hesseltine's master's degree candidate (later Tindall's student), Dan Carter. George Tindall to James V. Carmichael, Jr., March 10, 1992. 2. LeNoir Dimmit, Chief Loan Bureau, Uni- versity of Texas, 1917-51; Vera Snook, Librarian, Little Rock, Arkansas, Public Library, 1926-48; May Fidelia Boudinot, Librarian, John Brown University (Arkan- sas), 1934-53; Mary Utopia Rothrock, Librarian, Lawson McGhee Library, Knoxville, Tennessee Public Library, 1918-34; Director of Library Services, Tennessee Valley Authority, 1934-48; Phineas Winsor, Dean, Library School of the University of Illinois, 1909-40; Delia Foreacre Sneed, Principal, Library School of The Carnegie Library of At- lanta, 1908-15. 3. James V. Carmichael, Jr., "Ahistoricity and the Library Profession: Perceptions of Biographical Researchers in LIS Con- cerning Research Problems, Practices, and Barriers," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Educa- tion 31 (Spring 1991): 329-56. 4. Papers from the Library History Round Table Program of 1992, "The Public Li- brary Inquiry: Reminiscences, Reflec- tions, and Research," were edited by Mary Niles Maack and appeared in Libraries ff Culture 29 ÍWintfir 1QQ4Ì 5. Sydney J. Pierce, "Dead Germans and the Theory of Librarianship," American Li- braries 23 (Sept. 1992): 641-43. 6. Readers may want to compare these re- marks with the earliest essays on the sub- ject: Jesse H. Shera, "On the Value of Library History," The Library Quarterly 22 (July 1952): 240-51; Louis Shores, "Li- brary History Education," The Journal of Library History 3 (Jan. 1968): 3; (October 1968): 291-95; The Journal of Library History 4 (Jan. 1969): 5-8; (Apr. 1969): 103-5; (July 1969): 109-203; (Oct. 1969): 293-95. 7. As an example of the possibilities of read- ing research, see Janice Radway, "Beyond Mary Bailey and Old Maid Librarians," The Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 35 (Fall 1994): 275- 96. To its credit, the Library History Round Table and Libraries fr Culture devoted Library History Seminar VIII to the theme of "Reading & Libraries" to incorporate new historical research on reading. To their shame, directors of the Public Library Association voted down endorsement of the "Billions of Bucks for Books" campaign for young readers in 1993. See "Miller Criticizes PLA for Refusing to Support Billion Books," School Library Journal 39: 11 (May 1993). 8. For example, Schrader's challenging con- tent analysis of definitions of information science, has been almost totally ignored. See Alvin M. Schrader, "Toward a Theory of Library and Information Science" (Ph.D. diss., Indiana University, 1983); and "In Search of a Definition of Library and Information Science," The Cana- dian Journal of Science 9 (June 1984): 59-77. 9. Gerri Flanzraich, "The Library Bureau and Office Technology," Libraries & Cul- ture 28 (Fall 1993): 403-29. 10. This observation is based on participa- tion as an editorial advisory board mem- ber of the Beta Phi Mu Monographic Series (Greenwood), where the author was apprised of recent sales figures. Fall 1995
318 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 11. Joanne E. Passet, Cultural Crusaders: Women Librarians in the American West (Albuquerque: Univ. of New Mexico Pr., 1994). 12. As a sampler of the editorial barrage which began with the publication of members of American Library Associa- tion's Gay and Lesbian Task Force march- ing in the 1992 San Francisco Gay Day Parade on the cover of American Librar- ies 23 (July/Aug. 1992), see "More on Gay Coverage" (Reader's Forum column) American Libraries 23 (Oct. 1992): 738; "Gay Rights Is A Professional Is- sue, "(Letter), American Libraries 24 (Sept. 1993): 700; and most of the Reader's Forum columns encapsulated by the time span represented by these issues. Many address the broader themes of social responsibilities as they relate to libraries and librarians. 13. Blaise Cronin, "Shibboleth and Sub- stance in North American Library and Information Science Education," Libri 45 (Mar. 1995): 45-63. (Keynote presenta- tion at the conference of The Association for Library and Information Science Edu- cation, Februarvl, 1995.) 14. Barbara M. Melosh, "The Physician's Hand:" Work Culture and Conflict in American Nursing (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1982); "Sentimental Women Need Not Apply": A History of the American Nurse, produced and di- rected by Diane Garey and Lawrence R. Holt, 60 min. (Direct Cinema, 1988). Videocassette. The film first aired on PBS. 15. Joanne E. Passet, "Entering the Profes- sions: Women Library Educators and the Placing of Female Students, 1887-1912," History of Education Quarterly 31 ÍSummer 1991Ì: 207-28. 16. R. Kathleen Molz, "The Public Library Inquiry as Public Policy Research," Libraries & Culture 29 (Winter 1994): 61-74. 17. James B. Stewart, "Moby Dick in Manhat- tan," The New Yorker, June 27/July 4, 1994, 46-66. Volume 36, Number 4