Introduction How might information literacy (IL) be animated by new approaches to literacy theory to make concerns about equity its point of origin and the production of equity its central function? What begins as a broad question of the theoretical underpinnings of finding, evaluating, and using information intensifies when placed at the junction of community college students and higher education, since this intersection is harrowing, indeed—as fraught with obstacles to accessing further higher education as are paths to accessing information, a more traditional librarian concern, with technological, political, and economic barriers. Students in community colleges need libraries in which the theory undergirding information finding, evaluating, and using addresses what Jenny Cook‐Gumperz has called the central “problem of distribution of opportunity” [1, p. 42]. Given the abysmal rate of community college students transferring to four‐year institutions, a flawed but useful measure of equity [2, 3], nothing less than this radical endeavor seems worthy of attention. To be more precise, although the specifics of information literacy (IL) are of vital importance, without a framework concerned with improving equity, the specifics do not seem consequential enough to realize any sort of substantial result. In other words, community college instructional librarians spend a great deal of time analyzing how to teach the use of a catalog, how to maneuver through a database, or how to find credible Web sites [4]; these inquiries, while essential for all students, might lead to more equity for community college students by widening the scope of IL. For example, the specifics of an information interaction—a young Latina and a community college librarian using a database to find an article on César Chávez for a reading class—can be understood most completely by asking the following: What theoretical inquiries must we undertake to see what is going on here? And, in what ways does a librarian’s theory of IL enable or disable this young women’s ability to get information on Chávez (retrieve it), “get” this information (understand and evaluate it), and get from (use) her finding and evaluating of it something that will get her capital (equity)—meaning, meaning‐making practice, a well‐chosen quote, a reference to a piece of scholarship with high capital, an elegant research paper, an A in the class, a ticket to further higher education? In summary, the questions that urgently need answering concerning the role of community college libraries in what students do and don’t do, know and don’t know, and feel and don’t feel about information might yield more fruitful answers if they issue from a focus on equity and a resistance to inequity. In this article, I first identify conceptual advances in literacy theory that have contributed to vitalized theories of IL, theories that might lead to more equitable educational outcomes for community college students. Following this, the concept of equity, specifically as it applies to community college students, will be discussed. I then describe Jean‐Luc Nancy’s framework of globalisation and mondialisation [5] and apply it to moments in ancient librarianship history with the hope that librarians who are critically aware of their vocation’s history will be better positioned to think expansively about IL. In order to better understand how community college students’ equity might be furthered, I intersperse among these historical examples some reconceptualizations of IL that have the potential to contribute to the production of equity, particularly for community college students. Information Literacy, Conceptual Advances in Literacy, and Equity Information literacy, a topic of immense consequence over the past decade in academic libraries, has been discussed, defined, and debated by LIS scholars in over 5,000 articles since the term was coined in 1974 [6]. Why has IL gained such momentum? As librarians have become more and more interested in instruction over the past thirty years, their interest in IL has grown [6–9]. Understood as a product of the confluence of change in technology, in the ways in which college students interact with information, in society’s perception of the nature of knowledge, and in the way librarians view their role in higher education, definitions of IL tend to include three elements: “resource‐based learning, critical thinking, and life‐long learning” [8, p. 423]. Taking into account that one of the main reasons for IL’s rise to prominence is that librarianship has felt a strong need to proclaim its relevance, it is not surprising that in the literature of librarianship, IL has often run the risk of being understood as a silver bullet, as a monolithic and generic set of skills that transforms students [10]. At times it seems to promise too much—to be the key to lifelong learning, the antidote to humanity’s all too human record of hoodwinking itself politically and economically, and the conduit for social justice [11]. Yet many applications of IL seem quite limited. Community college librarians spend vast amounts of their instructional time devoted to the mechanical aspects of IL, teaching students how, for example, to cite their sources in correct MLA, APA, or Chicago style. But if information literacy as it is currently understood is lacking in a number of ways both theoretically and practically, then how might community college librarians refocus their attention toward addressing issues of equity for their students? How might community college librarians, who frequently claim interest in producing more equitable results for their students, theorize IL more effectively? To better understand how new theoretical perspectives on literacy might link IL to equity in community college libraries, a precise description is needed of what these perspectives entail as well as what is meant by equity. Brian Street has identified several contested, complex, and interrelated approaches to literacy that have emerged since the 1980s in response to an earlier, less fruitful understanding of literacy [12]. This older view was “a reified autonomous notion” of literacy “which had a big ‘L’ and a little ‘y’” (12, p. 370). Novel perspectives on literacy that have led LIS researchers to think anew about IL include • Emphasis on explicit instruction of how specific discourses are constructed • Critical literacy, which foregrounds “social change, cultural diversity, economic equity, and political enfranchisement’’ [13, p. 1]2 • A sociocultural understanding of meaning as socially created • Student engagement in the research process early in the semester • New conceptualizations of the nature of reading • An approach to IL as a practice rather than as a set of skills • Foregrounding of the role of power in thinking about literacy • A broadening of IL to encompass insights from workplace information literacy What do these approaches have in common? When applied to IL, these conceptual advances in literacy seek to produce, directly or indirectly and with varying degrees of explicitness, an understanding of literacy that is more and more equity centric. These equity‐centric perspectives on literacy have been employed by researchers of IL in invigorating ways that will be explored throughout this article. Although all college students profit from IL that is infused with characteristics of these new ways of conceptualizing literacy, community college students, who are, on average, least likely to succeed in higher education [15], especially need IL that is vitalizing and that leads toward equity. But what is meant by equity? The first step in linking such a view of IL and equity is to delineate which area of equity, with its vast theoretical, economic, and political implications, instructional librarians in community college are positioned to address. In defining equity specifically in the context of community college students, it is important to differentiate between, on the one hand, educational equity as it is framed in community college research and, on the other hand, librarianship’s long history of research on information equity, which has examined such topics as the “information rich and the information poor,” “the knowledge gap,” and “the digital divide.”3 This article will focus on educational equity for community college students, which is often measured by looking at the extent to which students’ persist in enrolling semester after semester, transfer rates of community college students to four‐year institutions, and degree or program completion rates. These dependent variables are usually analyzed in terms of such independent variables as advising, remediation, social and academic integration, transfer support, and financial aid [18]. One promising line of research on educational equity in community colleges has contrasted equity with the related concepts of diversity and inclusion [19]. In this approach, equity is gauged by comparing the outcomes of a target group, students in community colleges desiring a baccalaureate, for example, to an appropriate reference population, such as all students who obtain a bachelor’s degree [20]. This framework then shifts the emphasis from individual students as the unit of analysis and, instead, asks what role the community college faculty, staff, administrators, and institutional structure play in creating inequitable outcomes. This shift in focus is also evident in the research of Jim Cummins, who offers a theoretical framework stressing educators’ “personal redefinitions” as one antidote to the repeated failure of educational reform for minority K–12 students [21], many of whom eventually attend community college. He asserts that truly equitable educational reform requires “personal redefinitions of the way classroom teachers interact” with their students and surrounding communities [21, p. 649]. While insisting that political approaches to equity are necessary, Cummins insists that “implementation of change is dependent upon the extent to which educators, both collectively and individually, redefine their roles with respect to minority students and communities” [21, p. 649]. As minority students are much more likely to enter higher education through community college than by going directly to four‐year institutions, [22, 18], any attempt to further equitable outcomes in higher education for them must carefully examine the affordances and obstacles that community college libraries offer in the educational pipeline. But equity in community college libraries is not simply about improving educational outcomes for students of color. Community college students as a group are more likely than other students in higher education to be from all other historically underserved segments of the population—the first generation in their family to attend college, low‐income students, English language learners, newcomers to the United States, and students with physical and cognitive disabilities [22, 18]. Michal Kurlaender describes community colleges as “important vehicles for moderating inequalities in educational attainment because they offer noncompetitive access to higher education to socially, financially, and academically disadvantaged students who otherwise would not be able to enroll in college” [15, p. 7]. Discussions of educational equity by community college researchers have never explored the role of the library. Similarly, a thorough search of LIS literature on educational equity and community college IL instruction retrieved no results. The goal of this article is to begin to bridge this gap by identifying ways in which IL, infused by conceptual advances in literacy, while important for all students, is crucial for furthering community college students’ educational opportunities—in other words, for opening up channels for community college students’ equity. All librarians profit from considering the transformative aspects of their work, but community college librarians in particular, who tend to serve historically underserved students, might consider new ways of thinking about IL that contribute to more equitable educational outcomes for their students. Naive assumptions that a reimagined theorizing of IL is somehow sufficient to produce educational equity for community college students are less than helpful—approaches to lessening educational inequity that overlook political and economic factors at macro levels could result in less equitable outcomes. For example, misplaced hope that equity is achieved simply by reenvisioning community college students as producers rather than as consumers of information could potentially hinder students’ equity by distracting attention from community college libraries’ chronic issues of understaffing and underfunding. However, while acknowledging that complex, interrelated, and stubborn social, political, and economic factors, most of which are beyond the control of librarians, contribute to inequitable educational outcomes for community college students, librarians can exploit their limited but potentially pivotal role in furthering their students’ equity by reconceptualizing IL. Linking educational equity for community college students to IL theory requires a study of “power at its extremities, where it becomes capillary” [23, p. 96]. Where “power … becomes capillary” is a fitting description of a community college library in which the decisions of those holding economic and political power are transformed into resources and policies for students whose families have generally been on the short end of the bibliographic stick for generations. Likewise, here at this capillary level is where librarians are positioned to transform new theories about literacy into IL that creates equity. Institutional capillaries are ideal for studying these transformations of power into policy and theory into equity, but how are we to understand either of these processes when they both are so microscopic and diffuse? A useful starting point involves placing IL in historical context. Christine Pawley encourages such a historical analysis of IL, asserting that “even an innovative professional practice carries with it the marks of its inheritance—its genetic imprint—although the implication of these characteristics may be poorly recognized” [8, p. 425]. Examining early moments in librarianship at a capillary scale—considering ancient libraries’ catalogs, for example—may help to explain how students’ education equity is hindered in community college libraries. Such a historically expansive examination at such a minute level requires a powerful conceptual framework. 2.  For an overview of the impact of critical literacy theory on information literacy, including discussion of Paolo Freire, see James Elmborg [7]. Heidi Jacobs [14] also offers helpful suggestions for using Freireian approaches to thinking about theory undergirding information literacy. 3.  The very long history of research on equity in librarianship has tended to focus on information equity, which Leah Lievrouw and Sharon Farb define as “the fair or reasonable distribution of information among individuals, groups, regions, categories, or other social units, such that those people have the opportunity to achieve whatever is important or meaningful to them in their lives” [16, p. 503]. Readers wishing to gain an understanding of this line of research will find their review very useful [16]. Research done before the 1990s is more thoroughly reviewed by Ronald Doctor [17]. Jean‐Luc Nancy’s “Globalisation” and “Mondialisation” and the Catalog of Nippur Jean‐Luc Nancy, in describing two contrasting directions in which history might be currently unfolding—globalisation (globalization), which he sees as the death of the world—and mondialisation (world forming), which involves “the creation of the world” [5, p. 29], offers an enormously generative theoretical framework within which to consider the tension inherent in IL between the librarian’s aspiration to aid in finding, evaluating, and using information (mondialisation) and the librarian’s desire to suppress this impulse by declaring certain knowledge as off‐limits (globalisation). A radical theorizing of IL requires contextualizing it in this dynamic tension between library as an aid to accessing information (mondialisation) and library as a barrier to access (globalisation). Catalogs and indexes, the same tools for using the library, for gaining access, for facilitating circulation of materials, for the consumption of information, are also the marks of certification and of authority, literally the list of holdings. Jacques Derrida explains this authority through etymology [24]. In tracing archive to arkheion, a house in which superior magistrates, archons, both guarded and interpreted official documents, Derrida sees the archive as a place of patriarchal guardianship and “hermeneutic authority” [24, p. 3]. According to Nancy’s framework, globalisation results in a homogenized and unjust world, where hermeneutic authority is oppressive and total—a world in which librarians see their role primarily as guarding and vetting information. Mondialisation, on the other hand, would require librarians to redefine their primary task as contributing to the creation of an equitable world by conceptualizing information as something that is created and to undertake this personal redefinition with a sense of urgency: “To create the world means: immediately, without delay, reopening each possible struggle for a world, that is, for what must form the contrary of a global injustice against the background of general equivalence” [5, p. 54]. Just as Jacques Derrida’s linguistic excavation of the word archive “reopens” our understanding of hermeneutic authority, so might an attempt to link Nancy’s framework to archeologists’ physical excavations of ancient libraries open possible ways of conceptualizing IL. Excavation of the earliest known library, near Nippur in southern Mesopotamia, unearthed what might be thought of as IL’s founding text: a rudimentary catalog. Consisting of two tablets, “dating to around 2000 B.C., both inscribed with a list of Sumerian works of literature—various myths, hymns, laments” [25, p. 4], how does this catalog, etched in clay, offer us insights into the ways freshman and sophomore college students interact with information? The catalog of Nippur offers at least two understandings simultaneously: first, it is evidence that, at the moment that collections grew too large for easy access through browsing, a retrieval tool—an aid to access—was invented, even if the tool was a simple list. It is, in the jargon of librarianship, the first known finding aid, and aids for finding are, indirectly, aids for using, for creating, for participating in the discourse, ultimately for the furtherance of democratic processes, for mondialisation. Second, the catalog signifies hindrance, the library’s authority, priestly authority, and, to the extent that it is interpreted as objectified, total and unified knowledge, a tool of globalisation. The catalog is an inventory of the library’s holdings, thereby a description of the sanctioned knowledge—literally sanctioned, if one considers that many of the ancient libraries were physically connected to sanctuaries [25]. As both an aid for using and for the production of knowledge, on the one hand, and, on the other hand, as an aid for keeping, for keeping order (in library terms, bibliographic control) and for demarcating certified knowledge, the tablets of Nippur indicate librarianship’s central contradictions: sharing and holding; aiding and hindering; furthering research and, by designating certain information as privileged, obstructing it. Information literacy has conventionally been theorized to explain catalogs, indexes, tables of contents, and database search boxes, the descendants of the Nippur catalog, as aids for finding and using information, but how would theory about IL change, and how would community college students’ educational equity be furthered, if the tablets were acknowledged by librarians—and explicitly presented to students—also as tools for keeping: keeping from, keeping separate, keeping safe, keeping the status quo? Rather than trying to overcome this tension, Pawley wisely describes the tension as being “between conflicting ideals of, on the one hand, a promethean vision of citizen empowerment and democracy, and on the other, a desire to control ‘quality’ of information that has the potential to result in—albeit unintended—procrustean consequences” [8, p. 425].4 Advocating “understanding it and laying it open for inspection and discussion,” Pawley also embraces this tension as “creative and helpful” and asserts that “we can achieve and maintain a balance between constraint and liberality that will promote the most emancipating—promethean—institutional and professional practices of IL” [8, pp. 425–26]. How might this tension, apparently as old as libraries themselves, be further theorized? Nancy’s philosophy needs further exploration. It is important to emphasize that an application of Nancy’s mondialisation to IL would not result in a kind of riotous information free‐for‐all, a resolution of the dissonance inherent in librarianship between encouraging discovery and encouraging discernment. Rather, following Pawley’s advocacy for an acceptance of the tension as fruitful, mondialisation would be operationalized as theory supporting IL that fosters careful yet adventurous sense making. At first, this stance may seem excessively and unproductively conservative; it is tempting to align mondialisation with absolutely free information interaction. However, just as I associate Nancy’s globalisation with unjust discrimination and not with astute discernment, I also align mondialisation with judicious freedom in research, avoiding the theorizing of IL that would teach students to see information as undifferentiated. Unpacking Nancy’s densely constructed argument will help to explain why an acceptance of librarianship’s ancient contradiction is congruent with both Nancy’s philosophy and with equity‐centered IL theory. Central to both the misery caused by globalisation and the justice produced by mondialisation are contrasting understandings of meaning. Nancy’s globalisation is associated with a globe in space, with “totality as a whole” [5, p. 27], and with an unjust global network of agglomeration—unrelenting conglomeration mixed with accumulation resulting in wealth for a few and misery for more and more [5, p. 33]. As such, globalisation does not allow for meaning making. It is “an earth without a sky” [5, p. 47], that is, an objectified orb without a horizon that would provide a reference point for meaning making. Such a globe leads to progressive “enclosure in the undifferentiated sphere of a unitotality” [5, p. 28], similar to Michel de Certeau’s depiction of an existence in which the reader is a sheep, “progressively immobilized” and “handled” [26, p. 166]. Such a “confinement” and “reduction,” which de Certeau declares “unacceptable” [26, pp. 165–66], results in what Nancy calls an “un‐world” [5, p. 34]. In contrast, mondialisation involves a world, such as “Debussy’s world” or “the hospital world” [5, p. 41]. As opposed to globalisation’s objective “totality as a whole,” mondialisation is “a totality of meaning” that involves a value system constituted of knowledge, affectivity, and participation [5, p. 41]. Sharing, an important component of Nancy’s philosophy, is how one participates in such a world. For Nancy, sharing in a world’s “value system” or “meaningful content” means “apprehending its codes and texts, precisely when their reference points, signs, codes, and texts are neither explicit nor exposed as such” [5, p. 41]. Who better to facilitate sharing, who better to explicate and expose codes and texts than librarians, the vocational descendants of the priestly cataloger of Nippur, who acquired, classified, and sanctified the very first collection? This is a crucial point in developing a philosophical basis for an IL theory that emanates from a concern for equity while honoring the ancient role of the librarian as “keeper.” No longer wishing to wear the mantle of arbiter but hesitant to throw away such a long venerated cloth, the librarian committed to equity shares the mantle by turning it inside out, explicitly encouraging students to inspect the seams, to examine critically the ways in which information is constructed. 4.  Pawley explains her intriguing two mythological allusions, which resonate powerfully with mondialisation and globalisation, in a helpful footnote: “In the Greek myth, Prometheus, son of a titan, takes pity on humans and gives them fire. He thus empowers them to improve their lives by stimulating their creativity and enabling the development of the arts and sciences. Procrustes, on the other hand, is a robber who waylays travelers and forces them to lie on a terrible iron bed. If they are too short to fit the bed exactly, he stretches his victims. If they are too long he chops off their legs. Either way, death is the result” [8, p. 425]. Explicit and Critical Information Literacy for Creating Information This shift in the role of librarian toward facilitating an explicit and critical examination of information is of particular importance in community colleges. Often the first generation in their families to attend higher education and frequently coming from poorly funded K–12 schools in which they have been underprepared for higher education, community college students especially would profit from librarians who see in themselves some of the metaphors suggested by Allan Luke and Cushla Kapitzke: “critical commentators, mediators, … mentors, … nomadic intellectuals and cultural tourists” [27, p. 472]. Mentored to think about information critically, such students would be more likely to interact with information in strategic ways than if they received instruction from librarians who viewed themselves as bibliographic custodians. Librarians who view their job as monitors of information and who prize the conventional LIS framework of efficiency and effectiveness are probably the least likely mentors for promoting the idea that knowledge is constructed, an idea that is both crucial to Nancy’s thoroughly constructivist concept of mondialisation and essential to the intellectual development of all college students. Because students often arrive at a community college underprepared, they are both especially disinclined to see themselves as capable of constructing knowledge and especially prone to see knowledge as “existing as a thing‐in‐itself, independent of mediation and interpretation” [27, p. 484]. Community college librarians need to offer underprepared students’ IL embued with expectations that research is about what Radford calls “the individual’s attempt to locate his knowledge claims within an existing order of knowledge claims” [28, p. 485]. Such an approach to IL—an approach that authorizes students to create meaning, to construct an argument, to stake claims, and to question others’ claims—is often full of inefficiency, doubts, intellectual circling, and confusion. It is surely more efficient for both librarian and student to see knowledge as something that can be tracked down and captured, as Luke and Kapitzke have described [27, p. 484], but it is a kind of efficiency that community college librarians especially need to reject. Literacy theorists Glynda Hull and Mike Rose long ago pointed out the debilitating effects of overrating efficiency when facilitating underprepared college students’ advancement toward college‐level English courses [29]. They offer a reminder that is especially pertinent to community college librarians: “hesitance and uncertainty—as we all know from our own intellectual struggles—are central to knowledge‐making” [29, p. 9]. As important as it is for librarians to reconsider the value they place on efficiency, it is equally important to rethink the chronological configuration of the research process and to reimagine the nature of reading as an act of discovery and creation. Early engagement of students in the research process and regarding students as creators of knowledge from the moment that they begin research are two characteristics of a reconceptualized IL especially appropriate for community college libraries. Creation is conventionally conceived as happening only during the third act, the “using” act of a three‐act information literacy drama, which involves a first act of “finding” and a second act of “evaluating.” De Certeau [26] complicates this magnificently! De Certeau asserts that even in the act of reading, the middle act of evaluation, students are foreshadowing the third act of using, producing “gardens that miniaturize and collate a world” [26, p. 173]. Not when quoting, not when paraphrasing, not when synthesizing during the writing phase, but in the very act of reading, according to de Certeau, the reader hearkens back to the first “finding” act, like “Robinson Crusoe discovering an island” [26, p. 173] and simultaneously prefigures the third “using” act by producing gardens, “constitut[ing] a secret scene” [26, p. 173]. De Certeau’s potent vision of the reader is especially useful for community college librarians, who work with students having, in many cases, limited facility in reading. To pretend that de Certeau’s reenvisioning of the nature of reading could somehow erase the fact that a significant number of community college students lack basic reading skills is fruitless. However, de Certeau offers librarians an alternative image of reading—a vantage that emphasizes readers’ capacities rather than their shortcomings. Information literacy founded on de Certeau’s conceptualization of reading and on Nancy’s sense of urgency—“immediately, without delay”—would attempt to engage community college students as early as possible in meaning making. A community college library in which all phases of research were regarded as creative acts could contribute to equity. When distributed throughout the research process, the act of creating might lead students to see their roles as creators, librarians interpreting their jobs as mentors of creators, and IL pedagogy that would be more like a glass‐blowing class, combining technique, aesthetics, risk, demonstration, and practice, and less like a workshop on Microsoft Excel. These effects would tend to increase academic and social integration, important components of college success for all students [29] but of crucial importance to students in community colleges because of the central role such integration plays in learning, persistence, and, ultimately, in their transfer to four‐year institutions. Many community college students drop out early in the semester before they have established a sense of belonging to the college. Hull and Rose argue that “the real stuff of belonging to an academic community is dynamic involvement in generating and questioning knowledge” [28, p. 297]. Community college librarians who base their IL theory on Nancy’s urgency to create early in the students’ experience and on de Certeau’s view of reading itself as an act of creation might contribute to improving students’ retention rates by structuring their pedagogy in ways that bind students to the college early in the term. How could a community college library support students in viewing information critically and seeing themselves as authorities capable of creating knowledge? How could librarians in community colleges translate into practice what Pawley describes as “envisioning information use as a process that involves all users in both consumption and production” [8, p. 422]? Mining the pedagogical ore of these questions, Michelle Holschuh Simmons advocates creating alliances among student, discipline‐specific instructor, and librarian, with the librarian acting as a “discipline discourse mediator” who makes explicit the tacit ways in which information in a particular discipline is constructed [30, p. 297]. She celebrates historical instances of discipline‐specific work in librarianship including the work done in the mid‐twentieth century by specialist librarians who created extensive bibliographies in their particular area of expertise. This work of creating bibliographies, although among the most traditional tasks of the librarian, could exemplify the best practices of a theorizing of IL that is truly equity centric. If students were apprenticed in compiling bibliographies with discernment; if they were encouraged to seek information in all kinds of formats; if they were taught to annotate them critically; if they were, through publishing the bibliographies online, afforded opportunities to give and receive commentary on their choices and annotations; and, if the bibliographies were regarded as valuable works of creation, useful for the whole local community of scholars, then these bibliographies could truly contribute to an IL pedagogy radiating from equity. This approach might contribute to more equitable educational outcomes for community college students by moving students toward a role of authority and by moving librarians away from the idea that IL is a set of skills. Creating an annotated bibliography that critically examines how specific disciplines’ discourses are constructed is a complex process—calling for exactly the kinds of qualities Diane Zabel recommends in excellent IL instruction: “integrated, relevant, ongoing, collaborative, and applied” [31, p. 20]. Community college students, some of whom have spent years in skills‐oriented classrooms only to test into more skill building in basic reading, writing, and math courses on arrival at college, are especially in need of meaningful, integrated educational endeavors and of IL that involves, to use Annemaree Lloyd’s terms from her study of workplace information literacy, a “simultaneous and interrelated process which enacts the individual into the discourse of the context” [32, p. 85]. Contributions toward educational equity might be possible in any academic library where librarians see their job as creating pedagogy for students in the discourses of, for example, English, history, biology, and political science. Community college librarians would especially profit from thinking in terms of IL for discipline‐specific discourses, since their libraries serve both transfer students and vocational education students in such disciplines as radiological technology, fashion design, and nursing. Next, returning to an examination of examples from ancient libraries will show that community college librarians need to conceptualize IL in ways that call into question issues of authority and that make explicit the tension in librarianship between aiding and hindering access to information. The Hattusas Catalog, Hostile Encounters, and Disqualified Knowledge The long tradition of privileging librarians as experts and information from libraries as reliable, a tradition to this day apparent at every level of education, can be seen in another ancient catalog, found in a library in the Hittite capital of Hattusas, south of present‐day Ankara [25]. More elaborate than the two tablets found at Nippur, the Hattusas catalog includes helpful bibliographic details: “Any priest who needed a ritual for a given problem, instead of picking up tablet after tablet … had only to run eye over the entries in the catalogues. It was a limited tool: the order of the entries is more or less haphazard (alphabetization, for example, lay over a millennium and a half in the future) and they give no indication of location” [25, p. 7]. The catalog may have been, as Lionel Casson calls it, “a limited tool” with limited possibilities for enlarging the ability of a limited subset of the population—priests—to gain access to the discourse at hand (performing rituals), but it is, nonetheless, an early example of how the practices involving IL are situated within tension. This tension springs from the ability of the IL apparatus both explicitly to connect priest with ritual and its ability implicitly to identify accepted rituals acquired by authorized experts. Like modern‐day library catalogs, which save students the time and trouble of searching through endless texts to find an academic “ritual” for an academic “given problem,” the Hattusas catalog should be understood, without question, as being very helpful for finding and using information. However, the unspoken effect of the catalog, that of privileging information within it, whether for a Hittite priest or a community college student, must be acknowledged as well. All too often students’ first visit as undergraduates to an academic library includes messages about the superiority of peer‐reviewed articles, a certain disdain on the part of their professors for encyclopedias, the extremely dubious quality of the free Internet as opposed to the proprietary databases to which the library subscribes, and the absolute unworthiness of Wikipedia, even, with some professors, as a starting point. The message given to college students must be similar to that given to the priests of Nippur and Hattusas—here are kept the rituals, here, etched into these tablets, are the sources of information that you can trust. Michel Foucault seems to name this conflict between librarian and user when he speaks of “the memory of hostile encounters which even up to this day have been confined to the margins of knowledge” [23, p. 83]. It is easy to observe these “hostile encounters” in warnings found on clay tablets from the palace of Ashurbanipal in Nineveh: “Your lordship is without equal, Ashur, King of the Gods! Whoever removes [this tablet], writes his name in place of my name, may Ashur and Ninlil, angered and grim, cast him down, erase his name, his seed, in the land” [25, p. 12]. We recognize present‐day manifestations of these hostile memories. Among these are the obvious instantiations: “access denied” messages for students lacking the proper password for certain databases, denial of privileges for students who either do not belong to a library’s mother learning institution or have fines or other blocks on their borrowing privileges, MySpace and other “disqualified knowledges” filtered out by some campuses, and the simple but dramatic inequity of Internet access. However, the “memory of hostile encounters” central to this article’s thesis, embedded in the discourse of IL potently, pervasively, and yet almost invisibly, constitutes a major element in librarianship’s habitus: certain pieces of information are authorized; certain texts are declared the property of the “King of the Gods,” thereby excluding the rest. Foucault’s questions, directed to the very heart of IL theory, of scholarly discourse, and of librarianship, ask: “What types of knowledge do you want to disqualify in the very instant of your demand: ‘Is it a science?' Which speaking, discoursing subjects—which subjects of experience and knowledge—do you then want to ‘diminish’ when you say: ‘I who conduct this discourse am conducting a scientific discourse, and I am a scientist’?” [23, p. 85]. This disqualification of certain kinds of information, while detrimental to all college students, is particularly debilitating to community college students, who frequently arrive at college underprepared to engage in scholarly discourse but who often have had all sorts of other powerful information literacy experiences—as immigrants persistently negotiating a maze of community resources, as consumers shrewdly maneuvering through complex networks to procure affordable services and goods, as employees tenaciously seeking work and evaluating conflicting sources of information to get ahead economically, and as individuals whose “critical consciousness as members of oppressed groups is finely honed and who may not be predisposed to display the competence they possess” [33, p. 291]. Such students’ success in community college depends partly on learning about IL in ways that respect the rich knowledge they bring with them from these experiences. Paralleling the interest among literacy theorists in literacy beyond the walls of the school [33], IL outside of the educational context has been identified by Lloyd, who studied IL among firefighters, as a way to trouble the waters of IL discourse and vitalize its theoretical possibilities [32]. Lloyd argues for expanding our notions of information literacy by examining workplace information literacy, which “allows other voices and other ways of knowing to be heard and represented” [32, p. 84]. While beneficial for all students, Lloyd’s argument is especially important when conceptualizing IL for community college students, many of whom work long hours to support themselves and, in some cases, their families. Including workforce information literacy in thinking about IL also foregrounds the interplay of information with other nonacademic pursuits, what Lloyd calls “the multiple realities of everyday life” [32, p. 84]. Multiple realities are precisely what many community college students experience. Deeply engaged in work, family, and social activities, community college students are less likely than students at four‐year institutions to identity primarily as college students. These multiple realities and identities make community college libraries an especially appropriate space for an expansive conceptualization of IL. Toward an Equity‐Centric Information Literacy This article has attempted to show that, for several reasons, community college libraries are ideal places from which to translate advanced concepts about literacy into equity‐centric IL. First, approaches to literacy that make explicit the ways in which specific disciplines’ discourses are constructed have led IL researchers to conceive of librarians as “discipline discourse mediators”—insider‐outsider librarians who can improve students’ chances of educational success by teaching them how communication in their particular discipline is carried out [30, p. 299]. Community college students, many of whom belong to family or social networks in which such explication is rare and whose previous education has not prepared them to analyze the specifics of discourses, would especially profit from librarians who reveal the rhetorical patterns of specific disciplines in constructing information. Next, critical literacy theorists, with their explicit emphasis on addressing issues involving inequity, have influenced the foregrounding of epistemological issues in IL, such as the inherently political nature of information. Critical IL is of special importance to community college students, many of whom have the most to gain from penetrating interpretations of information, given their generally marginalized political and economical status. Third, theories that use a sociocultural framework to view literacy as a practice rather than as a set of skills have aided LIS researchers in conceiving of IL as a fundamentally complex and creative enterprise. This widening of IL’s theoretical scope contributes to students’ educational equity by asserting their capacity as authorities and as creators of information. Fourth, studies of power and of its implications in the workings of literacy offer community college librarians ways to examine critically their own IL instruction. This critical stance might help librarians to consider how their pedagogy leads to them to disqualify subtly but potently certain kinds of knowledge—the very kinds of knowledge possessed by the students whose equity they are trying to further. And, finally, just as literacy researchers whose studies of literacy practices outside of school have resulted in more nuanced understandings of both the nature of literacy and of how to honor literacy resources that students bring to school, LIS researchers have used workplace information literacy to expand notions of IL in academic settings. These more expansive ways of viewing IL could be translated into better educational outcomes in any academic library, but in a library serving community college students, whose identities are generally more closely tied to work than students in four‐year institutions, such broad theorizing of IL is especially necessary for contributing to educational equity. All librarians might profit from considering how educational equity could be furthered by thinking about their vocation as lodged within an ancient tension between furthering access to information, mondialisation, and blocking access to it, globalisation, but such contemplation is especially pertinent for community college librarians, whose students are, in general, the most vulnerable in terms of the ill effects of undertheorized IL. To the extent that a community college student’s relationship to knowledge shifts from passive recipient, whose task is to find, evaluate, and use knowledge, to active producer of knowledge, whose enterprise is to create meaning, equity will tend to be produced. When students view themselves as agents—as creators of information—no longer do they see their papers as compilations of pieces of “Truth” retrieved, evaluated, and used but rather as created works written with the authority that flows from understanding information’s political, social, and economic dimensions. This, also, might lead toward educational equity because such a project, if students enthusiastically participated in it, might produce the crucial effects of academic and social integration into the culture of the community college. What is at stake in how community college librarians theorize IL? Perhaps the question should be posed to the many students who enter community college with the goal of eventually earning a baccalaureate degree. According to statistical analysis by Mariana Alfonso: “By enrolling at a community college, instead of at a 4‐year institution, students see their probability of attaining a bachelor’s degree reduced by a range between 21 and 33 percent” [34, p. 893].5 If librarians meditate on this vision of injustice, then it becomes apparent that nothing less than equity is at stake when we consider IL theory. Such an urgent stance toward IL is endorsed by Derrida’s attempt to connect archives, justice, and “hope in the future” [24, p. 74]: “I have … tried to situate justice … in the direction of the act of memory, of resistance to forgetting” [24, p. 76]. Nancy argues that “the only task of justice is thus to create a world tirelessly, the space of an unappeasable and always unsettled sovereignty of meaning” [5, p. 112]. Perhaps community college libraries are particularly appropriate places to translate Nancy’s framework into practices that would contribute to more equitable outcomes for community college students. This possibility would be difficult to measure for a number of reasons, including the need for precise ways to gauge educational equity, the difficulties researchers generally encounter in tracking community college students after they graduate or transfer, and the many confounding variables that might obscure the effects of an approach to IL that claims to be equity centric. These issues might provide avenues for further research. 5.  Alfonso’s analysis controlled for a number of important factors, including “lower socioeconomic status, academic preparation, and educational expectations of community college students” [34, p. 894].