GERMAN WORKING-CLASS READING AND THE RISE OF NAZIISM HEINZ SCHURER IN I939, just before the outbreak of World War II, Dr. Erich Thier, di- rector of the Leipzig library school (Deutsche Volksbiichereischule), pub- lished a study of the reading habits of the workers of Leipzig, using for the most part data from the period of the demo- cratic Weimar Republic (i9i8-33).' The study was published at a time when Hit- ler's dictatorship over Germany seemed to be firmly established; the whole book is written in an enthusiastic Nazi spirit, and the author characteristically goes out of his way to preface it with a quota- tion from a speech by Hitler. Naturally, the question arises as to whether a book written in Nazi Germany at such a time and under such conditions deserves any serious notice at all or whether it should be dismissed as mere Nazi propaganda. Careful study of the work, however, leads to the conclusion that its contents should be of interest to librarians and to sociologists, and it is hoped that the pres- ent discussion of Thier's material may stimulate further and more ambitious re- search along the same lines. Thier's book is based on the analysis of documentary evidence collected in the Leipzig public libraries, where a method of making such investigations had been developed by one of the foremost figures of German librarianship, Walter Hof- mann. Under Hofmann's guidance the Leipzig public libraries had become model institutions of their kind, of which the community was immensely-and rightly-proud and which were much studied and admired all over Germany. Among the special features of the library technique developed in Leipzig was a method of issuing books to readers which made it possible to study the reading habits of individual readers or groups of readers over long periods. A Leseheft ("reading record") was issued to every user of the library. Details of the reader's occupation and age were noted on each Leseheft, and a record was kept on it of all books withdrawn by him. These Lesehefte, when collected, furnished a basis for detailed investigations of read- ing habits. The pioneer work of this kind was carried out by Walter Hofmann him- self, in his remarkable analysis of the reading of women.2 Thier's study is a suc- cessor volume to Hofmann's pioneer achievement. Naturally, an analysis from the pen of an ardent Nazi librarian of the reading of working-class readers during the period preceding the establishment of the Hit- ler regime presents problems of a very special kind, and this perforce leads us to a political digression. While the tradi- tional influence of socialist and Marxist ideology on the German working class is a matter of common knowledge-at this very moment we are witnessing the re- vival of the socialist and Marxist work- ing-class movement in Germany after the downfall of Hitler-the special position of Leipzig in the history of the German labor movement is not so well known. Throughout its history the Leipzig x Gestaltwandel des Arbeiters im Spiegel seiner Lektiire: Ein Beitrag zur Volkskunde und Leserfi/hrung ("Beitrage zur Volksbiichereikunde," hrsg. von der Reichsstelle fur das Volksbiichereiwesen, Bd. I [Leipzig: Otto Harrassowitz, '9391). 2 Die Lektiire der Frau (Leipzig, 193I). 201
202 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY working class has been regarded as one of the best educated, most intelligent, polit- ically mature, advanced sections of the German working class. It was in Leipzig that Ferdinand Lassalle founded the first socialist workers' party in Germany (in I863); and in the days of Bismarck that statesman's great socialist antagonists, August Bebel and Wilhelm Liebknecht, had Leipzig as their headquarters. In World War I the Leipzig workers had solidly backed the pacifist wing of the socialist party, which was strongly op- posed to Kaiser Wilhelm's war policy. During the period of the Weimar Re- public the Leipzig working class was ex- tremely well organized, politically as well as industrially, and the Leipzig socialists formed one of the most highly valued sections of the German Social Democrat- ic party. Further, for centuries Leipzig had been the center of the German book trade and one of the centers of German publishing. There was a large group of highly skilled workers engaged in the printing and binding of books and allied trades, and the connection between the world of books and large numbers of the working class, at least from the point of view of mere physical contact, was far closer than would normally be the case. Seen against this background, it is evi- dent that a study of the reading habits of the Leipzig workers was a task worth undertaking. To introduce the author: Dr. Erich Thier came from a working-class back- ground himself and started life as a man- ual worker. By taking advantage of the adult education facilities granted to able youths of his class in the days of the Weimar Republic, he managed to get a university as well as a library training and rose to become director of one of the largest of the Leipzig public libraries, situated in the heart of an extensive working-class district. In politics he was connected with the socialist movement and was active in adult educational work carried out under socialist auspices for many years. Then came the slump of I929 and on its heels the meteoric rise of the Nazi party, culminating in its tri- umph in 1933. Like his chief and in- spirer, Walter Hofmann, Erich Thier was swayed by the surge of the Nazi move- ment even before it had come into polit- ical power, and by the time his book was written the former socialist had long been an active Nazi. In short, with a per- sonal history like this, Thier was well qualified to investigate the reading habits of the Leipzig workers with whom he had been in close contact throughout his life; on the other hand, readers of his book must beware of the political bias which pervades it. If, however, some of the data set forth by Thier prove useful for a better understanding of the socio- logical aspects of group reading, then even the Nazi book will have rendered some service to the cause of social science and true scholarship, despite the fact that it was written to buttress a cause which stood for just the opposite. Before discussing Thier's data and the conclusions he bases on them, two points must be mentioned which should be borne in mind in any discussion of the Leipzig public libraries. First, practically all German public libraries deny open access to the shelves to their readers, and thus there is a fundamental difference be- tween them and American and English public libraries. Second, Walter Hof- mann was never interested in the num- ber of people who became readers in his libraries or in circulation statistics; he was a protagonist of the strictest possible principles of book selection and much preferred a small number of readers read- ing "good books" to a huge mass of read-
GERMAN WORKING-CLASS READING AND THE RISE OF NAZIISM 203 ers reading a huge mass of indifferent books. Beanrng these differences in mind, one is not surprised to find that the ex- tent of library membership revealed by the Leipzig library statistics is extremely low as compared with American and British figures. Thier's investigation is limited for the most part to the adult male workers who were active readers for the ten-year peri- od I922-32. During the years I920-28, adult male worker readers in the Leipzig public libraries numbered only two to three thousand. In I929-32, the years of the slump and its consequent mass un- employment, the membership figures of this particular social group rose steeply until they reached ten thousand at the end of the period. With the decrease in unemployment which coincided with the establishment of the Nazi regime in I933, there was a strong downward trend-to about seven thousand in 1937 (p. I82).3 The most detailed figures are available for 1933. According to the German na- tional census held in June of that year, Leipzig then had 7I3,470 inhabitants. Of these, 24,79I used the Leipzig public li- braries. Of these users, 54 per cent be- longed to the working class. The group with which we are concerned, the adult male worker readers, numbered 9,437. Since there were I 29,450 adult male workers in Leipzig, this means that only about 7 per cent of them were users of the public libraries-a figure which corrobo- rates one's expectations as to the prob- able low percentage of library readers in relation to the whole Leipzig popula- tion. Bearing in mind the rather austere as- pects of the Leipzig public libraries-no admission of "light" books, no open ac- cess-the answer to the question with which Thier opens his investigation be- comes evident: "What section of the working class is likely to join the public libraries?" Thier answers, and there seems to be no reason to disagree, "The more intelligent and the skilled worker is the first to become a reader" (p. 3). While a general statement of that sort occasions no surprise, the figures Thier gives concerning the proportions of skilled and unskilled workers are truly interesting. According to a very elabo- rate occupational analysis in 1931, this proportion was as high as 82 to i8 (p. IS). On the whole, one seems to be justified in assuming that the small minority of adult male workers who were regular readers in the Leipzig public libraries for a period of ten years and longer represent the intellectual upper layer of their class. Thier uses two periods of comparison, the first covering the years I922-26 and the second the years 1929-32. Most of his statements are based on the results yielded by an investigation of the first period. Again a historical digression is necessary to sketch the respective social and political atmospheres of these two periods. Although during the first period there is one year-I923-of acute politi- cal, social, and economic crisis, the other years, especially I924-26, are on the whole characterized by a certain stability (Dawes Agreement, Locarno), and there is no violent challenge to the republican form of government which was fervently supported by the majority of German socialist workers. The second period, 1929-3 2, iS charac- terized by an appalling economic slump, huge mass unemployment, and the rapid- ly increasing menace of the Nazi move- ment, which from the very smallest be- ginnings suddenly rose to become a huge party with a following of millions. A com- parison of the two periods, so unlike in their characteristics, shows considerable 3 Page references throughout are to Thier's book.
204 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY variations in the reading habits of the group of workers, and Thier's investiga- tion produces some very interesting and illuminating results. THE PERIOD I922-26 COMPARISON OF WORKING-CLASS AND MIDDLE-CLASS READERS Thier divides the whole field of non- fiction into three groups: (i) literature in which the main feature is the appeal to the imagination, (2) literature appealing TABLE 1* Working-class Middle-class Readers Readers Imaginative............ I64 o00 Practical . I OO OI Theoretical.100 123 * Based on Thier's Table 14 (p. 28). TABLE 2J Type of Nonfiction Working-class Middle-class Type o Nonfction Readers Readers Travel .I86 100 War memoirs I63 IOO Animal life .3... . I37 100 * Based on Thier's Table 84 (p. 157). to the practical mind, and (3) literature appealing to the theoretical mind. The figures concerning the proportionate in- terest in these three groups of nonfiction taken by working-class as compared with middle-class readers are revealing (Table I). Compared with all the other groups of male readers, "the working-class read- ers form the group with the smallest share of theoretical interest" (p. 30). The picture given by the proportions in Table i is corroborated by further data which seem worth reproducing (Table 2). The proportion is at once reversed if dif- ferent types of books are chosen, but the resulting psychological picture remains the same (Table 3). These comparative figures appear valu- able enough. While it would be rash to draw too many conclusions as to the in- herent inferiority of the one and the in- herent superiority of the other class from the data, the unequal distribution of psy- chological types and intellectual ability in the two classes compared comes out very clearly. There is no reason to sup- pose that the middle-class readers repre- sent an Elite of their class, while there is some basis for assuming that this is the case with the working-class readers, which makes the striking differences re- TABLE 3* Working- Middle- Type of Nonfiction class class Readers Readers Music, arts, literature ....... OO I(99 Ancient Greece and Rome.. 100 I51 Plays, poetry ....... ....... OO 5I73 Theoretical natural sciences.. I00 I37 * Based on Thier's Table 8s (p. I s8). vealed still more remarkable. In the light of Thier's figures the profound psycho- logical buttressing of social class divi- sions appears to be a phenomenon of con- siderable significance, and the facts re- vealed by the analysis at this stage alone seem to justify the method as developed in Leipzig as a useful tool of social inves- tigation. FIELDS OF INTEREST OF WORKING- CLASS READERS Thier devotes a considerable amount of space to the study of several special types of readers who are clearly marked off from the rest. The data used are based on an analysis of a thousand Lesekefte, all belonging to the group of adult male worker readers.
GERMAN WORKING-CLASS READING AND THE RISE OF NAZIISM 205 Theory-minded readers.-The group of readers interested above the average in problems of theory was found to be ex- tremely small, amounting to only I05 of the i,0oo. Only 9 of the io5 borrowed more than 25 theory books in two years. Thier comments on these results as follows: When talking about the theoretically gifted and interested worker, we can never for a min- ute compare his reading quota with the usual book consumption of the intellectual worker. We have also to bear in mind what an impact each single theoretical work, if mastered, is bound to have on the worker reader. Such a book in its relative value, or lack of value, is not considered as it should be against the back- ground of the entire scientific knowledge of which it forms only a part, a single unit among possibly hundreds and hundreds of books. Com- pared with the reading of the intellectual work- er, the self-education of the worker reader must bear a dogmatic character ..... Only a very few worker readers give the impression that they are really members of the intelli- gentsia and have been born into the wrong class. .... The majority master only a few works belonging to the sphere of true learning [pp. 33-341. Technically minded readers.-The read- ers interested in technology, a very sharply defined group, muster only twice as many as the theory-minded-202 out of i,ooo. Thier's comments on the men- tality of this group are to the effect that they are the most unambitious in their general reading; this applies also to their reading of fiction. Not a few of them, he says, are so devoted to their special line that to them any other aspects of life are almost negligible. Readers of travel and adventure.-The group of readers of travel and adventure is as large as that of the technically minded-about 200. These two groups together are four times as large as that of the theory-minded. As Thier has it, "This class of readers is the most uncom- plicated, or the most primitive, if you like, of working-class readers." Politically minded readers.-In the im- agination of the average member of the Leipzig middle classes, the typical Leip- zig worker was a man obsessed by politi- cal fanaticism, absolutely enmeshed in Marxist philosophy, full of class resent- ment, blind to everything in life but polit- ics viewed from the narrowest angle of socialist militancy, and filled with a burn- ing hatred of the capitalist system. This conception was characteristic of the polit- ical outlook of the German and Austrian middle classes and has had a disastrous influence on German politics during the period between the two wars. Therefore it is worth discussing, however fantasti- cally it misrepresented the true state of German working-class psychology. After all, not only the Leipzig worker but the working class throughout Germany has always been supposed to be profoundly influenced by orthodox Marxist ideology. To what extent did this political philos- ophy influence the reading of that section of our readers which is clearly marked off from the rest as specially interested in politics? We can safely assume that this section would solidly vote Socialist or Communist in elections, and many of the group would be active in the political labor movement or in the trade-unions. First, as to the actual size of the sec- tion: contrary to all expectations, the politically minded group comprises only 62 of the i,ooo worker readers. Thus it is by far the smallest special group. Fur- ther, the definitely Marxist readers among them comprise just half of the group-that is, there are 30 intensely Marxist readers among the i ,0oo. Marx's Das Kapital, quoted daily in both the left-wing and the right-wing press as the Bible of the German worker, was issued only 35 times in five years (p. 83). While
206 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY other more easily accessible Marxist classics were more popular, there still re- mains the astonishing fact that the work- er readers were very little attracted to the Marxism which was generally sup- posed to be-in Germany-the one and only subject in which they were interest- ed. This lack of interest was the more re- markable because the socialist literature was extremely well represented in the Leipzig public libraries. An excellent guidebook to this field (compiled by Herr Erich Thier) was available for a few cents to any interested reader. A similar picture is shown by an analy- sis of the interest of worker readers in the social sciences. The social sciences were very little read, Thier shows. Not only travel books but technology, natural sci- ences, history, literature, music, and fine arts were read more extensively; the so- cial sciences as well as the novel of social criticism were read more by the middle- class readers than by the working-class readers. Even to one intimately ac- quainted with the Leipzig working class of the period discussed by Thier, the data he gives come as a surprise. That the analysis does reveal such an unexpected state of affairs seems to me to be a very important reason for under- taking such investigations. To many people, the laborious social surveys un- dertaken by investigators seem a sheer waste of time, since the results obtained are often so obvious that the amount of work connected with the survey appears to be grotesquely incommensurate wvith the results. I myself have heard a lectur- er in a British school of librarianship making fun of the statistical surveys of reading habits which, after months of counting punched cards, reveal only that women over thirty-five like to read love stories! It is perfectly true that the read- ers' survey often merely corroborates im- pressions which come to the average edu- cated person by the ordinary experiences of life; but, on the other hand, as we have seen, it does reveal facts completely at variance with empirical conceptions based on common sense and ordinary ex- perience and does give a quantitative basis for such generalizations. Literature-minded readers.-The last special group includes those readers who are predominantly interested in litera- ture, the theater, music, and the arts. This group numbered 150 out of I,000 and is thus smaller than either the tech- nically minded group or the group of readers of travel and adventure, but twice as large as the politically minded group. Thier offers the following com- ments: The working-class reader chooses fiction and belles lettres mostly according to their contents. He asks for a social novel, an ad- venture story, a historical yarn, but not for the most recent work or a definite work by a definite author. It takes a very long time for the current literary fashion to be perceived by the working-class reader. In most cases, by the time this fashion reaches him, it has already become out of date for the middle-class reader. Even then, names of authors mean little. Every librarian knows the request slips in which only the book titles are entered but not the names of the authors. Here Thier's analysis is borne out by other investigators of the sociology of reading. There seems to be a definite law of time lag according to which currents of thought and artistic expression take a considerable time to percolate down into the various social classes from the cul- turally creative strata of society. Atten- tion to this time lag as a characteristic feature of "culture distribution" has been drawn in one of the most brilliant essays on the social aspects of reading,
GERMAN WORKING-CLASS READING AND THE RISE OF NAZIISM 207 Mrs. Q. 0. Leavis' Fiction and the Read- ing Public.O Thier gives another interest- ing example, this time taken from his- tory: It seems to take a number of years for his- torical events to be digested sufficiently to be- come subjects on which interest becomes con- centrated. The Russian Revolution of 1917 did not interest the Leipzig working-class readers so much during the period 1922-26 as did the French Revolution of 1789 [p. 148]. To recapitulate: of i,ooo readers who, generally speaking, can be regarded as the cream of the Leipzig working class, 7I9 were especially interested in particu- lar fields. Of these, 317 were interested in higher-level fields (theory-minded, I05; politically minded, 62; literature- minded, iSo) and 402 in lower-level fields (technically minded, 202; readers of travel and adventure, 200). The one field which is conspicuously mssing as a field of special interest is re- ligion. Leipzig, like the whole of Saxony, is a predominately Lutheran town; in a Roman Catholic district it is very likely that another picture would have been en- countered. If socialism, in its German materialist form, inspired only a minor- ity of the worker readers to take a deeper interest in politics, and an even smaller number to take an interest in Marxism, it certainly acted as an agent for divert- ing the reader's interest from religion. (In this respect, an analogous study of the reading of British workers would probably reveal a different state of affairs.) As the picture stands, in an 6lite of working-class readers as few as a third take an interest in the higher-level fields of literature. Even in this area their re- sponse is of a far smaller intellectual range than the response of the middle- 4 London: Chatto & Windus, 1932. class reader. The political convictions which to any observer seemed to keep the social classes at arms' length in twenti- eth-century Germany are revealed as having penetrated only very superficially into the workers' minds. Only a small minority take a real interest in politics. There certainly has not been a totalitar- ian Gleichschaltung of the socialist work- ers' minds causing their Marxist or so- cialist opinions to penetrate every nook and cranny of their mental equipment. On the whole, the picture presented is of a very modest intellectual level-one far more restricted than the middle-class level and in many ways a considerably inferior copy of the middle-class mental equipment. There certainly is not the faintest promise of a "proletarian cul- ture" or "proletarian literature" in the picture. And it should be borne in mind that this is in a section of the working class which is especially closely related to the world of books and more intelli- gent and better educated than the major- ity of the German workers and that the analysis covers a period when socialism as such was unchallenged as the ideology of the German working class. THE PERIOD I929-32 THE GENERAL PICTURE AND READING TRENDS While the first period of comparison (I922-26), generally speaking, was one marked by the absence of long-term mass unemployment and, especially in its sec- ond half, by a certain atmosphere of stabilization and prosperity, the second period shows a completely different pic- ture. Germany was hit by the most dis- astrous economic slump she had ever ex- perienced, and the economic crisis was paralleled by a most severe political crisis
208 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY which finally led to the utter collapse of the Weimar democracy and the estab- lishment of Hitler's dictatorship. During this period the socialist movement was in perpetual political retreat, while the Nazis were forging ahead at a breathtak- ing pace, and even within the German labor movement the antagonism between the moderates (Social Democrats) and the extremists (Communists) grew at an alarming rate. How did the Leipzig worker readers re- act to the upheavals around them, by which many of them were directly hit as they were forced into the ever swelling ranks of the workless? Let us return to the figures of Thier's analysis. As is to be expected, there is a steep rise in the interest in politics and history. Another feature which is by no means so obvious and which needs some explana- tion is the simultaneous steep decline of interest in theoretical and general natural sciences. This decline had already begun in the preceding years in a much less pro- nounced form, but the impact of the slump accelerated it so sharply as to re- quire some comment. Since the eighteen-nineties, when Ger- man socialist ideology attained its char- acteristic features, two main influences had formed a kind of secular religion. In this respect the German working-class movement differed profoundly from that of British labor. These two main influ- ences were Karl Marx's theory of histori- cal materialism and Charles Darwin's theory of natural evolution. No matter in what form these philosophies were understood, the faith in them had given German socialism its tremendous self-as- surance, its fondly held belief that Ger- man socialism was "scientific socialism" and that German labor was theoretically backed by the most advanced philoso- phies of western Europe. One may smile at this naivete now, but there is no doubt that this firm conviction was a consider- able psychological asset in the selfless and idealistic struggle of thousands of German workers in building up their huge political and industrial organiza- tions in the face of the bitter hostility of Imperial Germany in the quarter-cen- tury I890-i9I4. After the collapse of the old regime in I9I8, socialism seemed to be the one great hope for a reconstruc- tion of a new democratic Germany, and hundreds and thousands of middle-class people found themselves attracted mo- mentarily to the German labor move- ment, which held out the promise of a better, freer, and more peaceful future. In 1919-20 there was a marvelous spirit abroad in many Germans; great springs of idealism and devoted effort were re- leased in the hope of starting afresh on the ruins of discarded Prussian militar- ism. All this idealism and high-minded endeavor was favorable to the socialist movement and looked to it as its chief protagonist. No wonder that the work- ing-class readers, members of a rapidly advancing and victorious movement, felt more assured than ever of the profundity of their very own philosophy of life, the Marxist-Darwinian conception of social and natural history as they understood it. Especially in Leipzig, which had stood on the left of the movement for many years, this nineteenth-century material- ist secular religion was particularly deep- ly ingrained. No wonder that in the years I9I8-20, when to many Germans social- ism seemed to give the promise of a bet- ter world, the two fields of interest, poli- tics and natural sciences (the background for Marx and Darwin), attracted to themselves a record number of worker readers. The steep upward curve in the reading figures of these groups was but a facet of the optimism and self-confidence
GERMAN WORKING-CLASS READING AND THE RISE OF NAZIISM 209 which was alive in the German socialist movement as a whole in the two years after the revolution of November, i9i8. How different is the picture ten years later! While the interest in politics is on the increase, this rise is, as has been noted, accompanied by a sharp decline of interest in the natural sciences-an indi- cation that the backbone of materialist orthodoxy was far less strong than in i9i8-20. Whatever the shortcomings of this philosophy, it had been a tower of strength to the German labor movement. It had filled the workers with a messianic conviction that the victory of socialism was guaranteed by the laws of nature, just as this philosophy had carried the Russian Bolsheviks through the most ap- palling risks and ordeals to their final vic- tory. The decline of interest in the natu- ral sciences reveals that the working class faced the tremendous double challenge of the economic slump and of the Nazi threat to the Weimar Republic with a far less intense belief in a secular religion than it had possessed in the early nine- teen-twenties. Nothing else had been de- veloped to fill this vacuum, so the result was purely negative. The materialist philosophy had, after all, been some sort of bond between the workers and im- portant intellectual currents of the past. Its weakening showed a victory of inter- est in the topical and the easily accessible over the sense of striving for a certain seriousness and philosophical founda- tions in one's outlook, a triumph of shal- lowness over depth-in short, a sad de- cline in the intellectual level all round. Everywhere, in Thier's analysis of the period under review, there appears the same picture of a loss of intensity of mental effort, of the trends toward the more superficial aspects of life and to- ward the journalistic kind of literature instead of the book demanding more se- rious concentration. The sober figures of the book issues to worker readers during the period of the slump show up starkly the appalling psychological impact of mass unemployment and political pessi- mism and defeatism in the working-class mind-a loss of the capacity for tackling serious problems and a reversion toward the primitive. CHANGES IN THE FIELDS OF INTEREST OF WORKING-CLASS READERS What happened to Thier's special groups of readers in the period under re- view-the technically minded, the liter- ature-minded, and the rest? By following their individual fates it may be possible to see if the facts fit the conclusions which have just been given by way of anticipation. The group of the technically minded shrank; there was no outlet for their type of interest in the world of mass unem- ployment around them. The slump was too much for the intellectual equipment of this particular group; as Thier brutally states, "The modest mental level of this group clearly underwent further mental impoverishment in this period" (p. 44). The impact of the slump, which brought about a decline of interest in technology, resulted in a steep increase of interest in travel and adventure. As Thier has it, "The slump, in short, fa- vored the uncomplicated and primitive mentality which sought in books an anodyne from the unbearable present." To use a hackneyed word, escapism meant mental retrogression, and escap- ism increased at the same pace as the numbers of the workless. That is the un- mistakable lesson which is taught by the sharply rising figures of worker readers of travel and adventure during the pe- riod. One of the most remarkable features
2IO THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY of this period is-as Thier stresses-the discovery of the war book by the German worker. He finds it very significant that, just in this period of almost unbearable stress and strain, the German worker, suckled in a strongly antimilitarist and anti-war creed by his socialist leaders, found his way to this tremendous chap- ter of German history, World War I. There can be no quarrel with Thier's facts, but an objection can be made to his insinuation that this discovery of the war book was a sort of mental prepara- tion of the average Leipzig socialist worker reader for the Hitler spirit and the fateful date of September, I939. The working class by no means lives in a watertight mental compartment of its own, completely isolated from the cur- rents influencing other classes of the pop- ulation. In Germany the great wave of war books, heralded by the sensational success of Remarque's All Quiet on the Western Front in I929, coincided with the onset of the slump and of the Nazi offen- sive. The astounding popularity of the innumerable war books then flooding the German book market would not leave the working class untouched. Further- more, far from glorifying war, many of the war books had an outspoken pacifist and anti-war bias-Remarque's book, to begin with, the most popular of all; while another war book, Hasek's Schweijk, which enjoyed an immense popularity with working-class readers, was down- right subversive. The political implica- tions that Thier insinuates-i.e., a sym- pathetic approach of the traditionally pacifist German worker toward national- ism, as shown by the popularity of the war book just before Hitler came to power-seems to be unfounded and heavily biased in favor of Thier's Nazi point of view. On the other hand, the amazing popu- larity of the war book among the Leip- zig worker readers in this period fits in perfectly with the general picture of the trend toward escapism and the general lowering of the mental level. Again, Thier, who so warmly welcomes the pop- ularity of the war book as a sign of the conversion of the worker from material- ist socialism to the pure gospel of nazi- ism, has to admit: Not only the readers of the adventure novel but those of the war novel also are of an extremely uncomplicated mentality. In both cases, interest in theory is overshadowed by the importance of immediate experience..... The most primitive type of working-class reader found the way to the war book first. To return from this digression to the discussion of the former "special groups": so far the figures have given a clear picture of the general prevailing trend. The same impression is given by the fate which overtook the group of the literature-minded during our period; this group practically collapsed, falling to a third of its former membership. The same general trend appears in the changes which took place in the group of the politically minded; there is a clear and unmistakable shift from the heavy, general, theoretical works to the more topical, journalistic type of book dealing in a popular way with current affairs. While in election times communism in creased at a considerable rate, there was no parallel increase in the interest in Marxist theory, all the interest of the ex- treme left being concentrated on journal- istic topical literature on Soviet Russia. This is a sure sign of how very superficial the leftward trend of the pre-Hitler years was compared with the far more intel- lectually based leftward trend of igi8- 20. From my own personal experience I can recall that many Germans who as young men had arrived at ideals of a hu-
GERMAN WORKING-CLASS READING AND THE RISE OF NAZIISM 211 manitarian democracy after the first World War stuck to these ideals through- out the twelve years of Nazi rule, while many leftist sympathizers of the slump period became Nazi converts in no time. Naturally, the length of the period dur- ing which a man holds certain opinions is an important factor, but Thier's analysis corroborates the impression of the infla- tionary and superficial character of the Communist electoral successes preceding the establishment of the Third Reich. Before summing up, a last digression may be permitted to show that there is a good deal of Nazi propaganda in Thier's "scientific" analysis. After discussing the results of his statistics concerning the group of long-term male adult readers which has formed the basis of the whole investigation hitherto, he suddenly changes his method and abandons the chosen i,ooo Lesehefte of the long-term readers for a moment to turn his atten- tion to a new and much wider field cover- ing all the working-class readers of the libraries in the period under review-for a definite purpose. Concerning the circu- lation figures for Mein Kampf, Thier ex- claims triumphantly: The book of the Fuhrer was the most read political book even among working-class readers, even before the national socialist revolution of I933 ..... While left-wing politics took up almost the entire sphere of interest in I922-26, in I929-32 it no longer filled even half of that particular sphere. While all this may be perfectly true, Thier has changed his method of analy- sis, and a few critical words should suffice to puncture the triumph of the ex-social- ist Nazi. Every librarian knows that there is a type of working-class reader who is driven into a public library as a last resource in times of mass unemploy- ment when his home is unheated and perhaps filled with other unemployed members of the family. This type is not the most valuable sort of library reader, and often his library membership ceases once a new job is found. Thus, during the slump the number of worker readers in the Leipzig public libraries rose sharply, as we have seen; and it fell equally abruptly when Hitler put an end to un- employment in Germany. Therefore, when discussing the entire mass of work- er readers during the slump, we are bound to encounter a far more primitive level than hitherto. The success of Mein Kampf among this mentally diluted mass of worker readers, many of them "mental driftwood," whose average quality was much lower than that of the selected i,ooo long-term readers, is thus no par- ticular reason for the Nazi Thier's ela- tion. It was the typical success of the fashionable and the topical among the superficial and mediocre. On the other hand, the decline of in- terest in left-wing literature, even among this mixed crowd of serious and not-so- serious readers, is a sign of the same de- cline in the political self-assurance of the working-class movement. Had this movement been in the ascendancy, its literature would have attracted even the "mental driftwood" of the casual read- ers; the defeat of the German socialist cause in I933, then still a thing of the fu- ture, is tragically implied in the shrink- age of the field of interest of the leftist literature, which no longer acted as a magnet. In following the respective fates of the various special groups of worker readers, we find that the figures show really movingly all the disastrous mental consequences of the economic and polit- ical crisis on the social group under re- view. Whatever the shortcomings of the traditional Marxist-materialist concep- tion of history and nature, this concep-
2I2 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY tion had been a source of strength and a stimulant to serious study. In the pecu- liar political situation of Germany be- tween I9I8 and 1933, the socialist work- ing class was the true backbone of the re- publican Weimar democracy, whose standard the middle classes had never really followed and which they attacked and bitterly renounced as soon as times got worse, turning eagerly instead to the Nazi gospel. The mental weakening of the working class sapped the foundations of the Weimar democracy. When Hitler sat himself in Bismarck's chair, he was not confronted with the optimistic mili- tant socialist movement of Bismarck's time, with its utopian messianism and fervent belief in the cause of the brother- hood of man, but with a discouraged, dis- illusioned mass of passive victims. The analysis of the reading of the selected groups of workers has demonstrated the victory of escapism only too clearly; this attitude of mind preceded and made pos- sible the victory of the archenemy of all the ideals the German working-class movement had always stood for. THE REACTION OF WORKING-CLASS READERS TO NAZI DICTATORSHIP The reader outside Germany may think that in this discussion the close connection between the world of books and the world of politics is exaggerated. The Nazis did not think so. Hardly had the Hitler dictatorship been established after the German Reichstag elections of March 5, 1933, than all over Germany the fires were lit in which thousands and thousands of the books detested by the Nazis were burned in solemn ceremonies. I remember the unutterable sadness and sense of tragedy which came over me when, walking in the streets of Leipzig one fine day in the spring of 1933, I sud- denly saw black flakes hovering in the air all around me-the charred remains of books which the Nazi hangman had just delivered to the flames. One must go back almost exactly four hundred years in German history to find a parallel: the burning of "dangerous" books by an- other set of chiliastic fanatics in revolt against Western civilization the Miin- ster Anabaptists of I534. A thoroughgoing purge swept over the German public libraries; anything writ- ten by Jewish, socialist, liberal, and paci- fist writers was ruthlessly eliminated from the shelves. To the Nazi mind, Rus- sia and bolshevism formed a single sinis- ter unit. At a congress of German public library workers, one librarian went so far as to declare the entire bulk of Russian literature a "borderline case" in which it was not always easy to make up one's mind whether to keep some specimens on the shelves or to pulp the lot. How did the worker readers react to the huge upheaval around them? Here are Thier's comments: The greater part of the Marxist readers left the libraries. Some few returned to them a few years later. In some cases they then studied national socialist literature intensively. The readers of character obviously did not want to surrender to the new spirit without a struggle. Others read outspokenly nonpolitical books. .... The other "sociologically interested" readers did not react in a uniform way. Some of the older members of this group were obvi- ously bewildered and disturbed for a long time. They deplored the disappearance of the old- style novel of social criticism and were eagerly looking for any books which would satisfy their traditional psychological complexes of social resentment. The younger ones found the way to the new situation more easily..... Some of them dropped reading political books altogether for a time. It cannot be said that these statements show a general conversion of all worker readers to the new Nazi spirit, but as we have seen, the special group of outspok-
GERMAN WORKING-CLASS READING AND THE RISE OF NAZIISM 213 enly left-wing readers formed only a tiny minority among the whole number in- vestigated-62 out of I,ooo in I922-26. Furthermore, one would not expect that this tiny group, devoted sincerely and often dogmatically to the Marxist ideol- ogy or to advanced social philosophies in general, would immediately cross over to the Nazi camp. The orthodox believer who has been devoted to some ideology for years is not likely to become a rene- gade at once when the times change; but this type of reader is in every class the exception and not the rule. Some of Thier's remarks reveal some- thing of a spirit of passive resistance; for example, he admits a steep decline of in- terest in political literature as one of the results of the new regime. The vacuum created by the purge of the traditional leftist books was not filled by new polit- ical Nazi books so far as worker readers were concerned. Thier analyzes I2,680 book issues to worker readers during the years of the Nazi period. These books dealt with three subjects: the World War, Nazi politics, and race theory. Of the total number of books issued in these three categories, those dealing with race theory constituted a miserable 2.2 per cent (p. 95). Thier is forced to comment: "Race theory is not yet sufficiently ap- preciated by the working-class readers. .... We are still waiting for the devel- opment of this particular sphere of inter- est." CONCLUSIONS Whatever Dr. Thier's intentions when writing his work, as an analysis of the cultural disintegration of a section of a social class under the impact of an un- paralleled economic and political crisis the book has succeeded in drawing a striking picture of the atmosphere out of which Hitler rose to power. Republican Germany being what it was, the class whose mental impoverishment in those years has been so clearly revealed hap- pened to be the only class which fervent- ly believed'in democracy and was op- posed to dictatorship and ideas of world conquest. The mental collapse of the working class heralded the political col- lapse of the Weimar Republic. The dry- as-dust statistics of the Leipzig public li- braries forecast the humiliating day when the German socialist trade-union leaders issued a proclamation asking the millions of their followers to march be- hind Hitler's banners in the Nazi proces- sion of triumph of May i, I933. I do not wish to make excessive claims for the importance of the book which has been surveyed, but I venture to think that investigations of this kind, if under- taken in a spirit of the search for truth, will result in a better understanding of the problems of our time. Connections between the political climate of a period and its popular reading have been point- ed out before, but attempts at a systemat- ic treatment are rare. It will be recalled that the great German historian Franz Mehring was struck by the sudden re- vival of interest in Schopenhauer's phi- losophy which characterized the period after the defeat of the German demo- cratic revolution of I848. Similarly, Rus- sian historians, discussing the period after the Russian revolution of I905, an- other defeated democratic revolution, have drawn attention to the amazing vogue of erotic and pornographic litera- ture at this time, exemplified by the sen- sational success of Artsybashev's Sanin, a novel long since forgotten. In both cases, these were aspects of the reaction of the German and Russian middle classes to the shattering of their cher- ished political hopes and illusions, allow- ing for the differences in place and peri-
214 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY od. From my own personal experience I should like to quote two examples of the interconnection of politics and culture which are perhaps not quite so well known. The first years of the Weimar Republic, in keeping with the whole temper of the period, were characterized by a great advance of the German adult education movement. After the year of inflation of I923 had ended with a defeat for democracy, resulting in a feeling of disillusionment among the supporters of the republic, the whole German adult education movement underwent a cat- astrophic slump from which it took many years to recover. The second example is again in the field of reading habits; no German living through the years of slump preceding Hitler's dictatorship could remain unaware of a most sinister symptom of mental disintegration star- ing at him from every newspaper stall. Almost every week a new astrological journal was added to the list of those al- ready existing, and the increasing popu- larity of this kind of literature at the time throws yet another sidelight on the mental condition of the German nation at the moment when Hitler was strug- gling for power. There must be many such examples crying out for systematic treat- ment, and perhaps we shall see the day when there will be a historical school of social psychology, including the study of the reading habits of classes and nations as one of its branches. If the present sum- mary stimulates research along these lines, even the book of the ardent Nazi will have supplied a few of the tools for such an enterprise.