THE URBAN LIBRARY AND THE ADOLESCENT MARGARET A. EDWARDS M ORRIS COHEN, in introducing a symposium on philosophy which I attended, observed that man was getting neither better nor worse, but as the individual has his ups and downs with some good days and some not so good, so, too, the human race maintains something of a norm. If this is the case, is it not as true for teen-agers as for the whole race? As a group, are they basically different from what they always were? Man's activi- ties may fall into new patterns, but his conception of the world and the uni- verse will be as new each year as the discoveries of science. His habits of worlk and play will be altered by elec- tronics, but his concerns will remain constant. He will still need love and se- curity; he will seek for identity and ful- filment; he will still wonder about the meaning of his own and all existence. Though he may die without realizing it, the answers he is seeking are in books. It is important that the adolescent learn this, since his search for meanings is es- pecially urgent and intense. Teen-agers today represent a larger percentage of the population than ever before. Television brings them into our living rooms to assauilt our senses and sensibilities, screaming and gyrating to outrageous music or milling around in love-ins. We are so stunned by all this that we often forget to cast a balance and to see it in proper perspective. For television also brings us the "College Bowl" as well as panels of brilliant, amazingly well-balanced high school students. We must remember the Peace Corps and VISTA and the thousands of young people who help disadvantaged children with their homework and in other ways. Their peaceful demonstra- tions, no matter which side they take, are better than apathy. All over the world, young people are interested in politics and society's welfare. But their eagerness to take up causes and pro- test, their readiness to overthrow estab- lished order and set right what seems to them wrongs, their potential power in sheer numbers-all this means they desperately need a sound attitude to- ward life, civilized feelings, an under- standing of people and culture-some- thing to go on besides emotion. There are various sources where they may find understanding, enrichment, and ideas, but the most reliable, never-fail- ing source is the books on the shelves of the public library. WNThat is the public library doing to interest adolescents in reading these books? In most cases, nothing. The usual custom is to supply factual mate- rial for school assignments when re- quested but to leave the adolescent strictly on his own when he wants books for pleasure and enrichment. This, how- ever, is not the case in some cities where some provision is made for the teen- ager, and special services are offered to him. For years Detroit has conducted educational television programs for teen-agers. Philadelphia has worked with delinquents and probationers. Dal- las and Seattle have worked effectively 70
THE URBAN LIBRARY AND THE ADOLESCENT 71 with schools. New York City has led the way in work with manual-minded vocational students and with a phenom- enal radio book discussion program. Baltimore, besides its program with schools, has been an innovator with book fairs, in-service training, and, at present, experimental programs in the War on Poverty. Some other cities have set up special services for young adults and are doing good work, but the pres- ent social crisis in our big cities calls for a general breakthrough. It is ex- tremely important that teen-agers all over the nation find out that the public library has a lot more for them than simply material for school assignments. Because this seems to me so urgent, I am going to make five charges against the public library-not in a spirit of hostility, but with a firm faith in the potential of the library for influencing the thinking and feeling of the adoles- cent and with the hope of stimulating new courses of action. I shall cite as state's evidence for my charges the re- cent survey of metropolitan public li- brary users of the Maryland Baltimore- XVashington metropolitan area by Mary Lee Bundy,1 associate professor of the University of Maryland School of Li- brary and Information Services. The urban district surveyed is organized. supported, and well enough patronized to seem to serve as a representative, fair, and up-to-date example of the ur- ban library. HOW HAS THE LIBRARY FAILED THE ADOLESCENT? 1. It has failed in the relationship of the majority of its staff to adolescents. -The ALA Ad Hoc Committee on In- struction in the Use of Libraries in its report to the San Francisco conference stated: "One of the greatest blocks to the total use of public libraries has been the attitude of generations of public li- brarians toward students.... Attitudes of resentment are being perpetuated." The Bundy survey shows that, although adults were not unusually critical of the staff, 25 per cent of the students com- plained. One said, "I appreciate the li- brarians who can tell when you need help and offer it to you in a pleasant manner without making you feel igno- rant." Another wrote, "Kindness is a virtue and I hope in the future we will have kinder librarians." Why do so many librarians seeming- ly dislike teen-agers? Are they insecure and feel that higher status is achieved through working with adults? Are they afraid of adolescents? Is it a little touch of Sadism that leads a librarian to hu- miliate the defenseless young person, criticizing him instead of his teacher who made an unfortunate or improper assignment, interrogating him in a seemingly polite way that undermines his confidence? Administrators are aware of this hostility, but little is done to inculcate continually in all members of the staff an attitude of outgoing help- fulness that will include even teen- agers. Although adolescents make up about half of a library's patronage beyond the children's department, many librarians still consider them an interruption to business. It is not only the 25 per cent who wrote complaints who resent the staff. Even those not mistreated re- sent seeing librarians embarrass their friends. Yet we wonder why there is ' Mary Lee Bundy, "Metropolitan Public Li- brary Users: A Report of a Survey of Adult Li- brary Use in the Maryland Baltimore-Washington Metropolitan Area; Preliminary Reports" (Col- lege Park: University of Maryland School of Li- brary and Information Services, 1967 [mimeo- graphed]).
72 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY such a shortage of librarians and issue ever more attractive recruiting material to explain to young people what an opportunity for service librarianship affords. 2. The urban library is off-balance. Its concern is with its informational services to the neglect of other needs of its patrons.-Since the simultaneous ex- plosions of knowledge and population, all hands have been put to work to get the facts to the people as expeditiously as possible and to deal with the never- ending, ever broadening school assign- ments. Some cities have eliminated young adult work above the ninth grade and have converted positions calling for special skills in introducing reading to the adolescent to the performance of other, more utilitarian, tasks. Some cities have assigned the person in charge of work with young adults to a subsidi- ary position, regarding this specializa- tion as an extravagance. Most adminis- trators cannot see why capable young librarians should be talking about books to teen-agers when there is a waiting line for pamphlets on, say, the mineral resources of Hawaii. Even administra- tors who believe in the promotion of reading for young adults have no sys- tem for promoting young librarians who have become expert in this field except to remove them from their specialty and make them branch librarians. In the library world, the promotion of reading pays less than even a small job involving administration. The cultiva- tion and enrichment of readers is a fringe service. Surprisingly enough, this same point of view is held by the cul- turally deprived citizens of the big city. To read for enjoyment is often consid- ered a waste of time. An example of this was found at the Pratt Library's Pennsylvania Avenue branch, located in the heart of a Negro slum. It was crowded each day of the school year with hundreds of teen-agers busily copying encyclopedia articles they could not understand, desperately trying to accumulate enough facts to satisfy their teachers. But when school closed in June, the library was almost deserted. Even though the building was air-conditioned and the staff friendly, the young people stayed in their hot ghetto, never thinking of reading for pleasure. One fall we organized a book club in the school which the gifted young adult librarian from the branch library would visit and lend books to the members to read for pleasure; she would later return to enjoy the books with them. The club received a most enthusiastic response from the teen- agers, but the faculty committee asked what kind of test would reveal how much the students had learned. I in- sisted that the only test was whether they subsequently came to the library to read for pleasure. When we have imparted the enrich- ing pleasure of reading to the children of the disadvantaged, culture will not be an incomprehensible intangible to the parents. For example, for three summers I drove a horse-drawn cart loaded with books through the streets of a Baltimore slum. One day I pulled up in front of a hovel where the mother was ironing. Her little boy wanted a book, and when I showed him a fairy tale, he was ready to accept it. First, however, I felt I should ask his mother if he could borrow the book. She looked very doubtful but eventually said, "You can let him have a book if you give him something that will do him good." She meant I could give him a speller or an arithmetic book, but the fairy tale was out. Librarians who overstress the in-
THE URBAN LIBRARY AND THE ADOLESCENT 73 formational services and underplay the promotion of reading are dangerously close to this point of view. According to the survey cited above, the percentage of people who come to the library for general reading is exact- ly the same as for those who come for materials or information on a subject.2 So our services are geared to the needs of half the patrons. We not only fail to make contact with the other half, but we do not call recreational reading to their attention in most of our displays. We boast of how little fiction we circu- late. Fiction, belles lettres, and biogra- phy depict the human heart and enrich experience. They are concerned with sorrow and joy and love. They cultivate the mind, civilize the emotions, and promote understanding. Yet we take more pride in the circulation of scien- tific treatises, how-to-do-it books, and financial reports. We do not wish to leave the impression that we are friv- olous or wasting the taxpayers' money. 3. The public library is passive rath- er than active.-The Bundy survey asked whether the library's role should be a passive one of supplying what is requested, or whether it should under- take active programs and services of its own. As far as the adolescent is con- cerned, it is time for the library world to answer this question. Do we or do we not believe that it is important enough for teen-agers to read books that it be- hooves us to bestir ourselves instead of leaving the problem entirely up to other institutions? Polls and surveys tell us that adolescents do very little unas- signed reading. Should public libraries let it go at that? Posted in one of the booths at the ALA Conference in San Francisco was the following unsigned quotation: "The time has come for the library to recog- nize its primary responsibility today is to the other agencies of society and only secondarily to the individual who walks through the doors." It was appalling to find such a statement on display in a state library booth and passing unchal- lenged by delegates to the convention. When this view is widely held, we shall enjoy the distinction of being the only profession not concerned primarily with the individual. Does it not follow that when we accept this philosophy we will have ceased to be a profession and will become, instead, the warehouse for other professions? Fortunately, the way is still open for libraries in large cities to enrich the lives of their adoles- cents. But this will not come about with new gimmicks and original approaches unless the underlying philosophy and present practices in urban libraries change. We should hold our informa- tional services to the present high level of performance, but should employ the same thinking and planning to bring the promotion of reading to the same level. We run our public libraries like su- permarkets; you put it in the basket, we check it out. As a result, the adoles- cent often arrives at the checking-out point with no books at all or with one he selected from its title or cover and which may turn out to be a bad bargain. The Bundy survey found that 47 per cent of the library patrons leave with- out being completely satisfied.3 Librar- ians generally believe that if books are in order on the shelves the reader in search of a good book has been served. If he needs help, let him ask. The su- permarket, the automat, and public li- 2-Ibid., chap. 3, pp. 7-8. 8"bid., p. 9.
74 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY braries are agreed on this method. Oth- er institutions that serve the public and believe in their products put highly trained, skilful people on the floor, not sitting behind desks, filing cards, or reading and waiting for the patron's ap- proach. The promotion of reading calls for intensive, skilful training. Most library schools ignore this field or give it scant attention in favor of training research technicians. The training is in library science rather than in the art of librar- ianship. This is the kind of training col- lege and special libraries want and the kind most in demand in public libraries. If library schools turned out specialists in the promotion of reading, they might have difficulty placing them. Many complaints about library school train- ing stem from this emphasis; students who enter the profession because they love books and wish to share their pleasure in them soon discover that they are being trained for technical services, and they are bored and dis- illusioned. In the library schools where I teach and in the workshops I conduct in vari- ous cities of the country, I ask my stu- dents how many of them, after they left the children's department ever were approached by a librarian with the suggestion of an interesting book to read. As a rule, in a group of twenty- five or so, two or three hands go up. This indifference is generally resented. The survey of the Baltimore-Washing- ton metropolitan district says, "In the day to day operation of a library, li- brarians talk to only a small number of users." And again, "The library user is apparently on his own; only 16%o sought help from a staff member."4 A prominent librarian in Washing- ton, D.C. recently told me about at- tending a public gathering where an un- usually attractive young woman gave a rousing talk on what books can mean to people. He was so impressed that he asked her after the meeting if she were a librarian. When she said she was not, he replied, "You ought to be." He per- suaded her to consider the field, and he even helped her get a scholarship. But when she read over the courses of study she backed out, scholarship and all. We needed that girl. We also need the kind of young people who go into the Peace Corps. But because we fail to communicate with our patrons, because we do not actively contribute to the en- richment of the lives of people, ideal- istic young college graduates ignore our good salaries to work with the Peace Corps for a bare subsistence. Because we appear to the general public as reluctant technicians who pass lightly over the promotion of reading, people have failed to take us to their hearts. Novels often feature lawyers, doctors, scientists, ministers, and teach- ers as strong central characters, while librarians are the minor characters who ignore pathetic children, hide books from teen-agers, glare at people who laugh, or provide comic relief by their eccentricities. This is not the result of a plot on the part of the writers. Read- ers never seem to feel that we have been dealt with unjustly. 4. Our obsession with the catalog is a boomerang that has sailed back to harm our relations with the adolescent and to diminish for him the joy of read- ing.-In 1965, the latest year for which there are complete statistics,5 28 per cent of the high school graduates of Baltimore went to college, and an addi- ' Ibid., p. S. ' Baltimore City Public Schools, Division of Guidance and Placement, "Follow-up of Graduates Report, Senior High Schools, June, 1965."
THE URBAN LIBRARY AND THE ADOLESCENT 75 tional 2.6 per cent enrolled for part- time courses. This 30.6 per cent of the high school graduates should have been taught the use of the catalog and refer- ence tools, to make it possible for them to pursue their college work. For the other 69.4 per cent, however, more harm than good has been done by the insist- ence on teaching them the tools of ref- erence and research. Four arguments support this thesis: a) Such teaching cannot be done suc- cessfully. The ALA Ad Hoc Committee on Instruction in the Use of Libraries says, "The great majority of students do not master library skills, and do not feel impelled to gain proficiency in them." The committee members, how- ever, do not despair; they suggest new devices and more instruction. For many years, the schools of the Baltimore- Washington metropolitan district have given thorough instruction in the use of the catalog and reference tools all through high school and, to some extent, in the lower grades. When the survey- ors working with Dr. Bundy looked for this trained patron, they found him at the shelves looking through rows of books, hoping to wrest from them the information he needed. The survey says, "He browses through the shelves hoping to find what he wants but is not so likely to use reference books, library catalogs, or to seek help from a librar- ian. He is even less likely to make use of other library services and resources such as periodical indexes."6 If the Bundy survey is correct, how many hours, days, and years of instruction in the use of the catalog have failed to pay off! Methods of teaching this skill may change and improve, but however many variables we introduce, one con- stant remains-the student who does not wish to learn, and so, cannot be taught. Moreover, if the library world keeps abreast of modern times, surely computers will eventually answer ref- erence questions related to schoolwork. Meantime, the public library could make instruction in the use of the cata- log and reference tools available for those who wish to learn. b) Our burning passion in the public library to force adolescents to use the catalog has damaged our relations with them. Librarians sometimes demand that a youngster look up a book in the catalog when it is within arm's reach of the librarian. Perhaps the most hated six words in American libraries are, "Look it up in the catalog." Here is what some of the students said, as quoted in the survey: "In general, the librarians are fairly helpful as long as you never make the mistake of asking where a book is. Do this, and the librarian 'sweetly' says, 'What's the matter, don't you know how to use the catalog?'" "I feel library service could be im- proved in that sometimes the librarians are too lazy to help you. Many times I have asked where a certain book is and she will say, 'Look it up in the catalog.' I feel this is not right." One adult patron wrote of librarians who, like some tradespeople, showed "the tyranny of petty authority," which, right or wrong, seems to be the idea held by some teen-agers. Further bound by our obsession, if a class from a neighborhood school comes for a visit to the library, we often en- tertain them royally with a lesson on the catalog when we might, instead, have interested them in Dostoyevski's analysis of the criminal mind, A. B. Guthrie's novels of the wild, free moun- tain men, or Van Gogh's passion to cap- ture the essence of life in paint and color. 6 Bundy, op. cit. (n. 1 above), chap. 3, p. 14.
76 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY c) Our argument for teaching all stu- dents the use of the catalog is based on a fallacy. Library literature holds that the student should acquire proficiency in the independent use of library re- sources as an essential part of his for- mal education and in support of his continuing self-education. Public li- brarians have convinced themselves that students now in high school will avidly continue their self-education throughout their adult lives, for which they will need to make continued use of the tools of research. The fact of the matter is that very few will ever put foot in the public library, and, as stated above, half of those who do come will want a good book to read rather than informational material. Most people pursue their lives unaware of a need for books. No one ever inspired them to read for pleasure, and they get along without looking up information. As for continuing self-education, that is the last item on their agenda. I would guess that not one in a thousand citizens of our big cities is continuing his self-edu- cation to the extent of needing to do research. d) The time saved if we gave up our futile attempt to teach everyone to use the catalog could be spent in the in- tensive promotion of reading. Instead of teaching the use of the catalog, we would have time for more class visits to talk about books, for assembly pro- grams on reading, for book lists, news- paper articles, reading clubs, for help- ing individuals on the floor, and going out into the community to promote reading. The teaching of a skill is not so valuable as the development of a cul- tural attitude. Steve Allen once introduced on his comedy hour an egghead professor so brilliant he had found an answer for which there was no question. Librarians teaching the use of the catalog in the past gave many of the disadvantaged adults who never use the library an- swers for which they have never had a question. 5. We are not meeting new chal- lenges with new ideas.-It is common knowledge that in the last twenty years the population of the American city has changed. In the past, the public library catered to the affluent middle class. To- day, large numbers of them have fled the city, leaving behind the poor, the disadvantaged, the culturally deprived. Instead of college-bound, well-fed, well- mannered young people, we have thou- sands of adolescents who live in ghettos on relief, without a father, and with a mother who never passed the third grade. In their homes, they never hear an interesting conversation or any men- tion of good taste and ethical standards. Too many drop out of school, commit crimes, take dope, join mobs, and hate all authority and established institu- tions. The whole concept of voluntary reading is foreign to them. But all this has made little difference in the public library's mode of procedure. The books are still on the shelves for those who wish to borrow them. This setup, which was never successful with the middle class, is doomed to failure with the masses. Here the public library faces its greatest challenge. Realizing the seriousness of the pres- ent crisis, the Fund for the Advance- ment of Education has granted $200,- 000 to VISTA to equip its workers with portable paperback libraries and has published a guide to show them how to make the best use of the books-how to talk about them, how to lend them, and when and how to give them away-in fact, how to make books and reading exciting and meaningful for the disad- vantaged. One of the public library's
THE URBAN LIBRARY AND THE ADOLESCENT 77 problems has always been our isolation from the masses, but the VISTA work- er overcomes that by living as well as working with the people. The public li- brary might have taken advantage of this unusual contact to experiment with ways of reaching the disadvantaged with books, but it was the educational world that had the inspiration and con- cern to plan the experiment. Even so, there are other ways of getting into the streets and into the lives of city people. If we have creative ideas and dedicated librarians, money can be found. In his Hooked on Books,7 D. N. Fader tells how he has influenced the rebellious, indifferent delinquents of the Maxey School to read three books apiece each week. While he is working in a controlled situation and is new to the field, his love of books and his suc- cess in transmitting enthusiasm for reading are well worth study. Another suggestion for reaching the public would be a regular national tele- vision program sponsored by ALA that would dramatize books and reading in such a highly professional, effective way that libraries all over the nation would feel its impact. Another suggestion came to me in a letter from a high school student who had read my comments about the pub- lic library. He proposed that libraries employ teen-agers in the summertime to promote reading with other teen- agers. If these young people were well trained and supervised, they might do an effective job and possibly furnish new recruits for librarianship. Creative librarians will be able to think of many new approaches to mak- ing books truly meaningful to adoles- cents, but whether real progress is made depends largely on the administrator. If he believes in reading promotion for the adolescent and gives it his full sup- port, half the battle is won; but to at- tain a real breakthrough, the adminis- trator needs what David Lillienthal considers the highest quality of super- vision-the ability to release talent, to develop the truly creative staff mem- bers. The administrator with vision and dedication to reading cannot wait for library schools to train his young adult assistants; most of them can offer little help. He might do better to consult with libraries that have set up effective in- service training programs for young adult librarians. Then he should find the person on his staff with the widest general reading background and an ob- vious love for people. With such a per- son as supervisor, a do-it-yourself train- ing program could be set up which, coupled with high standards and the release of talent, would find its own way toward making reading meaningful and enriching to the city's adolescents. We are today on the verge of revolu- tion and anarchy in our cities. There never was a time when the hordes of Negro youth so needed people, ideas, and institutions to believe in. It is time the library reached out to these young people. It is time we convinced all ado- lescents-the fortunate, the accelerat- ed, and the deprived-that the public library can furnish them not only the informational material they need but the wonder and joy of reading as well. The Book is our message. "Hol every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters, and he that hath no money; come ye, buy, and eat; yea, come, buy wine and milk without mon- ey and without price."8 I Daniel N. Fader and Morton H. Shaevitz, Hooked on Books (New York: Berkley Publishing Corp., 1966). 'Isaiah 55:1.