COMMENT SCIENCE AND NONSCIENCE IN QUALITATIVE RESEARCH: A RESPONSE TO THOMAS AND NYCE Alan R. Sandstrom and Pamela Effrein Sandstrom In their reaction to our article "The Use and Misuse of Anthropological Methods in Library and Information Science Research," Nancy P. Thomas and James M. Nyce accuse us of promulgating a "single science" that they would like to replace with a broader, more inclusive epistemology [1, 2]. While in their eyes we stand guilty of the "reduction of science and ethnography," they demonstrate their toler- ance and ecumenical spirit by recommending that approaches such as discourse analysis should have a central place in scientific investigation. We strongly disagree with both their characterization of our work and their recommendations. Even a cursory reading of our article reveals that we do not reduce science. In fact, we work hard to expand it beyond the narrow confines often ascribed to it by the antiscience crowd. We describe an inclusive approach to using scientific ethnogra- phy to investigate human thought and behavior. While appearing to broaden sci- ence, Thomas and Nyce are in fact blurring the distinction between science and nonscience in the study of human beings. Rather than increase the reach of scien- tific method, they undermine the very "systematicity and rigor" in research they claim to value. They cannot admit that they reject science outright, but this, in effect, is precisely what they do. We hope that library and information science (LIS) researchers will see through the hidden agenda of Thomas and Nyce and avoid the radical relativism that lies at the heart of their program. Although failing to identify themselves as such, Thomas and Nyce clearly fall in with the general category of postmodern or social-constructionist critics of science that we refer to in our article. Like postmodernists in general, they are long on rhetoric and short on specifics. They do not define discourse analysis, show how it would be of use to LIS researchers, or provide a single example of why this approach is superior to the scientific ethnography that we outline in our article. No mention is made about how we are to evaluate one discourse analysis over another. Are all such analyses of equal value? We are left wondering how such an approach can produce knowledge that is both valid and reliable and why it should replace scien- tific ethnography that has proven its success over the decades. If they intend dis- course analysis to supplement scientific work, they do not specify how this would be accomplished. In the terminology of scientific ethnography, Thomas and Nyce presumably are interested in emic data. What about the etic perspective on social interaction? Do they presume that merely revealing what is in people's heads (for example, values and worldview) or the hidden biases of analysts who write about [Library Quarterly, vol. 68, no. 2, pp. 249-254] ? 1998 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-2519/98/6802-0006$02.00 249
250 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY people's behavior provides sufficient grounds to explain social life? From the lack of specificity in their response, all we can do is guess at the answers to these questions. While accusing us of "rhetorical ferocity," Thomas and Nyce are not above a touch of ferocity in their own writing. They claim that we label critics such as them- selves "unscrupulous power elites and charlatans." They have not read our article. What we say is, "Those who would reduce social research merely to thick descrip- tions of emic states undermine efforts to achieve scientific knowledge of human behavior and leave people vulnerable to unscrupulous power elites and charlatans" [1, p. 176]. Thomas and Nyce characterize our argument as a "religious polemic," when in fact we defend scientific ethnography against attempts such as theirs to subvert the ability of scientific research to approach an objective understanding of the world. We stand accused of being "inconsistent and disingenuous," when we argue that science is only one way of knowing. We are neither inconsistent nor disingenuous in our stance. We continue to maintain that there are other ways of knowing, but we insist that only by applying scientific methods can we produce knowledge of scientific value. Religious or aesthetic value must derive from other approaches to the problem of knowledge. Thomas and Nyce write that we "appear to limit [research] to investigations of information seeking in information systems." Nothing could be farther from the truth. We clearly state in our article that scientific ethnography is limited only by the imagination of the researcher. They are also disturbed because we select researchers for praise who have "kept faith with scien- tific values" while dismissing critics of science. The bibliography in our article con- tains 152 sources, including many that exemplify the antiscience bias that we de- plore. We quote extensively from these works and try to explain why we are in disagreement with them. Thomas and Nyce's reliance on such notorious enemies of rationality and science as Paul Feyerabend and Richard Shweder should forewarn readers of the degree to which they have abandoned any hope of systematic knowl- edge of the social world. It is not clear to Thomas and Nyce to whom we attribute responsibility for the antiscientific thrust of some contemporary advocates of ethnography. In our article we clearly identify people like Clifford Geertz, a cultural anthropologist, postmod- ernists, and a list of researchers in sociology, education, and LIS who spearhead the antiscience movement (Gilbert Ryle is a philosopher and not a cultural anthro- pologist, as our critics would have it). Much of the antiscience rhetoric comes from within cultural anthropology itself. We fully acknowledge that. What we tried to do in our article is to warn LIS researchers not to fall for the nihilist despair that has captured some cultural anthropologists who cannot or will not do field ethnography of their own. In our reading, we found that LIS researchers were following the lead of this vocal minority and neglecting traditional scientific ethnography that forms the core of anthropological research. We have tried to correct the narrow definition of ethnography one often encounters in LIS publications. We point out that LIS researchers are overlooking the large body of work done in cultural anthropology that they seem to be duplicating in their articles and books. Anthropologists have been conducting ethnographic research under often trying conditions since the turn of the century. Why not take advantage of their insights rather than reinvent them? The debate between science and nonscience certainly still rages within cul- tural anthropology; see, for example, recent works that chronicle the struggle [3, 4]. The true postmodernist and antiscientific stance of Thomas and Nyce is revealed when they attempt to characterize our assumptions about science and ethnography. They derisively dismiss our discussion of canons of scientific knowledge, the need to strive for objectivity, the criterion of replicability in research, the need to identify
COMMENT 251 theoretical and empirical problems, the search for laws, and the goal of explanation. They accuse us of advocating "positivistic certainty," when everything in our article speaks against such a simplistic formulation. They overlook our discussions of prob- abilistic causation and the goal of approaching an objective view of social life with- out ever being able to achieve it completely. One of our greatest blind spots, ac- cording to Thomas and Nyce, is our assumption that "there is a real world out there which can be discovered" providing that "appropriately trained researchers apply appropriate methods." We fear that we are guilty as charged of this sin. But we would like to know exactly what alternative view they offer in its place. Is it a reality in which every social group determines its own world, where we are hopeless prisoners of our tribal group, gender, social class, race, and religion? Is there no way to transcend these provincialisms and with discipline and skill approach an objective view of the world and its inhabitants? Perhaps a telling criticism of us is that we supposedly "eschew a distinction between social facts and natural facts." This old distinction traces most recently to the neo-Kantians of the late nineteenth century and is not directly addressed in our article. We think that the human mind and the social and cultural systems that humans create are part of nature and, al- though the study of human beings presents difficulties, they can be fruitfully ana- lyzed within a scientific framework. For Thomas and Nyce, humans are beyond nature, perhaps even supernatural, and require nonscientific approaches to get at a deeper truth about them. It is an uncomfortable fact that Thomas and Nyce and their fellow postmodernists come close to being secular creationists. For this reason, their accusation that our article is a religious polemic takes on a special irony. In our article, we clearly state that "If LIS researchers want to reject positivist science, take a humanities approach in their work, and simply write descriptions that evoke what it means to participate in a social scene, that is certainly their right" [1, p. 171 ]. Yet Thomas and Nyce claim that we are trying to impose some "golden mean" on the field that will stultify the search for answers to "fundamental ques- tions." We are not concerned that people like Thomas and Nyce wish to pursue nonscientific research programs. They may even produce interesting results, but they will not be scientific results. What we fear is their apparent intent to replace the scientific approach to ethnography with some amorphous hodgepodge lack- ing the minimal criteria for scientific research that they readily disparage. There are accepted means for doing scientific research, and these are not hard to define. Scientific research remains the best approach to producing valid and reliable infor- mation about the social and natural worlds. The information it produces is available and of potential use to every human being in the world. Until they can demonstrate that the approach they advocate offers an advantage over science and that it pro- duces valid and reliable findings about social life not possible through scientific means, science should not be abandoned or compromised out of existence. The fact is that research findings even from nonscientific approaches will be convincing to the degree that they replicate standard scientific canons of evidence. Otherwise, it is just the author's word against everyone else. Thomas and Nyce further display their unfamiliarity with our article by claiming that we relativize both science and the kind of knowledge that it produces. Appar- ently, according to our critics, we simultaneously reduce and narrow science to the point where it cannot address the big questions and relativize it so that it is too broad to be of use. We do neither. We wished to point out the difference between working scientists and philosophers. The debate over positivism is basically a philo- sophical issue that little affects scientists in the lab or the field. Scientists occupied by trying to match empirical observations with theoretical expectations often are
252 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY able to create knowledge even though they may have little knowledge or interest in the philosophical issues that underlie their work. We are not philosophers and do not pretend to be. We are interested in creating a space within LIS for scientifically oriented ethnographic researchers to do what they do best, that is, make theoreti- cally informed empirical observations of social life. In addition, Thomas and Nyce claim that we seem to recognize that scientific results are contingent and then go on to contradict ourselves by saying that science is rigorous and objective. We do not have the slightest idea what they mean when they say that scientific results are contingent. Contingent on what? We do maintain and clearly point out in our arti- cle that scientific results are provisional, that is, subject to revision when better information or theoretical formulations become available. They accuse us of con- tending that scientific methods are "perspective-free." Nowhere do we contend such a thing. If our critics mean to imply that the social, political, and economic context in which scientists operate can influence their research, we agree. Few would disagree with such an obvious statement. To paraphrase our article, Thomas and Nyce have constructed a false image of science so that they can then proceed to deconstruct that same image [1, p. 176, n. 14], following Philip D. Young [5]. We are then accused of being dupes for the ruling class in our defense of scientific ethnography. Our critics suggest that hidden in our arguments are constructions of power and authority that we perpetuate, thus presumably contributing to the exploitation of weak and powerless peoples all over the world. This excursion into postmodern double-talk would be laughable if it were not taken seriously by people such as Thomas and Nyce. Science is a proven and effective means for learning about the natural and social worlds. Scientific knowledge can be used for or against people, it can save lives or kill, but in and of itself it neither exploits nor liberates (unless one includes liberation from ignorance). If Thomas and Nyce would be willing to discuss the military and political use of scientific knowledge, or funding sources and their influence on what research is pursued, we could understand and probably would agree with them. But to link these political-economic factors with the epistemology of science is wrongheaded. Scientific knowledge is found in all cultures, even those not organized along class lines. According to our critics, we also ignore the "constitutive nature of language in shaping and valuing the world." We do not ignore this topic; it simply has nothing to do with what we wrote about. Thomas and Nyce's apparent nominalism should not stand in the way of their grasp- ing the significant features of scientific research. Regardless of whether reality shapes language or language shapes perceptions of reality, scientific ethnography has significantly increased our understanding of the sociocultural systems of the world's peoples. Thanks to scientific ethnography and in spite of its shortcomings and the difficulties of conducting this type of research, our knowledge of the human condition is far in advance of what it was even a few years ago. Thomas and Nyce should expand their reading in anthropology beyond the works of the antiscience crowd before they make pronouncements about the field. In our article we tried to warn LIS researchers that there is more to cultural anthro- pology than the current evanescent postmodernist fad. Apparently some readers did not find our advice worth following. Anthropology's four subfields have always been a lightning rod for intellectual currents, and it is most unfortunate that LIS is discovering ethnographic methods just when several prominent anthropologists have given up hope of gaining systematic knowledge of human social life. But while this chorus of naysayers has received a disproportionate share of attention over the past ten years, many ethnographers have gone about their work in field sites all over the world producing solid empirical studies in the scientific tradition. Even
COMMENT 253 postmodernists recognize that ethnographic research is rooted in the scientific tra- ditions of the late nineteenth century. They speak of a so-called experimental mo- ment in the 1980s that fuels their hope of turning ethnography away from its scien- tific origins. But it is simply wrong to imply that Franz Boas was an opponent of scientific anthropology. He spent his life trying to improve the scientific standing of anthropology in the face of the grandiose, ethnocentric, and racist schemes of his contemporaries and immediate predecessors. That Boas was influenced by the neo-Kantians, including Dilthey and his conception of the human sciences, does not make Boasian anthropology less scientific: "If historical method was different than physical method, it was not therefore outside of or distinct from science" [6, p. 11], and "in practice, Boas conceived of history in rather traditional and indeed somewhat positivistic terms" [6, p. 13]. Indeed, "Boas was a veritable fortress of scientific sobriety in comparison with most of his contemporaries" [7, p. 253]. He was a radical inductivist who insisted on first-hand field research for the gathering of empirical information. Near the end of his life he lost faith that his method would lead to the discovery of universal laws of culture. But this did not mean that Boas lost faith in science-quite the contrary: "For him, science was very much a sacred enterprise" [7, p. 257], and Boasian anthropology "saw itself, and presented itself to the public at large, as scientific anthropology" [6, p. 15]. Thomas and Nyce's discussion of the nature of ethnography leaves us baffled. For them it is not a method per se, but it is intended to be a strong form of analysis that answers hard questions that relate to social issues. In addition, this strong analy- sis is achieved through "iterative questioning and revising of its own practices and categories." Furthermore, they claim to agree with us in this characterization. How- ever, we do not subscribe to their views on ethnography and we believe that they have seriously misrepresented what we say in our article. For us ethnography is an approach to the study of social behavior that is composed of a number of specific methods (for example, kinship analysis, census taking, observation, componential analysis, collection of oral narratives, etc.; cf. [1, p. 169]). Participant observation is a form of ethnography, and most anthropologists use these terms interchange- ably. No successful research strategy continually revises its practices and catego- ries-this is sheer nonsense. Ethnographers must be flexible and they must find multiple ways to double-check their findings, but ethnography, as a group of specific methods, can be taught to students and the best examples can be replicated by other field-workers. We believe that scientific ethnography has caused a revolution in the study of human behavior and thought, for reasons outlined in our article. We have no idea what Thomas and Nyce mean when they say that ethnography can answer the "fundamental" or "hard" questions or address critical "other prob- lems," simply because they do not identify what these are. Whatever they are, we stand accused of robbing ethnography of the ability to answer them. As an alternative to the narrow-minded scientism they feel that we advocate, our critics offer discourse analysis, "particularly if its units of analysis are broadly de- fined and are tied analytically say, through media, to the production and reproduc- tion of experience." What can this mean? Whatever it is, the assumption they hold is that information is a "discursive construct." This vague suggestion is the alternative Thomas and Nyce offer to replace one hundred years of extremely fruitful, even revolutionary, progress in understanding the human condition through scientific ethnography? Nowhere do they address the specific criticisms in our article that we level at antiscientific researchers, nor do they address the major issues we discuss. No mention is made of the emic-etic distinction, the qualitative-quantitative dichot- omy, the interplay between induction and deduction, or the problem of represent-
254 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY ing real humans in analysis. Their critique is based on a vague and generalized rejection of science as an example of a hidden power structure that falsifies reality in the interests of ruling elites. What they do not seem to realize is that their rejec- tion of the search for systematic, objective knowledge about social life robs people of their ability to counteract definitions of the world by self-serving elites. We ask Thomas and Nyce what in their approach to ethnography makes them think that it can stand up to fascism, racism, sexism, and ethnocentrism as successfully as the proven record of scientific ethnography and its fundamental assumption of the never-ending search for objective truth? REFERENCES 1. Sandstrom, Alan R, and Pamela Effrein Sandstrom. "The Use and Misuse of Anthropolog- ical Methods in Library and Infornation Science Research." Library Quarterly 65 (April 1995): 161-99. 2. Thomas, Nancy P., and Nyce,James M. "Qualitative Research in LIS-Redux: A Response to a [Re]turn to Positivistic Ethnography." Library Quarter 68 (January 1998): 108-13. 3. Fox, Robin. "State of the Art/Science in Anthropology." In The Flight frm Science and Reason, edited by Paul R. Gross, Norman Levitt, and Martin W. Lewis, pp. 327-45. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, vol. 775 (June 24, 1996). New York: New York Academy of Sciences, 1996 (proceedings of a conference held in New York, May 31-June 2, 1995, published separately as a monograph). 4. Kuznar, Lawrence A. Reclaiming a Scintific Anthropolo. Walnut Creek, Calif.: AltaMira, 1997. 5. Young, Philip D. "Facets of Ethnography: Practice, Theory, Fiction." Reviews in Anthropl- og 22 (1993): 115-25. 6. Stocking, George W.,Jr. "Introduction: The Basic Assumptions of Boasian Anthropology." In A Franz Boas Reader: The Shaping of American Anthropology, 1883-1911, edited by George W. Stocking, Jr., pp. 1-20. New York: Basic Books, 1974. 7. Harris, Marvin. "Historical Particularism: Boas." In The Rise of Anthropological Theory: A History of Theories of Culture, by Marvin Harris, pp. 250-89. New York: Crowell, 1990.