THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Volume 60 JANUARY 1990 Number 1 IN A STATE OF EMERGENCY: LIBRARIES AND GOVERNMENT CONTROL IN SOUTH AFRICA Christopher Merrett' Six levels are identified in the South African censorship system, providing the context for consideration of one of them: the State of Emergency. Four catego- ries of censorship emerge: prior censorship and suspension of publication; restraints upon information gathering; the suppression of anti-apartheid view- points; and the growth of militarization. The State of Emergency is seen as a microcosm of the system as a whole, and a comparison is made with "traditional" censorship of books. Emergency censorship is considered to be a radical tactical change whose impact on library resources and research in the humanities and social sciences is evaluated. In spite of the power and pervasiveness of the censorship system, it is concluded that there is still room for challenge and that a new breed of librarian is likely to play an important role in the process. Introduction The South African censorship system is a massive and pervasive institu- tion of such influence in society that it is generally considered in terms of its disaggregated parts. The danger of this approach lies in the fact that censorship as an institution is forgotten: the specific aspect under scrutiny gives a skewed perspective of the system in its entirety. Thus, to some, censorship conjures up a picture of books and periodicals under lock and key in the library; for others, the suspension or outright 1. Deputy University Librarian, University of Natal, P.O. Box 375, Pietermaritzburg, South Africa 3200. [Library Quarterly, vol. 60, no. 1, pp. 1-22] ? 1990 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-2519/90/6001-0001 $0 1.00 1
2 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY banning of newspapers hostile to government ideology; and, to yet others, the detention, harassment through the legal process, or assassi- nation of those activists who provide oral and published accounts of the aims and aspirations of anti-apartheid organizations. Many other im- ages, equally valid, are possible, but it is vital not to lose sight of the broader canvas which provides clues to the complex issue of government tactics. The relative importance of censorship's component parts at any given time, however, indicates changing official approaches and percep- tions. The system as a whole may be characterized as an inverted triangle comprising six layers, ranging from the broadest at the top to the most specific at the bottom. A fundamental means of censorship in South Africa is the institutionalized system of economic and social exploitation known to the world as apartheid, or separate development. Its aim is to perpetuate political control by that group designated "White," and in recent years it has attempted to make allies among middle-class seg- ments of other racially defined groups of South Africans: Indian, Col- oured, and Black. The vast mass of the people of the country remain a powerless and impoverished proletariat either in urban areas or, in- creasingly, in rural slums from which labor is drawn as required [1, 2]. Thus the economic structure of South Africa keeps the mass of the people at a safe distance from the means to communicate and without the political power to begin to change the national political economy. The next level involves education, sometimes described as the greatest censor [3, p. 24]. State education has for decades been used for ideolog- ical purposes by the South African government [4, p. 14] to reinforce the privileged position of Whites and to control the social and political potential and economic utility of the Black majority. The inferiority of Black education is demonstrated by the relative sums spent on White and Black children: the latest show that in 1985/86 R 2,746 was spent on each White child. The figures for those classified as Indian and Col- oured were R 1,386 and R 891, respectively. Black children living in white areas had R 387 spent on them, while the figures for the bantu- stans varied from a high of R 278 in Bophuthatswana to a low of R 184 in Lebowa [5]. These figures give a quantitative indication of relative deprivation. They have been given a graphic dimension by the Soweto Uprising of 1976 and persistent school boycotts and stayaways ever since. While the political economy denies access to the infrastructure of communications, except of course that controlled by the government, inferior education denies children the chance to develop their linguistic skills and potential for structured thought and persuasive reasoning. Taken together, these two means of censorship constitute an oppressive structure which is specifically designed to deny to the mass of the people the means and ability to communicate their frustrations, aspirations, or
IN A STATE OF EMERGENCY 3 essential humanity to their fellow South Africans, a human right with- held because it poses a threat to the continued existence of apartheid. For individual leaders and activists who escape these circumstances, the government has erected an impressive array of security legislation aimed at silencing the individual right to communicate. A complex set of statutes built around the Suppression of Communism Act of 1950 was centralized in the Internal Security Act of 1982. This legalizes a vast array of human rights infringements: individuals may be banned from any activity involving communication and restricted to given areas, a form of civic death; individuals may be detained for interrogation, as state witnesses or for preventive reasons, and in such circumstances many thousands have been tortured mentally or physically; organiza- tions may be banned and their assets seized; and publications such as newspapers similarly proscribed. All of these measures imply broad forms of censorship, and their frequent use has created a climate of fear and uncertainty which has partially achieved the aim of which censors in totalitarian states dream: the self-censored society. The fact that the authorities have failed to achieve a convenient symbiosis between the threat of repressive legislation and quiescence of the critical is epitomized by the States of Emergency declared under the Public Safety Act of 1953. The first was imposed on March 30, 1960, and lasted 123 days [6]. The second was declared on July 21, 1985, and covered various parts of the country, mainly in the Transvaal and Cape Province, until lifted on March 7, 1986 [7]. The respite lasted only until June 12, 1986, with the declaration of a national Emergency which is still in effect at the time of writing [8] and which some observers maintain can never be lifted by the present regime. The State of Emergency has a number of purposes encapsulated in the Winning Hearts and Minds (WHAM) strategy: to buy the compliance of radicalized communities through material improvement; to isolate and destroy popular political organizations by detaining leaders and activists, thus raising to unaccept- able levels the price of anti-apartheid involvement; and to place in officially approved political structures compliant Black politicians more amenable to a future without fundamental change. The successful pros- ecution of such policies requires a severe level of censorship in order to prevent the circulation inside and outside the country of evidence of the means used by the South African government to put down the popular revolt which grew from the Vaal Uprising at Sebokeng on September 3, 1984 [9]. In effect the State of Emergency is an admission of failure and weakness beneath a facade of kragdadigheid.2 Its censorship provisions, 2. An Afrikaans word which translates as "forcefulness." In a political context it means ironfistedness and relates to steamroller tactics.
4 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY and their effect on library collections and intellectual activity, form the central investigation of this article. A fifth level of censorship is embodied in statutes which address specific segments of South Africa's economy and society and restrict the flow of information to that provided or endorsed by official spokesper- sons. Innovative reporters and commentators willing to risk criminal proceedings occasionally find loopholes in the legislation, but in general it is true to say that nothing may be published on the police, prisons, oil supply, uranium, nuclear energy, defense, post mortem proceedings, national supplies procurement, or national keypoints without official sanction. The Prohibition of Information and Laws on Cooperation and Development Acts of 1982 tightened the grip of the authorities upon information about government policies and activities. This body of legis- lation has the specific purpose of distorting the information system of the country and creating a skewed model which not only denies factual data to the population at large but also inhibits the development of ideas and paves the way for the acceptance of government propaganda and misinformation [10, pp. 21-22]. The government is also withholding more information from the public: two recent examples involve detailed tourism figures and ship movements, details of which are no longer published because of economic sanctions. Finally, two statutes, the Publications Act of 1974 and the Internal Security Act of 1982, provide for the banning of specific bodies of literature, the proscription of which has had a significant impact upon political discourse and academic activity. The details have been reported elsewhere [11, 12], but a summary completes this description of South African state censorship. The Publications Act proscribes titles, some of which are deemed "possession prohibited." The Internal Security Act bans all the work of banned and listed3 persons numbering 417 in August 1988 [13]; works published by or disseminating the policy of illegal organizations (possession prohibited); and titles deemed to pro- mote the aims of communism (also possession prohibited). Large librar- ies, including all academic libraries, hold blanket permits enabling them to lend material which does not fall into possession-prohibited categories to students and academics, provided the titles are normally held under 3. The distinction between listed and banned persons is important. Listed persons, many of whom are political exiles, generally belong to a proscribed organization like the South African Communist Party, Congress of Democrats, or Congress of South African Students. They may not be quoted, and listing may extend beyond the life of an individual. Banned persons have specific restrictions placed on them for defined pe- riods, and banning orders expire with the death of an individual. The banned category has been largely superseded by restriction orders issued under the Emergency, except for a group of people convicted of treason.
IN A STATE OF EMERGENCY 5 lock and key, a register of usage and a separate catalog are kept, consul- tation takes place under supervision, photocopies are not made, and only staff and postgraduates remove them from the library. In the case of the works of banned and listed persons access is denied altogether to undergraduates, and quoting is forbidden while the police have a statu- tory right to monitor the state of the collection. The mere possession of such banned material is not an offense, but importation, retail, circula- tion, display, or continued printing or publication is forbidden, restrict- ing acquisition and usage to the large libraries. The material which falls into the three possession-prohibited categories may not be held by li- braries without the specific permission of the Directorate of Publications or the Director of Security Legislation as appropriate nor may research- ers consult it without similar permission. Under the Internal Security Act the state may demand a R 40,000 bond from new newspapers which it might in future have to ban. The largest such deposit (R 30,000) was requested in December 1988 when the left-wing Afrikaans newspaper Die Vtye Weekblad applied for regis- tration. Article 19, the recently formed international censorship watch- dog organization based in London, estimates that at least ten new news- papers have been stillborn as a result of such sanctions [14, p. 43]. Clearly the Internal Security Act forms part of the state security infra- structure, but so too does the Publications Act. Although it also deals with pornographic and blasphemous material, a large measure of the Publication Act's impact is felt by political publications. In the period 1981/82-1986/87 92 percent of 8,983 original submissions were made by agents of the state such as customs and excise officers, the police, and officials of the Directorate of Publications and only 8 percent by pub- lishers and the general public. During the periods 1980-81/1984-85 and 1986-87, 4,324 (49 percent) of 8,797 titles submitted were found to be undesirable [15]. There is at present a trend to lift bans on books, mainly literary works, academic treatises on Marxism, and dated socio- political analyses of South Africa.4 This does nothing to disguise the fact that much South African research has been exiled; the general ability to understand South African society has been undermined, areas of South Africa are completely closed to research, and self-censorship and privat- ism have become the refuge of South African scholars confronted by real or apparent bibliographic dead ends. In general, it is reasonable to argue that the potential contribution of academics to society as a whole has been undermined, and the social relevance of universities has been diminished [17]. 4. The South African Library in Cape Town, one of the country's five copyright libraries, has been in the forefront of the process of appealing to the Publications Appeal Board to lift restrictions on such works; see [16].
6 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Censorship under the Emergency Such are the different facets of South African censorship from the general to the specific and the context within which to consider the censorship implications of the State of Emergency. This is important because the potential of some sections of the regulations has yet to be realized, and an educated forecast can be made on the bases of state tactics and strategy in other areas of the censorship system. The current national Emergency regulations were first published on June 12, 1986 [8]. Many sections, especially those relating to the media or the detention of persons, were subsequently overturned in whole or in part, by the Natal Supreme Court in particular. Most such liberal judgments were reversed by the Appeal Court in Bloemfontein, a body which tends to show a preference for the state's perceived security needs at the expense of the individual and corporate civil rights of persons and groups oppos- ing apartheid. Where the authorities have failed to win a case on appeal they have simply reworded the regulations at the point of the mandatory renewal of the Emergency at midnight on June 11 of each year [8]; or brought out new sets of regulations such as the Media Emergency Regulations of August 1987 [18]. The annual renewal thus represents a consolidation of proclamations under the Public Safety Act, and for the purpose of this article those gazetted on June 11, 1988, are regarded as operative. Censorship is both implicit and explicit in the Emergency regulations. Four aspects emerge, the most obvious being prior censorship and the suspension of publications, restraints placed upon news gathering at source, and the suppression of anti-apartheid viewpoints. The fourth aspect lies in the degree to which the Emergency epitomizes the growing militarization of South African society, a development which has impli- cations for communication and resource building. The clauses relevant to censorship are contained in the Security and the Media Emergency regulations together with the schedule of restricted organizations. Prior Censorship Under the Emergency it is prohibited to publish information on security force action; restricted gatherings; certain strikes and boycotts deemed subversive; utterances of persons or officials of restricted organizations; the circumstances, treatment, and release of detainees; and advertise- ments published in respect of banned or restricted organizations.5 The 5. The state has had to become more precise about its definition of subversive material. In
IN A STATE OF EMERGENCY 7 determination of the state in this regard is indicated by the prohibition placed upon the publication of blank spaces and deletions which reflect the effect of the regulations6 and on the printing in a second title of material which would have appeared in a suspended publication. Ex- empted from these prohibitions are officials and members of govern- ment departments (some of whom make their own use of the statements of restricted organizations),7 Parliament and the President's Council; most judicial proceedings except those relating to detainees; and, significantly, a bona fide library carrying out normal loan activity. The government version of the news is released by a Bureau of Information set up on September 14, 1985, initially to present abroad a more palat- able version of South African reality [19, p. 62]. In the opinion of some analysts the Bureau of Information is not only a manager of news but also an agent of repression because since June 12, 1986, it has been the sole source for reporting unrest. The bureau typifies the belief that the key to the struggle for South Africa is the control of information [20, p. 55; 21, p. 16; 22]. Thus Louis Nel, deputy minister of Information, was able to put forward the view that South Africa does not have censorship, just a limitation on what can be reported [23]. It is unlikely that a library will be prosecuted for circulating a publica- tion containing prohibited information. There are, however, more seri- ous implications for libraries contained in the prohibited-information clauses. The state is attempting to erase from the documented record essential facts about contemporary South African society, a matter of importance for future historians faced with gaps in published material. These are likely to affect researchers interested in security force methods, boycott campaigns,8 and political detainees, among more im- portant aspects of South African sociopolitics. The mainline, commer- August 1986 the Natal Supreme Court found only one of six definitions precise enough to be valid in law, a decision which created temporary space for press freedom. During the period September-December 1987, however, it claimed it had identified 301 press reports with subversive content [15, 1986/87, p. 41]. 6. In June 1986 three newspapers, Star, Sowetan, and Weekly Mail, were warned that blank spaces and deletions could be construed as subversion. By way of protest the editor of the Sowetan wrote in his weekly column about a potato. 7. Talking with the ANC, published in Johannesburg by the Department of Information in 1986, quotes the South African Communist Party (SACP) nine times and the African National Congress (ANC) thirty-four times. 8. In the crisis of political legitimacy and economic decline in which the South African system finds itself, boycott is an important nonviolent means of protest for anti- apartheid South Africans. Election boycotts have challenged the racist constitutional dispensation; rent and service boycotts, the financially exploitative nature of Black local government; and consumer boycotts, White right-wing city councils and Black organi- zations believed to be collaborating with the system.
8 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY cial press has been effectively muzzled by these restrictions as well as by non-Emergency security legislation and a traditional caution born of conservative management and the pressures of advertising revenue. Since the early 1980s there has developed, however, an alternative philosophy in the press which, while operating under enormous con- straints, has had the courage to test and challenge these Emergency regulations to the limit. For example, the actions of the security forces may not be reported, but it has been possible to document the reactions of crowds in such a way that the informed reader understands quite clearly what has happened, for example, in a tear gas attack.9 The alternative press has also tested the regulations by arguing that once the police have issued a daily "unrest report," newspapers may add their own information and interpretation.'0 In this way the alternative press has attempted to preserve for the historical record information about the condition of South Africa by extending the tradition of confronting gray areas of security legislation with pro-active and aggressive re- sponses to the Emergency regulations Seizure Under the State of Emergency, however, the potential for creative interpretation of the law has been severely curtailed. The authorities have general powers of entry, search, and seizure, and specific power to seize publications or recordings. Such seizures became more common in 1988. For example, on July 20, 1988, police seized 14,300 copies of the Learn and Teach booklet The Historic Speech of Nelson Rolihiala Mandela at the Rivonia Trial even though the speech is part of open court proceed- ings and the documented history of South Africa. Excerpts had already been printed by two newspapers and the Bureau of Information in its propaganda pamphlet Talking with the ANC. In the ensuing case in the Rand Supreme Court, Mr. Justice Gordon described the Emergency as a "super censor over the courts" [26]. On August 5, volume 4, number 30 of the Weekly Mail was seized, followed by forty-eight hours of silence before the police provided an explanation. It was accused by the au- thorities of flouting the regulations concerning reporting of security force action and undermining conscription by covering the views of 9. A good example is contained in [24]. Similarly police cars are known as "familiar yellow vehicles" and the police themselves as "people who may not be named because of the Emergency regulations." 10. This was rejected by the Rand Supreme Court in a case following seizure of the Weekly Mail in August 1988. It is not permissible to add facts or report a different version of events; see [251.
IN A STATE OF EMERGENCY 9 conscientious objectors. Al Qalam, an anti-apartheid NMuslim monthly, last appeared in July 1988. In late August, 5,000 copies of the next edition were seized because they contained an advertisement supporting a boycott of the forthcoming municipal elections on October 26. Al Qalam was subjected to repeated raids and the confiscation of documents and photographs in September and October and has not been able to publish since. A fourth seizure involved Crisis News, a Western Province Council of Churches publication, of which 30,000 copies were im- pounded in August. Censorship by seizure was not unknown in pre-Emergency South Africa, but it has become a more frequently used tactic to suppress the publication of anti-apartheid data and opinion. On September 9, 1988, the power of seizure under the Emergency was transferred from the Department of Home Affairs to that of Law and Order, in other words, to the security police. In the past such police powers (under the Internal Security Act) could be challenged in court, but under the Emergency the judiciary has no power to intervene if the police have decided that the regulations have been breached. At the time, it was felt that this might indicate government impatience with the suspension process (see below), which had caused a certain amount of embarrassment through its slow processes, inefficiency, and ensuing dissension [27]. With each new State of Emergency or suspension, elaborate procedures had to be re-initiated and such bureaucracy, it was suggested, did not fit the image of quick, firm, decisive action favored by the security forces. Suspension It subsequently emerged that increased police powers were not to sup- plant the warning and suspension process. Since October 1987 the Minister of Home Affairs has issued a steady stream of warnings against periodical publications and suspended five of them. Under the Emer- gency he has the power to prohibit the publication and production of named titles for up to three months in the case of a registered periodical and for six months when unregistered. Such a suspension is subject to two gazetted warnings, and those warned have the right to make repre- sentations to the minister. Twelve publications have received a first warning so far, as shown in table 1. Eleven of them represent anti- apartheid viewpoints, and the twelfth was a far right publication which is no longer produced. One of the ten has been silenced as its parent body, the End Conscription Campaign, was restricted in August 1988. The purpose of this punitive power was seen at the outset by those likely to be affected as the restriction of reporting on the aims and activities of extra Parliamentary organizations [28].
10 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY TABLE 1 NEWSPAPERS WARNED AND SUSPENDED BY THE MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS AND COMMUNICATIONS UNDER SECTION 6 OF THE MEDIA EMERGENCY REGULATIONS Title Warnings Outcome New Nation October, December 1987 Suspended March 22-June 10, 1988 Work in Progress November, December 1987; January 1988 ... Die Stem November, December 1987 Ceased publication, December 1987 Sowetan November 1987 ... South November, December 1987 Suspended May 10-June 10, 1988 Weekly Mail December 1987; April, Suspended November 1-28, May, August 1988 1988 Grassroots April 1987; January 1988 Suspended February 17-May 16, 1989 Out of Step April 1987 Parent organization restricted August 1988 Saamstaan April 1987 ... New Era June 1988; January 1989 Suspended February 17-May 16, 1989 Free Azania November 1988 Al Qalam January 1989 The first publication to face suspension, New Nation, whose produc- tion is underwritten by the Roman Catholic Church, evaded banning initially, on January 15, 1988, by taking the matter to court. Its case concerned the vagueness of the regulations and the fact that fifteen objections to its contents made by the minister were incomprehensible. Some of the material which he found objectionable had already ap- peared in the Afrikaans Press, for example. The Rand Supreme Court ruled against New Nation, arguing that the Emergency regulations were "abundantly clear" and maintaining that they had been violated in three issues of the newspaper, including one published prior to the gazetting of more stringent media regulations in August 1987 1291.11 The judge effectively advised that doubtful material should be omitted. Another newspaper under threat, the Weekly Mail, put its view of the government's purpose uncompromisingly when New Nation was sus- pended for thirteen weeks on March 22: "They banned the New Nation 11. The state seems to have a particular aversion to New Nation. In November 1988 a young man was arrested at a bus stop in Lebowa for reading a copy of New Nation, back issues of "Learning Nation" were confiscated from his home, and he was questioned by security police at Tzaneen police station; see [30].
IN A STATE OF EMERGENCY 11 and damned it to silence because it dared to reflect the violence of apartheid ... because it gave a voice to the voteless majority ... because it articulated the aspirations of millions of oppressed people" 131]. Weekly Mail expressed its support by publishing on its second page a reproduction of page 3 of the New Nation which would have been published on March 24, 1988, had it not been for the suspension. For three months one particular viewpoint on South African events was thus silenced. In addition New Nation's "Learning Nation" supplement, which promotes a radical interpretation of South African history and serializes courses in bookkeeping, prose writing, algebra, and health, was sup- pressed. This puts forward a philosophy of education which challenges state education and is a valuable cumulating resource in the libraries of human rights and community organizations, and trade unions. The government next suspended South, a Cape Town-based newspa- per, for one month from May 10, 1988. Its editor, Rashid Seria, had pointed out the obvious intention of the authorities to aim at the more peripheral of the alternative newspapers [32], although this action pre- cipitated the international Save the Press Campaign. Suspended newspa- pers have made constructive use of their enforced idleness, for example, helping other community newspapers, launching a press agency, and producing other media [33]. After a lull of some months, during which time the government made strong verbal attacks on the alternative press,12 it took action against the Weekly Mail, suspending it for one month from November 1 in a move that was widely interpreted as a retreat, in the face of international pressure, from more severe action. The Weekly Mail is generally recognized as the most prominent of the alternative press, originally founded in response to the collapse of the Rand Daily Mail in 1985 [35].13 It presents a high standard of reporting on political, economic, and human rights issues in South Africa and an important proportion of analytical material as well as a significant arts section. It is a vital channel for informed, anti-apartheid opinion and has during its three-year history become an important academic resource. It draws upon the work of a number of organizations specializing in distinct sociopolitical fields, such as the Human Rights Commission, Lawyers for Human Rights, and the South African Council of Churches, and makes this information accessible on a weekly basis. Although the Weekly Mail is vulnerable to the standard deficiencies of newspapers as an academic source, it provides what is frequently the only material of 12. Minister of Home Affairs Stoffel Botha described the alternative press on May 18, 1988, as "media terrorists" who gave publicity to "revolutionaries"; see [341. 13. The state president of South Africa heralded the closure as a step toward "consensual politics" [35, p. 7].
12 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY any depth on crucial aspects of the South African condition. Since it is indexed, it is an interim resource filling the gap between the annual publication of Survey of Race Relations [36], recognized as a primary source on South African affairs. A breakdown of the material found objectionable by the minister gives an indication of the explicit threat to research endeavor contained in the paper's suspension. He was particu- larly concerned about its coverage of security force action, the activities and aims of banned and restricted organizations, and the views of conscientious objectors, all topics deserving comprehensive coverage in the nation's libraries and vital to a reasoned debate about the future of South Africa. A closer look at the articles found offensive further illustrates this: publication of constitutional guidelines put forward by the African National Congress accompanied by sober analysis and some hostile comment; an academic analysis by a respected political scientist at the University of the Witwatersrand on the current state of the Pan Africanist Congress; and a general article on the secretary general of the South African Council of Churches, Frank Chikane. The minister is obliged to list the items which offend but not to give reasons [37, p. 145]. Further measures gazetted against the press include the proscription of titles regarded as continuations of suspended publications and the compulsory deposit of copies of periodicals free of charge for scrutiny. These restrictions also frustrate the publication process. Information Gathering A particular characteristic of the State of Emergency has been its inhibit- ing effect on information gathering at source. This is not a new develop- ment, as restrictions on access to Black areas of South Africa have long been in force, but the Emergency regulations are specifically framed in order to prevent the gathering of certain types of information. For instance, reporters and photographers are obliged to remove themselves from the scene of security force action, and the taking of photographs is forbidden. Trained observers are frequently excluded by declaring an area, such as the scene of a strike, an "operational zone" even where there is no active unrest. In this fashion, the methods and conduct of the security forces remain unobserved by those with the skills and inclina- tion to add such data to the documented record of contemporary South Africa. At the time of the declaration of the fifth Emergency on June 11, 1988, the government announced its intention to register news agency businesses and those employed by them [38]. The South African govern- ment has long wanted to control journalists, and a register was suggested
IN A STATE OF EMERGENCY 13 by the 1982 Steyn Commission, but this has been averted by self- regulation agreements with the mainline Newspaper Press Union (NPU). In the 1980s, however, parallel to the growth of the alternative press has been the development of alternative news agencies which have gathered information and released it to the press in a way incompatible with the State of Emergency. The proposed register was aimed at such activity, but its implications were imperfectly thought out, opposition was intense, and the regulation was withdrawn on July 28, 1988. How- ever, the threat of registration, which has hung over South African journalists for some years, remains. Suppression of Viewpoints At an individual level, the greatest impact of the Emergency has been felt by the detention without trial provisions. The exact number of persons detained since July 1985 is not known because of the disruption experienced by human rights organizations active in this field, the enor- mity of the task, and the lack of monitoring structures in small towns and rural areas. Detention was common before 1985, most notably under the Terrorism and Internal Security Acts, but the numbers of persons detained annually were in the hundreds. Since mid-1985, at least 40,000 people have been detained [39]. Among them have been many journal- ists: for example, almost the entire staff of Saamstaan, an Oudtshoorn community newspaper, have been detained at some stage. Some 500 have been in prison without trial since June 1986, and an equal number have experienced detention for over one year. The purpose of the state is quite clear: this is preventive detention designed to silence articulate leaders and organizers of anti-apartheid organizations.14 Their views, and their ability to disseminate them through any media, are securely locked up in prison in the same way as those of fellow activists convicted in the many political trials that have taken place in South Africa since the mid-1950s. 15 Those who have been released enter what has become known in now rather cliched terms as the larger prison of South Africa. Important 14. One of the longest-serving detainees, Louis Mnguni, is a lecturer in philosophy from the University of the North at Turfloop and Northern Transvaal president of the United Democratic Front. Held since June 12, 1986, he was hospitalized twice during his detention, which ended in mid-February 1989. 15. The latest is the Delmas Treason Trial involving a 420-day trial, twenty-two defen- dants, and 911 individual and fifty organizational co-conspirators. The conviction of four of the defendants on treason charges effectively made illegal mass peaceful mobilization against apartheid.
14 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY leaders have been restricted under the Emergency in a fashion less obvious than those banned in the pre-Emergency era under the Internal Security Act. Gone are the days when careers were callously wrecked, and all social life was denied. Nevertheless, the restrictions suffered today contain functional and geographical limitations. Although they vary from person to person, they tend to restrict ex-detainees to a given magisterial district and sometimes to evening and night-time house arrest, and frequently contain prohibitions on publishing and public speaking as well as access to institutions involved in the dissemination of information. Such restrictions are now commonplace on the release of long-term high-profile detainees. 16 They may also, since September 22, 1988, simply be gazetted on anyone without being personally served. Similarly the government has acted against anti-apartheid organiza- tions. Under pre-Emergency security legislation organizations were banned and their assets confiscated-the African National Congress (ANC), Pan Africanist Congress (PAC), and the Christian Institute are famous examples. Under the State of Emergency such effective corpo- rate death is not imposed, as organizations are able to exist in name, carry out administrative tasks, and meet financial obligations. Beyond this, all activity is proscribed, including publication of their, or anyone else's, data and ideas. On February 24, 1988, seventeen anti-apartheid organizations were restricted entirely, and the Congress of South Afri- can Trade Unions was prohibited from engaging in any activity outside a narrow definition of trade union work. The seventeen organizations were involved in grassroots anti-apartheid activism, education, and hu- man rights monitoring. A few days later the Committee for the Defense of Democracy, an umbrella body formed in Cape Town to carry on some of these tasks, was itself restricted. In August 1988 the End Conscription Campaign, an organization opposed to military conscription, the occu- pation of Namibia, and the presence of the South African Defence Force in Black townships was restricted, and from October to December twelve more political and community organizations, including one founded in the aftermath of the February restrictions, were effectively banned. The amount of literature thus censored was enormous. Most important, the State of Emergency has cut off the flow of information and opinion concerning conscientious objection, human rights violations (detentions, political trials, assassinations, and disappearances), alternative educa- 16. For example, Zwelakhe Sisulu, editor of New Nation, was held for 735 days and released on December 2, 1988, when he was effectively disbarred from political or journalistic activity. His restriction order runs to three pages and shows that he was held for his work as ajournalist [40]. He had been detained twice before, in 1981 and 1986, and banned between 1980 and 1983.
IN A STATE OF EMERGENCY 15 tion, and grassroots organization and methods of resistance in the Black townships. The government has used relatively low key and sophisticated tech- niques with a primary, but not sole, aim of reinforcing censorship of anti-apartheid viewpoints and data which would cast its actions in a poor light. In the words of Desmond Tutu, archbishop of Cape Town: "The government's idea is to smash effective political opposition, no matter how peaceful and to rule with the jackboot.... Many people see it here as a declaration of war against peaceful and legally operating groups" [41].17 The government's strategy has not been entirely successful. Some churches have taken up part of the work of restricted organizations, and documentation tasks have been shouldered by unaffected bodies. Some restricted groups, especially in the area of human rights monitoring, have re-emerged under new names, and the Human Rights Commission was established in Johannesburg. By the end of 1988 there were signs that the disrupted documentation process was beginning to revive. Militarization The overall characteristic of the current State of Emergency is the extent to which it contributes to the growing militarization of South African society. Under the Emergency a limitation of liability in terms of civil and criminal proceedings covers the actions of all security force person- nel as long as they act in good faith and have reason to believe that they are behaving in the interests of state security. In other words, security force power, including censorship, is virtually limitless unless mala fide can be proved in court. The State of Emergency is the legal device by which the country is increasingly administered by the National Security Management System (NSMS). This has been developed since the late 1970s, and while details are still obscure, it is known that it shadows every level of civil administration from parliament to local government. Each basic unit, known as a Joint Management Centre (JMC) [43], has four main interests: information gathering, security, welfare, and com- munications. The latter function, known by the Afrikaans acronym Komkom (Kommunikasie Kommittee) has relevance to the information dissemination structure of South Africa and thereby to libraries. 18 While a pall of silence has been drawn across so many aspects of South African life, Komkom generates publicity for government initiatives through 17. His opinion is amplified in [42]. 18. It is widely believed that Komkom has a penchant for literary endeavor in the form of smear pamphlets.
16 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY printed and other media forms, with the aid of local organizations which have the approval of the authorities. NSMS strategy is based on the counter-insurgency theory of Beaufr6 [44, pp. 48 ff.], which argues that the "total onslaught" against South Africa manifests itself in a low- intensity civil war in which words and thoughts are weapons [14, p. 41]. There is increasing evidence that those involved in documenting human rights abuses are potential assassination victims.19 No aspect of social, economic, or political life is immune from militarization, and the impact upon libraries is likely to be felt in the form of growing lacunae in collections covering South African affairs. Censorship, Information, and Libraries In many senses the State of Emergency represents a microcosm of South African censorship. Like apartheid itself and its educational system, it is used to divide people from one another and accentuate their differences rather than their common humanity and problems. This is achieved by cutting channels of communication between different communities in such a way that ignorance is encouraged. Like non-Emergency security legislation, it contains the power to silence articulate individuals and influential organizations in a variety of ways, denying them the access to the media that is vital to discourse in such a vast country with its variegated society.20 Like the legislation which controls the flow of data on specific aspects of the political economy, it hampers knowledge about state policy and methodology which would lead to a fuller understand- ing of the nature of South African society and therefore ideas about how it might be changed. Finally, like the statutes which control access to books and periodicals, it allows the state to ban outright, as a last resort, publications which break through the censorship net. Notwithstanding the need to see censorship as a continuum, there is 19. Beliswa Mhlawuli of Grassroots, who appeared in the BBC documentary "Suffer the Children," lost an eye in an attack on her in Guguletu, Cape Town, in early 1988. Godfrey Dhlomo, a young Detainees Parents Support Committee worker, who ap- peared in a similar American documentary, was killed in February 1988 near Johan- nesburg. On May 1, 1989, Dr. David Webster, senior lecturer in social anthropology at the University of the Witwatersrand and a well-known human rights activist, was shot dead by gunmen outside his home. He had just completed a report for the United Nations on political assassinations in South Africa. 20. One of the most disturbing aspects of the declaration of the State of Emergency on June 12, 1986, was the sense of isolation and lack of news about local and national events experienced by those closely involved. A major task of anti-apartheid groups since then has been to keep open channels of communication and to develop alterna- tive media.
IN A STATE OF EMERGENCY 17 virtue in detaching a component such as the State of Emergency and subjecting it to close scrutiny, in particular comparing it to other facets of the system. Although fewer papers are being written on the topic than ten years ago, there is quantitative and qualitative evidence [45, 46] to show that "traditional" censorship, epitomized by the book-banning provisions of the Publications and Internal Security Acts, remains a problem for research and library collection building in South Africa. It is also, however, an obstacle which the adventurous have sometimes been able to avoid. This has been feasible because of a number of internal contradictions in the bureaucratic methods required to sustain it: the need to use librarians, who are not always cooperative, to police the system; the difficulty of tracing all the published work of banned and listed persons; and the impossibility, in a relatively open society with strong links with other countries, of controlling the world's literature. By comparison with the censorship described above as "traditional," the censorship provisions of the State of Emergency may be character- ized as "radical," fully justifying the government's description of its tactics as a "total response." The Emergency censorship provisions re- quire no surrogates, such as librarians, and are directly administered by state agents, representing a significant change in tactics. Lists of titles banned under the Publications and Internal Security Acts suggest that the main area of library stock affected is overseas theoretical material used to place local research in context. Emergency censorship, on the other hand, clearly has little effect on this type of publication. In the course of less than three years, however, it has already had a devastating effect on the collection and publication of the raw material of the sociopolitical and economic condition of South Africa, a trend which will leave a lasting imprint on the country's libraries. The irony of this situation lies in the fact that the Emergency has, in some academic quarters, stimulated the urge to research and document, so dramatic are the events unfolding around people. Nevertheless, intellectual activity was placed under an effective State of Emergency well before 1985, and some aspects have for years been potentially criminalized. The library stock affected has belonged almost exclusively to the arts and social sciences, although a few scientists are to be found in the ranks of the listed.2' The nature of the State of Emer- gency will accentuate this, stifling research in a wide range of fields. Most research in the humanities and social sciences requires as reference 21. For example, the famous South African botanist Eddie Roux, all of whose works on education, South African politics, and history as well as pasture science, rural econ- omy, and plant physiology, are technically still banned because Roux was a member of the South African Communist Party. He died in 1966.
18 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY point or contextual framework a background of documentation, and there are many instances in South Africa where research has been thwarted by an absence of library material. For example, South Africa has one of the world's worst records concerning capital punishment. In 1988 a campaign for its abolition was resuscitated, but attempts by researchers to locate a body of literature on the topic have led to disappointment. The State of Emergency can only exacerbate this type of situation. Clearly, the existing South African political economy desperately needs censorship to achieve optimum levels of conformity and intellec- tual repression and acceptance of official values. By censoring, it reveals itself as extremely insecure. Although the social structure and interna- tional relations of South Africa are very different from those in Eastern Europe, it is possible to apply Milan Kundera's definition of censorship: "organized forgetting" [47, p. 235]. In other words, censorship is a state- orchestrated attempt to erase from popular consciousness and the his- torical record areas of fact and ideas. Two prominent anti-apartheid academics have responded to this in concrete terms by arguing that "our struggle is also a struggle of memory against forgetting" [48, p. 4]. One of those convicted in November 1988 in the Delmas Treason Trial, Patrick Lekota, national publicity secretary of the United Democratic Front, has written: "The apartheid regime has tried to wipe out all memory of the mass struggles of the 1950s. Leading political organiza- tions of the time have been outlawed. Leaders and ordinary people have been jailed or forced into exile; others were killed. Some have been banned or listed, their words, their memories becoming unquotable. Books, pamphlets, posters, badges, flags were seized in numerous raids, or were censored in silence. Years of campaigning, mass struggles in- volving millions of people, all of these the system has tried to cast into permanent oblivion" [48, p. 197]. In a society in which the information system is so distorted and manipulated, the position of libraries is obviously problematic. If librar- ies are laboratories for peaceful intellectual endeavor and creativity, then censorship is an act of violence against cerebral activity. In a country as diverse as South Africa, in which political debate reaches depths as fundamental as its geographical extent and the degree to which basic civil rights shall be offered, and to whom, libraries have immense educational potential. Not only might they act as a nexus for different strands of social and political thought from within the country but they are also major means of access to such thought from the rest of the world. Instead, they have, to a significant and alarming extent, been harnessed to the political imperatives of the state. They have been successfully cut off, for example, from all but a fraction of the aspira-
IN A STATE OF EMERGENCY 19 tions and problems of the proletariat, that fragment which has been documented by academics and political activists. In this way, through no fault of their own, they are a monument to our ignorance rather than our understanding of South African society. Owing to restrictions on individuals, corporate bodies, and dissemination of official information, vast lacunae are developing in the documented record, and it is possible that these gaps will never be filled even under a more democratic dispensation. Some material is available in foreign collections specializ- ing in southern African affairs, and there are first signs of the expatria- tion of South African documentation centers.22 However, even overseas collections can do nothing to counter the various ways in which the government suppresses publication. The role of the library is being progressively circumscribed, and it is pertinent to conclude by considering what librarians might do to counter the trend. There is little evidence from the past to suggest that librarians as a professional group have done much to counter the fundamentals of traditional censorship [I I]. Within the last decade, however, the founda- tions of a new paradigm have been laid within South African librari- anship. It contains a number of weaknesses but draws its undoubted strength from the desire to place librarianship within a democratic and post-apartheid context. Its adherents are to be found in all types of library, although generally not yet in positions of great influence. The most active of them work in resource centers run by groups of political, community, trade union, church, and human rights organizations [49]. These are now located in the major cities of South Africa, where they collect actively the material of anti-apartheid groups and promote its use by a wide spectrum of society, but particularly by those suffering from an inferior education or, in extremis, young people absent from school because they are on the run from the police or vigilante groups allied to the state. The existence of these libraries is precarious. They are often run by groups which are at risk of banning or restriction, although some church denominations are increasingly assuming a protective role. They are frequently raided by the police who have, as has been seen, wide powers of seizure. Finally they are prime targets for the latest form of South African censorship: arson as a result of firebombing and explosions [50]. Those who run libraries, resource centers, and documentation and archive collections housing antigovernment material are thus moving toward the epicenter of a civil war. It is not easy to see how such 22. In November 1987 the South African Council of Churches (SACC) exiled its Ecu- menical Documentation and Information Centre for Eastern and Southern Africa (EDICESA) to Harare, Zimbabwe, because one of EDICESA's objectives is the docu- mentation of the South African regional policy of destabilization.
20 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY resources can be protected when faced with the power at the disposal of the state or groups close to it. So far university libraries have been virtually immune from state action although reluctance to control uni- versities too blatantly cannot be assumed in perpetuity: conditions in South Africa change very rapidly, and the State of Emergency has provided the backdrop for some surreal experiences. At least two librarians have been detained since mid-1986, and others have been questioned. The case of Annica van Gylswyk, an archivist in charge of the Documentation Centre for African Studies at the Univer- sity of South Africa in Pretoria, is the most famous. In her employment, and through her activities for the Black Sash in the Winterveld region, she was closely involved with the material and the personalities of the anti-apartheid movement, and much of her interrogation by Security Police focused on her travels as a collector of archival material. Her jailers put her under severe psychological pressure for some weeks, and her employers placed her on unpaid leave. Threatened with further imprisonment without trial, she elected to be deported to Sweden, land of her birth and passport, although she had lived in South Africa for thirty years and was married to a citizen [51]. "Her experience provides a model for the danger perceived by the State from the documentation of the struggle" [52, p. 129]. For the time being, it would appear that there is some space for university libraries to pursue a creative acquisitions policy and fulfill an imaginative role in the documentation of current affairs. This is particu- larly pertinent in an era when the idea of the "people's university" is being canvassed. One interpretation centers on the extension to the oppressed of those ideals for which universities have traditionally stood-freedom of expression, thought, and information, for in- stance-but which have too often been the preserve of a privileged elite. Universities could contribute to the democratic process by assisting in the documentation, display, and circulation of material under threat from the state. The censorship ramifications of the State of Emergency should act as a very clear signal to concerned South African librarians. Traditional censorship is dependent upon their cooperation-coerced or volun- tary-and it is within their power to break down one part of the system while the authorities are otherwise involved in reinforcing it elsewhere. South Africa has never lacked courageous opponents of authoritarian- ism and racism. Some of the most admirable are today involved in the communications industry, and there are signs that such people are becoming involved in the profession of librarianship. The current strat- egy of the South African democratic movement is to work for broad- based and innovative opposition to the apartheid state at a time when it
IN A STAT'E OF EMERGENCY 21 faces crucial internal contradictions and a crisis of legitinmacy. There are encouraging signs that some librarians are now ready to contribute toward that process, creating a greater flow of information which will help the citizenry forge its own future. REFERENCES 1. Murray, C. "Displaced Urbanization: South Africa's Rural Slums." African Affairs 86 (1987): 311-29. 2. Cobbett, W., and Nakedi, B. "Behind the 'Curtain' at Botshabelo: Redefining the Urban Labour Market in South Africa." Review of African Political Economy 40 (1987): 32-46. 3. Tlali, M. "Remove the Chains." Index on Censorship 13, no. 6 (1984): 22-24. 4. Welsh, D. "Some Political and Social Determinants of the Academic Environment." In Student Perspectives on South Africa, edited by H. W. van der Merwe and D. Welsh. Cape Town: Philip, 1972. 5. Race Relations Survey, 1986. Pt. 2. Johannesburg: South African Institute of Race Relations, 1987. 6. Government Gazette 6,403 (March 30, 1960), Proclamation 90. 7. Government Gazette 9,876 (July 21, 1985), Proclamation 120. 8. Government Gazette 10,279 (June 12, 1986), Proclamation 108; 10,770 (June 11, 1987), Proclamation 95; 11,340-44 (June 11, 1988), Proclamations 97-100. 9. Rantete, J. The Third Day of September: An Eyewitness Account of the Sebokeng Rebellion of 1984. Johannesburg: Ravan, 1984. 10. Mathews, A. S. "Censorship, Access to Information and Public Debate." Theorna 55 (1980): 21-31. 11. Merrett, C. E. "The Academic Librarian and Political Censorship in South Africa: Victim or Collaborator?" Wits Journal of Librarianship and Information Science 3 (1985): 17-37. 12. De Jager, P. Banned Publications: A Manualfor Libraries. Johannesburg: South African Institute of Library and Information Science, 1983. 13. Corder, H. "The Little List Lengthens." South African Joumal on Human Rights 4, no. 2 (1988): 233-38. 14. Information, Freedom and Censorship: The Article 19 World Report.... London: Longman, 1988. 15. South Africa. Department of Internal Affairs. Annual Report, 1980/81 to 1983/84; and Department of Home Affairs. Annual Report, 1984/85, and 1986/87. 16. "329 Back on Open Shelves." SAILIS Newsletter 7, no. 10 (1987): 10. 17. Merrett, C. E. "Censorship: The Challenge to South African Universities." Theonra 64 (1986): 1-12. 18. Government Gazette 10,880 (August 28, 1987), Proclamation 123. 19. Duodu, C. "South Africa Cracks Down on Foreign Journalists." Index on Censorship 14, no. 6 (1985): 61-62. 20. Tomaselli, K., and Tomaselli, R. "From News Management to Control." Die Suid- Afrikaan 8 (1986): 53-55. 21. Gordimer, N. "Censorship and the Artist." Staffrider 7, no. 2 (1988): 11-16. 22. Schwarz, P. "The Writer at the Walls of Jericho: Nadine Talks about the Word under Siege." Weekly Mail 3, no. 23 (June 12, 1987): 22. 23. "Index." Index on Censorship 15, no. 9 (1986): 50.
22 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 24. "Soweto Ungoverned." Weekly Mail 4, no. 33 (August 26, 1988): 1, 3. 25. Johnson, S. "Weekly Mail Seizure: Judge's Reasons Could Squeeze Media." Weekly Mail 4, no. 32 (August 19, 1988): 4. 26. Hadland, A. "Courts Face a Catch 22 Says Judge." Weekly Mail 4, no. 33 (August 26, 1988): 2. 27. Harber, A. "Stoffel's Good News.. Weekly Mail 4, no. 36 (September 16, 1988): 11. 28. "Stoffel Hands the Editors Some Homework." Weekly Mail 3, no. 35 (September 4, 1987): 3. 29. Hadland, A. "A Month's Reprieve for New Nation." Weekly Mail 4, no. 4 (February 4, 1988): 4. 30. "Youth Arrested for Reading New Nation." New Nation 3, no. 44 (November 3, 1988): 3. 31. "What the New Nation Would Have Said." Weekly Mail 4, no. 11 (March 25, 1988): 1. 32. Davis, G. "The Short, Troubled Life of South." Weekly Mail 4, no. 14 (April 15, 1988): 11. 33. Sidley, P. OThe Small-Town Paper Which Shops Won't Sell and No Printer Will Touch." Weekly Mail 4, no. 18 (May 13, 1988): 16-17. 34. South African Joumal on Human Rights 4, no. 2 (1988): 254. 35. Uys, S. "A Silenced Voice." Index on Censorship 14, no. 4 (1985): 7-8. 36. Survey of Race Relawions. Johannesburg: South African Institute of Race Relations, 1930-. 37. Budlender, G. "Law and Lawlessness in South Africa." South African Journal on Human Rights 4, no. 2 (1988): 139-52. 38. Harber, A. "The Register of News Agencies." Index on Censorship 17, no. 7 (1988): 25- 27. 39. Human Rights Commission. Fact Paper 1 (1988): 4. 40. "Free?" New Nation 3, no. 49 (December 8, 1988): 5. 41. Artick 19 BuUetin 2 (1988): [4]. 42. Johnson, S. "The Friendly Executioner Strikes Again." New Nation 3, no. 44 (Novem- ber 3, 1988): 8. 43. Phillips, M. "No Reform without Security?" Upfront 1, no. 1 (1988): 9-12. 44. Frankel, P. H. Pretonra's Praetorians: Civil-Military Relations in South Africa. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984. 45. Merrett, C. E. "Censorship and the Academic Process: A Survey Conducted at the University of Natal." Wits Journal of Librarianship and Information Science 4 (1986): 88- 95. 46. Coggin, T., ed. Censorship: A Study of Censorship in South Africa. Johannesburg: South African Institute of Race Relations, 1983. 47. Kundera, M. The Book of Laughter and Forgetting. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1983. 48. Suttner, R., and Cronin, J. 30 Years of the Freedom Charter. Johannesburg: Ravan, 1986. 49. Berghammer, C. N., and Karlsson, J. "A Resource Centre for a Changing South Africa." Wits Journal of Librarianship and Information Science 5 (1988): 8-20. 50. Merrett, C. E. "Censorship and the Destruction of Documentation Centres in South Africa." New Library World 90, no. 1068 (June 1989): 105-6. 51. Harris, J. "Annica Hakandotter van Gylswyk." Sash 29, no. 3 (1986): 27-28. 52. Merrett, C. E. "The Dark Hours: South African Libraries in a State of Emergency." Wits Journal of Librarianship and Information Science 5 (1988): 124-32.