Historical Research as Critical Practice and Relationship: The Carnegie Libraries in Iowa Project James Elmborg and Christine Pawley The Carnegie Libraries in Iowa Project (CLIP) is an interdisciplinary project that seeks to chart the history of Iowa's Carnegie libraries by creating a digital library of images and other documentary and statistical information to be made publicly available over the World Wide Web. Using CLIP as a starting point, and by using critical methods to analyze the records from sociological, historical, architectural, aesthetic, and technical perspectives, library users ranging from humanities scholars to school children are encouraged to study the history of Iowa's Carnegie librar ies in the context of their changing communities. CLIP represents a partnership among faculty, students, and staff at the University of Iowa's School of Library and Information Science (SLIS), Iowa's library practitioners, and members of Iowa com munities, including high school and college students as well as members of the gen eral public. Introduction?Carnegie Libraries in Iowa "Whenever I hear the words inner sanctum I think of the Ames Public Li brary," Toth recalls of her Iowa childhood in the 1950s. "It was a massive stone temple, with imposing front steps that spread on either side into two flat ledges, overhung by evergreens. Waiting for my mother to pick me up, I could sit almost hidden on the cool stone blocks, surveying passing cars with a re moved superiority. Safely perched on my pedestal, surrounded by my stacks of new books, I always felt unusually serene, bolstered by the security of the library behind me and the anticipation of the books beside me. Even to the moment of leaving it, my visits to the library were high occasions."1 For more than a century, public libraries have played a central role in the life of Iowa's citizens. Today over 60 percent of Iowans are regis tered borrowers at one of more than 540 public libraries in the state. Each year they check out over twenty-five million items, nearly three-quarters consisting of books.2 Often "the library" means the local "Carnegie" library, frequently the community's most substantial public building. At the beginning of the twentieth century 99 Iowa cities and vil lages wrote proposals for Carnegie public library buildings, which the Carnegie Corporation then funded in partnership with the communities themselves, resulting in 99 Carnegie Corporation grants, which contrib J. of Education for Library and Information Science, Vol. 44, No. 3-4?Summer/Fall 2003 ISSN: 0748-5786 ?2003 Association for Library and Information Science Education 235
236 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science About the Authors James Elmborg is Assistant Professor (James-elmborg@uiowa.edu); and Chris tine Pawley is Assistant Professor (Christine-pawley@uiowa.edu), School of Li brary and Information Science, University of Iowa, Iowa City. This paper was presented at the Association for Library and Information Science Education (ALISE) Annual Conference, January 21-24, 2003, Philadelphia, PA. uted to the building of 101 public libraries. Seven colleges received grants for academic libraries. Only three states?Indiana, California, and Illi nois?received more public library grants. And as Jones points out, it was the Iowa city of Fairfield that set in motion Andrew Carnegie's philan thropic program that eventually built over 2,500 libraries in the United States and other English-speaking countries, at a cost of over sixty-eight million dollars.3 Over subsequent decades, generations of Io wans learned to make regular use of the Carnegie buildings, which often bore a distinct architectural re semblance to each other. Users entered the libraries (typically symmetrical and fronted by Greek colonnades) by means of a flight of steps. Inside, the users were immediately confronted by the circulation desk, over which the-usually female-librarian presided. The library's spatial features in con cert with the managerial, technical and gendered dimensions of library work shaped both the library's functions and users' reading practices. Thus the significance of a Carnegie library building is not only a matter of aes thetics or nostalgia. As Van Slyck makes clear, the internal design typical of Carnegie building shaped library work as well patron experiences, with im plications for a gendered division of tasks and responsibilities, and for the provision of services to specific clienteles, such as immigrants and young people.4 While the Carnegie program helped stamp small-town America with a certain standardized "look," local strategies for change have been anything but uniform. Today the emphasis on permanence and place has shifted. Current cen tennial celebrations provide a reminder that although many of the original Carnegie libraries are still in use, others have been converted for commer cial or other public purposes and have been replaced by newer structures that reflect shifts in public library ideals and practices. Recent technologi cal changes, including digitization and the Internet, challenges the very no tion of the library as place. Virtual networks, some claim, can replace not only physical artifacts like books and newspapers, but also the face-to-face human contact provided within the public space of the library. Other critics argue that public library buildings and collections continue to play a unique and indispensable role in preventing "civic disengagement."5 Indeed, in many communities in Iowa, public buildings like libraries, schools, and
Historical Research as Critical Practice and Relationship 237 civic centers represent civic identity in very concrete ways. As rural life in Iowa faces questions about its future viability, the loss of a school or library can cause profound anxiety. Historic buildings like Carnegie libraries are especially problematic, figuring as they do in local narrative in complex ways. On one hand, symbols of proud pasts, and on the other hand, standing in the way of progress, historic libraries create complex rhetorical prob lems for those who seek to articulate the meaning of local libraries and the communities who own them. The Carnegie Libraries in Iowa Project represents a partnership among students, staff and faculty at the University of Iowa's School of Library and Information Science, Iowa's library practitioners, and members of Iowa communities, including high school and college students as well as inter ested members of the general public. CLIP seeks to chart changes in Iowa's Carnegie libraries by capturing digital images and collecting documentary and statistical data to be stored in a database record for each community, prior to analyzing the data from sociological, historical, architectural, aes thetic, and technical perspectives. The State Library of Iowa is helping identify communities in each of seven "Library Service Areas" where pub lic library and school media staff are enthusiastic about more extensive CLIP participation. The authors plan to share their findings through SLIS student presentations to libraries and high schools, publications on the web and in print, and radio broadcasts. Library History?Why? Knowledge and understanding of library history provide, as Alfino and Pierce point out, an essential basis of developing a sound professional ethic. "Key to understanding librarians' ethics is a well-reasoned narrative account of what a librarian is," they argue. Such a narrative account cannot simply be provided by discussing the value of information, but must also "cohere with narrative self-understanding of the profession in the context of its history."6 While many library educators would doubtless agree that in an ideal world, LIS education would indeed include a study of the historical context in which many of today's developments and decisions are best un derstood, they would probably recognize that for most schools, courses in library history are themselves "history." A minority of LIS schools now of fer courses on the history of libraries and librarianship, and an even smaller number of these are taught by tenure-track faculty. An informal survey of the curricula posted on their web sites by fifty-three North American li brary and information science (LIS) schools in the Fall of2001 showed that although seventeen schools (32 percent) list courses in their catalog that contain both the words "history" and "library," "libraries," or "librarian ship," eleven (21 percent) scheduled such courses during the period 1999-2001, and at only seven schools (13 percent) were such courses taught by tenure-track faculty. LIS faculty whose research specialty is his
238 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science tory are themselves an endangered species. Most library educators proba bly find it hard to remember when they last posted or even spotted a job advertisement that included library history as a desired area of teaching and research interest. Failure to research library history is not just a result of LIS schools focusing their attention elsewhere, although that is certainly part of the pic ture. It is also symptomatic of a larger problem in LIS as a whole. Many schools currently have difficulty in recruiting and retaining faculty. In some schools more faculty time is allocated to teaching than research. So the question arises: who now, and who in the future, will produce (as op pose to transmit) knowledge in LIS? If LIS faculty numbers are indeed shrinking, and the resources available for research are also reduced, then increasing reliance on practitioner research might seem to be an obvious answer. Yet problems exist here, too. Librarians may feel constrained to spend their time in ways that have more immediate value to their local situ ations than in contributing to the profession's stock of knowledge. Librar ians may also not be well trained to carry out research: with the LIS curriculum under pressure to add technology-oriented courses, schools have not only dropped classes in library history, but many have also aban doned a research methods course requirement. And finally, the model of re search typically taught by LIS schools in the past, with its emphasis on highly structured, quantitative social science methods that assume a hypothetico-deductive theoretical framework, does not lend itself well to practitioner adoption. By contrast to large-scale collaborative social science or information sci ence research projects that depend on external funding, research into li brary history is highly accessible. It can be undertaken by individuals on a shoe-string budget. It can also be done anywhere?libraries exist in com munities large and small, and with a little ingenuity, their history can readily be found in public records and documents. Moreover, the history of their institution is of tremendous interest to library practitioners. A casual question posted on the Iowa librarians' email list about the history of Iowa's Carnegie libraries produced a flood of responses within less than an hour, and convinced the authors that if they wanted to design a research pro ject that incorporated student-practitioner collaboration, here was a good candidate. And this interest was not just a matter of superficial appeal. Iowa's librarians understand that a knowledge of their local institution's history can inform and facilitate community conversations about the li brary as real and virtual space and place, and about the services that the public desires to fund. The goal is to stimulate Iowa's communities to study the history of their own libraries by providing not only access to key pri mary resources through CLIP'S digital library, but also by encouraging them to adopt a model for historical research that uses such lo cally-available sources as library borrowing registers, minutes of city council and library trustee meetings, records of women's clubs, small-town newspapers, and librarians' work diaries.
Historical Research as Critical Practice and Relationship 239 Critical Research For most of the twentieth century, the prevailing style of LIS discourse has used technical and administrative language to describe and analyze sys tems-oriented problems. Such discourse starts from a position of relative institutional stability. It assumes, for example, that we know what schools, libraries, and information systems are and for what they are intended. Techno-administrative research has an important role to play in situations upon which the contours of institutions are widely agreed. When consensus about the "why" questions already exists, or when one group in society is sufficiently powerful to impose its definitions on the rest, little support can usually be found for asking "why" questions in any extended manner. An swers to those questions can be assumed, allowing researchers to begin an swering "how" questions. The central issue becomes one of how to realize these established goals, and how to evaluate them. In the techno-adminis trative tradition, efficiency and effectiveness are key criteria. Much (though not all) research in LIS has traditionally fallen into this category, and includes topics such as the design and implementation of informa tion systems, the study of managerial techniques in libraries, the applica tion of psychological perspectives to human-computer interaction, and indeed almost all user studies. In other words, it works within a spe cific relatively stable institutional context to solve technical or manage rial problems related to the operation of the specific institution or organization. However, when, for whatever reason, that consensus no longer exists, or when hegemonic or coercive control over definitions finds itself seriously challenged, then "why" questions bubble to the surface, influencing the struggle for a new control or consensus. Stability can no longer be as sumed: major change is under way. If there is any consensus about libraries in the early twenty-first century, it is that they are in process of major change! Favored candidates for causes of this instability include the spread of digital technology, the erosion of the public sphere in favor of privatiza tion, the rise of global market capitalism, and a shift toward multicultural ism and diversity. For assessing these competing claims, or simply for analyzing what is occurring, the techno-administrative research model is inadequate. When the future information landscape is uncertain, research ers need to step back from the concerns of local organizations and look crit ically at the scene in its entirety. In the last two decades, the term "critical" has become fashionable in LIS discourse. That "critical thinking," for example, is a component of infor mation literacy, has become a truism. While the provenance of the term is hard to trace, it is clear that at least some LIS researchers trace its lineage to the critical theorists of the early and the later Frankfurt school.7 The work of these scholars has varied in emphasis and indeed diverged in significant ways, but important common strands include linking themes of ideology and power with what they were among the first to call the "cultural indus
240 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science tries," and the recognition of the inescapability?and indeed desirabil ity?of political and moral judgment in social analysis. This is not, after all, a neutral approach. Some of the ideas of the Frankfurt school have been as sumed by many other scholars, probably less rather than more systemati cally, and critical theory is often written with a small "c" to indicate a general approach which has many divergent aspects, but still some com mon threads. Critical research calls into the question the contours of the institution. It draws on scholarship in epistemologa ethics, politics, and social theory to stand back from the institution and ask questions like, "What are libraries for?" "Who are they for?" "What should libraries consist of?" "How did li braries come to communities? "Why?" It asks "why" questions, rather than "how" questions. In a 1991 text on LIS research methods Harris and Itoga argue that "critical theories [are] designed to emancipate and enlighten; critical theories ... alert librarians to the ideological frame surrounding li brary service"8 One area of critical research in LIS has been work on intel lectual freedom. Another has been library history research, which at least in the past has alerted LIS students to the role of class, race, and gender in the formation of information agencies and professions. Critical Pedagogy In asking such questions about the meaning of libraries, librarians, and li brarianship, the authors suggest that the answers to these questions cannot be assumed and are not mutually understood. Indeed, a central assumption of critical theory holds that institutions in society are complex construc tions crucial for the ways that the culture enacts an ideology, often to the ex clusion of competing interpretations. The intimate relationship between interpretations of history and the maintaining of national myths suggests to critical scholars that reading "against" these myths can provide a healthy antidote to the view of education as neutral purveyor of cultural truth. Taken to its logical extension, critical scholarship is transformative. By critically questioning national and cultural myths as truth, scholars accept the responsibility to answer new questions for themselves and for society. With this transformation, critical scholars must change their relationship to their culture, their institutions, and their students. Critical theory leads di rectly to critical pedagogy?the restructuring of the student/teacher/ knowledge relationship based on the desire to create genuine inquiry rather than the desire to transmit unquestionable knowledge. Teaching from criti cal pedagogy implies that teachers will disown the power traditionally in herent in their role and encourage the spirit of independent inquiry in their students. Critical pedagogy argues that meaning is local and must be constructed by individuals who care about the questions being posed and who have some investment in creating valid answers for themselves. In critical peda
Historical Research as Critical Practice and Relationship 241 gogy, the first role of the teacher is not to answer questions, but to help the student pose meaningful questions. Freir? argues for creating a "prob lem-posing education" to counteract the "banking concept" of education built around depositing knowledge in students' heads. The teacher changes from "provider of answers" to "collaborative problem poser," one who helps identify meaningful themes and suggests methods of inquiry that stu dents might find useful. Rather than creating "objects" of the study of his tory (libraries, communities, individuals as "things"), such teaching demands that students become engaged with communities in the co-creation of knowledge about themselves. Once meaningful questions have been posed, the teacher needs to help students answer those questions for themselves.9 Developing an alternative pedagogy has been a natural outgrowth of the realization that the current method of teaching posits a way of knowing and learning. Teachers cannot ask genuine questions when speaking from posi tions of absolute authority in the academy. Dewey was among the first to recognize that American classrooms enact political realities. He argued that, in order to create citizens who are critical thinkers engaged in democ racy, we need to create classrooms where critical thinking and engaged citi zenship are practiced. In making the classroom a site of learning engaged with important social questions, Dewey argued, we are able to create a "progressive" education for students?one that neither presupposes the fu ture nor accepts the reality of the past. To Dewey, history constitutes an un folding reality, a "progressive" action. A socially engaged education should be unfolding, as well.10 Rather than describe uncritically the prac tice of libraries and librarianship as they have been constituted in the past or as they might be constituted in some Utopian future, critical theory allows us to create classrooms based on critical inquiry into the meaning of librar ies and librarianship. In doing so, we ask new questions about the profes sion and our own teaching practices as LIS educators in an effort to understand the phenomenon of the library. Critical theory can bring new perspectives to the library narrative, a narrative that needs renewing examination that cannot be conducted through techno-managerial methodology. Critical theory argues that dominant "grand narratives" (whether Marxist, capitalist, or democratic in nature), cannot reliably create meaning in nuanced, local contexts. As Lyotard argues, "Narratives ... determine criteria of competence and/or il lustrate how they are to be applied. They thus define what has the right to be said and done in the culture in question."11 They authorize them selves and foreclose inquiry. Indeed, such "grand narratives" (as Lyotard calls them) do little to explain exactly what the public library meant and continues to mean to a small town in Iowa. CLIP will explore ways to articulate a library narrative in the context of the local, so that each individual library can understand its own past, its own present place in its community, and its own unfolding place in the future. By creating a com munity of scholars around each of the Carnegie libraries in Iowa?a com
242 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science munity composed of K-12 students, public librarians, graduate students, and interested citizens?CLIP supports the writing of that history, one li brary at a time. In that spirit, CLIP intends to provide the tools and contexts necessary for each of Iowa's public libraries to write its history. In doing so, we will pose problems about the nature of libraries and librarianship, problems we hope to see addressed in each library's unfolding efforts to find its identity. We believe that every library's story will be different and that the motivation to build a library and to invest in that library will have been somewhat differ ent for each community. In other words, the "how" and "why" questions will be the same, but the answers will be different for each library. In the process, SLIS students will be encouraged to pose questions about the place of the library in the history of communities; public libraries will be asked to participate in answering those questions; and students in high schools in Iowa will collaborate with their teachers and librarians to tell the stories of their Carnegie libraries?how they came to be, what they mean to their communities, and what they will become as the future unfolds. Freir? argues that "[the] practice of problem-posing education entails at the outset that the teacher-student contradiction be resolved. . . . Through dialogue, the teacher-of-the-students and the students-of-the-teacher cease to exist and a new term emerges: teacher-student with students-teachers. The teacher is no longer merely the-one-who-teaches, but one who is himself taught in dialogue with the students, who in turn while being taught also teach. They become jointly responsible for a process in which all grow. In this process, arguments based on 'authority' are no longer valid_People teach each other, mediated by the world."12 This model invests time and en ergy in local research and collaboration throughout the community. The "meaning" of the local library cannot be provided by "authorities" in the academy, but will be constructed, instead, by each community as part of the process of answering questions about itself. CLIP Participants and Activities In contrast to large-scale collaborate social science projects that concen trate principally on outcomes, CLIP focuses on process, and on the building of relationships among participants. We have adopted what Robson calls a "flexible" research strategy, one that employs designs that "typically make substantial use of methods which result in qualitative data (in many cases in the form of words). . . [and] are also flexible in the sense that much less pre-specification takes place and the design evolves, develops and... 'un folds' as the research proceeds." Such designs (which may also make use of quantitative data) are more fitted, Robson believes, to "real world" enquiry, that is, "investigation involving people in 'real life' situations."13 This fits the research model that students learn in the required research methods course at Iowa, a research model that also facilitates practitioner r&
Historical Research as Critical Practice and Relationship 243 search.14 We encourage students to adopt the identity of researcher, to think of themselves not merely as consumers of research, but as producers of knowledge. CLIP gives Iowa LIS students an opportunity to strengthen this identity. The main participants include members of the SLIS community, including students and faculty, graduate assistants, a visiting scholar with an advanced degree in art history; members of Iowa's library commu nity?the state librarian and other state library staff, Library Service Area coordinators; and public and academic library directors and staff. We are also receiving active help from members of Iowa's history community, es pecially historians at the State Historical Society, and interested members of the public. In developing a web-based digital library that stores and provides access to images of buildings and historical documents, sound files of interviews, and text files, we are collaborating with our colleague, information scien tist David Eichmann, to use software he has developed?the Multimedia Oriented Repository Environment (MORE)?as a program for storing and retrieving CLIP data. Over a period of several semesters, SLIS students in classes on multimedia, digital libraries, and public libraries, or as part of in dependent study projects, are completing tasks as part of their coursework (which together contribute to the database). These include visiting towns with Carnegie libraries and capturing digital images of the current state of the buildings, and collecting and digitizing historical images along with documentary and statistical data that will be stored in a database record for each community. Among other information, the students research the his tory of each library and list the primary and secondary sources relating to this history that are available in the library's collection and archives. They may also interview library staff about current use and future projections. Many possibilities exist for analyzing the data from a variety of perspec tives. For example, the history of the processes by which communities ap plied for and received Carnegie grants can shed light on the local distribution of power a hundred years ago. Frequently the process was initi ated by women's clubs at a time when women were still barred from voting, and yet found other means to exercise political influence. We are facilitat ing these research activities at a number of levels and in a variety of for mats. While involved faculty are working on their own projects, students in multimedia classes are practicing technical skills by capturing digital im ages, and students studying information use and users are undertaking case studies in small groups of Carnegie libraries. SLIS distance students can work individually on independent studies of libraries in their own parts of the state. Additionally, in the summer of 2003, one of us will offer a re search practicum. In the summer of 2003, using both primary and second ary resources, students in a research practicum class will examine the historical and cultural impact of a Carnegie library in a community within driving distance of Iowa City. Working in pairs, the students will document the impact of the library through a web-based site which will include digital images, scanned documents, and finding aids. Further dissemination of
244 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science their findings will take the form of in-class presentations and a short radio spot to be aired on public radio by Humanities Iowa. We also have been working with an undergraduate student and history faculty at a four-year college to use locally available primary sources to study the founding of that college's library. We envisage that in the future, similar studies might also form the basis of a teaching and learning partnership with students from a nearby high school. Conclusion: The Meaning of "Library" as Space Carnegie libraries performed a complex and as yet unclear function in the lives of communities in Iowa. They created a space and place where liter acy and citizenship became intertwined with the American ideal of self-betterment. Carnegie libraries might be understood as an example of what Castro called the morada vital or "the vital dwelling place of life." These vital dwelling places are created by people as they aspire to create meaningful cultures. They result when "a phenomenon happens to be in phase with the current of a people's life." In such circumstances "authenti cally cherished values are multiplied and diffused with an easy spontaneity and in terms of high achievements."15 According to Castro, "the dwelling place of life is built in the process of transcending the routine, daily func tion of custom and usages."16 Castro concludes that "a people maintains its preferred forms of historifiable activity as long as a vital impetus lasts, or until it is modified internally by other peoples who come to be mingled with it, or until it is annihilated by some cataclysm."17 Were Carnegie libraries such vital dwelling places? To what extent can they be seen as nurturing the "authentically cherished values" of literacy and self-improvement? Are those values still cherished? Is the public library still a vital dwelling place, or has its value passed into history? Such questions naturally arise in the context of the local exploration of the history of the Carnegie library. CLIP'S collaborative model has great potential for harnessing research to address such questions. Knowledge of library history is key to understand ing information provision, policy, and ethics, and particularly so for librari ans in small towns where the public library often constitutes the only significant public space, and the interplay between "real" and "virtual" li brary resources may be poorly articulated.18 Our graduates are learning not only to assume the stance of "researcher" as they move into the profession, but to help their constituents experience the excitement of recovering their communities' pasts while they engage simultaneously in a conversation about their libraries' future. CLIP will create a context for broad commu nity collaboration that we hope will stimulate questions beyond the identity of the library, questions about the nature of community, the future of rural life, and the viability of public libraries in the age of technology. These questions must, by necessity, be posed by individual communities in their efforts to write their own narratives and explain their own identities.
Historical Research as Critical Practice and Relationship 245 References and Notes 1. Susan Allen Toth, Blooming: A Small-Town Girlhood (Boston: Little, Brown: 1981) 89-90. 2. State Library of Iowa, Iowa Public Library Statistics, 1999-2000. 3. Theodore Jones, Carnegie Libraries Across America (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1997),129, 2-3. 4. Abigail Van Slyck, Free To All: Carnegie Libraries and American Culture, 1890-1920 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995). 5. Wayne A. Wiegand, "Taking Them Seriously in This Place We call' Library : ' What Ameri can Studies Can Teach the LIS Community About Cultural Agencies and Practices," (Ran som Chair Visiting Lecture, University of Texas at Austin, April 18, 2002); and Robert Putnam, Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American Community (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2000). 6. Mark Alfino and Linda Pierce, Information Ethics for Librarians (Jefferson, NC: McFarland and Co, 1997), 21. 7. Critical Theory is associated with a specific movement in philosophy and the social sci ences?the first generation Frankfurt School in Germany in the 1920s, '30s and '40s (Theodor Adorno, Max Horkheimer, Herbert Marcuse, Walter Benjamin, Erich Fromm), and the second generation Frankfurt School, known for the work of J?rgen Habermas, who has written on the concept of the public sphere and speech act theory, among others. 8. Michael H. Harris and Maseru Itoga, "Becoming Critical: For a Theory of Purpose and Ne cessity in American Librarianship," in Library and Information Science Research, Charles R. McClure and Peter Hernon, eds. (Norwood, NJ: Ablex, 1991), 347-57. 9. Paulo Freir?, The Paulo Freir? Reader, A.M. Freir? and D. Macedo, eds. (New York: Con tinuum, 1998). 10. John Dewey, Democracy and Education (New York: Free Press, 1996), 76. 11. Jean Francois Lyotard, The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge, Geoff Bennington and Brian Massumi, trans. (Minneapolis: Univ. of Minnesota Pr., 1984), 23. 12. Freir?, The Paulo Freir? Reader, 74. 13. Colin Robson, Real World Research: A Resource for Social Scientists and Practitioner Re searchers, 2nd ed. (Oxford: Blackwell, 2002), 3-5. 14. The School of Library and Information Science at the University of Iowa's Research Methods course syllabus can be accessed at: http://mingo.info-science.uiowa.edu/ ~pawley/202fall02/202Fall02schedule.html. 15. Americo Castro, The Spaniards: An Introduction to their History (Berkeley: Univ. of Cali fornia Press, 1971), 100. 16. Ibid., 119. 17. Ibid., 104. 18. Alfino and Pierce, Information Ethics for Librarians, 21.