LIBRARY CO-OPERATION IN THE SOUTHEAST LOUIS SHORES IN THE nine states' that comprise the region of the Southeastern Library Association there are now some five thousand college and university, public, school, and special libraries. Since 1920 these libraries have to a varying degree co-operated with one another in regional planning. The results of this co-operation for the period between 1920 and the out- break of World War II were effectively summarized in 1939 in an article by Charles Stone.2 The present paper is seen as an essential addendum to the Stone report, for since the war a new and per- haps significant impetus to regional li- brary co-operation and planning has been given by three postwar forces. The result of this impetus may have far-reaching implications not only for the nine states of the Southeast but for the other thirty- nine in the Union. Of the three forces that have stimu- lated most of the thinking and working of southeastern librarians on a regional basis, the influence of the philanthropic foundations has been first, not only chronologically but strategically. Be- tween the two world wars the Carnegie Corporation, the General Education Board and Rockefeller Foundation, and the Rosenwald Fund (1) stimulated and supported the development of co-opera- tive research centers in Atlanta, Nash- vile, and Durham-Chapel Hill (and New Orleans and Texas in the South- west); (2) strengthened numerous college libraries, both white and Negro, by pro- viding books, buildings, and opportuni- ties for further professional education for personnel; (3) financed county library demonstrations in selected counties and studies of these demonstrations ;3 (4) en- couraged development of school library standards and financed education of school librarians; (5) established profes- sional library schools and assisted teacher-librarian education programs; (6) aided Negro library development on all levels-elementary to graduate and professional as well. The specific way in which the foundations sponsored regional library development in the Southeast during the two decades that preceded Pearl Harbor is detailed in Mr. Stone's article,4 and in the southeastern survey.5 In 1944, as the final phases of the war began, the General Education Board re- sumed its support of an interrupted phase of regional library development. It invited state school library supervisors and representatives of library education agencies in both the Southeast and the Southwest to meet in Atlanta for the purpose of reviewing regional standards for school libraries and for the education of school librarians. Three more confer- ences followed-in Atlanta, Nashville, I Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Missis- sippi, North Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee, and Virginia. 2 "Library Objectives in the Southeast," Library Quarterly, IX (1939), 17-31. 3 L. R. Wilson and E. A. Wight, County Library Service in the South (Chicago: University of Chi- cago Press, 1935). 4 Op. cit. I L. R. Wilson and M. A. Milczewski, Libraries of the Southeast: A Report of the Southeastern Coopera- tive Library Survey, 1946-1947 (Chapel Hill: Pub- lished for the Southeastern Library Association by the University of North Carolina Press, 1949). 335
336 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY and Tallahassee-and out of these came several important products and at least one significant by-product. At the second Atlanta conference the Southern Associa- tion's school library standards were re- vised and strengthened. The Nashville conference held at Pea- body was devoted entirely to the content of the curriculum for the education of the teacher-librarian and the school librar- ian. From the beginning the South had been confronted with the problem of articulating short courses in teacher- training institutions with ALA accred- ited programs in library schools. Unable to secure any assistance on the national level, since the other regions maintained steadily that the problem did not exist in any significant proportions for the library schools of the East, West, and Midwest before the war, the South decided to attack the problem regionally. In Nashville representatives of all kinds of library educational agencies sat down together. There were teachers of teacher-librarians who offered twelve semester hours or less of professional li- brary education. There were heads of de- partments of library science with offer- ings up to thirty hours in professional courses. And there were, of course, the directors of the South's ALA accredited library schools. The problem was to ar- ticulate not only these three types of programs but the individual courses that comprised them in such a way that stu- dents moving from one institution to an- other would not be penalized by repeti- tion. A monumental piece of work re- sulted, including syllabi for core courses and standardization of transfers.6 The Tallahassee conference7 intro- duced the workshop as a technique and launched a series of workshops the fol- lowing summer in most of the southeast- ern states for the improvement of school librarianship. General Education Board funds supplemented state and personal budgets and made possible wide partici- pation. Mimeographed reports of these state workshops describe dramatically the postwar stimulus given to school li- brarianship by these state workshops and regional conferences.8 The by-product was a fifth regional conference in Atlanta sponsored by the Southeastern L.ibrary Association and financed by the General Education Board.9 This time college and university, public and special, librarians as well as school librarians and library school teachers were brought together to ex- plore the common aspects of education for librarianship in all kinds of libraries. This Atlanta conference was unique in the history of professional library gather- ings. It helped school librarians and uni- versity librarians (to cite the two kinds of librarians who most often contend they have professionally comparatively little in common) discover that there is a unity in librarianship. After a week of exploration it became evident that there is a core of professional content and method necessary for the adequate per- formance of librarianship in any type of library. INTERSTATE MOVEMENTS The second significant influence on re- gional library thinking and planning in the Southeast are the strong interstate 6 Summary of third Southern Library Planning Conference on Training for School Librarianship, November 13-19, 1946, Nashville, Tennessee; Pea- body College, Southern Association Quarterly, XI (March, 1947), 404-10. 7Library Leadership Work Conference, March 10-15, 1947, Tallahassee; Florida State University, Library Journal, LXXII (February, 1947), 861-63. 8 Nora Beust and W. H. Shaw, "Report of Li- brary Workshops for the General Education Board" (November 1, 1947). (Typescript.) 9 Southeastern Conference on Library Education, February 29-March 6, 1948 (Atlanta, Georgia; Southeastern Library Association, 1948).
LIBRARY CO-OPERATION IN THE SOUTHEAST 337 movements in many areas of human en- deavor. In agriculture and industry, in labor and interracial relations, in nu- merous economic and cultural efforts, planning and working have cut across state boundaries more frequently in the Southeast than perhaps in any other re- gion in the United States. Inevitably these interstate inclinations have mani- fested themselves in education and in li- braries. Among the most powerful of the inter- state influences is that exerted by the re- gional accrediting agency, the Southern Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools, which includes two states in the Southwestern as well as the nine in the Southeastern Library Association. Through its library standards for schools and its library education standards for colleges and universities it has had a powerful effect on strengthening the re- gional library association. As early as 1926, therefore, the Southeastern Li- brary Association was in a position to recommend personnel and principles for evaluating and standardizing libraries and library education. Through the Southern Association's Commission on Higher Education the Southeastern Li- brary Association was able to exert its professional influence in developing standardized lists of periodicals and ref- erence books for college and university libraries. Other interstate educational associations and agencies, like those of the graduate schools and of various sub- ject areas, such as modern languages, offer an opportunity for, and an incentive to, a regional library association to as- sume leadership and speak up for profes- sional librarianship in the Southeast. But, of all the interstate educational agencies in the Southeast, none has had greater impact or more dramatic appeal than the Southern Regional Education Board. It was created by the action of thirteen state legislatures in the South in June, 1949, to promote regional educa- tional development.10 This action "marked the first time in the history of the United States that states had entered into a compact for Inter-State coopera- tion in education."" The mission of the board is well sum- marized in these words: The full development of leadership cannot be done by each state as a self-contained unit. Industry, agriculture, and public services are no respecters of state lines. Flood control, inter- territorial freight rates, soil erosion, crop regions, forest areas, marketing regions, hous- ing problems, health deficiencies, are a few of the problems held in common by many or all states in the South. No single state nor institution can develop within its own borders the technical facilities for leadership training in all fields of human knowledge.12 Under these circumstances the board, representing all the states, has under- taken to plan with the universities areas of specialization and concentration. To date, three major fields have been devel- oped: human medicine, dentistry, and veterinary medicine. Additional fields are under consideration. Under the terms of the compact, states without training facilities in these areas pay at the rate of $1,500 per year for each medical and dental student and $1,000 for each vet- erinary medicine student toward the sup- port of institutions in other states. These examples are sufficient to indicate the trend of regional planning in the South for higher education. This kind of regional educational plan- ning inevitably has some immensely im- portant implications for libraries. But, in order for libraries to avail themselves of 10 Additional states have entered the agreement or are about to enter. 11 John E. Ivey, Jr., "Some Recent Develop- ments in Regional Education," Southeastern Librari- an, I (fall, 1951), 91. n Ibid.
338 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY these opportunities, they cannot plan and function on an isolated, individual basis while the institutions they serve move ever closer to a regional plan. It is obvious that libraries, too, must plan re- gionally if for no other reason than that regional educational voices may speak with regional library voices. FEDERAL AGENCIES The third potent interstate influence emanates from the increasing number of federal agencies that have chosen the Southeast for their activities. First and foremost among these has been the Ten- nessee Valley Authority. The TVA re- gion, which first included only the states in the Tennessee Valley, has so extended its good work and services that all the nine southeastern states willingly en- tered the regional library survey which it sponsored.13 But the TVA's interest did not end with this vast stock-taking of the library opportunities in the Southeast. Shortly after, it offered the Southeastern Library Association generous support for the dis- semination, through libraries, of infor- mation about the region. Although econ- omies in the federal budget prevented the consummation of this provocative re- gional undertaking, at least one co-opera- tive project was completed, and the Southeastern Library Association was further stimulated to strengthen its or- ganization for additional undertakings. Nor is the TVA the only federal agency that has found its way into the Southeast. Since World War 11 an in- creasing number of military and related governmental agencies have chosen the Southeast for headquarters, and in their wake has followed considerable private industry. Among the most important of these agencies are the Air University, the Naval Research Laboratory, the Insti- tute of Nuclear Research, and the Air Proving Ground. Since the work of these institutions is being related to the gradu- ate and professional programs of the uni- versities of the region, library responsi- bility can be assumed only on a regional basis and under a co-ordinated library plan. SOUTHEASTERN LIBRARY ASSOCIATION Because of these three interstate forces -philanthropic foundations, educational and other cultural movements, and fed- eral agencies-and the necessity of deal- ing with them on a regional basis, librar- ians of the Southeast have steadily tended to strengthen their interstate as- sociations as a necessary connecting link between their state and national associa- tions. In November, 1920, the librarians of the nine southeastern states formed the Southeastern Library Association. For nearly thirty years this association func- tioned as a confederation of state library associations. It met biennially, charged no dues, published no journal, and had no authority to contract or act officially for the librarians or libraries of the re- gion. But, as the three interstate forces acted ever more powerfully on the re- sources of the region, librarians became increasingly aware of the fact that, unless one articulate voice for librarianship were found in the Southeast, these forces would either act on library matters with- out the consent of librarians or neglect libraries altogether. Certainly, regional policy conferences to which all other pro- fessional and cultural movements sent single delegates could hardly welcome nine delegates from the area of librarian- ship. At the first postwar meeting of the Southeastern Library Association in 13 Wilson and Milczewski, op. cit., p. 301.
LIBRARY CO-OPERATION IN THE SOUTHEAST 339 Asheville in 1946, the association em- powered its Executive Committee to ap- point an Activities Committee to explore the possibilities of strengthening the or- ganization through the appointment of a full-time executive secretary, the publi- cation of a journal, and a more systemat- ic attention to regional library needs.14 The Activities Committee reported to the Louisville meeting in 1948 seven areas of activity appropriate to the Southeastern Library Association. These included (1) encouragement of library co-operation; (2) liaison with regional agencies and with the state and national professional associations; (3) attention to recruitment, education, and placement of professional personnel; (4) establish- ment of a library information clearing- house for the region; (5) continued devel- opment of library standards; (6) biblio- graphic collection and organization; (7) legislative guidance; (8) assistance to federal library activity in the region. These principles were approved, and the committee was authorized to develop the details for a strong organization.'5 Two years later in Atlanta a drama- packed series of sessions led to the adop- tion of a new constitution and authoriza- tion to incorporate, appoint a part-time paid executive secretary, inaugurate a journal, enter into contracts, establish a permanent headquarters, and collect dues. The association was incorporated, headquarters were established at Georgia Institute of Technology, and the first contract was signed with the TVA. An editor for the Southeastern Librarian, of- ficial journal of the association, was ap- pointed, and Volume 1, No. 1, appeared in the summer of 1951, featuring the papers and proceedings of the fifteenth biennial conference. First as a member and then as chair- man of the Activities Committee and first president of the association under its new constitution, the author of this article was intimately concerned with the origin, early development, and growth of this new regional organization. Almost from the start, problems of budgets, activities, contracts, and memberships rushed in upon the officers. Certain policies had to be determined at once. One of the major decisions was to rely upon the membership through committees to carry on the many activi- ties for which the association had been reorganized. But committees sometimes do not perform, and such lack of per- formance can be fatal to a new organiza- tion. It was decided early, therefore, to set up a pattern for all committees. This pat- tern consisted of three parts: (1) person- nel suited for the task; (2) mission to be stated by the committee itself; (3) calen- dar, under which the committee pledged itself to complete the mission or a phase of the mission by a definite date. To select the personnel and to avoid the weakness, found in most associations, of selecting the same people over and over again, members were asked to indi- cate, in order of preference, committees on which they would like to serve. These preferences were tallied and the tallies used to select members for committee work. The president sent each chairman a tentative statement of mission, and each committee was asked to rework and re- fine its own statement. Attached to the statement was the committee's own cal- 1" Proceedings and Papers of the Southeastern Library Association, 12th Biennial Meeting, Ashe- vlle, North Carolina. 16 Proceedings and Papers of the Southeastern Library Association, 13th Biennial Meeting, Louis- ville, Kentucky.
340 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY endar indicating what it planned to ac- complish by the next biennial meeting of the Association. The twenty-four committees can be grouped under three major areas of ac- tivity- extension, research, and profes- sional improvement. Integration of these various efforts is accomplished through a Liaison Committee. Ultimate responsi- bility for budget as well as for all activi- ties rests with the Executive Board. To date, the Liaison Committee, un- der the chairmanship of William Jesse, has effectively performed one of the ma- jor functions of the association, viz., con- tact with other regional agencies and with the state and national library as- sociations. It consummated a $7,000 contract with TVA for the reproduction of scientific journals. It secured some aid from the Southern Regional Education Board to launch the Resources Inven- tory Project. It has participated in South-wide planning conferences and has established a joint committee with the Southwestern Library Association to represent librarianship in the southern states. At this moment the Liaison Com- mittee is negotiating through the ALA for Ford Foundation support of a region- al program. At least a half-dozen of the commit- tees are engaged in or concerned with ac- tivities intended to support research in the region. Perhaps the most dramatic achievement to this point is that of Com- mittee S (Reproduction of Scientific Ma- terials, under the chairmanship of Law- rence Thompson). A demonstration proj- ect, financed largely out of a $7,000 grant from the TVA, is resulting in the microfilming of some thirteen sets of sci- entific journals most needed in the re- gion. Among the journals selected for re- production and to be made available to libraries not only in the region but else- where are the Royal Society of London Proceedings; the American Journal of Physiology; the London Chemical Society Journal; the Botanical Gazette; the London Physical Society Proceedings; Comptes rendus de l'Acade'mie des sciences, Paris; and Biochemische Zeitschrift. Equally promising is the mission of Committee F (Resources Inventory, un- der the chairmanship of Stanley West), which has been set up in three phases. Phase I, financed jointly by the South- eastern Library Association and the Southem Regional Education Board, in- volved preparing a prospectus for the in- ventory. This was completed in Septem- ber, 1951. Phase II, a work conference held in Daytona Beach with research li- brarians and professors, sought to refine the procedures. Phase III is about to be- gin with pilot inventories of library re- sources in the region for research in the six subject areas that are under contract with the Southern Regional Education Board. Ultimately, it is hoped, there will be a complete inventory of library re- sources in all subject fields. Other research activities are involved in the work of the committees on college and university libraries, special libraries, and defense and federal relations. Exten- sion activities are the concern of such committees as those of school libraries, public libraries, legislation, and audio- visual services. A wealth of association activities is found in the work of those committees concerned with professional develop- ment. Under the chairmanship of Louis Round Wilson, Committee C (Histori- cal) has set itself the task of writing the history of the Southeastern Library As- sociation and of collecting association archives for headquarters. Committee D (Statistics; Robert Alvarez, chairman) is periodically preparing data for publica-
LIBRARY CO-OPERATION IN THE SOUTHEAST 341 tion in the Southeastern Librarian. Com- mittee G (Library Education; William Fitzgerald, chairman) is pursuing the problem of codifying curriculum content through a proposed work conference. And so it goes from A to Y in the associa- tion's committees where missions have been defined and calendars set, the total representing a composite of regional pro- fessional activity. What does it all add up to? A regional demonstration of mobilizing five thou- sand libraries to support our nation's two major concerns in the present world situ- ation-research and dissemination. If the Southeastern Library Association can di- rect the power in the libraries of its re- gion in such a way as to contribute effec- tively to the research going on in agencies like the Institute of Nuclear Research, the Air University, and TVA, then a very real contribution will be made by the li- braries to America's superiority in the international race for scientific innova- tion. And if the Southeastern Library As- sociation can so co-ordinate the potential for dissemination in the five thousand li- braries of the region as to effect a net- work of print and audio-visual communi- cation that will rival radio and television networks, then again the libraries will make their influence felt in strengthening the nation's hand in the ideological con- flict. For these reasons the Southeast has been taking stock. "It has been studying itself not as a section, self-centered and unmindful of the nation, but as a region, whose significance is heightened by vir- tue of the fact that it is an integral part of the nation."'" And now, having taken stock, the Southeastern Library Association is on the threshold of a new era of regional planning which will place libraries side by side with the other dynamic social agencies performing indispensable func- tions for the benefit of the nation as a whole. 16 Wilson and Milczewski, op. cit., p. 1.