F R OM TH E E D I T O R SAftermath, Part 2: Despite the Way It May Seem, All Is Not Lost for Libraries and Librarianship Paul T. Jaeger, Ursula Gorham, Natalie G. Taylor, Lindsay C. Sarin, and Karen Kettnichhis is the second of two special issues that Library Quarterly has devoted to the im-T plications of the political events of the 2016 presidential campaign in the United States,the outcome of the election, and the subsequent policy and political events for librar- ies and other cultural heritage institutions. Much of what falls into these categories, of course, is bad news for libraries, librarians, and those who rely on libraries. The national and local political scene over the past 2 years has been extremely dishearten- ing for many people in the library profession. This is not really news, but it is something that we have to articulate clearly to start mapping out what we do in response. From the perspec- tive of our profession and institutions, the negative pressures are found in interrelated and con- current strands in the political discourse. First, the 2016 presidential campaign was defined by language that ostracized and dehu- manized many of the disadvantaged or marginalized populations—racial, ethnic, and religious minorities; LGBTQ folks; immigrants and refugees; people with disabilities; non-English speak- ers; people living in poverty—that libraries have long sought to include in their local commu- nities and in society as a whole. And as a profession with a distinguished history of providing career opportunities to women long before most other fields did, the prominent antifeminist, anti- woman (or at least anti-“nasty woman”) rhetoric of the campaign provides an especially pow- erful sting. Second, such language has been turned into action by the new presidential administration and resulted in, among other things, a spike in hate crimes against many of these groups that we work to better integrate into the communities that we serve and the president’s proposed budget, which slashes funding for many social services and institutions central to the lives of many library patrons, including education and literacy programs, scientific research, and even health care and disease prevention (Achenbach and Sun 2017; Davidson 2017; Snell, Paletta, and DeBonis 2017; Strauss 2017a, 2017b). Third, many key principles around which we have built our field—freedom of expression, equitable access to information, the provision of reliable resources—have been equally batteredLibrary Quarterly: Information, Community, Policy, vol. 87, no. 4, pp. 295–302. © 2017 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-2519/2017/8704-0001$10.00 295
296 • The Library Quarterlyby the 2016 presidential campaign and what has followed the election. As institutions devoted to increasing the knowledge, literacy, and self-empowerment of our community members with information, libraries are in a strange place in a world of alternative facts, fake news, and the splendid isolation of people seeking only opinions (and facts) that they already agree with. Those posters from the American Library Association that just say “Read” suddenly seem like profound political stances. The political discourse has rapidly come to devalue many whom we serve and much of what we do. This devaluation fits perfectly with the overall political philosophy of the last 40 years of American politics. Since the dawn of the Reagan administration, many political leaders have ad- vocated for cutting support for institutions and programs that serve the public good (Buschman 2003, 2005; Jaeger, Taylor, and Gorham 2015). Known as “neoliberal” economic doctrine, this way of viewing public services has led to decades of decreases in support for libraries and many other services. In recent years, this view has become heavily tied to the nonsensical claim that librar- ies are no longer needed because of Google. These three strands are totally intertwined, and their impacts over the next few years (at least) feel almost predestined. The people who count on our institutions will need greater support from them, and probably in many new ways that we are not yet able to imagine; the political climate will become increasingly negative toward libraries and the values they promote; and finances will become much further constrained. Each strand will feed the others, squeezing libraries more and more. In short, we are institutions of the public good that promote education, literacy, expression, rights, justice, and equity, but virtually every noun in the first clause of this sentence is now considered a political liability. This situation can easily inspire a sense of helplessness or even pointlessness. The libraries are doomed, so we just hope that the effects of global warming wipe us out before we have to close our doors due to lack of funds, right? No. Definitely no. Feeling sorry for ourselves is not a luxury that we have; our patrons need us, and our country needs us. We have a great deal to be proud of in the history of our profession and in the present of our profession. From those past and current achievements, there is a clear vision of what we can do now and in the future to fight for the values of our profession and the needs of our communities. About 5 years ago, the authors of this article began writing a series of publications on the sociopolitical climate influencing libraries, the significant social and political impacts of librar- ies, and the ways in which libraries can better articulate and demonstrate their value and con- tributions in the political environment (e.g., Jaeger et al. 2014, 2015; Jaeger and Sarin 2016). Through the research for these publications, we developed a strong sense of the arc of the profession’s activism and engagement. For well over a century, libraries and librarians have been uniquely adept at turning awful situations into chances for innovation. Consider a few examples:
From the Editors • 297• When waves of immigrants from regions of the world that had not previously made up a large portion of the US population began to flood major cities around the years of the First World War, libraries invented myriad ways to help these new populations become integrated. Innovations of that era such as literacy classes, children’s story time, and job-seeking materials and instruction are still fundamental to what we do today. And as a bonus, our institutions around that time were also among the first in many metropolitan areas to adopt new technologies and procedures that made library buildings cleaner and healthier than most other public buildings. • The Great Depression in the 1930s sent library usage escalating as library budgets dwindled. The demand for both library books and reference services skyrocketed; between 1930 and 1932, circulation at libraries around the country jumped by 25% to 30% annually, although those averages were down to 14% by 1935, as libraries had fewer intact materials left for patrons to borrow. Yet, despite the lack of intact materials and too little funding to hire new staff, libraries found a way to expand services for unemployed adults and children in need. • When censorship was widely supported by the public (from Comstock laws to McCarthyism), we stood against censorship in what people could read, in our col- lections and more broadly in society. We made opposition to censorship the cen- tral principle of the Library Bill of Rights in 1939. We won the battle for public perception: censorship, although making a comeback in certain quarters, is clearly antithetical to democracy for the majority of the public. • When the George W. Bush administration implemented a series of laws and policies after 9/11 that were intended to greatly increase the ability of the government to monitor the reading habits of people and to collect information from libraries, we found many creative—and often ingeniously subtle—ways to protect the privacy of our patrons while bringing national attention to the issue. The cover of Library Jour- nal asked, “Who wants to be the first to go jail?” in response to the USA PATRIOT Act. Then-president of the American Library Association and now Librarian of Con- gress Carla Hayden directly engaged Attorney General John Ashcroft on these is- sues. Ashcroft weirdly called librarians “hysterical” in response, flip-flopping on the extent to which the law was being used in libraries as he tried to discredit the ef- forts of libraries to raise awareness about the impacts of the law. • During the Great Recession that began 10 years ago, libraries were once again seeing unprecedented usage at a time when budgets were dropping, sometimes precipi- tously. And, as during the Great Depression, libraries found ways to create services that met new needs, emphasizing programs and services to promote job seeking and local economic development, to provide greater connections to government services, and to ensure Internet access and resources for those who could no longer afford them.
298 • The Library QuarterlyThese specific examples are only part of the larger mosaic of actions by our institutions that have led the fight against injustices. Our field has been far ahead of most of the rest of the nation in embracing and advocating for—and opening our own professional ranks to— not just women but also members of the LGBTQ community, people with disabilities, and people of color. Not every library has been on the right side of every issue as fast as we may wish they had, but overall, we have probably done better than any other profession in con- sistently maintaining focus on making society more inclusive and individual lives more eq- uitable. For example, just think about a public library at this moment. Much of the space and pro- gramming are devoted to free computer and Internet access, digital literacy courses and one- on-one assistance, job search and application training, and help with navigating government forms and obtaining social services, among other activities. There are books, DVDs, CDs, and much else to loan out, but people are more often in the public library to improve their own lives. Much of the current role of public libraries is ensuring that community members have the equitable chance to get basic services, to become educated, to become employed, to be civ- ically engaged, and to communicate effectively, all of which are human rights. A similar sum- mary of contributions could be readily constructed for a typical academic library or a typical school library or a typical public law library or any other kind of library you can name.What We Contribute In a time of extraordinary need or political crisis, libraries evolve and innovate and endure. That is where we are now. With all these current political challenges, we can focus on doing what libraries do best: adapting and leading through service to meet the changing needs of our com- munities and individual patrons. And if that sounds overwhelming or too abstract, then it might help to think about what each of us can do in terms of a few key verbs that define our institu- tions and our profession.Belong Libraries belong to their communities, but they also are a key part of the community sustain- ing itself. The library is central to the community that it serves, whether that community is the students attending a particular school, the people living in a certain geographic area, the groups of people affiliated with a college, or the researchers investigating a specific topic. A strong li- brary is indelibly etched into the life and activities of its community, a place that community members take for granted because it is so good at what it does. Even a cursory glance at the history of libraries reveals that they brilliantly adapt to the changing needs of their communities, whatever that means. The Internet has significantly shifted the focus of libraries’ collections, for example, but this change has vastly expanded the re-
From the Editors • 299sources available to communities and their connectivity to other parts of the world. Through such adaptations, libraries are important in helping communities to grow and members of those communities to have a sense of community and belonging. With the significant chal- lenges that many populations are now facing in the overall social and political climate, a sense of community and a sense of belonging will be more essential than ever for many people served by libraries. Provide Essentially, libraries provide what their specific local communities need from them. In addi- tion to the activities of a typical public library, every public library also responds to very spe- cific local needs. There are public libraries in the United States providing community health nursing, drug counseling services, social work services, the ability to order and pick up grocer- ies, tool libraries, cake pan libraries, a safe place during moments of strife and civil unrest, and countless other programs and services that meet a specific local need that perhaps no other institution is trying to address. And, again, every other type of library could generate a simi- larly diverse and impressive list of general and local contributions to communities. Each library provides education, space, services, shelter, programs, outreach, and so many other contributions to its community that a full list would be overwhelming. Providing what communities and community members need will be increasingly important as the neoliberal economic doctrine embraced by so many political leaders at national, state, and local levels leaves fewer and fewer other social services and public goods available.Create A key part of providing what communities need is creating innovative educational services be- fore many members of the community even realize that such services are needed. Establishing maker spaces to promote learning in science, technology, mathematics, robotics, and engi- neering is a very recent example of libraries’ making a new educational contribution to their communities. Across the history of the field, many of the core components of what our insti- tutions do began as creative programs that had never been tried before; the aforementioned children’s story hour is a good example of an innovation that has flourished. Libraries also create opportunities for community members through practical skills pro- grams—teaching technology literacy and searching skills, resume writing and job searching, and navigation of e-government resources and applications, among much else. These skills cre- ate new opportunities for the community members who learn from such programs. Both types of creation result in a more educated community, and these educational opportunities will be particularly important as other social supports and publicly available educational op- portunities dwindle.
300 • The Library QuarterlyEngage Libraries engage their communities in many valuable ways, reaching out to community mem- bers, taking library services to unique spaces, and cultivating relationships. These functions are all extremely important, but more ambitious engagement—talking about the good the library does for the community as frequently and widely as possible—is increasingly important. We do many great things that people who do not use the library already are unaware of; as we pick up more responsibilities and generate new ways to contribute, the need to advo- cate for ourselves only increases. Engage local politicians and civic leaders, local media, and members of the community who are not regular library users to let them know about all of the irreplaceable contributions you make and all that would be lost to the community if your funding were reduced. People need to understand why Google will never be able to replace a library. Too often, because of our field’s resistance to advocacy, we hurt our institutions and our profession by not being louder and prouder about our accomplishments. If your local gov- ernment is cutting public funding, failing to advocate for the library can have serious conse- quences for the library, the staff, and all of the community members who rely them. We have amazing stories to tell; we just need be brave enough to tell them. These are the primary reasons that the word “library” is so powerful, both to those who rely on libraries and to those who wish to defund them. Libraries and other cultural heritage institutions are uniquely capable of empowering individuals and entire communities, promot- ing equity and justice in ways that few other institutions can. In This Issue All of these concepts—belong, provide, create, and engage—are reflected in the various essays and articles that compose the second part of “Aftermath: Libraries, Democracy, and the 2016 Presidential Election.” This issue opens with “Dear Students: Becoming an Archivist in a Time of Uncertainty and Unrest,” a personal reflection by Ricardo L. Punzalan on the interconnec- tions of archives, political issues, and professional practice. The impacts of the 2016 election on LIS education and educators are further explored in “On Responsibility in the Classroom and the Ubiquity of Politics: Postelection Reflections from the United States and Canada,” by Keren Dali and Debbie Rabina, and “We Will Not Be Silent: Amplifying Marginalized Voices in LIS Education and Research,” by Sandra Hughes-Hassell and Amelia Gibson. As these three articles reveal, preparing current LIS students to be engaged and forward- thinking information professionals is acutely important at this time. Similarly, it is incumbent on those already in the field to respond to changes wrought by the new political environment. The importance of teaching information literacy, for example, has received more attention be- cause of growing concern about fake news. Ray Pun, in “Hacking the Research Library: Wiki-
From the Editors • 301pedia, Trump, and Information Literacy in the Escape Room,” describes an instructional pro- gram at Fresno State University that uses gamification to help students build information literacy skills. And, in “Yes, We (Still) Can: Promoting Equity and Inclusion in Children’s and Young Adult Library Services,” Renee F. Hill offers guidance on helping young patrons become engaged with issues of diversity, inclusion, equity, politics, and social justice. However, the ability of libraries to help their patrons navigate a complex and shifting information landscape may be affected by changes in funding, as discussed by John Chrastka in “What a Renewed Federalism Means for Libraries.” Paul T. Jaeger, Erin Zerhusen, Urusula Gorham, Renee F. Hill, and Natalie Greene Taylor, in “Waking Up to Advocacy in a New Political Reality for Libraries,” also examine changes in library funding and related policy developments, arguing that advocacy efforts at local and state levels are becoming increasingly important. Notwithstanding the challenges facing libraries of all kinds, our profession’s potential to contribute to democratic discourse has never been clearer, as explored in “Mobilization of Ru- ral Libraries toward Political and Economic Change in the Aftermath of the 2016 Presidential Election,” by Bharat Mehra; “Negotiating Borders: Librarianship and Twenty-First-Century Pol- itics,” by Nadia Caidi, J. J. Ghadar, and Danielle Allard; “Creating Space at the Table: Intellec- tual Freedom Can Bolster Marginalized Voices,” by Shannon Oltmann; and “Libraries: Reunit- ing the Divided States of America” by Nancy Kranich. Together, the perspectives and ideas presented in this issue—and their underlying mes- sages of hope and resilience—highlight how so many in our field have used the turmoil and uncertainty of the past few months as an impetus to belong, to provide, to create, and to engage. Facing Tomorrow Building a library and being a librarian are emphatic statements of a firm belief in helping and improving the community. Our institutions and our profession are inherently hopeful— we would not chose this line of work unless we believed that we were committed to pro- moting education, inclusion, social services, public spaces, digital literacy, social justice, and human rights while meeting many other community needs as a part of our regular work. These community-focused values will serve us well as we navigate the next few years. We have faced many large challenges before, and if we stay focused on what we can do best and the peo- ple who need us to do our best, we will be able to scale whatever mountains are just ahead. So, all is not lost. The changes and challenges may be long-lasting and impactful, but li- braries and other cultural heritage institutions are longer lasting and more impactful. Many important innovations will flow from these years of difficulty as we rise to meet the expanded and new needs that result from this political and policy environment. We have much to do, and this issue—and its predecessor—offer a bounty of ideas for working with the realities of now.
302 • The Library QuarterlyReferences Achenbach, Joel, and Lena H. Sun. 2017. “Trump Budget Seeks Huge Cuts to Science and Medical Research, Disease Prevention.” Washington Post, May 23. https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/to-your-health /wp/2017/05/22/trump-budget-seeks-huge-cuts-to-disease-prevention-and-medical-research-departments/?utm _termp.4d884470d67c. Buschman, John E. 2003. Dismantling the Public Sphere: Situating and Sustaining Librarianship in the Age of the New Public Philosophy. Westport, CT: Libraries Unlimited. Buschman, John E. 2005. “Libraries and the Decline of Public Purposes.” Public Library Quarterly 24 (1): 1–12. Davidson, Joe. 2017. “Support Grows for Small Agency with Big Reach on Trump’s Budget Death Row.” Washington Post, April 21. https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/powerpost/wp/2017/04/21/support -for-small-agency-with-big-reach-on-trumps-budget-death-row/?utm_termp.88d1b9f254ec. Jaeger, Paul T., Ursula Gorham, John Carlo Bertot, and Lindsay C. Sarin. 2014. Public Libraries, Public Policies, and Political Processes: Serving and Transforming Communities in Times of Economic and Political Constraint. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield. Jaeger, Paul T., and Lindsay C. Sarin. 2016. “All Librarianship Is Political: Educate Accordingly.” Political Li- brarian 2 (1): 17–27. http://openscholarship.wustl.edu/pllib/vol2/iss1/8. Jaeger, Paul T., Natalie Greene Taylor, and Ursula Gorham. 2015. Libraries, Human Rights, and Social Justice: Enabling Access and Promoting Inclusion. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield. Snell, Kelsey, Damien Paletta, and Mike DeBonis. 2017. “Even Some Republicans Balk at Trump’s Plan for Steep Budget Cuts.” Washington Post, May 23. https://www.washingtonpost.com/powerpost/even-some -republicans-balk-at-trumps-plan-for-steep-budget-cuts/2017/05/23/9bf202f8-3f62-11e7-adba-394ee67a7582 _story.html?utm_termp.6f285b730e9b. Strauss, Valerie. 2017a. “Betsy DeVos Apparently ‘Confused’ About Federal Law Protecting Students with Disabilities.” Washington Post, January 17. https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/answer-sheet/wp/2017 /01/17/betsy-devos-confused-about-federal-law-protecting-students-with-disabilities/?utm_term p.7dd76b0bc538. Strauss, Valerie. 2017b. “Why the Word ‘Merely’ Turned Many Advocates for Students with Disabilities against Gorsuch.” Washington Post, April 7. https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/answer-sheet/wp /2017/04/07/why-the-word-merely-turned-many-advocates-for-students-with-disabilities-against -gorsuch/?utm_termp.5e9ecfdbce1e.