Information Vaccine: Using Graphie Novels as an HIV/AIDS Prevention Resource for Young Adults Kendra S. Albright School of Library and Information Science , University of South Carolina , Email: albright.sc.edu Karen Gavigan School of Library and Information Science , University of South Carolina , Ema il: kga vigan @ma ilbox.se. ed u HIV/AIDS infections are growing at an alarming rate for young adults. In 2009, youth, ages 13-29, accounted for 39% of all new HIV infections in the U.S. (Division of HIV/ AIDS Prevention, Centers for Disease Control (CDC), 2011). South Carolina ranks eighth in the nation for new HIV cases, while the capital city of Columbia ranks seventh (Carolina Teen Health, 2012). Education and prevention efforts are needed to raise young adults' awareness of HIV/AIDS issues in order to reduce this troubling trend. To address this need, the researchers and a graphic illustrator worked with incarcerated students age 1 5-1 9 in the South Carolina Department of Juvenile Justice School District, to develop an age-appropriate, culturally-diverse graphic novel on HIV/AIDS, entitled AIDS in the End Zone. Phase I of the project was to create the novel. Once Phase I was completed, Phase II of the project began. During this phase, graphic novel book club in- terventions were held with young adults in public libraries in Columbia, South Carolina to measure knowledge gains and impact from reading the graphic novel. The purpose of this phase was to examine the role that graphic novels can play as a resource for increasing HIV/AIDS awareness among young adults. Phase II was funded by the 2013 ALISE Research Grant. The findings of the study are reported here. This study is the first of its kind to provide scientifically-based research that examines whether or not graphic novels can be an effective HIV/AIDS prevention tool for young adults. Implications for LIS education are discussed. Keywords: graphic novels, young adults, bibilotherapy, psychoanalytic information be- havior Problem Statement and Literature Review Although prevention breakthroughs have been made in HIV/AIDS in recent prevention have been made in recent years, it is still a deadly disease. Over 10,129 young people in the U.S. have died from AIDS (National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, n.d.). Of all new HIV infections in 2006, 34% were among youth, ages 13-24. By the end of 2006, nearly 56,500 youth were living with HIV infection or AIDS. In 2009, young persons accounted for 39% of all new HIV infections in the US. For comparison's sake, persons aged 15-29 comprised 21% of the US population in 2010. In 2009, young African Americans counted for 65% (5,404) of diagnoses of HIV infection reported among persons aged 13-24 years (Division of HIV/AIDS Prevention, Centers for Disease Control (CDC), 2011). South Carolina has one of the highest incidence rates for HIV/AIDS in the Unit- ed States (Figure 1). In South Carolina the primary at-risk population for HIV/AIDS is African-American teens, particularly J. of Education for Library and Information Science, Vol. 55, No. 2 - (Spring) April 2014 1 78 ISSN: 0748-5786 © 2014 Association for Library and Information Science Education
Information Vaccine: Using Graphic Novels as an HIV/AIDS Prevention Resource 1 79 Figure 1. 201 I South Carolina HIV/AIDS (South Carolina Department of Health and Environmen- tal Control, 2010). young men. Eighty percent of 15 to 24 year-olds who are newly diagnosed with HIV/AIDS in South Carolina are African- American (South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control, 2010). The rate of reported new HIV/AIDS cases among African-American South Carolin- ians is eight times that of Whites (Caro- lina Teen Health, 2012). As a result, edu- cation and prevention efforts are needed to raise young adults' awareness of HIV/ AIDS issues. Unfortunately, many young people are not concerned about becoming infected with HIV/AIDS (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2000). Further, prevention campaigns are not usually targeted to a specific, local community; rather, they are often designed in a more generic format and fall short of their intended prevention efforts (Albright, 2007). Albright (2007) identified important components of suc- cessful HIV/AIDS prevention programs in Sub-Saharan Africa that were integrat- ed into the current study. She identified the following components of successful campaigns that have been adapted to this study: 1. Materials should be designed spe- cifically for the target audience within their particular culture. They need to be available in the language of the target population. The researchers believe the graphic novel should be written in the vernacular of the target population for the study: Columbia youth, aged 1 5-19, many of whom will be in the higher risk, African-American population. 2. Because of the high degree of illiteracy in South Carolina, materials need to be available in a format that includes vi- sual images as well as text. 3. Because of the collectivist culture of the target population, information is
1 80 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE likely to be shared in common spaces (e.g. public and school libraries, com- munity centers, schools, churches). The graphic novel should be made available in those places. 4. Peer education appears to be a common and effective approach for disseminat- ing HIV/AIDS information. Thus, the target population should be included in the development and modification of the materials, word-of-mouth and shar- ing of information will be enhanced via peer networks. 5. The use of fiction is helpful for mak- ing HIV/AIDS information more inter- esting and appealing, particularly for youth, with a storyline and correspond- ing visual images. Successful prevention campaigns also take into account the use of appropriate messages targeted to the specific popu- lation in an authentic, accessible format (Albright, Kawooya, & Hoff, 2006). Al- though much of the existing HIV/AIDS prevention information for young people is accurate, it is often not readily available, nor presented in a format such as graphic novels that they find appealing. Further, due to the large influence of media and advertising, today's young people are very visual and multimedia learners. As Flynt and Brozo (2010) suggest, "Visual culture is a constant in students' daily lives." (p. 526). Young adults are more inclined to read and retain information if it is in an en- gaging format such as graphic novels that is popular with their generation (Gavigan, 2012). Growing evidence suggests that the use of graphic novels in the educational setting can enhance learning and the ar- tistic format can facilitate learning for students with varying learning styles and abilities (Botzakis, 2009; Carter, 2007; Gavigan, 2012; Krashen, 2004; Monnin, 2008). In addition to these considerations, the researchers adopted a theoretical per- spective from the field of psychoanalytic psychology. Rather than looking at cog- nitive aspects, which focus on the ways in which users think about information, a psychoanalytic perspective was employed, focusing on a more complex set of inter- actions that occur between the conscious mind and that of the unconscious. There is a growing body of evidence that sug- gests that up to 95% of decisions are made outside of conscious awareness (see, for example, Westen, 2007). The features of psychoanalytic theory focus on affect and the expression of emotion, where the in- dividual may attempt to avoid distress- ing thoughts and feelings by suppressing it into the unconscious mind (Shedler, 2010). A psychoanalytic approach sug- gests an alternative methodology that is more qualitatively based, i.e. projective tests (e.g. storytelling and the Thematic Apperception Tesi , among others). The use of projection provides insight into the inner worlds of individuals' thoughts and feelings and their meanings (Pervin & John, 2001), and are based on the belief that unconscious thoughts and feelings are accessible through a person's projec- tion onto an object or situation. Projec- tion is commonly used in psychology to investigate how a person responds to ambiguous stimuli while unaware of the assessment technique being used. The re- searchers chose to use this projective ap- proach to create and test the effectiveness of an authentic, emotionally-focused, and culturally-targeted graphic novel about the sensitive nature of the topic of HIV/ AIDS among young adults. The target population themselves are in a better and more emotionally vulnerable position to create a more powerful and effective sto- ry than those who are not within that pop- ulation. As members of the target popula- tion, the young adults were able to create content that would be more relevant to their peers in their local community. Tak- ing these considerations into account, the purpose of this project was to examine the role that graphic novels could play as a resource for increasing HIV/AIDS awareness among young adults.
Information Vaccine: Using Graphie Novels as an H IV/ A IDS Prevention Resource 181 Project Objectives The overall objective of this project was to provide an age- and culturally-appropri- ate graphic novel about HIV/AIDS with young adults in public libraries in South Carolina to help them meet the following objectives: 1. Young adults who participate in the study will develop an increased aware- ness of HIV/AIDS after reading the graphic novel and participating in the graphic novel book club intervention. 2. Participants will acquire the knowledge they need to make informed decisions regarding HIV/AIDS. The HIV/AIDS prevention program, Information Vaccine: Using Graphic Nov- els as an H IV/ AIDS Prevention Resource for Young Adults is a new intervention program designed to meet the needs of the target audience in South Carolina. Initial project funding was used to hire an il- lustrator to work with students at a South Carolina Department of Juvenile Justice School District (SCDJJSD) high school in summer 20 1 2. 1 The researchers and illus- trator worked with incarcerated youth to develop a culturally-diverse graphic novel on HIV/AIDS using age- and culturally- appropriate text, story, and illustrations. Together, they created a story that was of interest to the students, written in their own vernacular and designed to appeal to the high-risk population of African- American teens. The graphic novel will help young adults acquire the knowledge and resources they need to make informed decisions regarding HIV/AIDS. The resulting graphic novel, AIDS in the End Zone , was piloted with high school students in South Carolina in the Richland County Public Library System in Columbia, SC in 2013. The basic plot of 'A Carnegie Foundation Community Initiative grant from the Uni- versity of South Carolina was awarded in 201 1 to pay the graphic novel illustrator for her work in Phase 1 of the project. the story is that the new student, Marcus, is named the starting quarterback on the varsity football team. Former star quarter- back, Brad, crafts a plot to get his star spot back by setting up Marcus with Maria, who is HIV-positive. The graphic novel was used with a pilot group of young adult public-library patrons. Pizza was offered to attract participants to the event which was publicized at the selected branches. Several book club interventions took place, in which participants were given a pre-test of their HIV/AIDS knowledge be- fore reading the novel, and a post-test to measure knowledge gains. In addition, fo- cus groups were held with the participants and the resulting data was incorporated into modifications of the novel. Research Design, Methodology, and Analysis Techniques In order to better understand the effec- tiveness of the graphic novel in this proj- ect, the following research questions were used to guide this study: 1 . How does reading a graphic novel about HIV/ AIDS affect adolescents' under- standing of HIV/AIDS issues? 2. What are the ways in which adolescents respond to a graphic novel about HIV/ AIDS? In Spring 2013, book club interventions were held with three groups of high school age students in the Richland County Pub- lic Library System. The researchers were granted Institutional Review Board (IRB) approval before initiating the interven- tions. During the interventions, partici- pants were asked to take a survey to assess their knowledge and attitudes about HIV/ AIDS prior to reading the graphic novel. Next, each participant received a copy of the graphic novel and was asked to read it, after which they were asked to take anoth- er survey assessing their knowledge and attitudes about HIV/AIDS. This provided data about the knowledge gains from the
1 82 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE graphic novel. After the post-survey was completed, participants participated in a focus group interview to explore their views of the graphic novel, what they had learned, and what modifications they thought should be made to the graphic novel. Subjects were each given a $20 in- centive card to participate in the study. Im- pact evaluation was measured by analysis of data from the focus groups and pre- and post-survey scores. The descriptive ques- tions were designed to show any knowl- edge gain and change in attitudes among the participants. The qualitative questions were designed to provide insight into the nature of the materials' impact and provide clues as to which elements of the material were particularly effective in influencing knowledge and attitudes. Based on the data that resulted from the book club interven- tions, the graphic novel was modified to in- corporate suggested improvements. Findings and Discussion The total number of study participants was forty, of which 80% were female and 20% were male. The mean age of partici- pants was 17, with a range from 15-20. The majority of participants (85%) self- identified as African- American, 12% as mixed race and 3% as white. Of the forty participants, 37% considered themselves to be at risk and 36% knew someone who has/had HIV/AIDS. A comparison of the pre- and post-test survey results, taken before and after read- ing AIDS in the End Zone, revealed a num- ber of positive results. After reading the graphic novel, there was a 25% decrease in the number of people who believed that HIV/AIDS was transmitted genetically. The number of people who believed there was a cure for HIV, or who were uncer- tain about a cure, was small before reading the novel. Post-test survey results, howev- er, indicated a significant decrease in the number of erroneous beliefs in a cure for HIV, and a significant increase in the num- ber of correct answers (Figure 2). Figure 2. Is there a cure for HIV/AIDS? Fewer than half (of) the participants be- lieved that HIV could be spread through breastfeeding, prior to reading the graphic novel. Post-test survey results revealed a significant increase in the number of peo- ple who, after reading the novel, under- stood that HIV can be transmitted through breastfeeding. Qualitative results from the focus groups also produced informative and in- teresting data. One of the most frequently mentioned issues encountered by the re- searchers, in discussions with other people who read the graphic novel, was the lack of a homosexual character in the story. When the study participants were asked for their opinions about homosexuality in the story, the overwhelming response was that a homosexual character should be added to the story. Another topic that emerged in the data pertained to Maria, the only woman in the story. There was extensive discussion about misogynistic aspects surrounding Maria's character. The general consensus was that her character needed to be better developed, including a deeper portrayal of her own views of herself and her life. One participant reported: Maria needs a little more work. Her facial expressions look like she's doing bad act- ing.
Information Vaccine: Using Graphie Novels as an H IV/ AIDS Prevention Resource 1 83 Other participants suggested her ap- pearance needed some changes. One par- ticipant suggested: Short-shorts are a bit trashy; make her a bit less seductive. Another participant said: Take out the nose ring. A third participant added: Too much tight clothes; boobs hanging out. Another comment that was made sug- gested the story be expanded to include more about Maria's friends. Maria needs to have friends around her. One friend should know about it. The ending of the story was also dis- cussed, since some focus group partici- pants described it as "over the top." The original story was that the character of Sean, Brad's best friend, would follow his conscience and grab the microphone at the championship football game of the sea- son and tell everyone there the truth about what Brad had done to set up Marcus and Maria. Alternative endings were discussed and recorded. Other concerns identified during the fo- cus groups were also discussed. There was some confusion over the point of a discus- sion depicted between Marcus and his par- ents. One participant responded: The parents should have had a sex talk with him. They should have given him condoms instead of money, by showing him the right thing, instead of sending him out with money. He's going to have sex regardless. In addition, there was a scene where it appeared that Marcus might be preparing to hit Maria. The participants felt that this ruined Marcus's good guy status and that it should be deleted. As one participant said: I didn't like the punching scene. . . . Mar- cus should have just told everyone she had it rather than hitting her. The results of the surveys and focus groups were taken back to the young men at the South Carolina Juvenile Jus- tice Department for their consideration. The researchers felt that it was important to maintain the authenticity of the story, since it was the students' creation. The students made the final decisions regard- ing modifications, which have now been incorporated into the final story. AIDS in the End Zone is scheduled for publication in early 2014, through the Young Palmetto Books imprint of the University of South Carolina Press. Future plans are to return to the SCDJJ to work with another group of incarcerated youth to produce another title in the series. This is based on the desire of the students who felt it would be important to create graphic novels about additional social is- sues. They came to the realization that the visuals in the graphic novel aided their learning, thereby scaffolding their knowl- edge in the area of HIV/AIDS awareness. For example, one young man commented: I would rather read a graphic novel than a textbook because pictures get to the point quicker. Another student added: Visual with text was more fun to read . . . you can actually see the scenes playing out. One student described his pleasure in participating in the project when he stated: It gave us the experience to write a book and be a part of a creative thing. Discussion While the overall findings suggest posi- tive knowledge gains, they were not as great as were expected by the researchers. This may be explained by an age and edu- cation effect, however. Correlating grade with the knowledge gains suggest that most of the participants in the study had com- pleted high school health science, where
1 84 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE HIV/AIDS information is part of the cur- riculum. The gains also suggest, however, that the information presented in the ex- isting curriculum may not be sufficient at getting enough and accurate information to their students. Overall, the preliminary results are promising, although the graphic novel may be more effective with young adults who have not yet been exposed to HIV/AIDS curriculum, i.e. those students not yet in high school. This is a question for future research. A psychoanalytic approach was used as part of the rationale for the creation of the graphic novel. The target population were themselves selected to author the content in order to create an authentic story drawn from their own emotional perspectives that were projected onto the characters in the story. While the initial results are promising, further research is needed to determine its effectiveness. Implications for Curriculum Library and Information Science (LIS) education has not traditionally been in the business of creating content, which has been more the realm of other disciplines. In light of the increasing investigation and understanding of information use, how- ever, it seems a natural step for LIS edu- cators to encourage students to work with local constituents to create content tar- geted to specific local community needs. This study provides preliminary evidence to support the idea that LIS educators and professionals can develop useful, relevant and effective content. The process can be easily replicated in school, public and academic library settings. For example, school librarians can collaborate with classroom teachers to help students create curriculum-based graphic novels that ad- dress the American Association of School Librarian's Standards for the 2 1 st Century Learner and the Common Core State Stan- dards (CCSS). Further, Youth Services Librarians can provide programming that allows children and young adult patrons to create graphic novels on a variety of top- ics, including social issues that could then be shared with the community. The findings of this study are already being incorporated into our LIS classes, in- cluding Young Adult Literature for gradu- ate students and Information Literacy for undergraduates. Students in these classes learn how the content for the graphic novel was developed, how this process can be replicated as well as how the use of graph- ic novels can scaffold learning in a variety of content areas. Conclusion The quest to provide effective HIV/ AIDS prevention resources for young adults must examine the texts that they value, such as graphic novels. This is the first study of its kind to provide sci- entifically-based research that examines whether or not graphic novels can be an effective H IV/ A IDS prevention tool for young adults. The students who participat- ed in the graphic novel intervention proj- ect acquired the knowledge and resources they needed to make informed decisions regarding HIV/AIDS, including how to reduce or eliminate risk factors, how to talk with adults and / or partners, where to get tested for HIV and more. The findings suggest that AIDS in the End Zone has the potential to significantly impact on young adults in South Carolina, since it provides the target population with a greater knowl- edge of HIV/AIDS issues after participat- ing in the graphic novel intervention. Future Study The results of this pilot study were en- couraging and additional funding will be sought to initiate similar analysis national- ly and worldwide. A primary goal is to ex- tend this study to a more global audience and replicate it in other cultures. Specifi- cally, the University of South Carolina's School of Library and Information Sci- ence has a partnership with Royal I Mutee-
Information Vaccine: Using Graphie Novels as an HIV/AIDS Prevention Resource 1 85 sa University in Kampala, Uganda. The partnership between the two universities would provide the human capital neces- sary to replicate the study in that culture. A longitudinal study would be useful, where study participants are re-surveyed at six months and a year out, although there are a number of potentially confounding vari- ables that could affect results. Acknowledgements The researchers would like to thank the reviewers for their insightful com- ments on this paper. The researchers would also like to thank the University of South Carolina (USC) for the Carnegie Foundation Community Initiative Grant, and the Association for Library and In- formation Science Education (ALISE) for the Research Grant award. The re- searchers would also like to thank Dean Charles Bierbauer of the College of Mass Communication and Information Studies at USC, and SLIS Director, Dr. Saman- tha Hastings, for their continuous support and encouragement. References Albright, K. S. (2007). HIV/AIDS information seek- ing and healthcare communications in Sub-Saha- ran Africa. Durban, South Africa: International Federation of Library Associations (IFLA). Albright, K. S., Kawooya, D., & Hoff, J. (2007). Information Vaccine: Information and Uganda's Reduction of HIV/AIDS. In A. Mcharazo and S. Koopman (Eds.), Librarianship as a Bridge to an Information and Knowledge Society in Africa. Munich: K.G. Saur, 486-499. Botzakis, S. (2010). Graphic novels in education: Cartoons, comprehension, and content knowl- edge. In Wooten, D.A. & Cullinan, B.E. (Eds.) Children 's literature in the reading program: An invitation to read. (pp. 15-23). Newark, Dela- ware, US: International Reading Association. Carolina Teen Health, (n.d.). Know the facts - HIV/ AIDS info. Retrieved from http://www.carolina- teenhealth.com/knowthefacts/hivstdinfo.aspx. Carter, J. B. (2007). Building literacy connections with graphic novels : Page by page , panel by panel. Urbana, Illinois, US: National Council of Teachers of English. Divisions of HIV/AIDS Prevention. (2011). HIV among youth. Retrieved from http://www.cdc. gov/hiv/youth/index.htm Flynt, S., & Brozo, W. (2010). Visual literacy and the content classroom: A question of now, not when. Reading Teacher , 63, 526-528. Gavigan, Karen (2012). "Sequentially SmART: Us- ing graphic novels across the K-12 curriculum." Teacher Librarian 39(5), 20-25. Kaiser Family Foundation (2000). National survey of teens on HIV/AIDS. Retrieved from http:// www.kff.org/youthhivstds/upload/National-Sur- vey-of-T eens-on-H I V- AI DS .pdf. Krashen, S. (2004). The power of reading : Insights from the research. Second Edition. Portsmouth, New Hampshire, US: Libraries Unlimited. Monnin, K. (2008). Perceptions of new literacies with the graphic novel "Bone". Ph.D. Disserta- tion. Kent, OH: Kent State University. National Institute of Allergy and Intectious Dis- eases, n.d. "HIV/AIDS." HIV infection in ado- lescents and young adults research, NI AID, NIH. Retrieved from <http://www.niaid.nih.gov/top- ics/hivaids/understanding/population specific in- formation/Pages/hivadolescent.aspx>. Pervin, L. A. & John, O. P. (2001). Personality: Theory and research. 8th ed. New York, NY, US: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Shedler, J. (2010). The efficacy of psychodynamic psychotherapy. American Psychologist, 65(2), 98-109. South Carolina Department of Health and Environ- mental Control (2011). South Carolina's STD/ H IV/ AIDS data: Surveillance report, Decem- ber 31, 2011. Retrieved from http://www.dhec. sc.gov/health/disease/sts/docs/SurveillanceRe- port_201 l.pdf. Westen, D. (2007). The political brain : the role of emotion in deciding the fate of the nation. New York, NY, US: Public Affairs.