INFORMATION LITERACY: A CONTRADICTORY COUPLING' Christine Pawley2 Information literacy has established itself as an important subfield of librarian- ship. Yet although librarians justify information literacy as increasing demo- cratic participation by all citizens, their efforts to improve "quality control" of information also threaten to restrict choice in systematic ways. This contradic- tion results in part from the genealogy of the terms "information" and "liter- acy," terms that share a relationship traceable to an Enlightenment ideology, namely, that reading could transform society by informing its people. But read- ing's power to transform was also a contested issue for groups seeking political and cultural ascendancy, and reading genres that initially challenged conven- tional thought evolved into those that buttressed it. In the process, some groups came to be defined as information "consumers" and simultaneously excluded from the role of information "producers." Strategies that can raise awareness of the assumptions underlying this legacy include critical analysis of language use and envisioning information use as a process that involves all us- ers in both consumption and production. Adopting these can help librarians recognize that the tensions inherent in the discourse and practice of informa- tion literacy are not only unavoidable, but essential, if the basic condition of democracy-citizen participation-is to be fulfilled. The problems we face are not really technical-they are moral, they are ethical. A reliance on technical solutions leaves us still gasping, still empty. (MAXINE GREENE [1, p. 6]) "Information literacy" denotes an emergent professional and institu- tional practice.3 As James W. Marcum comments, over the last decade, 1. The author would like to thank the following for their help in formulating the ideas ex- pressed in this article: Larry Amey, Alan Bundy, Thomas Eland,James Elmborg,Joyce Kirk, Raymond G. McInnis, Ross Todd, and the five anonymous reviewers for the Library Quarterly who commented on the manuscript. 2. Christine Pawley, School of Library and Information Science, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242-1420; Telephone 319-335-5711; E-mail christine-pawley@uiowa.edu. 3. Christine Bruce traces the use of the term "information literacy" back to the late 1960s and relates it to early developments in computer-based information technology, but it was not until the 1980s that it began to enjoy widespread use [2, pp. 4-5]. [Libraiy Quarterly, vol. 73, no. 4, pp. 422-452] ? 2003 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-2519/2003/7304-0003$10.00 422
INFORMATION LITERACY 423 information literacy has established itself as "a major focus and purpose of librarianship," a field that has successfully drawn to itself considerable resources in terms of library staff and curricular time, not to mention policy-making energy [3, p. 1]. Library and Information Science (LIS) professionals have developed information literacy in response to a vari- ety of pressures: complaints in the mass media about "information over- load" (especially on the Internet); a constant flow of breathless reports from the information industries about "advances" in new technologies, and institutional pressures that include the presence of the very elec- tronic resources that librarians themselves have acquired for use. Definitions of information literacy abound, but most include the fol- lowing elements: "resource-based learning," "critical thinking," and "life-long learning."4 Educators and librarians depict the skills to use and locate information in a variety of formats, and the intellectual abil- ity to evaluate such information, as techniques or "tools" essential for a successful adaptation to the rapid social and technical changes that we will all face, we are told, throughout our lives. In 1998, Carla J. Stoffle, dean of libraries at the University of Arizona in Tucson, wrote in American Libraries: "Success in the next century-personal, profes- sional, civic and economic-will depend on the ability to participate intellectually in the emerging knowledge-based society. The knowledge explosion and economic changes brought about by the rapidly ex- panding information telecommunication technologies require individ- uals to be skilled independent learners.... [T] he average 21st-century worker may need the skills to cope with as many as seven major employ- ment changes in his or her lifetime" [5, p. 46]. Library educator Daniel Callison summarizes definitions of "critical thinking" for School Library Media Activities Monthly staff and teachers: "Thinking critically is the cognitive process we use to carefully examine our thinking (and the thinking of others) in order to clarify and improve our understand- ing.... Critical thinking is reasonable reflective thinking that is focused on deciding what to believe or do" [6, p. 40]. Such descriptions locate information literacy at the intersection of teaching and learning along one dimension, and information produc- tion and distribution along the other. The composite term "informa- tion literacy" is an example of discourse synthesis; as Raymond McInnis 4. In 1989, the American Library Association Presidential Committee on Information Literacy stated, "Information literate people are those who have learned how to learn. They know how to learn because they know how knowledge is organized, how to find information and how to use information in such a way that others can learn from them. They are people prepared for lifelong learning, because they can always find the information needed for any task or decision at hand" [4, p. 1].
424 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY reflects, "if two or more concepts are combined ... does the resulting concept produce a new understanding.... [and] are new, larger con- cepts generated?" [7, pp. 1-2].5 Most librarians would probably argue that "information literacy" is indeed an activity greater-or at least different-from the sum of its parts. And the conjoining of "informa- tion" and "literacy" sets up a powerful resonance. The so-called infor- mation age has become a defining metaphor of our time, while "liter- acy" is what philosophers call a "hurray" word: like democracy and apple pie, who can be against it?6 Small wonder, then, that librarians and LIS educators have welcomed the wedding of the two. Ownership of so politically charged a term assigns rights and privileges. It provides justification for resources, including staff, equipment, and research grants and funds for program development. In universities and col- leges, information literacy often appears on the undergraduate curric- ulum and is an important area of library staff expertise. For librarians charged with responsibility for teaching courses in information literacy this may represent success in an ongoing battle to garner, maintain, or divert funds these days only meagerly distributed by university ad- ministrators.7 Similarly, in K-12 schools, information literacy appears on the curriculum with increased frequency. Some states have identi- fied information literacy as a key competency for all students.8 Public librarians, too, talk of the need for information literacy among the gen- eral population.9 Courses in information literacy take place in the grad- uate curricula of LIS schools. A growing professional literature focuses on practical and technical aspects of developing standards and implementing information literacy 5. Discourse synthesis is the process by which new ideas and concepts become incorpo- rated in the "body" of knowledge-and for some ideas, become part of the stock of knowledge-what everybody knows. 6. In a discussion of epistemological and strategic issues connected with use of the term "in- formation literacy," Loanne Snavely and Natasha Cooper produce a list of thirty-four exam- ples of the use of the term "literacy" to denote basic knowledge in a subject or field. They also suggest thirty-six alternative terms to use instead of information literacy [8]. 7. For example, the Web page of the University Libraries at the University of Iowa states, "Clearly information literacy should be a key component in each student's education, and the University Libraries encourages the University of Iowa to implement information liter- acy throughout the curriculum" [9]. At the University of Wisconsin-Madison, all incom- ing freshman are required to take a two-course sequence that includes information literacy components, and that is mainly taught by campus librarians [10]. 8. The State of Wisconsin has established standards for "Information and Technology Liter- acy" that identify competencies for all students from pre-kindergarten through grade 12 [11]. 9. The mission statement of the Chicago Public Library, for example, includes the statement: "We welcome and support all people in their enjoyment of reading and pursuit of lifelong learning" [121.
INFORMATION LITERACY 425 programs in educational contexts. Yet even an innovative professional practice carries with it the marks of its inheritance-its genetic imprint -although the implications of these characteristics may be poorly recog- nized. Investigating the genealogy of the contributing terms "informa- tion" and "literacy" can bring some of these hidden traits to the surface and can alert practitioners to underlying tensions and inconsistencies that have the potential to deflect their practical programs, however well- intentioned and -conceived, from their ultimate goals. First, I argue that combining the terms "information" and "literacy" sets up a tension between conflicting ideals of, on the one hand, a promethean vision of citizen empowerment and democracy, and, on the other, a desire to control "quality" of information that has the potential to result in-albeit unintended-procrustean conse- quences.'? However, contradiction is not new to the field, and rather than try (fruitlessly, I believe) to resolve this tension, we should focus on understanding it and laying it open for inspection and discussion. Second, I contend that conceiving of information as a thing-the "reification" of information-has permitted us to treat it as a com- modity, a development that has actually facilitated the institutional- ization of libraries and their core activities, cataloging and reference. Third, I go on to show that the development of "information genres" such as reference and textbooks has contributed to the decontextual- ization of information, obscuring the specific conditions of its pro- duction. Fourth, I argue that although Enlightenment ideology saw information use in terms of building concepts and empowering "'the public" to create new knowledge, the pedagogy of reading and policies to promote "literacy" have systematically worked to render some groups of people-indeed, the majority-less capable of active information use and knowledge construction than an educated elite. Finally, in conclusion, I contend that although the contradictions that these inheritances have built into "information literacy" cannot be dissolved, we should see the tension between them as creative and helpful. The LIS community also needs to pay more critical attention to language use. By engaging in critical analysis so as to understand the specific conditions under which information is produced as a step toward involving users in "recontextualization" and ex- panding the category of "information producer" to encompass those 10. In the Greek myth, Prometheus, son of a Titan, takes pity on humans and gives them fire. He thus empowers them to improve their lives by stimulating their creativity and enabling the development of the arts and sciences. Procrustes, on the other hand, is a robber who waylays travelers and forces them to lie on a terrible iron bed. If they are too short to fit the bed exactly, he stretches his victims. If they are too long he chops off their legs. Either way, death is the result.
426 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY previously excluded, we can achieve and maintain a balance between constraint and liberality that will promote the most emancipating- promethean-institutional and professional practices of information literacy. Language and Ideology: Built-in Contradictions The language that the LIS community uses to develop the concept of information literacy is, of course, heavily dependent on the traditional style of argument and explanation in the field. Since the prevailing style of LIS discourse uses techno-administrative language to address technical and managerial problems, most professional literature de- scribes applied research into information literacy, provides economic and educational justifications for its existence, and passes on practical tips and recommends methods of evaluation. This literature is mainly expressed in terms of managerial and pedagogical theories and con- cepts; is addressed to teachers, librarians, and educational administra- tors; and can be found not only in scholarly and professional journals but also in monographs and edited books. Commercial publishers pro- duce "how-to" manuals and compilations of materials, like the Libraty Orientation Series ("Emphasizing Information Literacy and Biblio- graphic Instruction") published by Pierian Press. Clearly, information literacy has already gone a long way toward institutional acceptance. For many librarians, however, the ultimate ideal of information literacy is to promote citizen empowerment and democracy-a pro- methean paradigm that is hard to express in conventional techno- administrative discourse. The Association of College and Research Libraries (ACRL) Information Literacy Competency Standards for Higher Education, for example, includes the goal of creating "a more informed citizenry" [13]. This aspect of information literacy empha- sizes providing information users with unfettered access to a wide vari- ety of "sources." But because statements like the ACRL Competency Standards also refer, in the techno-managerial tradition, to the need for "effective and efficient" information access, and lay out the evalua- tive criteria on the basis of which information should be selected, information literacy also has the capability to produce and sustain a hierarchical system wherein expert authorities determine what counts as "knowledge." Such an approach emphasizes control rather than freedom, and a narrowing (as opposed to a broadening) of selection to those sources deemed "valuable." Rather than opening up possibili- ties for social, cultural, and economic participation in knowledge pro- duction by all citizens, the tendency of this procrustean paradigm is to fit all contingencies to an "iron bed," the dimensions of which are
INFORMATION LITERACY 427 predefined by a cultural, social, and economic elite." It would appear, then, that the very notion of information literacy embodies a tension between opposing aims. What can be made of these contradictory potentials? Contradiction is not new to the LIS field, and indeed American li- brarianship from the mid-nineteenth century on has experienced some persistent tensions that are detectable in the rhetoric surrounding in- formation literacy. In a 1975 paper aptly titled "Ambivalence and Para- dox: The Social Bonds of the Public Library," Phyllis Dain contrasted Sidney Ditzion's progressivist view of public libraries as "arsenals of a democratic culture" with the recent revisionist interpretations of Mi- chael H. Harris and Dee Garrison [15, 16]. That year, Harris had shocked-yet intrigued-the LIS community with an article about the founding of the public library movement. Influenced by recent revi- sionist interpretations of public school history, he argued that rather than emanating from "liberal and humanitarian zeal," as described by Ditzion, "public libraries were generally cold, rigidly inflexible, and elitist institutions from the beginning" [17, p. 25091.1'2 At about the same time, Garrison's essay drew on contemporary feminist thought to introduce the theory that gender was crucial to explaining librarian- ship's low status [19]. Rather than choosing one interpretation over the other, however, Dain sensibly pointed to the strengths and weak- nesses of both approaches. Since then, library historians have tended to follow Dain, recognizing the virtues of sitting on the intellectual fence. In 1984, Evelyn Geller published a sociological account (based on her 1980 Ph.D. dissertation at Columbia University) of changing atti- tudes among cultural authorities, including the library profession, to intellectual freedom [20]. Geller pointed out that at different periods in time, librarians shifted their ideological stance in ways that expressed three dilemmas. First, a "populist-elitist" dilemma expressed a conflict between the tastes of cultural professionals and sponsors and more popular taste; second, a "neutrality-advocacy" dilemma contrasted the librarian's role as civil servant responsible to the entire community, 11. Hope A. Olson relates that when Melvil Dewey's classification system was accused of pro- crustean tendencies, Dewey defended himself by likening his ten divisions of the universe of knowledge to a railroad: "better and quicker and cheaper." But, Olson argues, we should remember that "'better and quicker and cheaper' is always at a price, and the price is the violent reshaping of objects to fit the preconception of the knowing subject" [14, pp. 650, 663]. 12. This article ensured that Harris's critique would reach a wide audience. But it was based on a much longer and more thoroughly documented report that Harris prepared for the ERIC Clearinghouse on Library and Information Sciences and that later appeared as "The Role of the Public Library in American Life: A Speculative Essay" [181.
428 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY with her desire to exercise social responsibilities in ways that question the value of neutrality; and third, in a "freedom-censorship" dilemma, librarians struggle with ideas considered to fall outside the framework of conventional debate, ideas that seem to threaten the moral or social order. For librarians, these dilemmas, Geller argued, can never be re- solved; they inhere in the field-they come with the job. Contradiction, then, is a condition that characterizes the field. And echoing concerns of the earlier periods, the theory and practice of information literacy continues to raise issues of freedom versus control, and diversity versus standardization. These self-contradictions are un- avoidable. Yet the failure to acknowledge and come to terms with them could magnify the potential for unconsciously subverting a fundamen- tal belief to which most librarians adhere without reservation: support for citizen empowerment and democracy. "Information": Reification and Commodification To uncover these contradictions we need to investigate the heritage of the two contributing terms "information" and "literacy." While most commentators assume that "information literacy" is merely a marriage of convenience, pointing to the pairing of literacy with many other partners, in fact the two terms share an inheritance. And the common link is the social practice of reading.'3 The term "information" as we understand it today traces its ancestry to the Enlightenment and the development of a rationalist belief that people could be shaped for the better-"in-formed"-through reading. That the printed word could influence moral behavior went back further, of course-at least as far as the Reformation-but it was during the eighteenth century that were laid the foundations of what Michel de Certeau calls the "ideology of 'informing' through books-or the 'myth of Education"'-the be- lief that books "could, if they were sufficiently widespread, remodel a whole nation" [22, p. 166]. Indeed, according to Benedict Anderson, it was print and reading that permitted "imagined communities" to form, of which nations (another developing concept in the eigh- teenth century) constituted a major example [23]. And along with the spread of scientific attempts to discover "laws" of nature came the gradual acceptance of standardization and regulation in print-of, for instance, uniform rules of spelling. Another example was the eighteenth-century development of "reference" books. 13. See, for example, Wayne A. Wiegand's contrast of librarianship's focus on "useful knowl- edge" rather than "stories" [21].
INFORMATION LITERACY 429 While reference books were not new at that time, an Enlightenment focus on discovering knowledge rather than seeking wisdom from the past endowed them with a different character. Ephraim Chambers's two-volume Cyclopedia or an Universal Dictionary of Arts and Sciences ap- peared in 1728. The Encyclapedie of Denis Diderot and Jean de la Rond d'Alembert was published in thirty-two volumes between 1751 and 1780. Samuel Johnson's A Dictionary of the English Language came out in 1755, while the Encyclopaedia Britannica was first published in sub- scription form between 1768 and 1771. These major intellectual enter- prises were not undertaken in order to maintain fixed standards of truth and certainty, unlike their medieval predecessors. Rather, their authors and publishers saw them as tools for debate and instruments of philosophy, to facilitate the exchange of new ideas. According to Richard Yeo, "The encyclopaedias of the eighteenth century were a practical embodiment of the notion that knowledge should be accessi- ble to a wide public and, as such, their purpose was not just to collate knowledge used by elites, but to facilitate conversation and communi- cation" [24, p. 12]. McInnis, too, argues that these conversations formed the basis for "interpretive communities," and that dictionary makers like Chambers deliberately sought to transmit the new methods of intellectual engagement to "a broader public" [25, p. 120, n. 14]. Some were highly polemical, in contrast to the "neutral" understand- ing of reference works common today. In particular, Diderot's Encyclo- pedie presented a threat to French authorities in that it challenged, rather than confirmed, existing official knowledge.'4 With the publica- tion of the Encyclopedie for the first time, contends John Ralston Saul, "an alphabetical analysis of civilization looked, not backwards but for- ward through innovative social ideas" [27, p. 4]. The choice to alphabetize had consequences that the early compos- ers of dictionaries and encyclopedias could hardly have foreseen, al- though it was not without controversy even in the eighteenth century. Some contemporary critics argued that alphabetical arrangement of entries entailed the abandonment of the search for "an orderly over- view of the circle of knowledge" [24, p. 276], while Isaac Watts praised it as facilitating "consultation, rather than sustained reading" [25, 14. With the publication of the very first volume, officials understood the danger it repre- sented. "The Encyclopedists identified their philosophy with knowledge itself-that is, with valid knowledge, the kind derived from the senses and the faculties of the mind as opposed to the kind dispensed by church and state," argues Robert Darnton. "Traditional learning, they implied, amounted to nothing but prejudice and superstition. So beneath the bulk of the Encyclopedie's twenty-eight folio volumes and the enormous variety of its 21,818 articles and 22,885 plates was an epistemological shift that transformed the topography of everything known to man" [26, p. 7].
430 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY p. 120, n. 14]. But imposing alphabetical sequence on encyclopedia articles and word definitions, and thus removing words from their con- text, also promoted the "reification"-the "thingness" of informa- tion.'5 In the early nineteenth century, the prevailing concept of infor- mation was still as an active verb-as instruction that shaped the mind or character. But because this instruction increasingly derived from the practice of reading books, by the middle of the century the meaning of information had undergone a strategic shift, so that, linguist Geoffrey Nunberg points out, "information was taken to denote not the instruc- tion derived from books, but the content of books from which the in- struction is derived" [29, p. 113; my emphasis]. This shift had the effect of resituating "the agency of instruction to the text and its producers" and reducing the reader "to the role of passive consumer of content.," In other words, "information" had shifted from an effect to a cause, but a cause inextricably linked to books and reading [29, pp. 112-13]. According to Nunberg, our present-day abstract understanding also arises from a conflation of two senses of the word. On the one hand, he argues, we are familiar with an "ordinary, particularistic" sense, as in "I'm looking for a book about guinea pigs." On the other hand, when we talk about "the information age" or "information overload" we are thinking in a more abstract sense about "a kind of intentional substance that is present in the world." This "is the sense of the word which bears the ideological burden in discussion of the new technolo- gies" [29, pp. 109-10]. But we confuse these two senses, so that even in the abstract, we have come to think of information as a "thing." The first copyright law in England (the Act of Queen Anne in 1709) also contributed to acceptance of this concept. Jorge Reina Schement and Terry Curtis maintain that this thing-like perspective forms the conceptual foundation for the information society, making it possible to conceive of buying and selling information, possessing more or less of "it," stealing "it," and storing and retrieving "it"-all essential to commercialization and commodification [30, p. 9]. A commodity, liter- ally, is a thing that is produced to be bought and sold in a market. In a precapitalist system of production, people may produce goods and services for their own use-they grow their own food, make their own clothes and furniture, and entertain themselves. If they produce more than they need for their families they may exchange this surplus for something produced by a relative or neighbor. But for this sort of ex- change to become a regular event, the two products must be systemati- 15. While the meaning of "information" has been the subject of repeated (and repetitive) debate in US circles, the "thing-like" quality of information enjoys widespread accep- tance and, indeed, advocacy. See especially [28].
INFORMATION LITERACY 431 cally valued in terms of a third item-money. And for consistent and fair valuation, the products must be susceptible to measurement, stan- dardization, and aggregation. Books and other reading materials, as commodities, are of course produced in highly specific and situated ways. Like any other commod- ity, they "have not fallen from heaven" but have a history of their own, comments Paul Willis. "Follow any commodity back to the factory, and there is a world of surprise in store: complex labor processes, human hierarchies, discipline, sometimes bizarre management regimes of con- trol and motivation, conflict, weariness, and often suffering too" [31, p. 142]. Although we recognize these personal costs and contingencies in the things that we ourselves produce, when it comes to the commodi- ties produced by others, a veil descends and we forget them. Yet without commodification, the "quantity" of information could not have in- creased so fast, either in paper form in the second half of the nine- teenth century or in digital form in the second half of the twentieth. And despite laments by librarians about the effects of increasing com- modification, without it there would have been no institutional re- sponse in the form of public libraries and educational programs to promote mass literacy in the nineteenth century or information literacy at the end of the twentieth.'6 Packaging Information: Reference, Textbooks, and "Decontextualization" Constructing information as a neutral, abstract thing also opened it to manipulation by technical and administrative processes-it could be accumulated, sorted, classified, and filed. By these bureaucratic proce- dures the emerging library profession sought control over the first in- formation "explosion"-the sky-rocketing numbers of printed books, newspapers, and magazines during the latter part of the nineteenth century. Melvil Dewey invented his "Decimal System" in the early 1870s; other library classification systems quickly followed. By the end of the nineteenth century, cataloging had become a core practice of the new profession. Another core practice was reference. In the early 1870s, too, Samuel Swett Green drew attention in the first volume of 16. Librarians hotly debated issues that they link to the commodity nature of information during the 1980s and 1990s. For discussion that depicts increasing commodification or "commercialization" associated with the rise of digital technology as inherently harmful, see, for example [32 and 33]. Other discussion has revolved around the issue of fee-based library services. A recent example is [34].
432 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY American librarianship's first professional journal to the need for an intermediary to link readers with books [35]. Nunberg dubs library products such as classification systems, cata- logs, and indexes, along with reference materials and newspapers, as "informational genres." These genres support certain practices of reading-practices that reinforce the impression of information as an abstract thing. What these information genres have in common, Nun- berg says, are particular properties. For instance, they are "uniform" and "morselized." Uniformity arises from the separation of their con- tent from their material form. The essence of the "information" in the newspaper is irrelevant to the details of the newspaper's physical layout-the size of the font, the color of the ink, the number and size of pages, and so on. "Morselization" has to do with "quantization" or "atomization" that makes its measurement possible, so that in- formation can be broken into small chunks or "little atoms of content-propositions, sentences, bits, infons, morceaux" that can be disconnected and recombined, counted, stored, and retrieved [29, pp. 116-17] . The newspaper, for example, presents all historical events as "events of immediate daily significance, each occurring in a single place" [29, p. 118]. Although a newspaper's content is tremen- dously varied-consisting of reports of political events and natural di- sasters, gossip columns, editorials, letters, obituaries, advertising, and so on, these tend to lose their individual character: all can be described in terms of column inches. The newspaper's material form interacts with the formatting of its contents in discrete information packets to encourage the practice of reading in short, discontinuous bursts. Simi- larly, library catalogs reduce all materials, no matter what the format or subject, to a standard set of descriptions, producing information that stands as a surrogate to the original but at the same time obscuring the individuality of the original [29, p. 118]. These qualities of morseli- zation and uniformity contribute to our impression of the informa- tional genres as standing alone, lacking history, authorship-lacking context of production. An informational genre that Nunberg does not discuss is the text- book. But like newspapers, reference books, and library catalogs, school and college textbooks consist largely of uniform packets of in- formation that have been taken out of context and then recombined. Textbook reading, like reference book and newspaper reading, takes place in discontinuous segments. Rather than start at the beginning and read through until they reach the end, many students and teachers dip in and out of their textbooks, fitting the pattern of their reading 17. For a definition of an "infon," see [36].
INFORMATION LITERACY 433 to the demands of the curriculum rather than the other way around. Again, the voice of the author is muted; textbooks take on a disembod- ied, decontextualized life of their own. It is true that some famous text- books that have persisted through many editions and over the years may be known only by the name of the original author-"Samuelson" in economics, for instance, or "Perry" in chemical engineering-but this is also true of reference books [37, 38]. Although we may refer to a dictionary as "Webster's," we do not hold the long-dead Webster personally responsible for its contents. The personalization of these works is a mere metonym-a metaphor in which a part stands for the whole. "Recontextualization" and the Enlightenment Model of Information Diffusion Yet this apparent decontextualization is illusory. Information never stands alone-it is always produced and used in ways that represent social relationships. And these representations and relationships are not merely a matter of chance or individual choice but reflect the un- derlying patterns that structure society. All information use involves- in Michael Apple's term-"recontextualization," a process by which users make active sense out of the information packets that they en- counter [39, p. 68]. In Enlightenment epistemological theory the dis- crete packaging of information allowed readers to recontextualize the information content in ways that permitted them to produce new knowledge. As McInnis explains, "By bundling their concepts into concrete-like entities, scholars are able to move concepts at will from text to text" [7, p. 3]. According to this theory, the active reader employs the information packets as "bundles" or "building blocks" to combine them in potent and innovative ways. This treatment of concepts as the component parts of a metaphorical construction lies at the heart of information literacy ideology and may appeal to librarians on a number of grounds. It promotes a progressiv- ist theory of knowledge, which many may find reassuring. It also en- courages us to think of readers or information users as possessing agency-as active "builders" of knowledge, thus occupying a central position in the information process-a view that supports the prometh- ean paradigm of information literacy. But before exploring this con- ception of the active user in more detail, we need to pause and recog- nize that focusing exclusively or even principally on users' agency threatens to obscure the relational character of the process of knowl- edge production. By minimizing structural features that act to deprive
434 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY users of agency, we risk ignoring the ways in which the material and intellectual qualities of textual production and distribution shape read- ers' experiences. This provides an example of what sociologists call the "structure-agency dichotomy." As David Walsh explains, " [E]very con- ception of social structure must ultimately reduce to what people do in society, yet society always consists of particular and institutionalized forms of the organization of these actions. These cannot work, how- ever, without the commitment of actors to them. The question of struc- ture and agency then is whether this commitment is simply enforced or entirely volunteered, and how it is possible for it to be a combination of both so that social structure is both achieved by and constitutive of social action. The point is: under what conditions and how does this occur?" [40, pp. 32-33]. Enlightenment information products, like those of today, were cre- ated, owned, and distributed by members of an educated elite. Yet the apparent decontextualization of texts permits the stratified nature of their production to recede into the background and even to disappear. The Enlightenment model of information diffusion, as many commen- tators have famously pointed out, was a top-down structure, in which the wisdom of-literally-the "masters" was legitimized, naturalized, and presented as "fact" to everyone else, be they women, children, the poor, the illiterate, or non-Europeans.'8 In other words, processes of textual production and recontextualization were confined to the privileged few. Michael Apple uses the word "de-locate"' to describe the process by which curricular knowledge is removed from its original context in order to be recontextualized or relocated in a new peda- gogic situation. "The original knowledge from academic disciplines, differing social groups, and so on," Apple points out, "is appropriated by those groups of people who have power in the new context." In the case of school textbooks, for example, these recontextualizing agents consist of "textbook publishing houses, content consultants, and state and local educational authorities" [39, p. 68]. The relocating process removes the text from the professional discourse of researchers. It also modifies the text. How textbook writers present material depends on prevailing pedagogical theories. Doubtless they will also select material that they can present clearly and perhaps that is noncontroversial. These selection procedures are not random. Systematic forces come into play; "Curricula are rooted in differential power, in a set of social relationships that ultimately play a large part in determining whose cultural capital is made available and 'relocated' in our schools," Apple 18. Michel Foucault is perhaps the most often-cited. See, for example [41].
INFORMATION LITERACY 435 argues. "Only by understanding the interaction between the forces act- ing on government regulation and on the economics of textbook pub- lishing can we determine how such decontextualizing and relocating works" [39, p. 69]. The process that Apple describes with respect to textbooks can be applied, mutatis mutandis, to other information genres, including li- brary printed and electronic reference materials. Publishers, editors, designers, and scholars work together to distill, synthesize, and re- arrange printed texts so that they take on the uniform, recognized, and authoritative features of encyclopedias, handbooks, gazetteers, and so on. Of all the print materials in the library, modern reference materials are presented as among the most decontextualized. Authors recede into the background, the authorial voice muted or silent. Many ency- clopedia articles appear without accompanyingjustification in the form of references or citations. The information encapsulated in an article stands alone, authoritative by virtue only of its presence in the volume. Legitimacy is conferred by its place on the library shelf; although great variation can be found in the standard of production and scholarship in reference books, library patrons trust librarians (who themselves rely on the judgment of reviewers) to select only the "best." Marcia Bates even describes reference works metaphorically in terms of files and fields, as an electronic database, inverting the more usual practice [42] 19 The discourse of information literacy and, indeed, of LIS in general, provides few alternatives to this dispiriting portrait of monolithic social control, while in the past LIS researchers have too often presented "information use" as a relentlessly utilitarian activity, in which meta- phors of "searching," and "retrieving," "receiving," and "transmit- ting" prevail.20 Information users are depicted as passive "consumers" of information products; information literacy is a matter of making enlightened and informed consumer "choices." Yet if the Enlighten- ment model of information diffusion also leaves little room for differ- ences along such dimensions as class, race, and gender to emerge, LIS practitioners and researchers interested in a more multidimensional picture of information use and of users as active participants in these processes can draw inspiration from two parallel scholarly movements 19. More familiarly, computerized materials have adopted the metaphor of the book, espe- cially in the use of the term "page," for instance. 20. James Marcum criticizes the "information-processing paradigm" as "a problematic foun- dation . . . on which to construct a compelling model of learning and information liter- acy," for oversimplification, faulty logic, and overworking the concept of "uses" of "infor- mation" [3, p. 101.
436 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY in the 1980s and 1990s, one from within LIS, the other from print culture history.2' First was the development within LIS of "user-centered" models of information use. As Dervin and Nilan outline in their now-classic litera- ture review, during the late 1970s and 1980s, researchers' attention shifted from a system-oriented theory of "information needs" to a cog- nitive approach to "information-seeking behavior" that focused in- stead on individual users' consciousness and "inner worlds" [43].22 Dervin cast her own sense-making approach in terms of a "situation- gap-use," a model in which information users employ "sense-making" techniques to bridge a gap between their personal situations or "con- texts" and the information available for their use. Thus user-centered work shifted from viewing "information as objective and users . .. as input-output processors" to "information as something constructed by human beings" and users as "beings who are free to create from sys- tems and situations whatever they choose" [43, p. 16]. But while the cognitive approach gained currency in the 1980s, dur- ing the 1990s, some LIS researchers used Foucauldian discourse analy- sis to critique the cognitive view as depicting information use as a men- tal process taking place "inside" the individual user's head. Producing a radical individual view of information use that neglected structural constraints, such a theory had political implications. "A discourse of radical individualism, supported by polarizations of inner and outer, and of 'sense-making' as a radically individual act," wrote Bernd Frohmann in 1992, "becomes ideological in a society of, to borrow from Chomsky, necessary illusion and manufacturing consent, where 'information stores' and 'information needs' are constructed and con- tested on behalf of specific interests, and where image production and manipulation are highly politicized social practices" [46, p. 376]. Sanna Talja used a discourse analytic approach to reconceptualize us- ers as "knowing subjects" or "cultural experts." At the same time, she argued, researchers need to reconceptualize information systems "as participation systems in the organization and systematization of social knowledge" [47, p. 77].23 In a 1999 article that perhaps recognized a 21. Extensive literatures describe both of these, and it is beyond the scope of this article to do more than provide a brief outline. 22. For a more recent overview, see [44]. For an example of the cognitive approach that has enjoyed considerable influence among library practitioners, see [45]. 23. However, as Bernd Frohmann points out, in this article, Talja conflates several different kinds of discourse analysis-that employed by Foucault, Brenda Dervin, and conversation analysis. Foucault's emphasis, by contrast to the others, Frohmann argues, is on "institu- tionalized social practices"-the focus also urged in this article [48, p. 24, n. 20; emphasis added].
INFORMATION LITERACY 437 privileging of agency over structure in her earlier formulations, Dervin wrote that the sense-making approach both "mandates attention to the term 'information' as inherently a structural term" in which "informa- tion is typically used to describe the observings of experts," and simul- taneously claims that "there are myriad ways that human beings have individually and collectively verbed their words, in adaptation, re- sponse, resistance, creativity, challenge and invention." In this formu- lation an information user is an "actor" who is an "'information' ex- pert and theorist [49, p. 738]. Still working within the broad field of LIS, Elfreda A. Chatmnan pion- eered the use of ethnographic fieldwork to explore the "small worlds" and "everyday lives" of groups of less affluent information users who included women retirement home residents and janitorial staff on a college campus. While studying women at a maximum-security prison, Chatman developed her concept of "life in the round"-"a life lived with a tolerable degree of exactitude," in the sense that as long as the prisoners "sense that most events occurring can be taken for granted, and that they can approach their daily activities, moving along a life in a routine, predictable way, they do not question the dimension of security in their lives." Like the discourse analysts, Chatman empha- sized the importance of the collective, as opposed to the individual construction of information use: "it is the collective view that leads to understanding the workings of a small world" [50, p. 9; 51, 52]. The second "track" consists of the literature on reading produced by print culture scholars in history, literary criticism, and cultural stud- ies as well as LIS. In addition to incorporating nonutilitarian concepts (such as, for example, "pleasure" and "play") into their analyses, print culture scholars talk of readerly "appropriation" and "resistance," thus providing room for the exercise of individual choice and por- traying nonelite readers as possessing agency, rather than as passive and even manipulated. Argues Michel de Certeau, "Reading is . . . situated at the point where social stratification (class relationships) and poetic operations (the practitioner's constructions of a text) intersect: a social hierarchization seeks to make the reader conform to the 'infor- mation' distributed by an elite (or semi-elite); reading operations ma- nipulate the reader by insinuating their inventiveness into the cracks in a cultural orthodoxy." According to de Certeau, the act of reading provides readers with the opportunity to evade being shaped- "formed"-by elite cultural products [22, p. 175]. These two tracks are "parallel" in the sense that although they have apparently never crossed, they have both tried to balance research at- tention to information ("texts") with attention toward users ("read- ers"). Both represent ideas, theories, and methods that are evolving
438 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY through time, as their proponents struggle to reconcile tensions inher- ent in the structure/agency dilemma. But both also have the potential to provide LIS practitioners with insights, language, and a body of research on which to draw in devising information literacy practices that situate all information users-not just scholars-at the center of processes of information production and recontextualization, thus hy- bridizing the identity of consumer-as-producer and producer-as-con- sumer. The Pedagogy of Reading and the Etymology of "Literacy" The concept of the active reader was not foreign to cultural authorities of the eighteenth century, who recognized that teaching people to read carried its own dangers. No guarantee could assure that nonelite read- ers would use their opportunities in ways that the elites deemed proper-they might, for instance, read the Encyclop#die! And even when confronted with officially sanctioned materials, readers could produce their own interpretations, irrespective of authorial or producer in- tent-interpretations that could defy, subvert, or resist the dominant order. Believed even more dangerous was the ability to write, a percep- tion that produced systematic discrimination against whole groups of people lacking the qualifications of the cultural elite. As E. Jennifer Monaghan has shown, American girls and boys in the early colonial period both learned to read, but few girls were taught to write. Franc. ois Furet andJacques Ozouf have demonstrated similar gender discrimina- tion in nineteenth-century France. Some states of the antebellum South outlawed slave literacy [53-55]. Thus, from their beginnings over two centuries ago institutional arrangements for learning to read attempted to control who had access to what, and for what purposes, pitting a procrustean against a promethean ideology of reading. Never- theless, control was only ever partial. Some women did learn to write, and more succeeded in gaining access to printed materials considered unsuitable for female readers. Slaves, too, exercised courage and inge- nuity in acquiring the forbidden skills and using them to subvert the official order-sometimes literally to gain their freedom. Although the word "literate," in the sense of an individual's accom- plishment, has a long history reaching back to the middle ages, the first recorded use of the word "literacy," according to the Oxford English Dictionary, occurred in 1893, when an education journal article de- clared that "Massachusetts is the first state in the Union in literacy in its native population." This innovative use of "literacy" to describe a demographic construct-"population"-is instructive. Over the
INFORMATION LITERACY 439 course of the nineteenth century, as a concomitant to industrialization, urbanization, and the growth of the nation-state, governments became involved in a wide range of human activities. One of the techniques developed to manage their activities was the collection and manipula- tion of statistical data. Taxation, military service, and, in the United States, political representation, depended on the use of newly invented quantitative tools, the most essential being the population census.24 "Literacy," then, was invented as a term to describe and measure the "population's" ability to read and write as a "mass"-itself another term that came into common use in the nineteenth century, usually with derogatory connotations. Harvey J. Graff has described how in North America nineteenth- and twentieth-century mass literacy policies and practices developed around and perpetuated a taken-for-granted stratification based on social class [59]. Carl F. Kaestle, too, has pointed out the stratified nature of twentieth-century American pedagogical practice that provides the majority of high school students with just enough knowledge of literature to value high-culture products (like Shakespeare), but not enough fully to participate in high-culture activi- ties as producers, thus reproducing a hierarchical form of literacy [60]. Literacy, and information, then, share a heritage of cultural and so- cial control as well as of freedom and self-expression, a heritage that has the potential to be transmitted to and through information literacy. As is well recognized, new informational genres-digital catalogs, Web pages, E-mail messages, and the like, present the LIS community with a new version of an old problem; not only are they hard to "control" through traditional bibliographic technical systems, but they are hard to "read" in terms of their legitimacy. Whereas decontextualized print materials have an overt symbolic history (for example, they bear author and publisher names we have learned to recognize, and may have im- pressive bindings and a traceable provenance, which together boost the reader's confidence in their authority), digital genres lack this depth of signification. Information literacy can be construed in part as a techno-administrative effort to solve the problem of bibliographic con- trol and legitimacy with respect to digital genres. A glance at a typical library Web page that seeks to instruct users in methods of evaluating Internet materials confirms that librarians try to replicate the standards of authority of the print world in its electronic counterpart. Informa- tion literacy represents this as seeking "quality" or "dependability" by 24. Indeed, the very term "statistics" derived from the notion of the "state"; statisticians developed their professional practices and sold them to emerging state bureaucracies [56, 57]. For an elaboration of this argument and its application to the theory and methodol- ogy in the history of reading, see [58].
440 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY pointing to traditional standards of judgment: the institutional affilia- tion of the Web site's "author," or the presence and type (class of journal and so on) of citations. But at the same time, institutional practices of information literacy have the effect of reestablishing relations of authority and authenticity that developed over three centuries for the print production of com- modified information. In other words, they attempt to reproduce the social dimensions-the social relations-of the print world and impose them on the electronic world. This is no easy task. Electronic publish- ing on the Internet is a relatively "open" system. In particular, the World Wide Web was designed as a medium in which "everybody" can publish. Costs of publication and distribution on the Web are low. Individuals with no institutional affiliation can threaten the monopoly position of those accustomed to control information production and distribution, by publishing alternative content, as well as alternative modes of presentation. Contested standards of "decency" and issues of security ensure that along with commercial publishers and scholarly communities, state officials join the struggle for control. "We certainly need a structure that will avoid those two catastrophes: the global uni- form McDonalds' monoculture, and the isolated Heaven's Gate cults that understand only themselves," writes Tim Berners-Lee. "I feel that to deliberately build a society, incrementally, using the best ideas we have, is our duty and will also be the most fun. We are slowly learning the value of decentralized, diverse systems, and of mutual respect and tolerance" [61, p. 203]. A challenge for librarians, then, is to contribute through their infor- mation literacy practices to Berners-Lee's vision of an open communi- cations system not only in technological, but also in social and cultural terms, and to steer a course between the Scylla of chaos and Charybdis of conformity. One danger is that information literacy will take its cue only from the tradition of the decontextualized informational genres. Guidelines for the evaluation of Internet resources are typically-and perhaps of necessity-themselves decontextualized-they display little concern with actual content. Consider, for example, the page posted by the University of Wisconsin-Madison Libraries under the heading "Checklist for Evaluating Web Sites"-a particularly thoughtful and well-designed example of a common phenomenon [62]. The page lists questions under the following six headings: What? Who? Where? Why? How? And When? The questions posed are models of clarity; clearly the librarians who authored the page worked hard to avoid jargon and obscurantism. One particularly cogent question asks, "Why is this site on the web and how does it affect the information?" Students are ad- vised to "Determine the purpose of the site: Advocacy or 'soapbox'
INFORMATION LITERACY 441 (tries to persuade); Informational (often multiple viewpoints and refer- ences); Business or marketing (tries to sell); Entertainment." Although many of the questions and most of the headings in the checklist could be applied with equal relevance to print materials, it is unlikely that students would have to be warned that they would have to sort out advertising matter from the text "proper" with respect to most of the printed materials on the library shelves. Similarly, they would not ex- pect to be told how physically to navigate the print materials (although some such instruction would not necessarily come amiss). Most, but not all, of the page is based on traditional standards of evaluation in LIS-the sort of thing that librarians have been doing on behalf of patrons for over a century, only now patrons have to learn to do it for themselves. So what is the problem? If these techniques of selection and evalua- tion have worked over the decades for librarians, why should librarians not simply pass these techniques on to the general public? At one level, of course, there is no problem. None of us would wish to lay ourselves open to accusations of restrictive practice. However, traditional selec- tion of library print materials was never merely a matter of the routine application of a handful of principles. Collection development and sub- ject bibliography require an intimate knowledge of the content that is being evaluated, as well as the context of its production, based on an expertise (scholarly, in the case of academic materials) often acquired over many years. High-quality bibliography requires research that in turn requires time, diverse sources of material, sophisticated theoreti- cal understanding, and access to, if not membership of, a relevant inter- pretive community.25 Although a techno-administrative understanding of library reference materials many see no further than their structural, commodified, container-like shape, a more critical understanding recognizes not only the abstract principles underlying their structure but the contingent, his- torical features of their journey onto the library shelves. These historical features include not only the authors' official, institutional affiliations and title (if any) but their position in the interpretive community for whom they act as a voice; other writers who have had an influence on their ca- reers; those with whom they have "crossed swords"; the ways in which their views have changed over time. They include knowledge of the pub- lishing and reviewing processes that will flesh out the roles of editors, translators, and the writers of review articles in a variety of journals that 25. "Interpretive community" is Stanley Fish's term. Fish argues that judgments of informed readers are socially constructed and dependent upon the shared assumptions of the social groups to which they belong [63].
442 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY doubtless exercise different review policies. The library's own acquisitions and collection policies and practices will themselves have played a part in the book's journey-not only the formal, institutional policies that may be set out in black-and-white, but also the personal interests and prefer- ences of the bibliographers, the constraints or otherwise of blanket and standing orders, and the trade practices and policies of the jobbing firms with whom the library holds contracts. Those with such knowledge also understand that in terms of the pro- duction of knowledge, the library shelf is not the end of the journey, even for the most decontextualized reference materials. They recog- nize that the recontextualizing process does not only take place in one direction. What is the end product of one scholar's work-an encyclo- pedia article, for instance-may contribute to the initial stages of an- other's. The two traditional core library practices-bibliographic con- trol and reference-both contribute to this process of discourse synthesis. The decisions that indexers, catalogers, and classifiers make in providing intellectual access to the contents of books and articles through subject headings and index terms, and physically or virtually allocating works to particular areas of the library collection, contribute to the way in which researchers think.26 And along with other types of reference practice, information literacy itself may help to construct or define a discourse community. The process of knowledge formation is intertwined with the formation and re-formation of discourse communities-a process that takes place through its social dimensions. As McInnis points out, these social dimensions consist of the "qualities of craftsmanship" and the "community affiliations" that "inhere" in the work of scholars [7, p. 1]. Scholarly discussions of discourse synthesis tend to revolve around one particular segment of the knowledge community-other scholars. But clearly discourse synthesis is a phenomenon that occurs in any dis- course community, whether, as in the case of scholars, relatively power- ful, or more marginalized, as in the case of, say, an immigrant commu- nity. For marginalized groups, it has not, historically, been published reference works produced by well-established publishing houses that have facilitated the synthesis of their discourse. Rather, such groups have relied on more ephemeral materials, such as ethnic newspapers and other local community publications. As a growing number of LIS commentators have argued, even some public libraries with a mission 26. Geoffrey C. Bowker and Susan Leigh Star have provided a stimulating empirical analysis of the role of "invisibility" in the processes by which classification "sorts out" social rela- tions and activities, while Wayne A. Wiegand has discussed the contextual influences that helped shape Melvil Dewey's decisions on the classification structure [64, 65].
INFORMATION LITERACY 443 to serve as a center for community information have in the past done a poor job of collecting the publications of even quite sizable ethnic groups in their areas. A considerable literature points to a tradition of collection management practices that has led, historically, to a system- atic underrepresentation in library collections of materials of other groups, including gay and lesbian materials, radical publications of the left and the right, African Americans, and women.27 Promoting a Promethean Practice Traditional collection management practices, then, have served mar- ginalized groups relatively poorly in providing library-based access to their publications. But the Web, with its cheap production and distribu- tion technology, can supposedly level the playing field and provide uni- versal access to materials that previously circulated only within small communities. And what will information literacy contribute to this pro- cess of opening up access? The challenge is for LIS community to find a way of matching the creative and unfettered character of Web tech- nology as a publishing device, to open up people's access to "alterna- tive" Web-based publications, rather than lay them on a one-size-fits- all procrustean bed. A prerequisite for developing a promethean information literacy practice is paying critical attention to language use. While the procrus- tean pressures on the synthetic "information literacy" are powerful, they are not overwhelming, and neither do the separate words "infor- mation" and "literacy" necessarily carry pessimistic connotations. At the level of "populations," an increased spending on public education that leads to higher literacy rates, for example, can correlate with better material conditions that substantially improve the daily existence of millions. And for individuals, access to print or electronic reading materials-to "information"-can indeed transform the course of lives. But although library professionals and educators prefer to envi- sion a society in which information literacy plays a positive role in en- hancing the quality of public engagement, we are hampered in our search for a more critical discourse by a tradition in LIS that uses mana- gerial language as a matter of course and that pays almost exclusive attention to technical and administrative issues. This "selective tradi- 27. Tireless in bringing "alternative publications" to the attention of the LIS community have been James P. Danky and Sanford Berman, whose biennial anthology, Alternative Librayy Literature, has provided a thought-provoking collection of critical writings since 1982 (see in particular, [66]).
444 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY tion" has political consequences. When we restrict ourselves to an in- strumental, means-end range of concerns and language-"purposive- rational" thinking, inJfirgen Habermas's terms-we exclude ourselves from the option of questioning the value of what we do. We surrender the moral and political implications of our professional practices to groups outside the profession-who are neither shy nor reluctant to press their own agendas [67, 68]. So perhaps the LIS community should follow its own advice and engage in some serious "critical" thinking and analysis that raises specific and searching questions at the societal level, where the unit of analysis is neither the organization (as in managerial analysis) nor the individual (as in pluralist analysis), but society itself [69, 70]. The process of establishing information literacy in the educational curriculum at all levels parallels its incorporation into official dis- course, conferring a stamp of authority and legitimacy on the term. A commonplace and uncritical explanation for this acceptance goes thus: The information industries began the transformation of the produc- tion and delivery of information in the 1960s and 1970s, with the growth of commercially available databases and the initial phases of networked information technology. However, it was computer minia- turization and a fall in software and hardware prices that brought digi- tal technology within the reach of "ordinary" citizens from the 1980s onward. The most startling result has been the spread of the Internet, bringing E-mail and the World Wide Web (the most familiar of Internet functions) within the reach of "everyone," or at least of affluent mem- bers of industrialized countries. But, the argument goes, the spread and transformation of technology has not been matched by a spread and transformation of "end-user" skill. Just as in the nineteenth century, technological changes in the pro- duction of print on paper in conjunction with universal schooling made possible the spread of books, newspapers, and magazines, so the spread of digital technology in the late twentieth century now requires an invest- ment in universal digital education. Furthermore, it is not enough to be familiar with the basic practical techniques of computer manipulation; "information" now appears in new and different forms, and in huge quantities. In order to manage this unfamiliar flood, individuals need sifting, evaluating, and synthesizing skills. "Knowledge management" is the term that describes the most successful use of such skills: information literacy is a step on the road to reaching this acme and is a rational response to changed circumstances in the world "out there." This standard explanation, framed as it is in naturalistic language, masks the contested character of the struggle to define information
INFORMATION LITERACY 445 literacy and to claim it as a field of expertise.28 As the standard explana- tion shields the LIS community from the shifting power relations in- volved in the establishment and institutionalization of information lit- eracy, it also prevents us from articulating what should be the most important issue: that of our moral and political values. Rather than focusing only on negotiating some essentialist concept of the term and on the best techniques for transmitting the agreed-upon skills, we should also be debating the issue of what, fundamentally, we are trying to do when we engage in information literacy practices, however de- fined. Such a challenge requires us to ask why as well as how, and to draw on scholarship not only in LIS but also in education, epistemol- ogy, ethics, politics, and social theory, to ask questions like: "What is information literacy for and who is it for?" "In what social and institu- tional circumstances does it take place?" "What consequences does information literacy have for the distribution of social and cultural goods in society as a whole?" Furthermore, the analysis should recog- nize that socially and historically constituted power relations based on, for example, class, race, gender, and age mediate thought and defini- tions of knowledge [72]. In thinking about "knowledge," the critical analyst first and fore- most thinks relationally, asking how knowledge is defined, by whom and for whom, and how these processes contribute to the reproduc- tion, mediation, or transformation of power relations [73]. Thus a criti- cal question about information literacy is, "How does the institutional- ization of information literacy, and the development of information literacy as a "natural" category reproduce, mediate or transform power relationships?'" Critical analysis, then, focuses on values, always ideologically in- scribed, and inseparable from fact. As Philip Agre puts it, "Critical anal- ysis quickly becomes lost unless it is organized and guided by an affir- mative moral purpose ... critical research draws attention to structural and cultural levels of explanation-to the things that happen through our actions but that exist beneath our conscious awareness" [74, p. xii]. Language plays a key part in the construction of conscious and unconscious awareness. What language do we use to describe and dis- cuss information literacy? On what concepts do we draw to explain and justify this movement? Who is speaking in favor of information literacy, in what terms, and on whose behalf? Thus, critical analysis aims to de- naturalize the natural and to call into question the taken-for-granted. This is not simply a matter of intellectual curiosity. Rather, critical anal- 28. This standard explanation is rooted in technological determinism [71, pp. 22-32].
446 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY ysis takes as its aim the democratization of social, political, economic, and cultural relations-it has an emancipatory aim. Critically scrutinizing our language use also allows us to pay greater attention to information content and context-including production, recontextualization, and use. Who produces what print and electronic publications, and for whom? Which institutions, corporations, and in- dividuals are supporting publishing in terms of financial and political support? Who takes part in the processes of information decontextuali- zation, relocation, and recontextualization? Librarians and LIS educa- tors also need to pose these questions within the framework of their information literacy courses. Some programs have already adopted this approach. A pioneer is the library of the Minneapolis Community and Technical College (MCTC), whose information literacy course for in- coming freshmen starts with a lesson on "The Production of Knowl- edge" and includes a segment on "information politics." Students learn, for example, that "just because knowledge is produced and pub- lished does not mean that it will be widely distributed." It is no accident that under the guidance of librarian Thomas Eland, the MCTC library also focuses on collecting alternative press materials [75]. We can also learn from research streams in LIS and print culture history that treat "information use and users" (or texts and readers) not as groups to be manipulated and re-formed, but as discourse com- munities and communities of practice. Perhaps we could contemplate moving from a standardized to a more localized sense of information use as active production and consumption. Just as writing can be seen as an active and powerful form of reading (as cultural authorities of the eighteenth century well understood), so "information production" is something that we are all capable of, and in fact all carry out. It is an LIS truism, after all, that people prefer to obtain what information they need from friends and family before turning to more standardized and commodified information products. Just how nonelite groups produce and disseminate information is not well understood in LIS. Yet unless we make an effort to find out, and then to make use of this understand- ing in shaping what we mean and how we practice information literacy, we will fail to enlist nonelite "consumers-as-producers" of information in processes of production and recontextualization. To achieve these goals, librarians need to rethink what Ross Todd has called the "one-size-fits-all approach" to information literacy. Todd suggests that librarians collaborate with "other agencies who are pro- viding information to various community groups" to develop "special- ized tailored information literacy programs for the community based on real needs.... Drug information agencies, business organizations taking on knowledge management, organizations dealing with a range
INFORMATION LITERACY 447 of social concerns or social groups may benefit from the information literacy expertise of librarians ... and such collaborations may facilitate the initiation of alternative conceptions of information literacy and al- ternative pathways to its development, particularly in the social arena" [76]. And Todd's own research into the use of heroin information by a small group of teenage girls illustrates the concept of "consumers- as-producers." The girls, he concluded, "were not passive, robot-like processors of information, merely absorbing information indiscrimi- nately ... [but] were active creators of knowledge, manipulating infor- mation selectively and creatively to develop their revised pictures" [77, p. 21]. Reference librarians, too, might rethink how their expert profes- sional practices can contribute to a promethean vision. James Elmborg contends that academic library reference desk procedure typically ''emphasizes the librarian's expertise" in ways that are "unhealthy for the learner, who needs to participate in every decision in order to learn to be independent." Unfortunately, Elmborg argues, "many librarians today still consider their knowledge the source of their professional power." He recommends especially that librarians "describe in the scholarly literature what really happens in the messy process of re- search, rather than what we think 'should' happen" and work to "de- velop a vocabulary for discussing the reference desk as a teaching activ- ity" [78, pp. 462-63]. Addressing similar issues in cataloging and classification (that other core practice in LIS), Hope Olson argues that the hierarchically based Dewey Decimal Classification (DDC) system "typically follows the liberal approach of instituting equality or same- ness more often than it represents diversity" [14, p. 652]. As a result, "groups at the top of the hierarchy will always be gathered together, but groups lower down the hierarchy will be dispersed," systematically privileging some, while marginalizing others [14, pp. 654-55]. Olson's remedy is to search for "permeable" systems, even though this means that librarians may have to relinquish control; "instead of possessing this power exclusively," she points out, "we who are on the inside of the information structures must create holes in our structures through while the power can leak out," a process that "requires an active stance on the part of librarians and library users" [14, pp. 659, 662]. Although adherence to Enlightenment values may have gone out of fashion in the postmodern world of the 1990s, perhaps it is time for LIS professionals to acknowledge again the value of their modernist and humanist inheritance. This involves trolling back past the scientis- tic and technocratic influences of the late nineteenth and early twenti- eth centuries-influences that continue to dominate the field-to foreground an eighteenth-century value for information as represent-
448 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY ing an ongoing conversation about what counts as knowledge. At the same time, twenty-first-century multicultural values remind us that we also need to go beyond the top-down Enlightenment model in which books and journals were necessarily produced by an educated few- European white males to a man. As a modest start, then, we might consider the following components of a critical approach to information literacy: First, our information literacy courses should highlight, in addition to the tools and skills met- aphor, the importance of learning about context and content in under- standing how information "works." Second, we need to be both ex- plicit about the moral and political commitment to flattening rather than reinforcing current information and literacy hierarchies. Third, we need to recognize that information "access" is notjust about infor- mation consumerism but also about individuals and groups of people actively shaping their world as knowledge producers in a way that ren- ders the consumer-producer dichotomy irrelevant. And finally, we need also to come to terms with the fact that freedom and control perpetually vie with one another in LIS, especially in the arena of infor- mation literacy. Indeed, we should take comfort in the recognition that as long as the tension holds, both approaches have much to offer, just so long that neither wins outright. REFERENCES 1. Ayers, William. "Doing Philosophy: Maxine Greene and the Pedagogy of Possibility." In A Light in Dark Times: Maxine Greene and the Unfinished Conversation, edited by William Ayers and Janet L. Miller, pp. 3-10. New York: Teachers College Press, 1998. 2. Bruce, Christine. The Seven Faces of Information Literacy. Adelaide: Auslib, 1997. 3. Marcum, James W. "Rethinking Information Literacy." Libraty Quarterly 72 (January 2002): 1-26. 4. American Library Association Presidential Committee on Information Literacy Final Report. Chi- cago: ALA, 1989. 5. Stoffle, CarlaJ. "Literacy 101 for the Digital Age." Amercan Libraries 29 (November 1998): 46-48. 6. Callison, Daniel. "Critical Thinking." School Library Media Activities Monthly 15 (November 1998): 40-42. 7. McInnis, Raymond G. "Introduction: Defining Discourse Synthesis." Social Epistemology 10, no. 1 (1996): 1-25. 8. Snavely, Loanne, and Cooper, Natasha. "The Information Literacy Debate." Journal of Academic Librarianship 23 (January 1997): 9-14. 9. "Mission Statement" of the University Libraries at the University of Iowa. Available at http://www.lib.uiowa.edu/instruction/mission.html (last accessed January 20, 2004). 10. Loomis, Abigail, and Konrad, Lee. "Designing and Implementing CLUE, an Interactive, Multimedia Instructional Program." In Linda Shirato and Elizabeth R. Bucciarelli, Theory
INFORMATION LITERACY 449 and Practice: Papers and Session Materials Presented at the TwentyFifth National LOEX Library Instruction Conference Held in Charleston, South Carolina, 8-10 May, 1997, pp. 29-33. Ann Arbor, Mich.: Pierian, 1998. 11. "Wisconsin Model Academic Standards for Information and Technology Literacy." Available at http://www.dpi.state.wi.us/dltcl/imt/itlstfst.html (last accessed January 20, 2004). 12. "The Chicago Public Library Mission." Available at http://www.chipublib.org/003cpl/ mission.html (last accessed January 20, 2004). 13. Association of College and Research Libraries Information Literacy Competency Standards for HigherEducation. Available at http://www.archive.ala.org/acrl/il/toolkit/intro.html (last accessed January 20, 2004). 14. Olson, Hope A. "The Power to Name: Representation in Library Catalogs." Signs:Journal of Women in Culture and Society 26 (Spring 2001): 639-68. 15. Dain, Phyllis. "Ambivalence and Paradox: The Social Bonds of the Public Library." Li- braryJournal 100, no. 3 (1975): 261-66. 16. Ditzion, Sidney. Arsenals of a Democratic Culture. Chicago: American Library Association, 1947. 17. Harris, Michael. "The Purpose of the American Public Library: A Revisionist Interpreta- tion of History." Library Journal 98, no. 16 (1973): 2509-14. 18. Harris, Michael. "The Role of the Public Library in American Life: A Speculative Essay." Occasional Paper no. 117. Urbana-Champaign: University of Illinois Graduate School of Library Science,January 1975. 19. Garrison, Dee. "The Tender Technicians: The Feminization of Public Librarianship, 1876-1905." Journal of Social History 6, no. 2 (1972-73): 131-59. 20. Geller, Evelyn. Forbidden Books in American Public Libraries, 1876-1939: A Study in Cultural Change. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood, 1984. 21. Wiegand, Wayne A. "Librarians Ignore the Value of Stories." Chronicle of Higher Education (October 27, 2000), p. B20. 22. de Certeau, Michel. The Practice of Everyday Life. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1984. 23. Anderson, Benedict. Imagined Communities. London: Verso, 1991. 24. Yeo, Richard. Encyclopaedic Visions: Scientific Dictionaries and Enlightenment Culture. Cam- bridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001. 25. McInnis, Raymond G. "Discursive Communities, Interpretive Communities." SocialEpiste- mology 10, no. 1 (1996): 107-22. 26. Darnton, Robert. 7he Business of Enlightenment: A Publishing History of the Encyclopidie, 1 775- 1800. Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press, 1979. 27. Saul, John Ralston. The Doubter's Companion: A Dictionary of Aggressive Common Sense. New York: Free Press, 1994. 28. Buckland, Michael. "Information as Thing." Journal of the American Society for Information Science 42 (June 1991): 351-60. 29. Nunberg, Geoffrey. "Farewell to the Information Age." In The Future of the Book, edited by Geoffrey Nunberg, pp. 103-38. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996. 30. Schement, Jorge Reina, and Curtis, Terry. Tendencies and Tensions of the Information Age: The Production and Distribution of Information in the United States. New Brunswick, N.J.: Trans- action, 1997. 31. Willis, Paul. "Labor Power, Culture and the Cultural Commodity." In Critical Education in the New Information Age, edited by Manuel Castells, Ramon Flecha, Paulo Freire, Henry A. Giroux, Donald Macedo, and Paul Willis, pp. 139-69. Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Littlefield, 1999.
450 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 32. Mosco, Vincent. The Pay-Per Society: Computers and Communication in the Infonnation Age; Essays in Critical Theoy and Public Policy. Norwood, NJ.: Ablex, 1989. 33. Schiller, Herbert I. Information Inequality: The Deepening Social Crisis in America. New York and London: Routledge, 1996. 34. Sally, Dana M. "Prostitution, Simony, and Fees for Service: Walzer's Theory ofJustice and a Defense of Communally Funded Information against the Tyranny of the Marketplace." Library Quarterly 71 (July 2001): 330-59. 35. Green, Samuel Swett. "Personal Relations between Librarians and Readers." Library Jour- nal 1 (October 1876): 74-81. 36. Robert, Kirrily "Scud." "The Infon: A Fundamental Unit of Information." Available at http:// infotrope.net/writing/content/infon/infon.html (last accessed March 11, 2003). 37. Samuelson, Paul A., and Nordhaus, William D. Economics. 13th ed. New York: McGraw- Hill, 1989. 38. Peny's Chemical Engineers' Handbook. 7th ed. Prepared by a staff of specialists under the editorial direction of late editor Robert H. Perry; editor, Don W. Green; associate editor, James 0. Maloney. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997. 39. Apple, Michael W. Official Knowledge: Democratic Education in a Conservative Age. New York: Routledge, 1993. 40. Walsh, David. "Structure/Agency." In Core Sociological Dichotomies, edited by ChrisJenks, pp. 8-33. London: Sage, 1998. 41. Foucault, Michel. The Archaeology of Knowledge. New York: Pantheon, 1972. 42. Bates, Marcia. "What Is a Reference Book? A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis." RQ 26 (Fall 1986): 37-57. 43. Dervin, Brenda, and Nilan, Michael. "Information Needs and Uses." Annual Review of Information Science and Technology 21 (1986): 3-33. 44. Dalrymple, Prudence. "A Quarter Century of User-Centered Study: The Impact of Zwei- zig and Dervin on LIS Research." Library and Information Science Research 23, no. 2 (2001): 155-65. 45. Kuhlthau, Carol C. Seeking Meaning: A Process Approch to Library and Information Science. Norwood, NJ.: Ablex, 1993. 46. Frohmann, Bernd. "The Power of Images: A Discourse Analysis of the Cognitive View- point." Journal of Documentation 48 (December 1992): 365-86. 47. Talja, Sanna "Constituting 'Information' and 'User' as Research Objects: A Theory of Knowledge Formations as an Alternative to the Information-Man Theory." In Information Setking in Context: Proceedings of an International Conference on Research in Information Needs, Seeing and Use in Different Contexts, 14-16 August, 1996, Tampe, Finland, edited by Pertti Vakkan, Reijo Savolainen, and Brenda Dervin, pp. 67-80. London: Taylor Graham, 1997. 48. Frohmann, Bernd. "Discourse and Documentation: Some Implications for Pedagogy and Re- search." Joumal of Education for Librryy and Information Scen 42, no. 1 (Winter 2000): 12-26. 49. Dervin, Brenda. "On Studying Information Seeking Methodologically: The Implications of Connecting Metatheory to Method." Information Processing and Managemwnt 35 (Novem- ber 1999): 727-50. 50. Chatman, Elfreda A. "Framing Social Life in Theory and Research." New Review of Infor- mation Behaviour Research 1 (2000): 3-17. 51. Chatman, ElfredaA. The Information World of Retired Women. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood, 1992. 52. Chatman, Elfreda A. "The Information World of Low-Skilled Workers." Library and Infor- mation Science Research 9 (October 1987): 265-83. 53. Monaghan, E. Jennifer. "Literacy Instruction and Gender in Colonial New England." In Reading in America: Literature and Social History, edited by Cathy N. Davison, pp. 53-80. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1989.
INFORMATION LITERACY 451 54. Furet, Francois, and Ozouf, Jacques. Reading and Writing: Literacy in France from Calvin to Jules Ferry. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982. 55. Cornelius,Janet Duitsman. "VWhen I Can Read My Title Clear". Literacy, Slavery, and Religion in the Antebellum South. Columbia: University of South Carolina Press, 1991. 56. Porter, Theodore M. The Rise of Statistical Thinking, 1820-1900. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1986. 57. McKenzie, Donald A. Statistics in Britain, 1865-1930: The Social Construction of Scientific Knowledge. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1981. 58. Pawley, Christine. "Seeking 'Significance': Actual Readers, Specific Reading Communi- ties." Book History 5 (2002): 143-60. 59. Graff, Harvey J. The Legacies of Literacy: Continuities and Contradictions in Western Culture and Society. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1986. 60. Kaestle, Carl F. "Standardization and Diversity in American Print Culture, 1880 to the Present." In Literacy in the United States, edited by Carl F. Kaestle, Lawrence C. Stedman, Katherine Tinsley, and William Vance Trollinger, Jr., pp. 272-93. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1991. 61. Berners-Lee, Tim. Weaving the Web: The Original Design and Ultimate Destiny of the World Wide Web by Its Inventor. San Francisco: HarperSanFrancisco, 1999. 62. University of Wisconsin-Madison Libraries, "Checklist for Evaluating Web Sites." Avail- able at http://www.library.wisc.edu/instruction/instmat/webeval.htm (last accessed March 11, 2003). 63. Fish, Stanley. Is There a Text in This Class? The Authority of Interpretive Communities. Cam- bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1980. 64. Bowker, Geoffrey C., and Star, Susan Leigh. Sorting Things Out: Classification and Its Conse- quences. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1999. 65. Wiegand, Wayne A. "The 'Amherst Method': The Origins of the Dewey Decimal Classifi- cation Scheme." Libraries and Culture 33 (Spring 1998): 175-94. 66. Danky, James P. "Libraries: They Would Have Been a Good Idea." In Altenative Library Literature, 1996-1997, edited by Sanford Berman andJames P. Danky, pp. 3-6. Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland, 1998. 67. Williams, Raymond. "Hegemony and the Selective Tradition." In Language, Authority and Criticism: Readings on the School Textbook, edited by Suzanne de Castell, Allan Luke, and Carmen Luke, pp. 56-60. London: Falmer, 1989. 68. Carlson, Dennis L. "Legitimation and Delegitimation: American History Textbooks and the Cold War." In Language, Authority and Criticism: Readings on the School Textbook, edited by Suzanne de Castell, Allan Luke, and Carmen Luke, pp. 46-55. London: Falmer, 1989. 69. Alford, Robert R., and Roger, Friedland. Powers of Theory: Capitalism, the State and De- mocracy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985. 70. Pawley, Christine. "Hegemony's Handmaid? The Library and Information Studies Curric- ulum from a Class Perspective." Iibrary Quarterly 68 (April 1998): 123-44. 71. Sussman, Gerald. Communication, Technology and Politics in the Information Age. Thousand Oaks, Calif.: Sage, 1997. 72. Kincheloe, Joe L., and McLaren, Peter L. "Rethinking Critical Theory and Qualitative Research." In Handbook of Qualitative Research, edited by Norman K Denzin and Yvonna S. Lincoln, pp. 138-57. Thousand Oaks, Calif.: Sage, 1994. 73. Carspecken, Phil Francis, and Apple, Michael. "Critical Qualitative Research: Theory, Methodology, and Practice." In 7he Handbook of Qualitative Research in Fducation, edited by Margaret D. LeCompte, Wendy L. Millroy, andJudith Preissle, pp. 507-53. San Diego, Calif.: Academic Press, 1992. 74. Agre, Philip. Computation and Human Experience. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997.
452 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 75. "Information Literacy Tutorial." Available at http://www.mctc.mnscu.edu/library/ (last accessed March 11, 2003). 76. Todd, Ross J. "Information Literacy: Concept, Conundrum, and Challenge." Keynote Address at the National Information Literacy Conference, Adelaide, Australia, December, 1999. 77. Todd, RossJ. "Utilization of Heroin Information by Adolescent Girls in Australia: A Cog- nitive Analysis." Journal of the American Society for Information Science 50, no. 1 (1999): 10- 23. 78. Elmborg,James K. "Teaching at the Desk: Toward a Reference Pedagogy" Portal: Libraries and the Academy 2, no. 3 (2002): 455-64.