Teaching the Teacher WILLIAM C. ROBINSON (Editor's Note: The compiler is an Assistant Professor, School of Library Science, University of Southern Cali- fornia. Suggestions, comments or criti- cisms should be sent to him at the School, University Park, Los Angeles, 90007.) "... it's not what you're taught that does the harm but how you're taught. Our schools teach you by pushing you around, by stealing your will and your sense of power, by making timid square apathetic slaves out of you - authority addicts." - Jerry Farber "... within the teacher's emotional life are the forces that most powerfully affect the entire teaching process. The human, emo- tional qualities of the teacher are the very heart of teaching. No matter how much emphasis is placed on such other qualities in teaching as educational technique, tech- nology, equipment, or buildings, the hu- manity of the teacher is the vital ingredient if children are to learn." - Herbert Greenberg "How" and "humanity" key- note an increasing preoccupation with self-analysis and self-honesty in the literature on teaching. Surely, all of us can become more people-oriented in our teaching. And today, "the first day of the rest of your life," is a good time to begin. Allen, Dean A. "The Anxious Exam- iner," Universities Quarterly, 24 (Spring, 1970), 157-65. A highly readable exploration of the psycho- logical, educational, and administra- tive functions of examinations. "In our role as examiners we suppress weakness and self-doubt; we know the answers and demand that others know them. We have chosen to take part in the academic game where prestige, promotion and even profes- sional survival depend on compe- tence or its facsimile. It is playing the game to welcome the intellectual battles with bright, tough-minded, rivalrous junior colleagues and to accept as simple justice the defeat of the cowardly, the stupid, the nerve-wracked, and the indolent." Blum, Richard, et al. Drugs I: Society and drugs; social and cultural obser- vations and Drugs II: Students and drugs; college and high school ob- servations. San Francisco, Jossey- Bass, 1969. Bibliog. Based on em- 291
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP pirical research and a major litera- ture review, this massive work, done by psycho-pharmacology scholars at Stanford, contains a wealth of in- formation on "drugs, the conditions associated with their use, the kind of people most likely to use them, some of the results of their use, and the milieu - including attitudes, anx- ieties, and ideologies - in which drug use, especially social and per- sonal drug use is embedded." Well- written and interesting, this is a good introduction to a major prob- lem. "... the youthful drug user-or the phenomenon itself - is someone to whom we react. in highly intense and personal ways. Whether we re- spond with admiration for the pio- neering or rebellious spirit, with titillation over drug effects we our- selves might like to experience, with indignation over violation of law and convention, with anxiety over the consequence for those we know, or simply with wonder about what it all signifies, our own reactions are critical and compel us not only to seek understanding of student drug use but possibly even to examine our own responses with more than ordi- nary reflection." Brick, Michael and Earl J. McGrath. Innovations in Liberal Arts Colleges. New York, Teacher's College Press for the Institute of Higher Educa- tion, 1969. A recent survey of inno- vation in curriculum, instructional methods, the position of students on campus, and reorganization/restruc- turing of the liberal arts college based on brief descriptions furnished by the colleges themselves. Thus, an interesting but shallow report with no attempt to see if things really work as they are supposed to. In- cludes a disappointing section on libraries. Caldwell, Wallace F. "The Changing Legal Relationships Between Stu- dents and Universities," College and University, 45 (Spring, 1970), 245- 265. A competent and clearly writ- ten summary of recent develop- ments. Carlson, Elliot. Learning Through Games; A New Approach to Prob- lem-solving. Washington, D.C., Pub- lic Affairs, 1969. An extension of a 1967 Saturday Review article, this short popular treatment offers a quick and easy introduction to class room games. Dubin, Robert, et al. The Medium may be Related to the Message; College Instruction by TV. Eugene, Oregon, Center for the Advanced Study of Educational Administration, Uni- versity of Oregon, 1969. Bibliog. A unique, detailed, and methodically impressive analysis, based on 42 comparative studies, of the result of using ETV as an educational me- dium. Particular attention is given to the effect of ETV on the attitudes of its potential users - faculty and stu- dents. The authors conclude that 292
ETV "is no better and very little worse than the technology it re- places. Accordingly, the educational decision-maker and college adminis- trator may treat the ETV problem as an issue in technical innovation rather than a controversy in educa- tional policy." Students appear to be indifferent ftto considerations of media and method of instruction. The desires they do have about teaching are that the quality be high and the instructors be competent." Dubin, Robert and Thomas C. Taveg- gia. The Teaching Learning Para- dox; a Comparative Analysis of College Teaching Methods. Eugene, Oregon, Center for the Advanced Study of Educational Administra- tion, University of Oregon, 1968. Bibliog. The authors examined four decades of research, 91 previous studies, and concluded that when "the relative utility of given meth- ods of college teaching - is measured through final examinations: there are no differences that amount to anything." "This assumed linkage between teaching and learning is the morass in which much of the controversy about various teaching methods bogs down. For while the apparent focus of discussion is upon the alleged advantage of one teach- ing method over another, the out- come measured is usually declared to be some aspect of student learning." Farber, Jerry. The Student as Nigger; Essays and Stories. North Holly- Teaching the Teacher wood, California, Contact Books, 1969. The title essay carries a world of meanings and has been an under- ground classic for years. Other essays are uneven, the language is some- times blunt - I suspect many librar- ians would not purchase the book because of it - but Farber is almost always lively, and he usually has something important to say. Frieder, Brian. "Motivator: Least De- veloped of Teacher Roles," Educa- tional Technology, 10 (February, 1970), 28-36. A good general dis- cussion of how the teacher can be- come a better motivator, with em- phasis on an "explicit system of contracting between the student and teacher for curriculum and available time." "All children learn; the issue is whether or not we can teach chil- dren what we want them to know." Gies, George L. "Premature Instruc- tion," Educational Technology, 10 (April, 1970), 24-30. The April and May issues of ET discuss "designing curriculum in a changing society." This is one of the better contribu- tions, relating the "how," "when," and "what" of teaching. Gray, Charles E. "The Teaching Model and Evaluation of Teaching Per- formance," Journal of Higher Edu- cation, 40 (November, 1969), 636- 642. A short one stop article which is good for an introduction to evalu- ation or as a reminder if you are rusty. The author presents a broad 293
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP outline, but his evaluating criteria are specific enough to help most of us. Greeley, Andrew M. From Backwater to Mainstream: a Profile of Catholic Higher Education. New York, Mc- Graw-Hill, 1969. "As a contribution to a better understanding of the diversity in American institutions of higher learning, the Carnegie Com- mission on Higher Education in- tends to issue several reports that will contain comparable statistical and descriptive portraits of various types of institutions and their en- deavors." Current, authoritative, short, well-packaged and written, with a goodly amount of statistics, the series promises to be an excellent introduction/description of trends and problems in higher education. The second volume in this series is: Dunham, E. Alden. Colleges of the Forgotten Americans: A Profile of State Colleges and Regional Uni- versities. New York, McGraw-Hill, 1969. Greenberg, Herbert M. Teaching with Feeling; Compassion and Self -aware- ness in the Class Room Today, New York, Macmillan, 1969. Excellent in all respects, this work attempts to "open up for public consideration a significant area of the teacher's life - his inner world, his feelings, his emotional being." Beginning with myths which add to the burden of teaching by creating guilt feelings, Greenberg discusses dislikes, anger, middle-class shock, discipline, princi- pals, colleagues, parents, moods, private hells, sex in the classroom, race, dealing with feelings, and uniqueness and self -discovery. Hansen, W. Lee and Burton A. Weis- brod. Benefits, Costs, and Finance of Public Higher Education. Chi- cago, Markham, 1969. Originally commissioned by the California Legislature in 1967, the authors sought "to identify, classify, and measure the economic and social benefits and costs associated with higher education, to present an agenda for future quantitative re- search, and to set forth a framework for relating benefits and costs to such legislative policy issues as the appropriate level and sources of sup- port for higher education." Analo- gies should be drawn to libraries and this framework of analysis should be fruitful for librarians. Hefferlin, J.B. Lon. Dynamics of Aca- demic reform. San Francisco, Jossey- Bass, 1969. An intriguing well-writ- ten study, with enough case studies and examples to make lively reading. Based on a four year study which was designed to explore those fac- tors which inhibit or encourage aca- demic reform and improve educa- tional efficiency. Not a how to do it book, but an examination of the environment of change, of the "dynamics by which forward move- ment can be inaugurated." Academic change - the authors call it "vitality" 294
- "tends to be associated with con- ditions of environmental, structural, and individual adaptivity - includ- ing, among others, expansion, ur- banity, a need to recruit students, limited tenure in department chair- manships, and a positive orientation toward change - which interact to- gether in influencing the rate of reform." Must reading for anyone seriously concerned with academic reform. Hanus, Jerome J. "An Experiment in Individualized Instruction in Politi- cal Science," PS, 2 (Fall, 1969), 600-602. The author describes how he reduced the role of the lecturer and increased that of the student. "Class attendance is made optional, fear of failing an examination is avoided by providing for re-takes, the requirement that a student take an entire semester to complete a course is dropped, and the assump- tion that the instructor must assign the course grade is avoided. Thus, the student supplies his own moti- vation, sets his own pace, and deter- mines for himself what grade he desires." Hobbs, John N. "Discussion in the College Classroom," Journal of General Education, 21 (January, 1970), 249-258. "More so often than most approaches to education, discussion is encumbered with mis- taken notions concerning its goals and strategies, the roles of professor and student and its relation to other Teaching the Teacher types of intellectual discourse. With the purpose of recalling what many teachers have already learned from experience and adding a few sugges- tions, I will briefly consider discus- sion - what it is not, what it usually is, and what it might be/' Kahn, Roger. The Battle for Morning- side Heights; Why Students Rebel New York, Morrow, 1970. There is no lack of material on the events at Columbia and this is not the de- finitive account. But Kahn's bio- graphical vignettes and commentary, put together like a puzzle, tell us much about the event and student activism. Kenny, James A. and Thomas W. Herzing, "Games Professors Play," Journal of Higher Education, 40 (November, 1969), 624-635. Col- lege professors commonly play four types of games. "They might be labeled Build a Reputation (REP), Confuse the Student (CON), Blame the Opposition (BOP), and Pass the Buck (BUCK)." Humorous and effective. Kirschenbaum, Howard. "Sensitivity Modules," Media and Methods, 6 (February, 1970), 36-38. Respond- ing to the "need for a greater reality orientation in the classroom," Sidney B. Simon developed the sensitivity module. "It is a relatively brief unit of experience, something the student must do, that will enable him to become more sensitive to issues and people in the world around him." 295
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP Lipson, Joseph I. "Job Description for a Teacher in a New School," Edu- cational Technology, 10 (February, 1970), 7-12. Lipson's job descrip- tion provides a good basis for self-analysis and evaluation. "The teacher must have a wide range of solutions to specific student learning situations, and she should develop rules for using one alternative or another." Moxley, Roy A. "A Source of Disorder in the School and a Way to Reduce It: Two Kinds of Tests," Educa- tional Technology, 10 (March, 1970), S3-S6. Discusses the differ- ence between norm-referenced and criterion-referenced tests and their effects. "Disorder can be reduced if more grades' are given that indicate completion or incompletion as op- posed to A,B,C,D, or E." Nowlis, Vincent. The Graduate Stu- dent as Teacher by Vincent Nowlis, Kenneth E. Clark and Meriam Rock. Washington, D.C., American Coun- cil on Education, 1968. Highlights basic problems and issues, indicating not only what should be done but also what is being done to improve TA's. Slim and tentative, but an important reminder of what needs to be done. Soffen, Joseph. The Social Work Edu- cator; Readings on the Preparation and Induction of Social Work Fac- ulty. New York, Council on Social Work Education, 1969. Except for the emphasis given to induction/ orientation of prospective teachers, there is nothing here that is really noteworthy. Yet it is still fruitful to see what our "neighbors" are doing. 296