Introduction There is the need for diversity research that is substantive and that informs the practice of library management. There has been little original research about diversity in library and information services, in general, and in relation to public libraries, in particular. The limited original research related to diversity has focused primarily on academic libraries. Diversity in public libraries has become a critical issue in recent years, with less focus and possibly more immediacy than is the case in academic libraries. The rapid and dramatic demographic changes in the United States have had an impact on the composition of student populations. Public libraries, particularly those in urban areas where there has been and continues to be a tremendous influx of new immigrants, nevertheless are facing the challenge of meeting the needs of these segments of the population, including those needs related to developing proficiency in English language skills, which create ongoing challenges for librarians and administrators The literature on libraries and diversity focuses largely on the discussion of programs in individual libraries and is rarely informed by the broader diversity literature. To a lesser degree, private sector research and research on the academic environment have begun to document the relationship between organizational investment in diversity and overall organizational performance and success. The research that has been done has indicated the role of leadership in influencing organizational efforts and overall organizational success related to diversity. The complex relationship between diversity and organizational success continues to be studied, with one area of focus being efforts to more fully define a direct, causal relationship between fostering diversity and overall organizational success. This research study of diversity programs in large public libraries is intended to document the diversity activities and priorities in a segment of the profession that has been studied very little in this regard. While the diversity programs of a small number of individual libraries have been discussed in the literature, this study represents a broader, more comprehensive analysis related to diversity and public library services in order for public library research to inform and enhance practice. Thus, the research addresses the way in which diversity goals are operationalized in library functions and services. Literature Review Leadership Diversity and Organizational Success The bases for diversity efforts in organizations include awareness of the increasingly diverse population, as potential clients and potential hires, as well as addressing past inequities and current unfairness and eliminating underrepresentation. Recent research in the study of diversity in the private sector and, to a limited extent, in the academic environment, has highlighted a connection between investment in diversity and overall organizational performance and success [1]. Thus, according to Richard Koonce, “Now, companies are embracing diversity as a business focus and corporate value. Embracing diversity isn’t just the right thing to do; there’s a strong business case for it” [2, p. 24]. The emerging concept of leadership diversity is based on research involving the relationship between organizational investment in diversity and overall organizational performance and success, focusing on two primary considerations: the diverse representation among those in leadership roles and decision making among leaders that reflects diversity as a priority. This representation of diverse leadership includes the composition of the company’s board and senior management, among other positions. In this regard, management researchers have documented the fact that the companies that are the most diverse, as measured by factors such as minority employment at all levels, spending with minority suppliers, and underwriting business that goes to minority‐owned investment banks, have also been identified as more successful companies overall [3, pp. 53–54; 4]. In the 1999 Fortune magazine article identifying “America’s Best Companies for Minorities,” the researchers report rankings that indicate that the “companies that pursue diversity outperform the S&P 500” [3, p. 54]. Sherry Kuczynski reports similar results in her research, addressing what she has described as “a direct link between a company’s leadership diversity [in particular, diverse representation among company leaders] and its stock market performance” [4]. Katie Dean has shown similar results in relation to financial indicators of success being linked to having women in leadership roles, specifically, and greater diversity of perspectives, in general [5]. In providing an initial explanation for this relationship between diversity and organizational performance, Kuczynski notes that “Diverse leadership suggests that a company has drawn a wide pool of talent up through its ranks and is opening itself up to a variety of different views and ideas” [4]. The research indicates that diversity‐related goals, diversity programs, and initiatives are the norm in many companies, as reflected in financial decisions [6]. The relationship between diversity and organizational success is yet quite complex. As some organizations have become more diverse, there have been short‐term reductions in organizational performance associated with difficulties in building consensus [7]. The research reflects the fact that a broader range of perspectives makes reaching consensus more difficult, and organizational performance is hindered, as traditional organizational cultures change. Indeed, among the companies that have made substantial efforts in relation to fostering diversity and that have been the most successful companies overall, often the prevailing organizational culture had to be dismantled, with “a more inclusive one in its place” [8, p. 190]. In the academic environment, the research results have indicated that the colleges that are the most diverse are also the most highly rated, based on established rankings of academic and financial performance [9]. In addition, many university presidents have articulated the importance of fostering diversity in order to enhance the learning environment [10, 11]. Leadership Diversity Theory Leadership theory is based on the study of the ways in which individuals can influence the success of organizations, through their efforts and those of others, providing an appropriate basis for the consideration of issues of diversity as related to organizational success. In relation to leadership diversity, leadership theory is applicable with regard to the ways in which organizational leaders exhibit influence in fostering diversity and in contributing to overall organizational success and user satisfaction. Leadership diversity theory focuses on the diverse organization, as represented in articles by Geoffrey Colvin [3], Dean [5], and Kuczynski [4], in terms of diverse representation among organizational leaders and boards and among employees, as well as spending allocated to minority suppliers. The organization is also affected by external factors, such as societal demographics and the labor market in the field and the region or country in which the organization operates. Changes in organizational culture are needed in order to overcome short‐term drops in performance as the level of diversity increases [7]. Leadership diversity manifests itself in terms of the enhanced creativity and decision making that result from varied perspectives. In addition, specialized markets of customers are easier to target, and an increasing awareness of and concern among consumers regarding the performance, social responsibility, and composition of the companies that they patronize thus influences overall organizational performance and success[4]. The least well‐defined aspect of leadership diversity is the role of organizational leaders in the process of creating a more diverse organization, as they are influenced by enhanced performance and the ways in which diversity, as an organizational priority, is operationalized in the processes of organizational operations and service provision. With regard to the roles of managers and leaders, John Ivancevich and Jacqueline Gilbert suggest that “The improper or underutilization of a diverse workforce is … a managerial and leadership issue” [12]. Thus, leaders must articulate a rationale for diversity efforts in organizations that is compelling for employees, who have the responsibility of operationalizing diversity goals and provide an administrative structure, guidance, and support for developing and implementing diversity programs. Diversity in Libraries The literature related to diversity in libraries has focused to varying degrees on the four issues of staffing, collections, services, and organizational climate [13, p. 205]. The scholarly and professional discussion has documented a number of ways of operationalizing these aspects of diversity within the administrative or committee structures of academic libraries. The operationalizing includes the addition of administrative positions or the inclusion of diversity‐related responsibilities in existing positions, primarily in human resources. Similarly, the operationalizing might include the formation and staffing of diversity committees within the library, as well. With regard to staffing, for example, these administrators or committees undertake recruitment‐related activities, such as providing diversity and affirmative action training for search committees; monitoring search committees; conducting “exit interviews with candidates; and, [reporting] in writing to the dean of library services at the conclusion of each search,” as well as activities such as staff training [14, pp. 338–39]. The results of Winston and Li's study of chief academic officers addressed the processes used to encourage heads of academic units, including library directors, to foster diversity. The research indicated that such approaches are far more likely to include “administrative support and expertise” (89.5 percent of the institutions), as compared with the “availability of resources to support diversity efforts” (5.3 percent; [15]). With limited funding for new positions or the inability to use vacant lines for such positions, in some libraries, the implementation of diversity committees has been the result of institutional requirements that units of a certain size have such a committee [14, p. 338]. A study of research libraries showed that while all of the libraries participating in the study had a unit at the institutional level with responsibility for diversity in recruitment, more than 50.0 percent also had an individual or committee in the library with such responsibilities for the unit [16, p. 22]. The published research indicates that in small academic libraries no more than 5.0 percent have library diversity committees, and fewer than 4 percent employ library diversity or affirmative action officers [13, p. 210]. In such cases, it is more likely the case that the parent institution has a college diversity or affirmative action officer (72.1 percent of such institutions; [13, p. 211]). The assessment of performance related to diversity in libraries has been limited. Organizational climate surveys in libraries, which are typically conducted by experts from other disciplines (such as psychology), assess issues such as the level of diversity among library staff, changes in staff composition, and administrative support for diversity. These climate surveys are also able to identify undocumented difficulties among staff members of different backgrounds. In addition, the results of such climate surveys have been shown to serve as the basis for organizational improvements [13, p. 206]. The focus on assessment related to user satisfaction in libraries has been emphasized in relatively comprehensive programs, such as the Association of Research Libraries’ LibQUAL program. LibQUAL provides mechanisms for assessing the quality of services provided by library staff, the extent to which information services and staff provide assistance in meeting user needs, the quality and appropriateness of library resources in various formats, and facilities. The program, however, does not assess collections or services related to specific demographic segments of the user population, beyond the focus on academic majors, age, and gender, for example [17]. Another assessment program, E‐Metrics, is a data collection tool for the analysis of statistical data on network services and resources [18]. E‐Metrics is used in the study of online usage of collections and services, allowing for the analysis of a particular type of data that goes beyond traditional data collection involving the use of physical collections and in‐person services. Although assessment tools, such as LibQUAL and E‐Metrics, have not been used to evaluate services and collections related to diversity, they provide the opportunity for use in the evaluation of the growing number of online diversity programs and resources offered by libraries and library associations, such as the American Library Associations’ Diversity Online Web site, which includes a range of online diversity resources and specific library programs [19]. Diversity in Public Libraries To a large extent, the literature on diversity in public libraries has focused on collections and services, primarily, with discussions of individual library programs designed to foster diversity, in libraries such as the San Diego Public [20] and Denver Public [21], or a focus on service to specific populations, such as individual ethnic groups [22, p. 11] or the homeless [23]. In relation to specific aspects of public library service, such as services for children, for example, “the literature deals primarily with the need for collection development that incorporates diversity” [24, p. 25], typically in the form of bibliographies [25–27]. There is limited discussion of recruitment [28], as well as minimal discussion of assessment of the library’s diversity climate [29] or organizational design and collaboration with other agencies [30]. In general, the public library literature has included limited discussion of issues of diversity that is reflective of original research or the consideration of theoretical models. The literature includes many opinion pieces and “practical tips” [31] but is rarely informed by the broader diversity or leadership literature. The Fortune study and the related research involving the relationship between diversity and organizational success in the private sector and the academic environment provide a worthwhile basis for studying such a relationship in public libraries. Consistent with the focus on considering the role of leadership and administrative structure in influencing diversity efforts that enhance library services, criticisms of diversity‐related programs in libraries have included indications of “minimal attempts only undertaken in response to [organizational] requirements for accountability across units [and an overemphasis on] celebratory programs that include ethnic foods and interesting speakers” [32, p. 6]. Thus, there is the need for diversity‐related research that focuses on organizational activities and programs that are substantive in nature. The purpose of this research is to address the relationship between diversity and organizational success in public libraries, considering the case of large, successful public libraries. The primary focus is to identify diversity‐related activities, programs, and priorities in urban public libraries in four areas: staffing, collections, services, and organizational climate and awareness. Methodology To gather data for this study, survey methodology was used, with administration of a questionnaire to the Urban Libraries Council (ULC), a membership organization of one hundred and forty‐four “public libraries in metropolitan areas and the corporations that serve them” [33]. The Urban Libraries Council was founded in 1971, and its purpose is to strengthen public libraries as an essential part of urban life by striving to address shared issues, grasp new opportunities, and conduct research that improves professional practice in public libraries [33]. Of the 144 members, sixteen are corporate or associate members, such as state libraries. Thus, only the 128 sustaining, contributing, and regular library members were identified as appropriate for inclusion in the research study. A cover letter, which described the survey and requested the participation of the member library directors, was sent to the director of the ULC, who had agreed to forward the letter to the directors. The cover letter provided the URL, which indicated the secure server where the survey instrument used in the study was being housed. The survey instrument used in the study was adapted from one used in an earlier study of liberal arts college libraries by the authors [13] (as the modified version of an instrument used to study research libraries) and was designed to address diversity awareness, staffing, information services, and collections. The Association of Research Libraries (ARL) conducted a study of academic and research university libraries in 1997 [34]. In the study, the survey instrument gathered data on staffing, including recruitment, statistical measures of staff composition, and retention, and supplemented ARL Spec Kit no. 230, Affirmative Action Policies and Practices in ARL Libraries, compiled in 1998. The study was based on data gathered from surveys sent to 120 ARL member libraries, of which 108 were academic libraries. In 1999, the authors of this study obtained permission from ARL to use the questionnaire for a study of liberal arts college libraries. The authors modified the ARL questionnaire for the population and expanded it to include an enhanced focus on diversity awareness and library and information services and library collection development and assessment. Specifically, participants were asked about the existence of a library diversity committee and a library or college diversity or affirmative action officer, as well as about training for library search committees with regard to diversity issues. General approaches to increasing awareness of diversity, such as diversity workshops and climate surveys, were considered, as were staffing issues related to documenting minority representation in staff composition, recruitment and retention strategies, library services for diverse student populations, and assessment and development activities designed to evaluate and diversify collections. [13, p. 207] As is consistent with the documented ways in which diversity has been operationalized in libraries, participants were asked about the existence (and role) of a library diversity committee or affirmative action officer, as well as about diversity training for library search committees. Processes to enhance staff awareness of diversity issues, such as workshops on diversity and climate surveys, were considered, as were staffing issues related to documenting minority representation in staff composition, recruitment and retention strategies, library services for various segments of the population, and assessment and collection development activities designed to evaluate and enhance library collections. From the questionnaire used with liberal arts college libraries, the questionnaire was modified only to reflect the differences in the user populations and the administrative structures of public libraries (see appendix 1). With regard to library services, segments of the user population for which targeted services may have been developed and implemented were changed from minority students/students of color in academic libraries to racial/ethnic minorities/people of color and from students with disabilities to people with disabilities, for example. With regard to the types of programs offered, the list in the 1999 questionnaire included reference assistance, computer/information technology assistance, and tutoring services. The list was expanded to include English as a second language programs and literacy programs. In relation to staffing, the study of liberal arts colleges addressed the methods used to determine if the “library has been successful in recruitment and retention of members of diverse populations.” Terminology such as comparisons with peer institutions’ libraries and comparisons with census data remained the same. Comparisons with other campus units were changed to comparison with other municipal or county departments. In total, thirty‐nine institutions responded, reflecting an overall rate of return of 30.5 percent. The rate of return is based on the entire survey population, as opposed to a random or stratified sampling. As indicated, the corporate and state library members were excluded from participation. Thus, the libraries in the survey population are all large urban public libraries, based on the guidelines for full membership in the Urban Libraries Council, such that the nearly one‐third group of respondents are likely representative of the survey population [33]. Of the large public libraries that were included, it was determined that the request of identifying information, such as the state in which the library is located, might yield data regarding the geographic distribution of the respondents at the expense of reducing the likelihood of anonymity for the respondents. As there are only 128 such libraries, there are few such large libraries in most states. In addition, the study of the public library directors and other administrative officers regarding diversity programs, in terms of staffing, collections, services, and diversity awareness in public libraries has not been addressed previously. Thus, this research fills a substantial gap in the literature. Data Analysis Diversity Awareness and Organizational Climate In terms of the issue of diversity awareness and enhancing organizational climate related to diversity, the survey respondents addressed the question of whether they have made efforts to increase awareness of diversity issues among library staff. More than 90.0 percent of the libraries have undertaken such efforts. One library has not done so. Two study participants did not provide a response to this survey item. The types of activities that have been undertaken include diversity or cultural sensitivity workshops held in the library (87.2 percent) and the provision of funding support for attendance at conferences/workshops related to diversity (79.5 percent; see table 1). Smaller percentages of the libraries have hired outside consultants to evaluate, advise, or address issues of diversity (41.0 percent) and conducted diversity climate surveys in the library (30.8 percent). Table 1 Enhancing Diversity Awareness Process for Enhancing Diversity Awareness Number of Libraries Percentage of Total Diversity or cultural sensitivity workshops 34 87.2 Providing funding support diversity conference attendance 31 79.5 Hiring outside consultants 16 41.0 Conducting diversity climate surveys 12 30.8 In addition, the study participants were asked whether there are library diversity committees or diversity officers in their organizations. In fact, 41.0 percent of the libraries have library diversity committees. As might be expected, only 15.4 percent have library diversity officers. Staffing, Recruitment, and Retention In relation to the issue of staffing, the respondents were asked to indicate whether statistics related to staff composition are compiled for their libraries and, if so, by whom. In total, 87.2 percent indicated that such statistics are maintained for their organizations. In more than half of the libraries (56.4 percent), the statistics are compiled by a human resources or personnel officer in the library (see table 2). In 15.0 percent of the libraries, some administrative officer, such as the library director or assistant director, compiles such statistics. In addition, a diversity or affirmative action officer outside of the library, particularly in the administrative unit to which the library reports or with which the library is affiliated, maintains such library data in 12.8 percent of the libraries, while a diversity or affirmative action committee does so in one library (2.6 percent). While 15.4 percent of the libraries have a library diversity officer, none of the respondents noted that this individual has responsibility for maintaining data related to staff composition. In fact, it is the case that the administrator with human resources responsibility who compiles such data in more than half the libraries may also serve as the diversity officer. Table 2 Statistics Related to Staff Composition Responsible Individual or Committee Number of Libraries Percentage of Total Human resources officer in library 22 56.4 Other administrative officer in library 6 15.4 Diversity or affirmative action officer outside of library 5 12.8 Diversity or affirmative action committee in library 1 2.6 None 5 12.8   Total 39 100.0 In the area of recruitment, the study participants were asked whether they have made efforts to attract a diverse pool of candidates for open positions. In 94.9 percent of the libraries, such efforts have been undertaken in relation to professional positions and in 92.3 percent of the libraries for support staff positions. The respondents were asked to identify which of a number of approaches they have used to attract a diverse pool of applicants for open professionals positions. Nearly three‐quarters of the libraries have posted job advertisements in national publications (see table 3). In addition, nearly two‐thirds have done each of the following: posted advertisements in minority publications, mailed job advertisements to deans and/or faculty in library schools, or contacted specific minority organizations or institutions with job advertisements or for recommendations of potential candidates. Other processes include posting position announcements on listservs with large numbers of minority participants (56.4 percent), establishing contacts at professional or scholarly conferences (46.2 percent), contacting prominent members of underrepresented populations for suggestions regarding potential candidates (35.9 percent), sending targeted mailings to potential candidates, with job announcements and letters of invitation to apply (33.3 percent), maintaining a database of potential candidates in diverse populations (12.8 percent), and using directories of ethnic professionals to identify potential candidates (10.3 percent). As the participants were asked to indicate “all that apply” in their recruitment practices, the responses do not total 100 percent. Table 3 Recruitment Strategies Recruitment Approach Number of Libraries Percentage of Total Advertising in national publications 29 74.4 Advertising in minority publications 25 64.1 Mailing job advertisements to library schools 25 64.1 Contacting specific minority organizations 25 64.1 Posting position announcements on minority listservs 22 56.4 Establishing contacts at conferences 18 46.2 Contacting prominent members of underrepresented populations for recommendations 14 35.9 Sending targeted mailings to potential candidates 13 33.3 Maintaining a database of potential minority candidates 5 12.8 Using directories of ethnic professionals to identify potential candidates 4 10.3 Also, in relation to recruitment, the survey instrument addressed the question of whether those with interviewing and hiring responsibilities are trained in diversity issues. In all but one of the responding institutions (97.4 percent), such training is provided. In nearly two‐thirds of the libraries, such training is provided by the library personnel, diversity, or affirmative action officer. Other sources of training were indicated, including a library committee. The study participants were asked what data the libraries use to determine whether they have been successful in recruitment and retention of members of diverse populations. While more than a third (35.9 percent) of the libraries do not undertake processes to measure the level of representation, a large percentage (43.6 percent) compare the level of representation with census data (see table 4). Nearly 30.0 percent undertake comparisons with other municipal or county departments, while 25.0 percent gauge their progress based on the extent to which the goals that they have set in relation to representation are achieved, and 15.0 percent measure their progress by comparison with peer institutions. The participants were asked to indicate all of the measures that they use, such that the responses do not total 100 percent. Table 4 Representation among Library Staff Measure of Representation Number of Libraries Percentage of Total Census data 17 43.6 Comparison with other municipal or county departments 11 28.2 Setting goals and meeting them 10 25.6 Comparison with peer institutions 6 15.4 No program 14 35.9 The issue of retention was addressed, as well, in relation to the types of approaches that are used to retain minority librarians who are employed in the responding institutions. While all of the organizations indicated employing minority librarians, 41.1 percent of the organizations do not have retention programs in place. The retention approaches that were noted by the other libraries included diversity/sensitivity training for library staff in nearly half (48.7 percent) of the libraries, obtaining and utilizing feedback from minority librarians who leave and take other positions (35.9 percent), and connecting new minority hires with other individuals or groups in the community (23.1 percent; see table 5). Few of the libraries (15.4 percent) use mentoring programs for minority librarians or adjustments or counteroffers for minority librarians, if possible within the civil service systems (2.6 percent). Table 5 Retention Strategies Retention Approach Number of Libraries Percentage of Total Diversity training for other staff 19 48.7 Obtaining feedback from departing minority librarians 14 35.9 Connecting new minority hires with others in the community 9 23.1 Mentoring programs for minority librarians 6 15.4 Salary adjustments 1 2.6 No program 16 41.0 No minority librarians 0 .0 Library Services In relation to library services, 100 percent of the libraries have implemented programs that are designed to provide library services to segments of a diverse population. In this regard, 95.0 percent of the libraries have provided library services to immigrants (see table 6). A similar percentage (92.3 percent) has provided services for racial or ethnic minorities/people of color, and 75.0 percent of the libraries have implemented programs to provide services for people with disabilities. Table 6 Diverse Population Segments Segment of the Population Number of Libraries Percentage of Total Immigrants 37 94.9 Racial and ethnic minorities 36 92.3 People with disabilities 29 74.4 Others 9 23.1 In terms of the types of programs that have been offered, the largest percentage of the libraries (84.6 percent) has provided computer training (see table 7). In addition, a large percentage has provided literacy training (74.4 percent) and English as a second language training (61.5 percent). Slightly more than half (51.3 percent) indicated providing programs related to reference service for segments of the population, while 43.6 percent indicated that their organizations have provided tutoring services. Table 7 Library Services—Diverse Populations Segments Type of Program Number of Libraries Percentage of Total Computer training 33 84.6 Literacy training 29 74.4 English as a second language training 24 61.5 Reference service 20 51.3 Tutoring 17 43.6 Other 18 46.2 Library Collections With regard to collection assessment related to diversity, the study participants were asked whether the library staff have done any assessment related to collections of resources related to diverse populations (e.g., African American collections, Asian/Asian American collections). In total, 92.3 percent of the libraries have undertaken such collection assessment. In the related area of collection development, the participants were asked whether programs have been implemented to diversify the materials in the library collections in relation to diverse populations. In this regard, 92.3 percent of the libraries have made such efforts to diversify their collections. In 87.2 percent of the libraries, the respondents noted that funding has been secured in order to diversify the collections. The sources of such funding have included the redirection of funding from elsewhere within the library budget in nearly 80.0 percent of the libraries or grant funding (69.2 percent; see table 8). In 20.0 percent of the libraries, new or additional funding from the municipality, county, or library board has been added to the library budget for diversifying the library collection. Table 8 Funding to Diversify Library Collections Source of Funding Number of Libraries Percentage of Total Redirection of funding from library budget 31 79.5 Grant funding 27 69.2 Municipality 8 20.5 Other 14 35.9 Overall Evaluation In order to determine the extent to which leadership and administrative structure have had an impact on staffing, collections, services, and organizational climate, a number of correlational analyses were undertaken. In particular, the presence of a diversity committee and/or a diversity or affirmative action officer in the library was considered with regard to whether diversity‐related activities have been undertaken. The results indicate that there is no statistically significant relationship between the presence of a diversity officer and the presence of a diversity committee. In other words, the fact that a library has one does not correlate with having the other. It is interesting to note that there are only two libraries that have both a library diversity committee and a library diversity or affirmative action officer. The presence of a library diversity committee was shown to correlate with differences in terms of a number of diversity‐related activities, in the areas of recruitment, retention, and diversity awareness. First, the fact that there is a library diversity committee correlates with significant differences in terms of the maintenance of statistics associated with professional and support staff positions. In fact, all of the libraries that have such a committee maintain such data for professional and support staff positions. It should be noted, though, that for those institutions that do not have such committees, 95.5 percent maintain such data for professional positions, and 90.9 percent maintain data for support staff positions, as represented by chi‐square values of 0.000 and 0.001, respectively (significance was set at \documentclass{aastex} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{bm} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{pifont} \usepackage{stmaryrd} \usepackage{textcomp} \usepackage{portland,xspace} \usepackage{amsmath,amsxtra} \usepackage[OT2,OT1]{fontenc} \newcommand\cyr{ \renewcommand\rmdefault{wncyr} \renewcommand\sfdefault{wncyss} \renewcommand\encodingdefault{OT2} \normalfont \selectfont} \DeclareTextFontCommand{\textcyr}{\cyr} \pagestyle{empty} \DeclareMathSizes{10}{9}{7}{6} \begin{document} \landscape $p\leq .05$ \end{document} ). No significant differences were noted in relation to the maintenance of specific types of data, such as peer institution statistics, between libraries with or without diversity committees. Nonetheless, for those libraries with a diversity officer, significant differences were noted. Of the fourteen libraries overall that have no program in place for comparison of minority representation among the library staff, all of those institutions are without a library diversity officer. Thus, while 57.6 percent of the libraries without a library diversity officer have a program of data comparison in place, 100 percent of those with a library diversity officer have such a program, as shown by a chi‐square value of 0.046. Also, while 43.6 percent of the libraries overall use census data for comparative purposes, the most frequently mentioned type of data, 83.3 percent of the libraries with a diversity officer use such data for comparison purposes, as compared with 36.4 percent of the libraries without a diversity officer, as represented by a chi‐square value of 0.033. In terms of retention strategies, significant differences were noted in relation to a number of circumstances. While 41.0 percent of the libraries overall have no retention program in place, of those with a diversity committee, 81.3 percent have a retention program for minority librarians, a significant difference represented by a chi‐square value of 0.041. In addition, while 48.7 percent have offered training for other library staff, as a part of their retention efforts, 81.3 percent of the libraries with diversity committees have offered such training, as indicated by a chi‐square value of 0.003. In addition, the presence of a library diversity officer was correlated with a statistically significant difference in the use of salary adjustments as a recruitment strategy. While 16.7 percent of the libraries with a library diversity officer have used this strategy, none of the libraries that do not have a library diversity officer has done so, as represented by a chi‐square value of 0.018. It should be noted that only 2.6 percent of the libraries overall have used this strategy. Thus, limited conclusions can be drawn about the significance of this finding. With regard to organizational climate, the only difference that was noted in relation to enhancing diversity awareness among library staff involved the hiring of outside consultants. While 41.0 percent of the libraries overall have hired consultants in this area, 62.5 percent of those with diversity committees have done so, as compared with 27.3 percent of those without diversity committees, with a chi‐square value of 0.065—a value that is approaching significance. Conclusion and Implications Leadership diversity relates to the relationship between diversity and organizational success, with a particular focus on the role of leaders in fostering diversity and the overall importance of increasing the range of perspectives represented to enhance the quality of decision making and the provision of services to the user population. Studies such as this one can be important in the comprehensive evaluation of services of any type of library, particularly academic or public, where the increasing diversity of the user population and the overall focus on organizational performance make diversity an organizational priority. The results of the research indicate a number of implications associated with public library services, in particular. The results address the way in which diversity goals have been operationalized in library functions and services in a segment of the library profession that has been studied very little in this regard. The implications reflect the focus on the impact of leadership and administrative structure on staffing, collections, services, and organizational climate. The findings of this study indicate that organizational leadership is critically important in evaluating the overall operations of libraries and their services and in fostering and promoting diversity programs in all libraries. It should be noted that reflective of an understanding of the expanding diversity of the U.S. population, in terms of racial and ethnic minorities and immigrants, a relatively large percentage of libraries have provided services for and enhanced collections related to these segments of the population. To a large extent, the enhancement of collections has taken place with no new funding. In terms of diversity awareness and organizational climate, the responding organizations have undertaken activities to enhance the level of understanding of and support for diversity issues among librarians and staff. And yet, the use of outside consultants, who may bring objectivity and a broader perspective to specific organizational circumstances, has been limited. In addition, the introduction of library diversity committees has been correlated with a prevalence of diversity‐related programs in a number of areas. As is often posited in the profession, the research results indicate that there appears to be greater focus on recruitment than on retention of members of underrepresented groups. While the results may not be reflective of the programs and activities in public libraries that are smaller, less well funded, and in less diverse communities, the results indicate diversity‐related programs and services in large public libraries. Further research related to diversity in public libraries is needed in order to document diversity‐related programs and constraints in medium‐sized and smaller libraries. There is the need for further study of the nature of the relationship between the role of leadership in operationalizing diversity in terms of library administrative structure, in the form of administrative positions and committee responsibilities, and in diversity programs and initiatives. In addition, further research should address the effectiveness of ongoing recruitment and retention efforts and the level of user satisfaction associated with library services related to diversity. Similarly, while the assessment tools in place at present address user services and user satisfaction, in general, there appears to be the opportunity to address diversity as a variable, with regard to collections and service provision to segments of the population, but also public services staff composition, in terms of the impact on user satisfaction.