Library Material Without Instruction - A Disaster? FREDERICK HOLLER ONE of the strangest phenomena in American education today is the absence of mandatory library science courses in most colleges and universities. I am not referring to programs for beginning librar- ians in the various graduate library schools nor to the sporadic lectures given by librarians about how to locate books in the library. What I am talking about is a full semester course about information (library) material in the nature of an academic discipline with credit awarded toward bachelor and master's degrees. The absence of such courses in most graduate and undergraduate study programs is undoubtedly strange because library science is an important field in the communication sciences. There are courses in English, foreign languages, speech, and even journalism, but not li- brary science. The omission assumes disastrous proportions when the matter is regarded in purely scientific terms. Library material is essen- tially a machine, a technological product of our civilization, like the automobile or atomic energy. Like all machines library material needs to be used but its use must also be studied or its power will enslave us and possibly even destroy us. There appear to be many reasons for this strange lack of library science courses. One fundamental reason that underlies the general hostility toward library science courses seems to be a lack of awareness in regard to the subject matter of such courses. It is widely felt that library science does not have a proper subject content or that its sub- ject content is subordinate to the subject matter of the established academic disciplines. Consequently, librarians should only play a role that supports the teaching of these disciplines by providing a compre- Holler is General Reference Librarian at San Fernando Valley State College, Northridge, Calif. 38
Library Material Without Instruction - A Disaster? hensive collection of books and other reading material as well as some assistance in the use of such material. It appears to me that this view, although not entirely incorrect, is nevertheless inadequate. The inadequacy is revealed when one ex- amines a typical research topic in its treatment by the various disci- plines. Although practically any topic will suffice I have selected - for the purpose of my argument - the topic "The Republic of South Af- rica" in view of its high prominence as a result of the recent events in that part of the world. The Republic of South Africa is a subject that is regularly taught in various disciplines, notably political sci- ence, sociology, history, and others. However, the study of South Africa in these disciplines is limited by definition to the concepts of political science, sociology, and history. In other words, a political science course will study South Africa in the concepts of state, govern- ment, legislative and judiciary processes, interest groups, political be- havior, etc. Similarly, a sociology class will study South Africa in such concepts as culture, stratification, urban and rural patterns of living, marriage customs, social change, division of labor, etc. Finally, a course in history will examine South Africa in specific concepts of time and succession and in respect to political, economic, and other events. Books and other library material will be used in support of these con- cepts with the librarians at best providing some technical assistance. From the foregoing it is evident that what is not studied is the li- brary material itself as it pertains to South Africa. In other words, no systematic study is made by the student of the existence, accessi- bility, authority, and impact of library material by way of a thorough quantitative and qualitative analysis. The absence of such a systematic study becomes critical when one considers that all the political, socio- logical, and historical concepts such as those cited above derive their support mainly from printed material. Thus, any inadequacy or dis- tortion inherent in the library material itself will affect the reality of the concepts under study. Let us examine how this happens. Usually the first step in any analysis is the separation of the abstract concept into its components. South Africa is a highly abstract concept and even a casual reflection will immediately yield several hundred conceptual components. It soon becomes necessary to limit the range or aspect of these components and this, of course, provides the first source of distortion. Unfortu- nately it is one which cannot be avoided because of human inadequacy. Eventually, however, the student should have compiled a lengthy list 39
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP of terms which may include such words as land, people, civilization, way of life, apartheid, poverty, wealth, social relations, group con- flicts, politics, socio-economic development, and many more. In order to find books about these components of the abstract concept South Africa, the student first turns to the card catalog. At this point he usually needs the help of a librarian who may have to instruct him in how to translate the terms into subject headings with the aid of a subject heading list. A new list of terms is eventually worked out which on the basis of Library of Congress subject headings may con- tain such words or phrases as Africa; Africa, South; Africa, South - Race Problem; Negroes in Africa, South; Negroes in Africa, South - Segregation and many more. It is to be noted that the bulk of the library material on South Africa will usually be found under the head- ing "Africa, South." How little the students and - I may add - many of the faculty real- ize that these innocent looking headings are the source of considerable distortion in the perception of reality. The headings used in card cata- logs and other indexes are essentially part of a closed language sys- tem. The language operates in constructions which impose upon the reader a slanted and abridged meaning. As a result of its authori- tarian character the language of subject headings creates in the mind of the reader a fixed image which blocks off development of the real and probably different meaning of the concept behind the term. It establishes a false familiarity and a deceptive sense of finality. By its hypnotic, subconscious effect it sticks to the mind long after the reader has ceased to be exposed to it. Let us take, for instance, the subject heading "Africa, South." The impression is created that South Africa is a subordinate of the larger concept "Africa." It suggests that the characteristics and properties of the concept "Africa" apply with but slight modification to its sub- unit. The effect is comparable to the case where we would enter in- formation material on Australia under "Asia, South East - Australia." The deception is imposed that there is a unity or affinity which, al- though real in a certain, narrow geographical sense, is non-existent in a cultural and political sense. How extensive the damage and the dan- gers in this respect are can be seen from a remark by the late Dag Hammerskjold when he visited South Africa for the first time a year before his death. The United Nations Secretary whom nobody would accuse of being an uneducated man told the South African judge who acted as his guide: "But this is not Africa, this is Europe." 40
Library Material Without Instruction - A Disaster? The heading "Negroes in Africa, South" is even worse because it compounds this error in a second dimension. There are no negroes in South Africa but Bantus of tremendous cultural and linguistic di- versity. There are negroes in West Africa and also negroes in the United States of America. The negroes of West Africa and the U.S. are as different in language and culture as the Bantus are among them- selves and from the negroes of either West Africa or the United States. The use of the basically anthropological term "negro" to cover library material in cultural and political matters suggests a unity or affinity that is not only non-existent but also totally misleading. Possibly the worst damage is caused by terms that are vague, in- definite, or telescoped in meaning. Prominent in this category is the heading "Africa, South - Race Question" or "Africa, South - Race Problem." Consultation of a large unabridged dictionary would reveal that there are something like 15 different connotations of the term "race." Approximately half of these can be eliminated as belonging to a different idea but the remaining eight meanings are so varied as to make the term practically useless. Indeed, there is not even general agreement as to how many races exist in the world. Some would put the figure as low as five or six races whereas others believe that there are as many as 30 different races. Still others use the term race to cover several hundred different groups. While this is bad enough in itself, the use of the heading "Race Question" or some similar phrase in card catalogs, indexes and other library material creates the im- pression that the phenomenon is correctly recognized and identified with undisputed unanimity and absolute certainty. In fact, however, it imposes a one-dimensional thought - the race concept - on a very complex situation with the result that most students think within the prison walls of that one concept and never venture outside it. The truth, of course, is that it is equally possible and far more accurate to identify the problem in such sociological terms as "group inter- actions" or "group differences" and in such political terms as "emerg- ing nationalism" or "emerging nations." Naturally, even these terms should not be allowed to become ossified. The use of the term "race question" is misleading also in another respect. An inevitable by-product of applied subject headings is the fact that analogies - true as well as false ones - are created. The head- ing "race question" imposes a compelling but false analogy with the race question in the United States. However, the situation in South Africa is not comparable to that in the United States because its attri- 41
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP butes are neither quantitatively nor qualitatively matching. The con- nection is purely linguistic because the same set of words - race, negro, segregation, discrimination, etc. - is applied for both situations. A valid comparison could, however, be made between the South African situation and the one in Austria-Hungary until 1918. There, many attributes share a high degree of quantitative and qualitative similarity. Curiously enough, the connection is even a linguistic one because the term race was and is applied frequently by authors de- scribing the problems of Austria-Hungary. However, as far as card catalogs and other indexes go the connection is frequently blurred because cross references are lacking. During the past ten years the Public Affairs Information Service Bulletin (PAIS), for instance, has included race relations cross references between South Africa and such countries as Brazil, Great Britain, Kenya, New Zealand, and the United States but not to pre-1918 Austria (Austria-Hungary) . Here, once again, a closed, functionalized language system imposes a unity of opposites which militates against independent conceptual thinking and adequate differentiation. At the same time, it fails to reveal a unity of similarities or even identities which lie outside its narrow linguistic boundaries. The same phenomenon reveals itself when one examines the dis- tinction made in the Library of Congress Classification System between Literature (class PL, PR, PT) and other classes as, for instance, His- tory, Africa (class DT) or Political Science (class JQ) . The separation of literature from other classes is based on form. While the distinction is valid in a strictly formal sense, it is misleading in another, perhaps more vital sense. The impression is created that literature as a product of imagination does not portray reality. Even though great works of literature frequently reveal far more the reality of social and economic conditions, for instance, no subject headings in this respect are assigned to such works. An entire class of books is thereby removed from the path of investigation and existing similarities or identities are ob- scured. On the other hand, material in the DT and JQ classes is given sub- ject headings which supposedly reflect the reality of life in South Africa. A closer examination of the material may reveal, however, that the author, by the use of one-dimensional language, has created a work of imagination which bears little resemblance to reality. The curious effect is thereby achieved that the imagination of the author creates a lack of imagination in the reader. The reader never imagines 42
Library Material Without Instruction - A Disaster? that the situation could be different from the one portrayed by the author. Thus, it is the reader rather than the author who moves in a world of illusion although the reader is completely unaware of his predicament. This effect of unsuspected illusion is created by the repetitive usage of vague, indefinite terms, the inflectional genitive and the closed analytic predication. Perhaps the most notorious of the indefinite terms are freedom and progress. These ubiquitous words are used with such frequency that the response in the reader is almost always automatic. Freedom and progress is good and the absence of freedom and progress is bad. The mind is closed to any investigation of the facts behind these terms and the real meaning of the concept is hardly ever suspected. The use of the inflectional genitive as, for instance, in "South Af- rica's racial policy" or "Verwoerd's apartheid system" similarly creates fixed images. Such language leaves no room for essential differentiation or distinction. The meaning of the noun becomes the exclusive prop- erty of one person or locality regardless of the fact that such identifi- cation may be entirely illegitimate. The effect of the hypnotic image is so powerful that the reader can "safely" be exposed to at least some of the facts of the situation in the rest of the book or article. The initially imposed image will "safely" restrict the conceptual develop- ment of the reader. Even more powerful is the linguistic construction which links a given noun exclusively to a word of an entirely different or contradictional quality or sphere. Examples in this respect are "oppressive pass sys- tems," "cheap labor," "viscious segregation," "racial trouble," "white supremacy," "equal rights," "police brutality," etc. The dangerous im- pact of this fixed or closed vocabulary is that it has lost all cognitive value. It is merely "recognitive" in the sense that it recognizes only a fact that is beyond questioning. Perhaps the following example will make this clearer. The South African government is frequently characterized as a "minority rule." The term creates the image that such a rule is bad because it represents only a minority in the country. This fixation in the mind of the reader is pure imagery as even a cursory examination of the facts would reveal. The facts are that it is equally possible, for instance, to regard South Africa as being under majority rule. The South African government represents a cultural/linguistic majority in the country which outnumbers the largest minority group - the Xhosa nation - by nearly 20 per cent. The Xhosa nation in turn has its own 43
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP duly constituted government and the government of other small mi- nority groups is in various stages of existence and development. Fur- thermore, the South African Government represents the majority of educated or politically experienced persons. It was elected by an over- whelming majority according to the existing concepts of constitu- tionality and nationality. The point, of course, is that even if South Africa were under minority rule the conclusion that such rule must inevitably be bad is illusionary. Is a hospital, for instance, bad if it is run by physicians that represent only a minority of the total staff ? Is a library bad because it is administered by a minority of librarians ? I have devoted the preceding space of some length to the closed analytic predication because its inherent dangers will lead us back to the initial argument of this article. If anyone should doubt the dangers of the closed analytic predication he needs only to examine the speech made in the United Nations Assembly by U.S. Ambassador Arthur Goldberg last December when the question of imposing sanc- tions against Rhodesia was debated. The predominant feature of the speech was the term "minority rule." Surely it is not too hard to see in this instance how the sound of the phrase today can or will become the noise of the war tomorrow. The real culprit is the self generating imagery produced by the closed terminology, notably the closed analytic predication which is so often found in information material. In fact, the very term "in- formation material" has itself become enclosed in a narrow image. Information material - the material that informs, even educates. The more one reads the more one is informed or educated - or so is the image. Only rarely is it suspected that information material could be something else besides. Material, for instance, that also indoctrinates and even manipulates. Once the full meaning of information material has been recognized the question arises how the true information material can be sepa- rated from the indoctrination material. It may be argued that perhaps all that is needed is a certain reorientation in cataloging and classi- fication. But this view ignores the essential fact that regardless of orientation the language of library material will remain functional- ized. The closed analytic structure of functionalized language would still produce images - different ones perhaps, but still images instead of conceptional development. In the final analysis the distinction be- tween information material and indoctrination material is highly in- dividualistic. Every reader, every student will have to decide for him- U
Library Material Without Instruction - A Disaster? self what and where the dividing line is. But this is true only as long as the student is free to make his own decision. As long as he is under the influence of hypnotic definitions and functionalized images his decision is not free but manipulated. In this situation the conclusion seems inescapable that the librarian must come to the aid of the student. However, the role of the li- brarian cannot be that of a cataloger or classifier. In that role the librarian merely perpetuates the evils which I have described and acts as a censor of what should be read. Similarly, the librarian cannot play a merely passive role by confining himself to purely administrative matters because then the student would be left at the mercy of the in- formation material. What is clearly needed is the librarian in the role of a teacher and mentor who helps the student develop the mental faculties for grasping the contradictions and alternatives beyond the immediate impact of the library material. An excellent method for achieving this objective would be the preparation of analytical bibliog- raphies by the student under the supervision of librarians. Most bibliographies prepared by students today are in the nature of alphabetical listings. Even where bibliographies are classified the division of the material is based on concepts which are operative in academic disciplines other than library science. Such bibliographies while useful in respective fields of human knowledge are nevertheless quite inadequate. Their inadequacy stems from the fact that they do not tell us if the student has grasped the reality or substance of library material as opposed to mere utilization of a process leading to sub- stance. Analytic bibliographies, on the other hand, express a quantitative and qualitative measurement of library material according to concepts of library science, such as accessibility, style, and authority or cause. Inasmuch as subject headings in card catalogs and indexes can be the source of serious distortion it is necessary to list and measure the ma- terial affected by it. Similarly, since a closed one-dimensional language in writing militates against full conceptional development and ade- quate perception of reality it is necessary to list and measure the li- brary material written in this style. After the identity and volume of library material in repressive magic-ritual language has been exposed by the student he is free to search for the meaning of all statements encountered. But in this search he will be tempted and frequently forced - by the dictates of a particular academic discipline - to validate a given statement by checking it against widely held abstract general- 45
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP izations and the specific data he has been able to collect. In conse- quence of the logical processes and value judgments employed he will eventually come to the conclusion that the statement is either true or false. He thus becomes locked in the intellectual dilemma of having to choose between alternatives. If, for instance, he finds that apartheid is immoral he cannot also find that apartheid is moral or vice versa. Western logic eschews the thought process that A can be both iden- tical with B and different from B at the same time. And yet a choice between opposing alternatives may at best be completely futile and meaningless and at worst be the source of conflict and even war. It is a fact of human existence that no matter what our hypothetical student decides many people will have opposing view points. A decision that they are wrong will add little to our understanding of why they hold opposing views and what we can do about it. Library science, on the other hand, does not pose this problem because all statements are regarded as true simply because they exist. Library science is based on the thought found in India and Japan where the same word - sat - means both a fact of being and the fact of being true.1 The important question in library science is authority or cause. Who is the author? What is his name or is he anonymous or a corporate body? For the purpose of our specific topic the following particulars of the concept "Authority" will have to be established: Is the author a South African or a Non-South African? If he is South African, is he English, or Zulu, or Tsonga perhaps ? Does he reside in South Africa or is he an expatriate, perhaps living in London or Tanzania? If he is Non-South African, is he American or perhaps Nigerian or Indian? Has he ever lived in South Africa or does he not intend to live in South Africa? Is he a scholar, a government official, a businessman, or perhaps a member of the clergy? Or is he a journalist working for a particular paper or magazine ? Is he wealthy and where is the loca- tion of his wealth? Or is he poor and perhaps uneducated? Is he a member of a political party or organization, a liberal, a conservative or a communist perhaps? The answers to these and many similar ques- tions must form the basis for the analytical bibliography. Books, ar- ticles, and other writings are not simply arranged alphabetically by author but by authority. The analytical authority bibliography is designed to avoid two major sources for the inadequate perception of reality - one that is caused by the prevalent mode of education and the other caused by the existing rules of cataloging. 46
Library Material Without Instruction - A Disaster? Much of education today is a form of rational persuasion. As such it concentrates on the logic of the argument and locks the student, as I have mentioned, in the intellectual dilemma of having to choose sides. The author of the statement under consideration is rarely more than a phantom in the argument - an appearance without real sub- stance. The analytical bibliography, however, converts the author into concrete reality because it places the "authority" of the argument not in its logic but in its author. Authority means the acceptance of one's word or thought and as such is closely linked to jurisdiction or terri- tory. The analytical bibliography identifies and limits the territory of authority - be it mental or geographical. Thus the acceptance of the author's thought is never in doubt but its limits are defined. In the final analysis the author's words may be viewed simply as cries in the struggle for human existence. But contrary to the rules of cataloging they are not only the cries of an individual but those of a particular group. Though only one person is listed in the catalog as responsible for the intellectual content of the book, this is never the case and as such is a serious distortion of reality. The reality is that the real author is always a corporate body since the individual author does not speak for himself but is always the spokesman - authorized or unauthorized - of a specific group in a specific society. This group which may be political, cultural, occupational, or intellectual has its own experiences, interests, modes of thought, values, and objectives. These enter in one form or another and in varying degree of awareness into the contents of the book or article. The language of the book or article is therefore a form of communication only to those who are part of the group or want to become so. To all others the meaning of the language has to be translated or may well be untranslatable. The analytical bibliography is thus an indispensable tool for understanding the limits of our understanding because books and articles are arranged according to the societal rather than the logical system of meaning. In this sense the analytical "authority" bibliography fulfills a unique clarifying function. It demonstrates the link between the language of the information material and the societal processes which close the uni- verse of discourse. Ever since Karl Kraus2 we know that it is possible to reveal an entire political, moral, or cultural system by examining the language of the information material itself. It was Kraus who alerted us to the essential reversal of a cause and effect relationship between society and the information material. The content of information material is 47
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP not only a reflection of the behavior of society but a particular society as expressed in the actions of its members is also a reflection of the terminology of information material to which the particular society is exposed. This is most evident in the large, controversial areas, the na- tional and international issues, as, for instance, the "Vietnam" war, the "negro" problem, the "poverty" war, the "underdeveloped" na- tions, "equal" rights, "political" freedom, democracy, capitalism, com- munism, colonialism, etc. In spite of the tremendous implications of these problems our con- cern seems to be focused solely on the validity of the abstractions presented and, with one exception, never on the effect of the informa- tion material itself. Why is it that we are so concerned only about the effect of the so called obscene reading material and constantly cry for censorship in this respect? Is it because sex is more dangerous than war? Or is it because we think that only four-letter words of a certain kind can excite? Ever since Auschwitz we should know that also three- letter words - Jud' or jew - can excite and ever since Watts we should know that also five-letter words - negro - can excite. Our libraries have tried to solve the problem of the "four-letter word" literature by either not buying it or hiding it in reserve bookrooms. Since the re- serve bookrooms of our libraries are obviously not large enough to absorb all the other information material the only solution is that we must learn to live with library material. Yes, 1-e-a-r-n to live with it Notes 1. Herbert, Jean: An Introduction to Asia. New York, Oxford University Press, 1965, p. 143. 2. Karl Kraus (1874-1936), Austrian critic, poet, and journalist, whose examination of the grammar and vocabulary of Austrian information media during some 30 years provides a profound insight into the origin of World War I, the collapse of Europe's largest multinational empire, the rise of nazism, etc. It is significant that the bulk of his writings remains unavailable in English translation. 48