Using Literature to Teach in LIS Education: A Very Good Idea Kate Marek Reports on the effectiveness of using fiction in graduate education come from a variety of disciplines and professional fields. Perhaps the best known is the writing of Robert Coles, who speaks to the use of literature in educating doctors, lawyers, social workers, and teachers. But LIS education has done little to explore the potential of teaching with literature in our own discipline. Suggesting first a theoretical framework to support the combination of both the cognitive and the affective in higher education, this article goes on to re- port qualitative and quantitative findings that demonstrate the success of us- ing fiction in LIS education. Finally, specific applications are suggested and described. Introduction If you're reading this, chances are good that you are a Reader. Asked what you wish you could do more of, what you regret not doing, and what you hope to spend your time doing in retirement, "reading" will be at the top of your list. Many of us yearn to read - and frequently what we most yearn to read is quality literature. Why do we love to read? There are many responses to that question, both visceral, if you will, as well as answers grounded in research. Essentially, we read to expand our experience. It may be to escape into other worlds, to meet new people, to travel, or to pretend, but we broaden our horizons when we read. We learn. In this article, I will argue that as educators of adults, we have a tremen- dous opportunity to use literature to expand our students9 experience. And, I will argue, in library and information science (LIS) education, where our students are ever more likely than the general population to be Readers, we miss the boat when we forget about the power of literature to teach. The power of narrative itself, not only for teaching1 but also within cor- porate practice,2 has been well documented. I take a somewhat different ap- proach in this article, however, focusing on fiction and literature rather than on case-study style narrative. I will review theory from education and psy- chology that demonstrates the effectiveness of using literature for graduate Note: Some portions of this paper were previously published as part of a Ph.D. dissertation: (Catherine G. Marek, "The Experience of Using Fiction for Graduate Professional Education: A Phenomenological Study," (Ph.D. Diss., Emporia State University, 1999). I of Education for Library and Information Science, Vol. 47, No. 2- Spring 2006 1 44 ISSN: 0748-5786 ©2006 Association for Library and Information Science Education
Using Literature to Teach in US Education: A Very Good Idea 145 About the Author Kate Marek is an Associate Professor at the Graduate School of Library and In- formation Science, Dominican University (kmarek@dom.edu). Ms. received 03/06; accepted 06/06; revised 07/06. education as well as educational theory that argues for learning through ex- perience. I will describe the results of qualitative and quantitative studies, and I will offer specific examples of LIS courses where literature is an espe- cially effective teaching tool. I will also refer to published accounts from other disciplines where literature is used in professional graduate educa- tion. Background Reports on the effectiveness of using fiction in graduate education come from a variety of disciplines and professional fields. Perhaps the best known is the writing of Robert Coles,3 who speaks to the use of literature in educating doctors, lawyers, social workers, and teachers. Certainly there is no argument regarding the power of novels such as Willa Cather's My Antonia to teach about the complexity and richness of pioneer life. In un- dergraduate liberal arts education, literature is often used as a powerful teaching tool, as evidenced in such initiatives as the Great Books curricu- lum at St. John's College.4 But in The Call of Stories,5 Robert Coles de- scribes the power of fiction in teaching medical students about death from the perspective of human grief, or about illness through the eyes of a termi- nally ill mother of preschoolers. He also demonstrates the effectiveness of particular stories in teaching law students the finer points of human motiva- tion and the consequences - intended and unintended - of the law. He il- lustrates the power of story in teaching aspiring professional social workers about a life lived in poverty. It is in teaching these philosophical points - issues of humanity, values, and ethics - as contrasted with the teaching of a profession's clinical tools, where literature is so useful and ef- fective. In The Call of Stories, Coles builds on the work of his mentor William Carlos Williams, a medical doctor and a celebrated writer, ultimately de- scribing a series of examples of short stories and novels that Coles has found effective in his teaching. Flannery O'Connor's story "The Lame Shall Enter First," for example, is a story Coles uses with medical students to discuss the issue of a practitioner's cognitive authority and a patient's un- expected response. With the introduction of a particular story such as this in class, a discussion is generated that focuses on the characters. It is this valu- able discussion that takes education beyond memorization and analysis of the clinical.
1 46 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Theoretical Foundations Robert Coles speaks from his own experiences as he describes the effec- tiveness of using literature to teach professionals. In an effort to strengthen the proposal for this pedagogy, however, it is also helpful to investigate the- ories of human thinking, theories of human learning, and writings from sci- ence which expand our thinking about the scientific methods of discovery. To that end, I will refer to the work of two scholars (Jerome Bruner from the field of psychology, and David Kolb from education) whose work provides a theoretical framework demonstrating the usefulness of using literature in teaching professional adults. I will also highlight ideas from contemporary science writing which speak to the limits of the paradigmatic scientific method and celebrate the importance of intuition and imagination in the discovery process. Jerome Bruner's Modes of Thought Jerome Bruner, a prominent American cognitive psychologist, is a contem- porary author who continues to research the relationship between cultural narrative and an individual's ability to make meaning within his or her envi- ronment. In Acts of Meaning, Bruner describes the mid-20th century "revo- lution" in psychology as an effort to establish meaning as the central concept in that discipline.6 Bruner contrasts "folk" psychology, which he calls the psychology that dominates human interaction in daily life, from psychology's positivist paradigm that attempts to prepare for objective study by eliminating all aspects of the human mental state.7 The organizing principle of folk psychology is narrative rather than conceptual, according to Bruner. An important aspect of Bruner's work is his distinction between the narrative mode of thought and the logico-scientific mode of thought. The logico-scientific mode of thought, or "paradigmatic" mode as Bruner normally refers to it, is centered on mathematical and scientific sys- tems. Tools for this mode of thinking include logic, mathematics, and the scientific method of hypothesis setting and experimentation. Bruner notes that the "imaginative application" of this mode of thinking leads to "good theory, tight analysis, logical proof, and empirical discovery guided by rea- soned hypothesis."8 However, our preoccupation with science and indeed our infatuation with this mode of thought denies the rightful significance of another mode of thought, Bruner's "narrative mode."9 It is this arena of what we know, think, or feel, where narrative, and specifically for this study fictional nar- rative, can extend learning into greater depth and dimension. Fictional nar- rative is appropriate for the narrative mode of thought, since fact and fiction have different roles in the logico-scientific mode and the narrative mode. Representation of "truth" in the two modes of thought is very different. In the paradigmatic mode, the goal is to explain a phenomenon and to estab- lish proof based on scientific testing. Truth in the narrative mode, however, is problematic and fuzzy.
Using Literature to Teach in US Education: A Very Good Idea 147 In Acts of Meaning, Bruner describes the essential function of narrative in representing human reflective thought and in the construction of mean- ing. Ultimately, Bruner argues, the tools of interpretation and narrative are essential to the task of meaning making. In order to make sense of the world around us, we must rely on symbols generated by the structure of a power- ful narrative culture, including myths, stories, poetry, song, and litera- ture.10 And, while the logico-scientific mode of thinking seeks to represent truth within a narrow, positivistic view, the narrative mode of thinking seeks to understand the broader question of the meaning of experience. Ultimately, however, even Bruner's discussion regarding the merits of appreciating dual ways of knowing - the logico-scientific and the narra- tive - fails to acknowledge an important, more complex, way of under- standing emergent thinking and discoveries. That way of thinking is illustrated through the artistry of great scientific thinkers who explain the power of intuition and creative discovery as an essential part of the scien- tific method rather than an alternate, competing process. Einstein stressed the role of intuition in scientific discovery: "To these elementary laws there leads no logical path, but only intuition, supported by being sympatheti- cally in touch with experience."11 Evelyn Fox Keller's biography of geneticist Barbara McClintock pro- vides the framework for her investigation of the limits of the paradigmatic scientific method. She describes the role of imagination and vision not only in McClintock's life and work, but also in the work of Saint Thomas, Jean Perrin, Robert Millikan, and Albert Einstein. "[Einstein] was led to relativ- ity by imagining [emphasis mine] the visual experience of a traveler on a beam of light."12 We are familiar with the idea that a form of mysticism - a commitment to the unity of experience, the oneness of nature, the fundamental mystery underlying the laws of nature - plays an essential role in the process of scientific discovery. Einstein called it "cosmic religiosity." In turn, the experience of creative insight reinforces these commitments, fostering a sense of the limitations of the scientific method, and an ap- preciation of other ways of knowing.13 Bruno Latour, a contemporary sociologist of science, also emphasizes the multi-dimensional nature of scientific thought. He sees scientific dis- covery as socially constructed, not happening in the isolation of a sterile laboratory as is the stereotypical understanding of the ideal method, but rather as a multi-layered process that cannot be separated from the scien- tist's life experience and culture.14 Roald Hoffmann does a wonderful job of addressing "story" as an essen- tial component of science, going so far as to conceptualize alternate scien- tific hypotheses as "competing narratives."15 Again, Albert Einstein is used as a classic example of a scientist whose thinking, scientific process, and writing all demonstrate the presence of imagination and story in the build- ing of theory. Using Einstein's groundbreaking 1905 paper on the photo- electric effect,16 Hoffman demonstrates Einstein's technique of building
1 48 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science theory through compelling storytelling. "A young man of 25, Einstein had mastered the old stories. In this paper he combined the ways others looked at the world, and trusting analogy as much as mathematics, made some- thing new. Science is an inspired account of the struggle by human beings to understand the world, changing it in the process. How could this be any- thing but a story?"17 Einstein and McClintock are examples of scientists who also depended heavily on their own experience, whether it was through imaginative expe- rience or life experience, to help them move forward in conceptualizing new discoveries. An emphasis on experience in learning was advanced in 20th century educational theory through the groundbreaking work of John Dewey. In his Experience and Education,** Dewey presented the field of education with a compilation of his thinking on the importance of adding human reflection and thought to the then-popular recitation method of teaching and learning. His revolutionary work provided a springboard for ongoing investigation of the power of learning through experience. It is this broader question of the meaning of experience, specifically in our case as vicariously represented through fictional narrative, which pre- pares us for investigating the pedagogical uses of fiction in professional ed- ucation. I will use the work of educational psychologist David Kolb to extend this theory base, most specifically his theory of experiential learning. David Kolb's Theory of Experiential Learning David Kolb19 has developed a theory of experiential learning which is rele- vant to this discussion for a variety of reasons. Kolb reviewed the work of John Dewey as well as that of Jean Piaget and Kurt Lewin, and his resulting theory has elements of each of these philosophers while extending and modifying their ideas. Kolb's theory of experiential learning can be adapted directly to the use of fiction in the classroom. Kolb's diagram of experiential learning is presented here as Figure 1. The model demonstrates the interaction between the individual's personal development, education, and work. This interaction, shown in the model of a circle moving between the three points of personal experience, creates ex- periential learning. Kolb defines learning as "the process whereby knowledge is created through the transformation of experience."20 By combining two forms of prehension (apprehension and comprehension) and two methods of trans- forming that prehension (extension and intention), Kolb reveals four differ- ent forms of knowledge: Accommodative Knowledge, Divergent Knowledge, Convergent Knowledge, and Assimilative Knowledge. Kolb emphasizes that learning requires both a grasp or a representation of experiences as well as some transformation of that representation. It is this interactive process that produces learning. It is my contention that the use of literature can provide learning experi- ences which fit the description of various categories of learning according
Using Literature to Teach in US Education: A Very Good Idea 149 Figure 1 Kolb's Experiential Learning Process. to Kolb, depending on how the story is presented and discussed in the class. It can be argued variously reading a story provides a learning experience focused on comprehension, or through reliance on conceptual interpreta- tion and symbolic representation, or that it is a learning experience through apprehension, where experience is through reliance on the tangible, felt qualities of immediate experience. A likely scenario for the use of literature in higher education would include a cycle of individual reading, individual reflection, large group or small group discussion with some concrete in- struction, and continued individual reflection. At various levels of this cy- cle, the student would be engaged at all levels of Kolb's experiential learning cycle, depending on the level and intensity of the story as well as the amount of informational connections to the content of the class curriculum. Clearly there is a theoretical justification for the power of story and for reading literature as a valid learning tool. Therefore it is appropriate to ex- amine the specific kinds of curricular opportunities theory tells us we can best stimulate with literature. Fiction as Pedagogy While Paul Hirst21 describes the necessity of using different methods to study different types of curriculum subjects, it is also important to remem- ber that, as Dewey and others tell us, meaning is constructed through a corn- Personal Development / / Experiential 1 \ / 1 Learning J \ Education Work
1 50 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science plex variety of methods and processes. Literature is an important tool for moral understanding. Many educators speak to the difference between the cognitive and the affective, and educating toward both realms is critical.22 Dorothy Walsh23 has investigated the subject of literature as knowledge. Walsh looks at the definitions of knowledge and includes "experience" as an element of that definition. Literature, she says, offers opportunities to expand experience. Other words and phrases Walsh uses to describe what literature offers the reader are illumination, realization, epiphany, height- ened understanding, and revelatory insight.24 Bruner's argument regarding the role of narrative is consistent with this description by Walsh, where she celebrates literature's unique ability to convey something more than, some- thing beyond, the actual articulation of information. Louise Rosenblatt25 speaks specifically to the topic of using literature in education to help foster the society needed for a successful democracy. Ex- posure to other people and other cultures through stories helps American students see parts of the bigger picture. In addition, students need experi- ences which can help them consider various sides to an issue and make rea- soned decisions. Reading literature, Rosenblatt writes, can provide those experiences and develop those skills. Literature, she argues, therefore very much belongs not only in the English curriculum but also in the social sci- ence curriculum and beyond. Robert Coles26 brought to life the idea of using literature in higher educa- tion, and particularly in professional graduate programs such as law and medicine. While he was certainly not the first author to publish on this topic, his successful book made the topic more accessible and timely. In ed- ucational environments where so much effort is spent on the development of the intellect, Coles provides a rationale for also expanding the emotional and humanitarian aspects of the mind. He speaks of the moral aspects of the professions, by which he means the ability to grapple with questions of conscience and responsibility based on an understanding of the human di- mensions of life confronted in daily work. Fiction, Coles argues, brings those moral and emotional issues to life and provides a unique way to learn more about life. A good portion of The Call of Stories describes in depth specific works of fiction and how they were used in the classroom to provide a particular vicarious experience for the students, or to set the stage for a discussion of ethical issues faced by the story's characters. He includes instances of student responses from the classes to more fully describe the learning experience. Coles truly champi- ons the idea of using fiction to extend the students' experiences through lit- erature, offering the complexities of life up for discussion and reflection. The characters met in fiction stay in the mind of the reader, living with her in daily experience. "The whole point of stories is not 'solutions' or 'reso- lutions' but a broadening and even a heightening of our struggles . . ,"27 Sto- ries, Coles says, offer us a unique way to extend our understanding of ourselves and our life experiences, expanding the intellect and the emo- tions.28
Using Literature to Teach in LIS Education: A Very Good Idea 151 Using Fiction as a Teaching Tool Across Disciplines In his 1 968 book The Novelist on Organization and Administration: An In- quiry Into the Relationship Between Two Worlds,29 Dwight Waldo advo- cates using fiction as an effective pedagogy in the field of public administration. "Literature helps to restore what the professional-scientific literature necessarily omits or slights: the concrete, the sensual, the emo- tional, the subjective, the valuational."30 On the other end of the spectrum of disciplines is the work of engineering faculty Berne and Schummer, who advocate the use of science fiction in teaching the social and ethical impli- cations of nanotechnology. The authors suggest ". . . using selected science fiction stories in the engineering ethics classroom to provide students with ethical skills and cultural knowledge for engaging in public debates and for responsible decision making."31 "Science fiction can help students to ap- proach an understanding otherwise inaccessible, except through the realm of intuition, emotion, and imagination."32 Similar confirmations of the value of fiction in graduate professional ed- ucation exist in the fields of nursing,33 medicine,34 social work,35 psychol- ogy,36 and law.37 Certainly LIS should be among them. Applications in LIS Education With a strong theory base and significant examples in the academic litera- ture from other disciplines, a logical imperative exists to test this pedagogy in LIS education. For the past ten years, I have been using fiction in a vari- ety of library school courses. I came to the idea through my own belief in the power of story as well as a rather inescapable personal need to share lit- erature with library school students. Certainly the discovery of Robert Coles' work was significant and inspirational. Early forays into the peda- gogy convinced me that it was effective, and a quest began to support my positive results through research. I began to explore a wider theory base and to solicit student feedback, gathering data through quantitative and qualita- tive surveys. In one study,38 1 conducted focused interviews with individual students in an attempt to determine the essence of their learning experience as im- pacted by the use of fiction in a graduate library school course. Responses from subsequent brief surveys (Table 1 ) support the findings from the more in-depth study. Students enjoyed reading fiction for class and acknowl- edged that it enhanced their learning. They reported that reading fiction for the course stretched their thinking, gave them a chance to explore re- sponses through the discussions, and provided an excellent partner to the traditional academic course readings. Methodology In the first, more in-depth qualitative study,39 core themes of the experience of reading fiction for class were revealed through a phenomenological text
1 52 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science analysis process outlined by Clark Moustakas.40 Phenomenology, as a re- search paradigm which seeks to reveal and describe the essence of an expe- rience,41 proved to be an excellent approach to understanding more about the power of literature to teach in the professions. The Moustakas methodology calls for in-depth interviews which are transcribed and analyzed according to a systematic method of reduction and description; the overall goal is to discover the essential elements of the experience, or its essence. The researcher's own experience is "bracketed" in an attempt to eliminate bias.42 After preliminary analysis of the in-depth interviews, the researcher writes a composite description of the transcripts and identifies clusters of meanings, which lead to final identification of core themes and essences of the experience. The analysis process revealed the following core themes of the students' experience: • Characters - The participants established personal relationships with the characters from fiction, which enhanced learning on a variety of levels and extended experience. • Connections - The participants experienced connections between fiction and real life, and they expressed the ability of fiction to help make strong linkages between theory and practice. • Emotions - Well written fiction is vivid and emotional, which the participants described as being beneficial to their learning experience for a variety of reasons. The fiction touched the minds and hearts of the students at a depth beyond what purely informational material could reach. • Enjoyment - Many students enjoy reading fiction in general, and the experience of reading fiction for class was also very fun. Again, this was a benefit to learning. • Discussion - The discussion in the classroom provides for a framework, exposes and explores the connections to the course materials, and reveals a variety of nuances to the students' reactions to the texts. • Learning - Deeper / Longer Lasting. Combining the qualities of the experience already mentioned results in a deeper and more multidimensional learning experience. 43 These core themes provide compelling positive support for using fiction in LIS education. Each of these six core aspects of the students' experience as revealed in this study has been suggested and described in the scholar- ship of teaching literature from various disciplines, as previously refer- enced, and the subsequent surveys in this study also confirm these findings. In addition, this specific qualitative study has been further enhanced with numeric data from surveys administered to three subsequent groups of stu- dents. A simple survey was distributed to each group as a part of the final class session evaluation materials. In two cases, the course was a regular
Using Literature to Teach in LIS Education: A Very Good Idea 1 53 to
1 54 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science LIS graduate course (Groups B and C). One group of students (Group A), however, was a unique cohort of non-MLIS degree seeking students who were involved in a four-course, employer-sponsored continuing education series. The surveys were distributed to Group A as a separate handout at the end of the course, with an invitation to return the completed forms via U. S. mail. Groups B and C received the evaluation as part of the standard, anony- mous course evaluation at the end of the semester. Surveys for Groups B and C were distributed as separate forms and returned to the school's office as part of the sealed evaluation response packet. In each case, participation in the survey was strictly voluntary and completely anonymous. The same survey was distributed to all three groups, and asked simply ( 1 ) whether reading fiction for class had been enjoyable, and (2) whether the student felt his or her learning had been enhanced through the reading and discussion of fiction. Students were also given the opportunity to write ad- ditional comments on the bottom of the survey page. Table 1 shows the re- sults of the surveys. Examples of students' voluntary additional comments follow: • "Made me think more critically and 'outside the box'." • "Used imagination in addition to critical thinking skills to really make an impact." • "Many in our course would discuss our fiction reading later in the evening - it was a very strong aspect of the class!" • "It made me look at a possible future world and how it could be if we don't stay involved and make our voices heard on critical issues." • "The novel's value is longer lasting . . . than the articles. [The fiction] adds dimension and makes the academic text more relevant." • "Fiction gives readers an opportunity to step outside their own world and consider issues in a context more free from preconceived ideas or biases." • "The book discussion was fun - especially as applied to course topics." These enthusiastic results from students - not only in terms of added en- joyment from the use of fiction but also in terms of students' attitudes to- ward their learning - underscores the potential we have to incorporate works of literature in our teaching. Specific Examples of Literature in US Courses An obvious issue when considering using literature for a graduate level course is the material to be covered, and which works of fiction might en- able reflection and discussion of that material. For example, a significant aspect of LIS education is creating a broad understanding of the profes- sion's core values. Those values include intellectual freedom, equity of ac- cess, an individual's right to privacy, and stewardship of the human record. These and related issues are frequently introduced in a LIS program's intro-
Using Literature to Teach in US Education: A Very Good Idea 1 55 ductory course or covered in depth in courses such as Libraries in Society or Information Policy. Getting to know the characters in stories also helps bring the theories and issues in graduate education closer to the student. The study of censorship in the abstract, for example, is enhanced when you introduce a person or persons who live in a society where people are directly affected by censor- ship. Reading Fahrenheit 451 by Ray Bradbury introduces the student to characters who live in a society where the sharing of ideas is restricted to an extreme level. Getting to know the people who live in this situation and see- ing what their lives are like as a result of this political environment is an ex- cellent way to illustrate the positive democratic principle of freedom of expression. Reading within a certain framework, such as leadership, power, or the philosophies of information services, helps to prepare students for discus- sion and helps them to read the fiction for the most benefit in that particular context. Examples of literature which can provide effective discussions of these issues include George Orwell's 1984, Ray Bradbury's Fahrenheit 451 y Dai Sijie's Balzac and the Little Chinese Seamstress, and Josephine Tey's Daughter of Time. Students themselves frequently offer suggestions as well. Next, when considering the use of fiction in a course, how do you incor- porate the book or story into the course plan? Numerous options are avail- able, including large group discussion and small group discussion based on instructor generated questions. Students can also be responsible for con- tributing questions or can generate discussion based on an instruction to "Identify one statement or quote from the book that relates to our course topics." The discussion then comes specifically from their responses to the book. A more formal assignment such as a paper is also an option. Expanded Example Information Policy, a course included in the curriculum of many LIS schools, covers various aspects of the policy making process in regard to the regulation of information, within both organizations and governments. Discussions of organizational or bureaucratic policies can be dry and ab- stract, and yet regulations on the creation and dissemination of informa- tion, and on the individual's access to information, have a dramatic effect on personal autonomy and on the overall quality of life in society. Issues in Information Policy include privacy, security, information control and ac- cess, intellectual freedom, and stewardship of the human record. Those are precisely the issues addressed in George Orwell's novel 1984. Through the power of Orwell's story, the reader is drawn into a vicarious experience of living in a society where the restrictions of freedom are es- sentially all information restrictions: the main character Winston Smith is employed by the government to daily alter previously printed "news" and thus the human record. Facts (data and information) in his world are based
1 56 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science on the current moment's political agenda. Decisions about information cre- ation, dissemination, and access are made by the metaphorical Big Brother, and ultimately Winston himself is stripped of all his own personal truth through the total loss of intellectual and emotional autonomy. It is a bleak, bleak scenario, and it has no happy ending. The story is complex and full of rich illustrations perfect for our future information professionals. Policy decisions do matter. Outside actual travel to such a society, living through the characters in the story is our best chance to feel the impacts on life where there is com- plete and absolute external control of information. With 1984 included in the course syllabus, students begin Information Policy knowing the famous novel will be part of the course experience, and early into the course, refer- ences to Winston and his world are commonplace in our discussions as il- lustrations and cautionary-tale style comments. In addition to class discussion, students are responsible for a formal pa- per in which they select an information policy issue, analyze events and characters in 1984 in relation to that policy, and examine the human and so- cial consequences. The students are required to connect the characters and events in the story to our more academic and political course readings. The specific assignment reads as follows: Select one of the issues we've discussed in LIS 755: privacy, security, information commons, surveillance, data integrity, commercialization of information, informa- tion ownership, stewardship of the human record. Write a 7-9 page paper (double spaced) on the selected issue in general and its rele- vance in society. Include references to the issue as manifested in the characters and situations in 1984 which you think add dimension to your understanding. Describe what you think were consequences, intended and unintended, of specific policy deci- sions in 1984: What was the human impact? What was the impact on society? What do you think the long term future holds for this society as a result of the information pol- icy decisions? The student writing in these papers illustrates that the story does indeed make a lasting impact on their understanding of the dramatic effects infor- mation policy decisions have on society. Not all students, however, react positively to the use of fiction in my classes. It is infrequent, but students on occasion do complain about having to read literature in a graduate profes- sional program. Sadly, their reasons are consistently based on the idea that reading fiction is diminishing, and that it is of a lower standard than mate- rial from professional periodicals or monographs. This notion echoes Hoffman, who writes: Science seems to be afraid of storytelling, perhaps because it associates narrative with long, untestable yarns. Stories are perceived as "just" literature. Worse, stories are not reducible to mathematics, so they are unlikely to impress our peers. . . . But facts are mute. They generate neither the desire to understand, nor appeals for the pa- tronage that science requires, nor the judgment to do A instead of B, nor the will to overcome a seemingly insuperable failure. Actions, small or large, are taken at a cer- tain time by human beings - who are living out a story." 44
Using Literature to Teach in US Education: A Very Good Idea 1 57 Conclusion Using fiction in professional graduate education is an underutilized tool for expanded learning. We run the risk of losing the important human elements of our professions by focusing exclusively on mechanistic skills and the- ory. Literature has a unique capacity to touch our minds and hearts, and in the words of Robert Coles, to excite our moral imagination. It is a good time for exciting the moral imagination in LIS education. Ex- ponential technological change is creating new opportunities in informa- tion storage and retrieval, the essence of our professional role. But technological advancements have also created new threats to our profes- sional values, as it becomes ever easier to monitor and control information access and to manipulate data. We must educate librarians to be critical thinkers and reflective practitioners, to be flexible and creative. Many of our students are Readers, and we are educating them toward a profession steeped in literary culture. Exploiting the power of literature in our own classrooms is simply a very good idea. References and Notes 1 . Robert Fulford, The Triumph of Narrative: Storytelling in the Age of Mass Culture (New York: Broadway Books, 1999); Martha L. Hale, "Stories in the Workplace," Public Librar- ies 42, no. 3 (2003): 166-170. 2. Stephen Denning, The Springboard: How Storytelling Ignites Action in Knowledge-Era Organizations (Boston: Butterworth Heinemann, 2001). 3. Robert Coles, The Call of Stories: Teaching and the Moral Imagination (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1989); Robert Coles, Teaching Stories: An Anthology on the Power of Learning and Literature (New York: Random House, 2004). 4. St. John's College, Academic Program available at http://www.stjohnscollege.edu. Ac- cessed July 12, 2006. 5. Coles, The Call of Stories. 6. Jerome Bruner, Acts of Meaning. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1990, 4. 7. Ibid., 14. 8. Jerome Bruner, Narrative and Paradigmatic Modes oi I nought, In Learning and leach- ing the Ways of Knowing, edited by E. Eisner, 97-1 15 (Chicago: National Society for the Study of Education, 1984), 98. 9. Bruner, Acts of Meaning; Bruner, "Narrative and Paradigmatic Modes of Thought." 10. Burner, Acts of Meaning, 138. 1 1 . Quoted in Evelyn Fox Keller, A Feeling For the Organism: The Life and Work of Barbara McClintock (New York: W.H. Freeman and Company, 1983), 145. 12. Ibid, 150. 13. Ibid, 201. 1 4. Bruno Latour, Science in Action: How to Follow Scientists and Engineers Through Society. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1987), and "Bruno Latour" in Wikipedia.org, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bruno_Latour. Accessed July 12, 2006. 15. Roald Hoffmann, "Storied Theory," American Scientist 93, no. 4 (2005). Available at: http://www.americanscientist.org/template/AssetDetail/assetid/44518 . Accessed July 12, 2006.
1 58 Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 16. Albert Einstein, "On a Heuristic Viewpoint Concerning the Production and Transforma- tion of Light," Annalen der Physik 1 7(1905): 1 32-148. 17. Hoffmann. 1 8. John Dewey, Experience and Education: 60th Anniversary Edition. (West Lafayette, IN: Kappa Delta Pi, 1998). 19. David Kolb, Experiential Learning: Experience As the Source of Learning and Develop- ment (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1984). 20. Ibid., 41. 2 1 . Paul H. Hirst, Knowledge and the Curriculum (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1 974). 22. The cognitive -affective connection in higher education is receiving great interest within the scholarship of teaching and learning community. See, for example, the work of Dr. Randall Bass and others, including The Journal of Cognitive Affective Learning and The Center for Cognitive-Affective Learning, Oxford College of Emory University, http://www.cfkeep.org/html/snapshot.php7ids45306087/. Accessed July 12, 2006. 23. Dorothy Walsh, Literature and Knowledge (Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press, 1969). 24. Ibid., 11. 25. Louise Rosenblatt, Literature as Exploration, 5th ed. (New York: The Modern Language Association of America, 1995). 26. Coles, The Call of Stories. 27. Ibid., 129. 28. Ibid. 29. Dwight Waldo, The Novelist On Organization and Administration: An Inquiry Into the Re- lationship Between Two Worlds (Berkeley, C A: Institute of Governmental Studies, 1968). 30. Ibid., 5. 3 1 . Rosalyn W. Berne and Joachim Schummer, 'Teaching Societal and Ethical Implications of Nanotechnology to Engineering Students Through Science Fiction," Bulletin of Science, Technology & Society 25, no. 6 (December 2005): 459. 32. Ibid., 462. 33. Nadine Nehls, "Narrative pedagogy: Rethinking nursing education," Journal of Nursing Education, 34 (1995): 204-210; Júrate A. Sakalys, "Literary Pedagogy in Nursing: A The- ory-Based Perspective" Journal of Nursing Education 41, no. 9 (September 2002): 386-392; M. Siegel and C. Siegel, "The Use of Literature in Professional Nursing Educa- tion," Nursing Forum 16 (1977): 156-164; Ann C. Stowe and Lorraine C. Igo, "Learning From Literature: Novels, Plays, Short Stories, and Poems in Nursing Education," Nurse Educator 21, no. 5 (1996): 16-19; Jill Winland-Brown, "Can Caring For Critically 111 Pa- tients Be Taught by Reading a Novel?" Nurse Educator 21, no. 5 (1996): 23-27. 34. K. C. Caiman et al., "Literature and Medicine: A Short Course for Medical Students," Med- ical Education 22, no. 4 (1988): 265-269; Rita Charon et al., "Literature and Medi- cine - Contributions to Clinical Practice." Annals of Internal Medicine 122 no. 8 (1995): 599-606; Kathryn Montgomery Hunter, Rita Charon, and Jack Coulehan, "The Study of Literature and Medical Education," Academic Medicine 70, no. 9 (1995): 787-794. 35. Susan R. Brooker Gross, 'Teaching About Race, Gender, Class, and Geography Through Fiction," Journal of Geography in Higher Education 15, no. 1 (1991): 35-47. 36. Chris J. Boyatzis, "Let the Caged Bird Sing: Using Literature to Teach Developmental Psy- chology," Teaching of Psychology 19, no. 4 ( 1 992): 221-222; L. Dodge Fernald, "Of Wind- mills and Rope Dancing: The Instructional Value of Narrative Structures," Teaching of Psychology 14, no. 4 (1987): 214-216; Michael E. Gorman, "Using the Eden Express To Teach Introductory Psychology," Teaching of Psychology 11, no. 1 (1984): 39-40; Lyle Grant, "Psychology and Literature: A Survey of Courses," Teaching of Psychology 14, no.
Using Literature to Teach in US Education: A Very Good Idea 1 59 2 (1987): 86-88; Robert V. Levine, "An Interdisciplinary Course Studying Psychological Issues Through Literature," Teaching of Psychology 10, no. 4 (1 983): 214-216; Mike Mar- low et al. "Utilizing Literary Texts in Teacher Education to Promote Positive Attitudes To- ward Children With Emotional and Behavioral Disorders," Behavioral Disorders 22, no. 3 (1997): 152-159; P. R. J. Simons, "Instructing With Analogies," Journal of Educational Psychology 74, no. 3 ( 1 984): 5 1 3-527; Kerry C. Williams and Joseph Kolupke, "Psychol- ogy and Literature: An Interdisciplinary Approach to the Liberal Curriculum," Teaching of Psychology 13, no. 2 (1986): 59-61. 37. Dena S. Davis, "Tell Me A Story: Using Short Fiction in Teaching Law and Bioethics, Journal of Legal Education 47, no. 2 (1997): 240-245; Stephen Gillers, "Against The Wall," Journal of Legal Education 43, no. 3 (1993): 405-411; William Glaberson, "Best-Seller Account of a Lawsuit Spurs Law School Change," New York Times, December 26, 1998:A1,A12. 38. Katherine G. Marek, "The Experience of Using Fiction for Graduate Professional Educa- tion: A Phenomenological Study," (Ph.D. Diss., Emporia State University, 1999). 39. Ibid. 40. Clark Moustakas, Phenomenological Research Methods (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Pub- lications, 1994). 41. Moustakas; see also John Creswell, Qualitative Inquiry and Research Design: Choosing Among Five Traditions (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 1998). 42. Moustakas, 33-36; Creswell, 235-237. 43. Marek, 121. 44. Hoffmann.