Good morning, and thank you all for being at this most important conference. I appreciate that this is the second in a series of opportunities to talk about the issues of diversity and inclusion, and I am grateful to the University of Maryland and its fine faculty. The ALA diversity report (American Library Association 2012) lists a total of 118,666 credentialed librarians, of whom 6,160 are African American and 3,661 are Latino. That means about 8% of working librarians represent more than 40% of our population. In 1990, we had 120,365 librarians, of whom 7,423 were African American and 2,266 Latino. After 20 years, we had fewer librarians and a smaller percentage of librarians of color. Even worse, there were only 563 African American males, 5% of the total number of African American librarians in 2010. What is wrong with this picture? I am not suggesting that diversity is only about race. Diversity is not about color, gender, age, language, sexual orientation, or socioeconomic status—it’s about all of these things. If we don’t ensure that our libraries have frontline professionals who reflect the nature of the communities with which they work, then we will lose those valuable patrons to the back fence. They will turn instead to a neighbor who looks just like them, regardless of whether or not they receive valid information from that person. This situation doesn’t help create a sustainable future for libraries, nor does it help build a literate and knowledgeable citizenry. Encouraging diversity is one of the most important things we do as educational institutions. Education is really about intellectual diversity: looking at things differently. Sometimes librarians and staff reflect the diversity of the people they serve, yet sometimes it seems that we are going backward, with fewer librarians from diverse backgrounds. I believe that if we take action now, we can ensure that in the future, our library and information professionals will mirror the people they serve. To get us started, let me explore five ideas that I’ve been thinking about. First, let’s discuss the concept of going beyond mere equity of access. If we truly want to be inclusive, that means every format, every type of information, should be available anytime to anyone. The real issue at the bottom of the iceberg is that diversity without inclusion means nothing. Every message we construct must say, “You are welcome here.” Assortment, difference, distinctiveness, medley, unlikeness, variance, variety, and variegation are all synonyms for diversity. Note that not one of these terms includes the concept of quotas or force of any kind. Diversity is the natural state. Homogeneity, sameness, similarity, and uniformity are unnatural. We want to get to the point where diversity is not an issue and our environments are all-inclusive, welcoming, and based on integrity and justice. As stated by the Association of American Colleges and Universities (n.d.), inclusion refers to “the active, intentional, and ongoing engagement with diversity in ways that increase one’s awareness, content knowledge, cognitive sophistication, and empathic understanding of the complex ways individuals interact within institutions.” Inclusion is the act of creating environments in which any individual or group can feel welcomed, respected, supported and valued. Second, the methods we use to measure access for and service to specific populations are not adequate. We need new tools to tell the story of inclusion. For example, we don’t know the costs of inaccurate information or how lack of access may harm our social structures. I think this may be the most difficult challenge we face, and I am not sure how we solve it. Third, we need a rationale for change, and sometimes it is difficult to effect change. Academics are not designed to turn on a dime; we’ve worn the same outfits for 300 years! An essential part of what we do as library and information professionals continues to be connecting people with the information that they need. It is difficult to “train” for such a huge range of needs, yet we must meet the challenge. We must be flexible and better able to adopt new practices. Fourth, we need to grow our own future. The best solution I know is to recruit the best and brightest, adding sensitivity to diversity to deep understanding of user needs. That means recruiting diverse faculty, staff, and students and then providing an environment of inclusion so they can thrive and survive. And that means we need scholarships and support for faculty research. In our role as teachers, we need to insist that information literacy for everyone be a core requirement and that it include all types of literacy, from health and financial to media and political literacy. To do this effectively, we need a deep understanding of the societal value of diverse populations and the contributions they make to our cultural heritage. One way of doing this is to provide internships and service learning opportunities in a variety of environments. We cannot underestimate the value of being immersed in a community and providing needed services that match the population served. As we grow our own future, we need to cultivate future LIS faculty with research agendas that deal with issues of inclusion and the value of diverse LIS professionals. Mega Subramaniam and Paul Jaeger are doing a great job at the University of Maryland, and we need to emulate their strategies. My fifth and final suggestion is to develop a common research agenda that will provide longitudinal and impact data. Let’s start with the ABCs and build the Inclusive Research Agenda in which A includes research on Access, Attitudes, Attention, and Attraction to Funders; B focuses on Best Practices for recruitment, retention, and measuring impact; and C concentrates on Collections, Communities, and Captioning. Using these ABCs, we can assess attitudes, community needs, equity of access, needs of our funders, and sustainability of policies that create inclusive environments. In conclusion, diversity recruitment must become a top priority to ensure that our graduates will reflect the populations that they will serve. When we get such students, we can’t risk losing them or not preparing them for jobs that may change by the second with unfunded mandates, new technologies for communication, and unknown challenges. The following are a few images (figs. 1–4) that tell our story in Carolina.1 Basically, they illustrate our Diversity and Inclusion Mantra: “Reflect who you serve; plan how to do it; do it; evaluate it; live it; have an advisory group; have scholarships available; provide for the differently abled; include local celebrities and the student body; and tell everyone, every chance you have, at state and national events, the story of your success.” Figure 1.  Provide opportunities for your faculty to be all-inclusive. Figure 2.  Keep an active and informed advisory group, and listen to it. Figure 3.  Encourage presentations at professional associations. Figure 4.  Build scholarship opportunities at every chance. In closing, let me say that building an environment that is inclusive and diverse is never finished. There are no quotas to fill, no numbers to attain. When everyone has a voice and the opportunity to share their thoughts, it is good. So, that is my hope for the future. What is yours?