THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Volume VII JULY 1937 Number 3 TOMORROW' HARRY MILLER LYDENBERG IS TOMORROW more important than today? How much control have we over either? How are both affected by yesterday? How much ought we to think about each? Do librarians differ in this respect from the rest of the world? Is an occasional glance at the past a futile worship of antiquarian- ism? All fair enough as questions but certainly not for final deci- sion here or now. They may, however, serve to suggest that dreaming about the future is not necessarily wasteful and that a prudent man frequently checks yesterday with today for a view of tomorrow. Readers, every librarian will agree, are now much keener for help in social and technical problems than they were a genera- tion ago. Dogmatic theology, dominant until the fifties, has lost its rank. How long before our children will look at our present- day interest in social and economic theory and practice with the same detachment we now give to studies of the Pelagian or Sabellian heresies? Our books have had much the same shapes, forms-almost the same sizes-for five hundred years. How long before they I Part of a paper on library development given before the Harvard Library Club, February 17, 1936. 301
302 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY change radically as to method of manufacture, form, size, use? I am not daring enough to fix that date, but I am sure it will face us sooner or later, sure that the librarian today cannot af- ford to neglect thinking about the librarian of yesterday or to- morrow. Library work is a trilogy of people, books, equipment; and the people in the book world divide themselves again into the three groups of author, reader, librarian the latter serving as connecting agent. The author is not in question here. He will undoubtedly write books in the future as he has in the past, partly because he cannot help it, partly because his friends or his publishers (implying there, of course, no antagonistic grouping) urge him. The reader is certainly playing a larger part in the interest of the librarian now than he has in the past. An attention is today given to his needs both in the writing and in the manufacturing of books far beyond that of a generation ago. No doubt his needs were recognized in those earlier years; perhaps the chief change today is that expression of those needs has become more vocal, more systematically set forth. Previous to Dean William S. Gray's Reading interests and habits of adults, published in 1929, the principal studies on the subject of reading interests had been carried on by teachers in- vestigating the reading habits of students in elementary and high schools. In Dean Gray's very full Bibliography on the sub- ject he notes one study, Reading tastes of high school pupils, carried out in i902. After I920, various articles appeared in li- brary journals and other periodicals on such subjects as "Chang- ing fashions in dime novel substitutes," or "What do you read?" but by far the greatest research continued to be done in the field of student reading until the advent of E. L. Thorndike's book on Adult learning (i928), followed by Gray's study al- ready mentioned. An article by Mrs. Helen T. Steinbarger on "Reading interest studies," appearing in the Booklist of the American Library Association for July, I934, summarizes the work done since I928. The interest in readable books started in I926 with the li-
TOMORROW 303 brarians discussing the need for humanized literature (Libraries and adult education), possibly instigated by J. H. Robinson's Humanizing of knowledge, which was published in I923. Miss Felsenthal's list of Readable books in many subjects was published in 1929. Since then Mr. Chancellor, Miss Tompkins, and Dr. Bryson have written various articles on the subject, and finally Dean Gray's book What makes a book readable (1935) reports the findings of his scientific study of objective methods of evalu- ating the readability of books. Remember the sweep and scope of the "Reading with a pur- pose" series published by the American Library Association. Consider, too, the time and thought the school men have given to investigation of reading ability, to methods of improvement for children in school and for adults with school long behind them. Studies of reading ability have covered whole commu- nities, special groups, and adult education classes. Half-a-dozen libraries in various parts of the country have by observation, by questionnaire, and by intensive study sought to learn why readers come to the library, for what purpose their reading was done, what success they had, what difficulties they encoun- tered. There is no doubt that the reader is being observed and studied more carefully now than ever before. For the librarian) too, the past generation has unquestion- ably seen a marked change in point of view. There is today an emphasis on the need of training that was felt by comparatively few forty years ago. The growth of library schools needs no comment. Here and there a prejudice against them still may linger, a glance askance still be their normal reception. But that will pass. We see today an increasing fear of intrusting the library field to untrained workers. This changed point of view has unquestionably developed from the profession itself rather than from outside pressure. It is an appreciation of the opportunity, nay the necessity, felt by the people who do the work. There is no doubt as to its future. What form it will take, however, offers another opportunity for thought and speculation. We all have seen the school men show how keenly they feel the necessity for lessening, the atten-
304 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY tion to mere technique, the necessity for emphasizing the study of broader principles. Specialization in training and in later work has made itself evident in our calling quite as much as in the fields of medicine, law, or engineering. The benefits have been equally great, and the dangers are equally threatening. One of the problems for the next generation of librarians and for those responsible for library schools will unquestionably be how to provide trained people capable of handling specific problems of library work and possessed at the same time of foundations wide enough and in- spirations comprehensive enough to keep them from limiting their horizons to the particular tasks before them. Faced with such a problem, the medical world developed the hospital intern. Some of us have come to feel that a similar system is called for in the library field, giving the man who has had his training in the schoolroom and in the laboratory some means of tasting, testing, trying various phases of library work before he finally settles down to cultivation of the particular field he finds most responsive to his particular capabilities. The hand of the government or organized society has, within the memory of each of us, come to touch the librarian in a more intimate fashion than would have been dreamed of not so long ago. New York has joined Wisconsin and North Carolina and other states in requiring certification for librarians in posts paid from public funds. Massachusetts, I believe, has talked about this, though no decision has been reached. Emergency or work- relief projects recently have sent thousands of workers into li- brary circles. The national association of librarians is going through the stress and strain of deciding whether it ought to stand by its resolution adopted a year or two ago recommending increased attention to library service by the federal govern- ment. It makes little difference whether we approve of or deplore this tendency. Tomorrow will undoubtedly see more of it than did yesterday. Just how much more, and just what the effects are to be on the body politic and on the librarian, are questions that students of political science and government can answer
TOMORROW 305 with more accuracy and finality than I. But of the fact there certainly can be no question. LIBRARY EQUIPMENT The tendency today in design of library buildings seems to indicate an increasing emphasis on the desirability of a central storage space with special reading-rooms and study-rooms ar- ranged around it. In this, as in most other human affairs, the pendulum will probably swing to and fro, giving us a chance now and then to see library buildings favor the H form, shift to interior courts or a central stack core, or swing to something totally different. There is nothing ultimate, of course, in the precise form of the building. It must be adapted to the needs of the community it serves and the region that uses it. There is no doubt, however, that all our future buildings will have a control of air and light far beyond our fondest dreams. Physical control of the air, to say nothing of sound, will certain- ly follow in the library as it develops in the commercial and in- dustrial world. There will undoubtedly be more attention to the needs of the staff-more restrooms, recreation facilities, locker space, lunchrooms, etc.-all so obvious as to call for nothing more than mention. The library in larger centers must unquestionably face an increase in the mechanical handling of books and readers, regretfully leaving to the smaller institu- tions the personal contact the fortunate librarian in such a post is able to make between book and reader. THE CONTROL OF BOOKS ON THE SHELVES In the control of books on the shelves it is safe to say that the problems of classification will probably. loom as less important in principle than they did a generation ago. Looking backward, we recall the missionary zeal-the crusading eloquence-with which the Dewey Decimal System, the Cutter Expansive Alpha- betical System, the systems brought forward by Schwartz in New York and Perkins in San Francisco, all had their claims and advantages proclaimed on every occasion that offered. As a practical matter the problems of classification as a sys-
306 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY tem have been simplified by the increasing use of the cards printed by the Library of Congress, all supplied with Library of Congress Classification and many with DC marks. The tend- ency with all of us probably will be to work toward broader groupings, more elastic divisions, more ready recognition that we are part of a rapidly changing world, more recognition that ultimate reliance must be made on the staff and the catalog. And with mention of the catalog we have what is one of the most important problems facing the new generation, the young- er people. Let us hope they will solve it in more satisfactory fashion than we have done. Just see where we are today. Eng- lish, French, and German national libraries are all demonstrat- ing their belief in the desirability, not to say finality, of the author record in form of the printed volume. The Vatican Li- brary, to be sure, has given unqualified adherence to the card catalog as a satisfactory mechanism. Here, in this country, the printed catalog in book form now is almost a museum specimen, and yet none of us can fail to pay tribute to the skill, the sympathy, the scholarship, the un- derstanding displayed by such men as Charles Ammi Cutter in his Boston Athenaeum catalog, and by the compilers of the long series of catalogs issued by the Boston Public Library, the Peabody catalog in Baltimore, the Surgeon General's catalog from Washington, and the annotated catalog of the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh. The past forty years, however, have seen us all swing unquestionably into the field of the card catalog. When we consider the millions of cards that are now stored away in Washington, we see the problem that has been created for the trained or the untrained reader who works with the catalog of a large collection trying to learn what the library has on such a subject as the World War, or aviation, or philosophy-anything you please. The card catalog is admirable for keeping its information up to date in a form readily used if the reader has accurate knowledge of the precise title or the precise phase of the subject he is look- ing for. The latter side of the problem, however, is complicated by the fact that he must be sure his definition of his phase is the same as that of the maker of the catalog. The reader has the
TOMORROW 307 difficulty of fingering large masses of cards. The librarian has the difficulty of either keeping these cards clean or reprinting them when worn and soiled. The card catalog is unquestion- ably elastic, flexible, a devourer of space and of time in consulta- tion. It escapes the manufacturing costs of the printed catalog, but it is more expensive to admin'ister. Some of us have felt that, if large libraries retain the card catalog, they will sooner or later have to divide it into groups for the average or unsophisticated reader with simple demands, and separate groups for the man making a comprehensive survey of a whole category or faculty. (To a certain extent we do this now, of course: for example, when we arrange our sub- ject cards by date of publication or date of composition, putting into a separate group all books before I900 or I920.) The reader with any experience in the use of a large card catalog today must frequently realize that he can get best results by referring first to printed catalogs, bibliographies, or some other similar forms of aid, and supplementing this preliminary delving by his fingering of the cards. Perhaps we may be coming to a period when our large collec- tions will be forced to adopt the printing of author catalogs, cumulated from time to time and supplemented by subject guides covering limited fields and limited periods of time. To a certain extent the Harvard and Boston Public Library bulletins of a generation ago offered an encouraging solution to this cata- loging problem. Harvard has substituted the charming Harvard Library notes for the bulletin; and the Boston Public Library bulletin confines itself today to the listing of new books, with comments on and reviews of some of the more striking titles. In connection with this cataloging problem, the growth of recognition of the necessity for increased indexing and abstract- ing of periodicals is noteworthy. In 1893 there were about twenty printed indexes of periodicals available in the whole field of Western scholarship. Today, forty years later, we have between two hundred and three hundred, of which we certainly can count from seventy-five to one hundred as of major impor- tance.
308 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY To us it is instructive to see the recognition of the importance of this tool paid by American librarians and their early emer- gence in the field. Fortschritie der Physik began in I845, the Chemisches Centralblatt in i 85o, and the Zoological record in I864. It was in I8S3, however, that William Frederick Poole first introduced his Index to the public, and work on that had really begun four or five years earlier. It was in 1879 that Dr. John Shaw Billings began in Washington his Index medicus, bringing to fruition a task which he, like Poole, had begun sev- eral years earlier. The comparatively recent growth of union lists of periodicals, government serials, and newspapers, and the continued efforts to increase co-operative cataloging, are worth remarking. Print- ed indexes to the contents of books and periodicals have grown so strikingly in the last generation or two that we are sure their multiplication and development will continue. The question of research and the publication of its results is causing concern among producing investigators as well as among librarians. Sometimes it looks as though a monster machine had been roused or created, strong and powerful when properly controlled but with an inherent or implied threat if the grasp on the steering wheel or the pressure on the feed valve shows weakness or hesitation, like Goethe's Zauberlehrling when he forgot the word of control. It is certainly beyond the power of the average man today to give attention to the mass published in his own specialty, saying nothing about related and cognate but somewhat distant fields. Is he to throw his hands up in de- spair? Or is some new mechanism to be developed? Many graduate students are delving deep; the stream of peri- odicals and journals and series and studies sweeps on with ever growing volume and force; the injunction is constantly "Pro- duce," "Produce!" Industry rejoices in the research bureaus set up for many phases of scientific investigation, from electric communication and cellulose utilization to poultry oils and but- ter fats. Academic and industrial research is glimpsing how much duplication is evident-harmless, even useful, when fol- lowed primarily as gymnastic exercise; wasteful of time and
TOMORROW 309 effort when two strive for the same results, each ignorant that- the other is in the field. Industry, to be sure, occasionally looks at all this research activity as a race, with a crown for the victor at the goal, warn- ing the participant, however, to train in secret and say nothing until the patent shall be granted or the paper published. Per- haps the tendency today is toward more co-operation, more friendly rivalry, less stealthy cultivation of trade or professional secret attitude than was common a few years past. Common sense tells us that sooner or later the necessity for a clearinghouse for information about these projects will be recog- nized. A projector may stake out a claim proof against the world if he files notice at some central point and shows evidence of reasonable acitivity in working that claim. It will fall back into the public domain after a certain period unless he demon- strates that he is actually trying to do something worth while. So, too, it will become increasingly necessary that the results already attained in a given subject be set forth by a trained and competent surveyor or timber-cruiser before the investigator begins work in the field or laboratory. Similar surveys and eval- uations must follow at convenient or helpful intervals. This is being done in some libraries today by the library staff itself or by assistants trained in library methods and paid for by an outside agency. Tomorrow will undoubtedly see more of this kind of work than yesterday or today. There is no question on that point, except as to details. The end and the aim are as plain as a pikestaff, as certain as summer. Another phase of the catalog problem is its cost. What does a library spend on its catalog records? A tenth, a quarter, a half of the salary allotment? What ought it to spend? Answers to the first questions are a simple matter of arithmetic. To settle the last one will call for more time and thought than have hith- erto been given by any librarian I know. The question deserves more study and undoubtedly will receive it. Another change in our point of view, as compared with that of the past generation, is the increased attention paid to the gathering and preserving of ephemeral material. Pamphlets
310 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY have always been with us, broadsides too; it is almost a certain- ty that the librarian of tomorrow in a research collection will be struggling with his pamphlets, his broadsides, his leaflets, to a degree his predecessors never approached. TREATING THE INCREASING VOLUME OF PRINT This all means undoubtedly that the book stock will normally continue to double every twenty years in the usual university or research library. For the circulation collection the problem is less acute, because of wear and tear. For the research collec- tion there may perhaps be some-shall I say relief? or distress? -in the fact that much of the book stock since 1870 will disap- pear sooner or later because of the poor paper it was printed on. There is also the certainty that an increased use of books pro- duced or reproduced on film will lessen the demands for storage space. But it surely means that, even if the storage space does not double every twenty years, there will be insistent demand for more storage facilities. The inevitable step is, of course, an increased mechanization of the storage and delivery of books. The next consequence is that there will be greater reliance on the catalog and on the printed indexes, decreased reliance on the classified groups put at the reader's command, and increased cost of operation. Carry this doubling on every two decades for any length of time and we soon reach a realm of fantastic or astronomical magnitude. One element of relief will unquestionably come in the recognition of the necessity for greater selectivity, greater specialization in additions. The next generation will probably see fewer comprehensive collections of books and a greater num- ber of small centers in fields of lesser circuit. The problem of book storage and mechanical care of books offers an analogy to the problem of elevator transportation in- side a modern office building. By increasing the number of ele- vators, the number of floors can be increased. If this is carried on indefinitely, however, the elevators have to carry so much dead weight in shape of equipment or have to use so much valu- able floor space as to call a halt on their increase.
TOMORROW 311 It was President Eliot of Harvard who called for a storage warehouse, for a separation between dead books and live books. His suggestion raised a storm of protest, everyone standing up to ask how he or anyone else could say that a given book was ever dead or might not probably be wanted some time or other. This protest was adequately voiced in the report of the commit- tee of the Harvard faculty drawn up not so long after President Eliot made his suggestion at the Magnolia meeting of the Amer- ican Library Association in I902. However, President Eliot in this as in other fields demon- strated his foresight and his intelligence. The time is not far distant when we shall perforce have to divide our books not so much into classes of live and dead ones as rather into classes of extensive immediate use and more limited and more distant use. Is it a wild dream to think that some day, perhaps, New England libraries will have a central storehouse, say in the Con- necticut Valley, not so far from Springfield, not more than a day's march for most places, offering opportunity for speedy daily transference of books? Another place, perhaps halfway between New York and Philadelphia, for the libraries in that region? Other storage warehouses in other parts of the coun- try ? There is, of course, the disadvantage of delay in access to specific titles, meaning a wait perhaps of twenty-four hours for a book, or a trip to the storehouse. There is always the increased wear and tear due to transportation. And perhaps even more important is the psychological effect on the reader's attitude toward the library and its service, for he will certainly oppose a change until he has become accustomed to it. The advantages are equally obvious: (i) the increased speed and ease of access to the stock kept in the central building; (2) the lessened wear and tear due to less crowded shelves and less frequent shiftings; (3) the increased health-or decreased harm -for the books stored in places distant from the industrial pol- lution inevitable in our larger cities; (4) the advantages of pooled resources, if these reservoirs can care for the stock of a given region. Farther on we shall consider how increased facil-
312 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY ities of transportation, increased ease of telephone connection, and the possibilities in such things as television will unquestion- ably affect this problem of storage. While we are dealing with things of such magnitude, let us compare the costs of library service today with those of the not- too-distant past and attempt to project these comparisons into the future. Taking, for instance, the New York Public Library not quite forty years ago (for the fiscal year of I896/7-the first it is fair to compare with later years) we find it spent for books $52,474.76, for salaries $63,8I4.07, all other expenses add- ing to a total of $I43,236.79. For the calendar year I935 it spent, in its reference department, for books and prints $I72,- 142.28, more than three times the I896 record; for salaries $1,I59,688.42, about eighteen times as much as forty years ago -a total, with everything else added, of $1,5II,705.54, over ten times as much. The corresponding figures for Yale University Library run as follows: for books in I 896/7 it spent $ I 3,437.7 1, for salaries $12,680.94, and with all other expenses a total of $30,467.oo. For 1934/5 the corresponding figures are $85,- 436.97 for books, more than six times as much as in I896; $282,713.28 for salaries, a twenty-fold advance; for all expenses $46i,171.I3, fifteen times as much. Harvard in I896 spent for books $I9,604, for salaries $27,390, all other expenses $8,698-a total of $55,692. For I935 it spent for books $88,955, a four-and-a-half-fold advance; for salaries $163,995, nearly six times as much; all other expenses $99,ii9, more than ten times as much; total $352,o6g, an almost seven- times advance. Is it fair to assume that forty years hence we shall have the same geometrical increase? NEW INVENTIONS AND THE LIBRARY OF THE FUTURE And that brings us to a consideration of the effect on the li- brary of new developments in science and industry. Forty years ago our library records were either entirely manuscript or a combination of manuscript entries and printed forms. Our cata- logs were mainly printed books or manuscript cards, though a
TOMORROW 313 few did show cards reproduced by some of the gelatin processes. There were at least three sizes of cards in use, perhaps more. Today we see manuscript records only where typing or print- ing is impossible, and those are rare cases. Our catalogs are primarily on cards, standardized as to size. Thanks to the vision of Dr. Putnam and the Library of Congress staff, these cards are printed today in such large numbers as to make it wasteful to use anything but Library of Congress cards when they are available. And when it is not feasible to print cards, we reproduce them by mimeograph, multigraph, photograph-manuscript entries be- ing so few as to call for explanation or justification. And we are satisfied with these records ! Just think for a moment, however, of the way the combina- tion of the mechanical punching of cards and the use of the electric current have revolutionized the making of records in the fields of statistics and industry. Why has the library world never applied these methods to its problems? How long do we have to wait before a reader is able in this way to identify the cards in the whole catalog which record the particular topic he is searching for? These developments are bound to come. Just when or how or where is something perhaps librarians can an- swer. Though we librarians may not head the procession in this re- spect, we are not shamefully far in the rear as to telephone serv- ice, which is now taken for granted as part of the normal library equipment. The time is not long past, however, when it was necessary to put on one's hat and walk to the library to renew a book, to verify a quotation, to check on an author's birthday. Recently the staff at our information desk at the New York Public Library was asked to record the questions the telephone shot at them for one typical, normal hour, as near the average as possible. Here are a few of the questions: Do you have Brassow on medals and orders? Have you a list of art schools in New York City? Which Turner wrote on Electricity and heat? What is the form of address for a monsignor?
314 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY What is the origin and meaning of "boondoggle"? What information about individuals does the City directory give? Where can I hire lantern slides on scientific subjects? What does "droshky" mean? What is the correct spelling of Irvin S. Cobb's first name? How far back does your file of Jersey City directories go? What is the meaning of "dermetics"? Exact dates of death of Edward VII and Queen Victoria. What have you on gambling games, particularly faro? What does the quotation "Hinds of spring" [identified as "Hounds of spring"] refer to and come from? What has the library about Dr. Janeway, a well-known physician of the early nineties? In writing to an earl do I begin "Dear Earl"? Where can I get complete information about the Society of Arts and Sci- ences? Why is part of the Monroe Doctrine printed in italics in the textbook I'm using? Who publishes Scottish bankers magazine and where? Twenty in one hour, one every three minutes! If that number is multiplied by the thirteen hours the desk is manned each day, some idea is had of public service the past generation never dreamed of. Is there any reason to assume that the next genera- tion is not to see equal, if not greater, development? How soon are we to see television applied to long-distance reference work? A man today can sit at home and have the librarian tell him over the telephone what the World almanac records as the vote for representative in a given congressional district in i88o and 1932. It certainly will not be long before some means will be developed by which the librarian will put a given book in some kind of a machine and permit a man sitting in home or office to refer to it, if not to read it at length. The phonograph, the dictaphone, the slide rule are so common inside library walls as to call for scarcely passing comment. Some of us, I fancy, cannot recall when the photostat and other photographic equipment were not a normal part of library equipment. A few can go back to days when libraries had no such thing within their walls nor any dream that such things would ever face them. The importance, however, of the photo-
TOMORROW 315 stat and other photographic means of reproduction in library work needs no comment here. It is interesting to note, however, that it was a Yankee from the Green Mountain State, Henry Stevens of Vermont, who nearly seventy years ago saw a vision and, after ten years of experimenting, printed at London in 1878 his Photo-Bibliography; or, A word on printed card cata- logues of old rare beautiful and costly books and how to make them on a cooperative system and Two words on the establishment of a central bibliographical bureau or clearing house for librarians. The significant development of the technique of the use of reduced film-i 6, 35, or 70 mm.-has aided research by provid- ing an inexpensive and simple method of reproduction and dis- tribution. It will certainly aid in easing the problem of storage. It is said that new developments in this field make it not fan- tastic to believe that soon we shall be able to reproduce a whole book of normal octavo size on a 3 Xg card. This reduced film will aid in the systematic development of a collection. Librarians everywhere have been systematically checking recognized bibliographies to locate copies of books not on their shelves. This, followed up by a moderate expenditure of money for photostat or photographic or film reproductions, leads to the realization that in certain groups librarians may look with equanimity on a request for presentation of a given text. If it cannot be given the reader in the original, it certainly can be handed him in some form of reproduction. This new technique will also aid in systematic reproduction of books printed since 1870, on paper too poor to last but with messages too important to lose permanently, though perhaps not of suffi- cient importance to justify commercial reprinting or reproduc- tion. It is amusing to look at the new problem these unusual tech- niques develop. We now frequently divide our staff adminis- tratively into those charged with the care of printed books, manuscripts, maps, prints, etc. Who, pray tell, is to care for a typewritten document? It is unquestionably manuscript; it is unquestionably printed. It cannot go to both departments. What effect are these new films to have on these divisions into
3I6 THE LIBRARY tUARTERLY departments? Will the care of films be so special, call for such particular skill, as to urge the development of a department or division of films? Or will these records be stored in the standard bookstack? The makers of films tell us today that films must have satisfactory control of temperature and humidity if they are to have any hope of permanence. Does this mean speedy air conditioning for the whole bookstack? Or are the films to be kept in a separate storeroom? Well, what is the answer? What does it all mean? "Ships are but boards," Shylock says, "and sailors men." It would be natural for the librarian to cap that line by adding that books are but paper sheets sprinkled with lampblack. Absolutely true, but absolutely misleading. Back of the ship is the spirit of designer and commander. Back of the book is the spirit of the man with the message, the spirit of the reader hungry to see or hear it. That spirit has been with us long enough to makeuus sure that no matter whether we know what books will look like three hundred years from now, no matter whether we know how they will be shelved or read or used, we are sure that books in some form will play as important a part in the intellectual and cultural life of the community then as they do now, as they have done for the past three hundred years. And the librarian will play as important and as responsi- ble a part in their interpretation as he has for the past three hun- dred years.