Inducing Attitudinal Change Among Librarians CAROL L. KRONUS ABSTRACT Using the semantic differential, the attitudes of 35 public librarians participating in a training program on library service to the inner city were measured before and after the conference. A group of 30 public librarians in similar positions in large cities was randomly selected and measured with the same instrument to serve as a basis of comparison and control. Three of the five concepts tested - Community Involvement in Planning Library Programs, The Urban Poor, and Library Institutes as Educational Devices underwent statistically significant changes as a result of the five-day insti- tute. Comparing the post-test scores of participants and the control group reveals that participants' opinions of four of the five issues moved in the opposite direction from the views of their colleagues. A discussion of two competing theories of why attitudes change in institute settings - inter- personal context versus ideational content follows, with hypotheses for testing their relative influence. EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTES have different purposes, rang- ing from dispensing information about new techniques and materials to altering opinions, values, and behavior of its trainees. The kind of evaluation - its design and instruments - will vary with the specific purpose and scope of the training program. However, the common The author is a Research Assistant Professor in the Graduate School of Library Science at the University of Illinois, Urbana. 104
Attitudinal Change goal of training programs is change in people - of attitudes, of knowl- edge, of awareness. Therefore, the common objective of evaluative research is to provide a scientific assessment of whether the desired changes occurred as a result of the program.1 The search for signifi- cant change is the guiding principal of this evaluation of a training program for public librarians. From March 15 to 20, 1970, the Institute for "Public Library Service to the Inner City" was held at the University at Urbana.2 The institute was advertised via professional journals and mailed leaflets to attract potential participants. Thirty-five applicants, most of whom were public librarians already committed to and involved in urban library programs were selected. As understood by the evaluator, the institute planners hoped to change the attitudes and views of the participants by: a) increasing their understanding of the nature and causes of urban social problems, b) increasing their awareness of the variety of alternative solutions, c) expanding their perception of the public library's potential in helping to meet urban changes. The strategy of this institute was to expose participants to a wide variety of controversial ideas, media programs, and people. Rather than trying to "sell" participants on a unified plan, philosophy, or activity, the plan was to introduce realism, variety, and controversy into the program. The institute group was exposed to five days of information ranging from academic reports of research studies, re- views of personal library experience to reports of participants' own programs. Representatives of both successful and unsuccessful library programs served as resource persons. Speakers with different points of view, personal experiences, and levels of optimism about the city's future were invited to voice their ideas. They included university pro- fessors, high level library administrators and professional community organizers. In addition to listening to others, the institute participants saw films and gave talks. The plan of this evaluation is to assess the effectiveness of the in- stitute in accomplishing its goals. What influence did this exposure to a variety of opinions, information, suggestions and themes have on the librarians? How and in what direction were their opinions and con- cepts changed? The Instrument: In order to assess changes in participants' attitudes 105
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP and opinions, a semi-projective instrument, the Semantic Differential was used to measure the meaning of the program's central themes.3 A positive stance toward the first concept, Community Involvement in Planning Library Programs, was one of the few overt "messages" of the conference, representing a liberal progressive attitude toward ex- panding the public's role in making library decisions formerly made only by trained professionals. This debate is similar to the current con- cern of college administration and faculty confronted by students who want more power in decision making. Store-front Libraries was included to assess participants' attitudes toward a currently popular idea in urban libraries. Usually found in slum areas, store-front libraries are an attempt to bring existing library functions closer to the local residents by moving book collections from traditional sites to more accessible street locations. The third concept, The Library's Potential Role in Serving the Inner City, serves as a measure of optimism and hope for the urban library's future. Like other service institutions in the central city, (such as schools, hospitals, and welfare services) public libraries face grave financial and social problems which threaten its existence in its current form. Since The Urban Poor are the people to be served by the library, information about librarians' attitudes toward them is extremely im- portant. Finally, we included the concept Library Institutes as Educational Devices to get information about the participants' view of the value of this form of training. The concept was worded to elicit attitudes toward the general method of communication, rather than their evaluation of this particular training institute. Each respondent rated each of these concepts against nine semantic differential scales. Three scales (good-bad, unsuccessful-successful, and beneficial-harmful) represented the evaluative dimension, three (soft- hard, free-constrained, and powerless-powerful) for the potency factor, and three (fast-slow, cautious-rash, passive-active) for the activity dimension. Design: A comparison of persons' opinions and attitudes before and after the institute was deemed necessary to document any changes in their concepts and attitudes. The semantic differential was sent to the 35 participating librarians and all participants returned the forms one month before the institute. On the last day of the meetings they took the same test; the difference 106
Attitudinal Change between these two tests constitutes a measure of the effects of the insti- tute on their opinions and ideas. In addition, a control group of public librarians closely resembling the sample group in position and city size was selected and measured. Using the American Library Directory we selected 35 library positions from 35 randomly selected cities with populations over 100,000. The librarians currently in these positions were sent the same instrument about one month before the institute. Twenty-eight anonymous ques- tionnaires were returned; but one arrived too late to be included. In addition, one respondent had given copies to three of his librarians directly involved in an urban library project. This added bonus con- tributed three more questionnaires for a combined response rate of 79 per cent. We matched the positions of the control group with those of the participants whenever possible; however, many participants held newly created positions (such as "special programs coordinator* ') which were not listed in the Directory. In cases where matching was not possible, an equal proportion of top and middle administrators versus branch librarians was randomly selected. This control group serves as a comparison or benchmark to see whether participating librarians were significantly different from librarians who did not or could not attend this institute. The background characteristics of the control and the institute groups are shown in Table 1. The most obvious difference between the two groups is race; understandably, the topic of Service to the Inner City attracted a disproportionate number of blacks. Another difference be- tween the two groups appeared in the recency of their library training. Although not reflected in their ages, the institute librarians had re- ceived their professional training more recently than the control librari- ans. Fifty per cent had finished library school since I960, compared to 38 per cent of the control group. Finally, there are differences in their library positions. Partly due to the effort to recruit action-oriented librarians, a larger proportion of the institute group (13 out of 35) had positions such as urban project directors or assistants and community coordinators. Top administrators were under represented in the institute group, (12 per cent as com- pared with 30 per cent of the control group) . There were no significant differences between the two groups in their sex, age, education, or kind of training. Both groups were predom- inantly female, 40 to 50 per cent under 45 years of age, with masters' degrees mostly in library science. The participants over-represented 107
table 1. Percentage Distribution of Background Characteristics of Institute and Control Groups Control Group Institute Group Sex: Male 37% 31% Female 63 69 100% 100% (30) (35) Age: 24-34 23% 29% 35-44 17 21 45-54 37 29 55+ 23 21 100% 100% (30) (34) Position: Top-Director, Head Associate 30% 12% Middle: Special Project Coordinator 27 38 Local: Asst. Br. Lib. Branch Lib. 33 27 Other 10 24 100% 101% (30) (34) Race: White 87% 66% Non-white 13 34 100% 100% (30) (35) Education: College Degree 23% 30% Master's Degree 67 70 Post-Masters Work 10 0 100% 100% (30) (33) Library Degree: BLS-MLS 78% 85% Non-Library Science 22 15 100% 100% (27) (33) Year of Last LS Degree Before 1960 62% 50% 1960 & After 38 50 100% 100% (24) (28)
Attitudinal Change blacks, urban program librarians, and recently-trained persons. Clearly the institute attracted a special interest group within the occupation. This selective composition of the institute group partially explains their stated interest in getting practical advice and actual solutions. These librarians already have the interest in establishing innovative library programs, so they want concrete programs, suggestions, and plans. How does the institute group compare with the non-institute group in their opinions before they attended the conference? Table 2 shows table 2. Comparison Between Institute and Control Groups on Total and Component Means Institute Control (1st measurement) Concept Eval. Pot. Act. X Eval. Pot. Act. % 1) Community Involvement 4.03 .83 -1.93 .97 5.81 2.15 - .06 2.63* 2) Store-front Libraries 5.62 1.62 1.65 2.96 4.50 2.43 1.34 2.75 3) Library's Po- tential Role in Serving the Inner City 5.30 2.06 1.13 2.83 6.00 3.21 .56 3.25 4) The Urban Poor -1.43 -1.33 - .56 -1.10 .40 -1.06 -1.20 - .62 5) Library T«.*iH,^« *.73 1.13 - .03 2.27 6.29 2.45 1.74 3.49** * The difference between the concept means or the control ana institute groups is signmcant ai .u:> ìevei. ♦♦ Significant at .10 level. both the over-all concept means and those of the three component dimensions (evaluation, potency, and activity) for the two groups of librarians. The means can range between - 9.00 [extremely bad, weak, or inactive] and +9.00 [extremely good, strong, or active]. A mean score around 0.0 shows that the group felt that both adjectives were neutral or did not apply to the concept. Using the Mann-Whitney U test,4 significant differences were found in the over-all meanings of two of the five concepts - Community Involvement and Institutes as Educational Devices. Community Involvement in Planning Library Programs: This con- cept was scored at about half of its maximum positive evaluation by both groups, but the institute group w£$ about 35 per cent higher 109
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP than control (5.8 to 4.0). On potency, the control judged Community Involvement to be nearly neutral (.83) while the institute group gave it a moderate rating of 2.15, or two and one-half times the control rating. It appears that this institute attracted librarians who already saw significant value in including local community members in plan- ning library programs. Library Institutes as Educational Devices: Both institute and non- institute groups had equally favorable opinions of library institutes but they diverged on the other two dimensions. Librarians who attended the institute came with the view that institutes are a powerful and active means of education, while the non-institute group saw institutes as weaker and more passive. It seems that having a favorable opinion of institutes is a necessary but not sufficient condition for attracting participants. The deciding factor is the belief and expectation that attending these programs is a meaningful active step towards solving the library's problems. The meanings of the other three (Store-front Libraries, Libraries' Potential, and Urban Poor) connoted basically the same things for both groups. Summarizing the initial differences between the librarians who at- tended the training program and a control group of public librarians from similar sized cities, who did not, we find both background and attitudinal differences. The institute attracted more blacks, more recently-trained professionals, and more librarians in action - oriented positions. The participants had a more positive attitude toward com- munity participation on library affairs and the value of training insti- tutes in helping them find solutions to the urban library's problems. Table 3 shows the change in the meanings of the five concepts for the institute group, by comparing their judgments made before and immediately after the institute. The direction of the change is indicated by the sign - a plus sign means that the judgment on the post-test was more favorable, more potent or more active than in the pre-test. A negative sign means that the group judged the concept to be less favorable, less powerful or less active after the institute than before. The statistical significance level of the difference between first and second measurements (D) is shown within the parentheses, as measured by the Wilcoxin Matched-Pairs Test.5 As in interpreting all significance levels, the lower the figure, the more statistically significant the difference. The statistically signifi- cant changes are starred in the table. 110
Attitudinal Change table 3. Change From Pre-test to Post-test for Institute Group Change on: Concept Evaluation Potency Activity 1) Community Involvement +(.06)* +(.04)* -(.66) 2) Store-front Libraries -(.68) -(.06)* -(.60) 3) Library's Potential Role in Serving the Inner City +(.22) +(.62) +(.38) 4) The Urban Poor m +(.50) +(.16) +(.20) 5) Institutes as Educational m Devices -(.36) -(.20) -(.01)* Four of the 15 comparisons are statistically significant at the .10 level and several others show quite substantial shifts, indicating that participation in the program did change some views of the members. It is, of course, important to recognize the possibility of regression; how- ever the high reliability of semantic differential factor-scores in a test- retest situation reduces this danger.6 Community Involvement in Planning Library Programs: Two statis- tically significant differences occurred in the judgment of this concept. After the institute, the participating members had a more favorable opinion of seeking out the wishes of community residents when plan- ning library programs. This concept received more explicit emphasis during the meeting than any other of the tested concepts, for several speakers emphasized the absolute necessity of this concept in planning programs. One speaker blamed the failure of a project on the lack of effective involvement. Store-Front Libraries: One important change in the attitudes toward store-front libraries was a statistically significant decrease in the po- tency dimension. After participating in the conference, the librarians felt that store-front libraries were much weaker programs than they had thought earlier, or that the problems were much greater. This may be in response to suggestions made during the institute to break out of the traditional concept of library service - waiting for people to come into an existing location, even a physically close one. Another possibility is that librarians recognized the magnitude and perversity of the inner city's social, economic, and political problems. Whatever the particular reason, participants left viewing store-front libraries as a rather con- servative, pallid measure. Ill
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP Librarf s Potential Role in Serving the Inner City: Two substantial shifts in opinion are noted. After the institute, the group saw the library's role as more favorable and more active than before the meet- ings. In view of the failures reported on and the controversies aired, this growth of optimism is probably one of the most meaningful effects of the conference. Urban Poor: Starting from a pre-institute judgment of the urban poor as slightly good, rather weak, and passive, after the conference the participants rated the urban poor to be more favorable, stronger, and more active. This concept was one of the most susceptible to influ- ence through institute activities. Library Institutes as Educational Devices: Of all the concepts tested, this one changed the most, but in a negative direction. After the con- ference the group felt that library institutes were somewhat less valu- able, less powerful, and significantly less active a medium than they had thought earlier. These changes can be interpreted either as a negative evaluation of this particular institute or a disenchantment with the general idea of talking about bad conditions and needed changes. The first interpretation is doubtful for first, special care was taken to phrase the concept to refer to the general notion of educational institutes, and secondly participants responded to a more traditional evaluation of the institute with glowing praise and satisfaction. Another possible negative evaluation of this particular institute may be that participants failed to learn anything new; that they had read or heard all this be- fore. Thus, as an educational experience, this institute may have failed. However, it is more likely that the process of talking about and listening to others describe their attempts to set up new programs boomeranged. In grasping the enormities of the economic, political, and social challenges ahead of the inner city library, the participants probably realized how little talk contributed to solving these problems. This interpretation is strengthened by the fact that the downward shift of the activity factor of this concept is the strongest change experienced by the institute group. To summarize how the ideas and opinions of those who attended the institute changed, we compared them with the control group as a benchmark. Table 4 contrasts the three group means- the control group, the institute group pre-test and post-test. The institute group diverged from the non-institute group in their judgments of the first four concepts. Two of these differences were statistically significant, 112
Attitudinal Change table 4. Comparison of Concept Means of Control Group, Institute Group Pre-test and Institute Group Post-test Control Institute Institute Group pre-test post-test Direction Concept Mean Mean Mean of change 1 . Community Involvement .97 2.63* 3.24* divergence 2. Store-front Libraries 2.96 2.75 2.39 divergence 3. Library's Potential 2.83 3.25 3.44 divergence 4. Urban Poor -1.10 - .62 .21* divergence 5. Library Institutes 2.27 3.49* 2.55 convergence ♦ The difference between the institute and control group mean is significant at .10 level. while a third previously significant difference in the last concept lost ground. The first concept, Community Involvement shows more divergence between the two groups than before the institute. The participants see the idea of community involvement in deciding on library programs as much more favorable, more powerful and less passive than the control group. The image of the Urban Poor is also significantly different after the institute. The institute group came with an idea no different from the control group, but left the conference seeing the urban poor as more worthy and more powerful than did those who did not attend the meetings. Participants' judgments about Store-front Libraries and the Library's Potential Role also diverged from the views of non-partici- pants but not enough to be statistically significant. In only one concept, Library Institutes as Educational Devices did the conference act to bring the views of the two groups together. After the institute, the participants left with an identical opinion of library institutes held by the control group, whereas they came to the meetings with and perhaps because of a significantly different view. On the whole, after the training program, the participants* opinions of some key issues moved in the opposite direction from the views of a control group of colleagues. By comparing the men and women, blacks and whites, old and young it was possible to see if these factors affected the direction or magnitude of opinion change. However, no consistent differences were found, in- dicating that sex, race, and age were unrelated to receptivity or resis- tance to influences within this group. 113
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP This evaluation asked "what effect, if any, did this five-day conference have on the people who attended it?" To answer this question we tested them before and after the institute and compared their responses with those of a control group of librarians from similar-sized cities. We found that the librarians recruited to this institute were somewhat different, both in backgrounds and ideas, as measured by the semantic differential test. Comparing the before and after scores of the institute group, we found that the members underwent significant changes in the way they judged some central ideas in the institute. Three of the concepts - Community Involvement in Planning Library Programs, The Urban Poor and Library Institutes as Educational Devices were the subjects of significant opinion change. As a result of the conference, the par- ticipants rated the community's role and the urban poor more positively than before. The notion of library institutes as educational devices lost considerable appeal as a strong, active means of social change. Over-all, the librarians who attended this institute returned home with some different ideas than they brought. They also returned home even more different from librarian colleagues who did not attend the institute. So, the institute intensified some existing differences in per- spective, created new ones and ameliorated another. The question of what actually caused these attitudinal changes is a moot one. Was it that this conference assembled a voluntary group of likeminded persons with common interests and commitment whose interaction influenced one another, or did the training program with its barrage of ideas, experiences, and controversy produce the attitudinal changes? The voluntary nature of the institute (which is the norm among most professional retraining conferences) proscribed the kind of research design necessary to answer this question. In order to sep- arate the effects of group interaction and persuasion from the training program, the evaluator must be able to vary the group composition, so he can compare attitude changes within a heterogeneous non-voluntary group with those in a more homogeneous self-selected group like this. Until this is done, it is difficult for evaluation researchers to pinpoint the causal factors that operate in intensive educational institutes of this type. The importance of this question is evident when one tries to estimate how long these new perspectives and opinions will last after partici- pants return to their positions. One could hypothesize that if the inter- personal factor is mainly responsible for producing opinion change in 114
Attitudinal Change a conference setting, then the changes will be relatively short-lived once the reinforcing social context is dispersed. The fact that such conferences tend to draw people with atypical attitudes and make them even more divergent from their colleagues implies that the reality shock upon returning will extinguish attitudinal shifts rather quickly. The alternative hypothesis bodes more hope for longer-lived effects of such training conferences. If the attitudes of institute participants are changed predominantly by exposure to fresh ideas and perspectives, as presented by speakers, discussants and films, then it seems that the participant will retain their new perspectives longer, due to the fact that the participants have access to the ideational content through other media, such as professional journals and publications. These alternative sources of ideas and perspectives that are independent of the social context will reinforce the attitudinal changes after participants return to their positions. The relative importance of the social context versus ideational con- tent as change agents in conference situations is an important question which has implications for planning training conferences. Questions such as the type of participants to be recruited, the relative emphasis on formal versus informal structure, and the kinds of media to be used face all institute and program planners. Ideally, their decisions should be based on the results of objective evaluation research. Notes 1. Suchman, E. A.: Evaluative Research. New York, Russell Sage Foundation, 1967. 2. The conference was funded by U.S. Office of Education Grant # OEG-0-9-2 30003- 1020 for the complete descriptive account of this program, see the "Narrative Evaluation of the Institute for Public Library Service to the Inner City," submitted to U.S.O.E. by Terence Crowley, Director, May, 1970. 3. Osgood, E. E., Suci, G. J., and Tannenbaum, P.: The Measurement of Meaning. Urbana, University of Illinois Press, 1957. 4. Siegel, S.: Non-Parametric Statistics. New York, McGraw-Hill, 1956, pp. 116-126. Since the institute group is a self-selected, thus non-random sample, non-parametric statistics were used, which are distribution-free. 5. Siegel, pp. 75-82. 6. Osgood, p. 138. 115