Introduction There is much that the field of LIS can learn from its sister field of science and technology studies (STS), an interdisciplinary field that focuses on the social, cultural, ethical, and political dimensions of science and technology [1]. For example, as LIS moves its emphasis toward information technology, especially from physical libraries to digital libraries, it is useful to consult the existing STS literature on how values can be embedded in technologies in general, and especially in information technology (IT). The goal of this article is to combine insights from the fields of LIS and STS and to demonstrate the applicability of a theoretical framework developed from an STS perspective to an LIS study of the values embedded in digital libraries. Values can be defined as “evaluative beliefs that synthesize affective and cognitive elements to orient people to the world in which they live” [2, p. 2828]. Although they are a result of social interaction and may be shared among individuals, values are a highly individualized and personalized phenomenon.3 Steven Hitlin and Jane Allyn Piliavin [4] make a case for reviving an emphasis on values throughout the social sciences. This article attempts to follow this recommendation within the field of LIS.4 This article begins with a review of the STS literature, which has demonstrated that both technologies in general and IT have embedded values. Next, the article examines the types of values that are embedded in physical and digital libraries, based on the existing LIS literature. The article identifies the key insights and limitations that can be drawn from existing studies. Finally, the article ends by proposing directions for future research on digital libraries with embedded values, including empirical research that is multisited and comparative in nature, and a theoretical framework, boundary objects with agency, that allows for a better understanding of what values are embedded in digital libraries, how these values are embedded in digital libraries, and the implications of these embedded values. 3.  As such, values can be contrasted with ethics, which are shared frameworks that govern behavior and are codified as laws or norms [3]. 4.  While the field of LIS does not, strictly speaking, fit entirely within the label of a “social science,” there are aspects of the field of LIS that bear a striking resemblance to the social sciences. Technologies with Embedded Values While the traditional technoscientific perspective has held that technologies are value neutral, this argument has been opposed by those within the field of science and technology studies who argue that technologies do contain embedded values and, thus, are an important focus for ethical discussion.5 Langdon Winner [6–8], building upon the work of Lewis Mumford [9] and Jacques Ellul [10], argues that the design of technologies is a political process. Winner explains that “power, authority, freedom, and social justice are embedded in technical structures” [7, p. 40]. Winner provides the example of the atom bomb, the existence of which necessitates an authoritarian power structure to prevent a global catastrophe. Winner also cites works by Plato [11], Friedrich Engels [12], and Alfred D. Chandler [13] that connect technological development with a need for authoritarian power structures. Technologies, Winner argues, are inherently political and can be used to enhance either democracy and equality or hierarchical and inegalitarian power structures. Finally, Winner explains that designers are unquestionably political actors, whether or not they see themselves as such, and further that the design of new technologies should be opened up to users as well as to citizens in general, so that it can become a more democratic and inclusive process. Building on the work of Winner, Richard E. Sclove [14] argues that values and politics are embedded in technologies, while at the same time, “technologies—like other social structures—influence, but do not determine social reality” [14, p. 22]. According to Sclove, however, technologies do not have political meaning in a social vacuum. Rather, a technology’s political valence is largely determined by its social context. Technologies do not have fixed meanings, but rather their meanings are subject to local interpretation. Similarly, technologies can also be polypotent, in the sense of having multiple meanings or valences. These potencies may be either focal or nonfocal functions. Focal functions are central, intended effects, while nonfocal functions are less intentional and potentially more insidious in their effects. Similarly to Winner, Sclove writes, “nuclear weapons are designed focally to coerce, deter, or destroy other societies, but they contribute nonfocally to legitimating authoritarian government institutions within the societies that possess them” [14, p. 22]. Sclove argues that societies must be aware of and involved in producing technologies and their focal and nonfocal polypotencies, while at the same time, technologists should be aware of the social ramifications of their design work and should use their positions to work toward equalizing power relations rather than reinforcing or further stratifying unequal power structures. Deborah G. Johnson [15] provides a framework for understanding embedded values within the context of technological development. She breaks the ways that values become embedded in technologies into four categories: moral/metaphysical, support, material, and expressive. Johnson explains that in the moral/metaphysical embedding of values, “values pervade the invention and production of a technology, and these values are put into technology in such a way that they cannot be separated from it” [15, p. 22]. The support meaning of embedded values is based on the use of technologies, such that the choice to use a particular technology is indicative of a particular value decision. Material embedding of values comes in two flavors: technologies convey values in their design, and design is compatible with specific types of social relationships, often related to authority and power. Finally, according to the expressive meaning of embedded values, technologies have values because they have social meaning. She argues that these four means of embedding values are not mutually exclusive, but rather they can all simultaneously apply to the same technology. According to David J. Hess, “all research is ultimately guided by values” [16, p. 15]. Hess [17] introduces the concept of “technototemism” to explain how value differences are coconstituted with technical differences. Technototemism explains how race‐, gender‐, and class‐related differences and technoscientific differences mutually construct each other, allowing technologies to influence our dynamic understanding of social difference and simultaneously embedding values related to social difference within different technoscientific artifacts. Thus, Hess’s framework provides a nuanced approach to studying technologies with embedded values.6 5.  While this section focuses on the technology studies literature, science studies scholars such as Robert Proctor [5] similarly argue that science is also value laden. 6.  The emphasis on democratizing technology shared by STS scholars such as Winner, Sclove, Johnson, and Hess is consistent with the user‐centered design approach advocated by many LIS and IT scholars, which is discussed below. Information Technologies with Embedded Values Applying Sclove’s [14] work to IT, Douglas Schuler [18] provides the example of community networks as an IT with embedded values. The Seattle Community Network (SCN), which he was involved in founding, was designed using several explicitly stated principles that involve commitment to access, service, democracy, the world community, and the future. Writing about the development of the SCN, he recalls, “Fortunately, it was realized early on that the technology, policy, and processes should be driven by a set of principles rather than the reverse” [18, p. 336]. He lists six core values of new communities (including community networks): “conviviality and culture; education; strong democracy; health and well‐being; economic equity, opportunity, and sustainability; and information and communication” [18, p. 12]. These core values serve as the organizing structure for SCN and for his beliefs about the need for and requirements of community networks in general. Values are at the core of Schuler’s view of the design of community networks, since these values should, according to Schuler, determine the technical and administrative aspects of a community network. Schuler [18] and David Silver [19] argue that online communities should be designed in a participatory manner that involves all users or at least a broad cross section of users. Schuler argues that “developing a community network is by definition a community project” [18, p. 335]. He argues that all potential users of the community network should be involved in the design of the network and that this participation should be facilitated and encouraged. In his analysis of a less than fully participatory online community, the Blacksburg Electronic Village (BEV), Silver [19] argues that the combination of the lack of user participation in the development of the BEV and the nonrepresentative group of designers and administrators involved in developing the BEV led to the omission of important issues such as race, gender, and sexuality as discussion topics within the BEV. Silver argues that this shortcoming in the design of the BEV limits the participation of users by restricting the range of issues that can be discussed on the BEV, and that participation in use is limited largely because of shortcomings in access to and participation in the design process. Thus, participation in design and use can often be interrelated, such that more egalitarian use is often a product of more participatory design approaches. Schuler and Silver thus work to construct new strong counterpublics [20] through the participatory design of digital spaces that in turn encourage participation by users. In her collaborations with Helen Nissenbaum, Batya Friedman [21] has found that values play an important role in the design of IT. Specifically, Friedman and Nissenbaum have identified freedom from bias [22] and user autonomy [23] as values that can be embedded in IT by designers. Friedman [24] argues that additional study is necessary to explore in more detail how values are embedded in IT. Philip Brey [25] emphasizes the importance of the embedded values of justice, autonomy, democracy, and privacy. Amy Pearl and colleagues [26] make a similar argument for educational simulations and computer games, focusing on values related to gender and age. Chuck Huff and C. Dianne Martin [27–30] argue that the ethical implications of IT are so significant that “it is unethical to ignore the values embedded in technological artifacts” [29, p. 80]. Thus, there is compelling evidence that values are embedded in technologies in general and IT in particular. Libraries with Embedded Values Libraries are typically assumed to be objective and neutral, yet since the information provision carried out by libraries occurs in a cultural context and culture is never value neutral, libraries are indeed shaped by values [31]. Thus, like other technological systems, libraries contain embedded values. This section explores examples of values that are embedded in libraries. The following section will explore the relevance of these values to digital libraries. In his article, “To Reposition a Research Agenda: What American Studies Can Teach the LIS Community about the Library in the Life of the User,” Wayne Wiegand [32] focuses on two particular values embedded in libraries: the library as a place and the library as a source and site for reading. He builds on the work of Jürgen Habermas [33] to argue that libraries form an important public sphere that resists the tendency toward social isolationism identified by Robert Putnam [34]. Wiegand also argues that reading, especially of popular fiction, plays an important role in shaping readers’ everyday lives. Thus, by examining the values embedded in libraries and digital libraries, it is possible to focus on libraries as places and on reading in the lives of users.7 Former ALA President Michael Gorman has put a special emphasis on the values of librarianship in his writings on the library professions. In his book, Our Enduring Values: Librarianship in the 21st Century, Gorman [35] identifies eight core values of libraries and librarians: stewardship, service, intellectual freedom, rationalism, literacy and learning, equity of access to recorded knowledge and information, privacy, and democracy. Gorman also devotes chapters of his books Our Singular Strengths: Meditations for Librarians [36] and Our Own Selves: More Meditations for Librarians [37] to values. Due to his highly visible position, Gorman has brought great attention to the issue of values in librarianship. Christine Pawley [38] argues that the LIS curriculum, which is used to train librarians, also contains embedded values. Specifically, Pawley argues that the values of the LIS curriculum are evidence of hegemonic domination, such that the library and the profession of librarianship are used as tools of class warfare. Pawley focuses on four specific ways that middle‐class values have been incorporated in the LIS curriculum: corporatization, professionalization, scientification, and stratification. First, Pawley explains that corporatization, as in the case of the Carnegie Corporation’s role in the Williamson Report of 1923 and the W. K. Kellogg Foundation’s support of the University of Michigan’s School of Information, allows corporate values to enter into the LIS curriculum, leading to emphasis on managerialism and profit motives. Second, professionalization in the field of LIS can be linked to a hierarchical view of librarianship (which is masked by a gloss of pluralism) and to favoritism shown to other hyperempowered professional groups at the expense of underserved and marginalized populations. A third way that the LIS curriculum is influenced by middle‐class values is its attempt to present itself as a scientific field, thus adhering to the norms of science, such as communalism, universalism, disinterestedness, and organized skepticism [39], which have been critiqued by scholars in the field of science and technology studies but yet remain commonly accepted in popular discourse. Finally, the field of LIS stratifies literacy by privileging some literature as “good” reading while trashing most popular fiction, and also through the new category of information literacy, which emphasizes computing expertise that is easier for the economic elite to acquire. Pawley’s [38] discussion of the values implicit in definitions of information literacy resonates with the work of Kimmo Tuominen, Reijo Savolainen, and Sanna Talja [40]. Pawley also connects the middle‐class favoritism of the LIS curriculum to its place in institutions of higher education: helping to cement these class‐based values. Pawley concludes that in order to truly adhere to free and equitable access to information as a meaningful value, the LIS curriculum should be reformed to include additional emphasis on social theory, and, most of all, the debate over the values embedded in the LIS curriculum should remain prominent rather than allowing these values to become invisible and thus unquestionable. Even seemingly straightforward and neutral tools of the library trade, such as classification systems, have embedded values. Hope Olson [41] makes this point eloquently, tracing the values embedded in both the Library of Congress Subject Headings and the Dewey Decimal Classification. Olson explains that these classifications privilege some categories and materials over others. Specifically, she argues that “effective searching for marginalized topics will require greater ingenuity and serendipity than searching for mainstream topics” [41, p. 639], demonstrating the influence that classification systems can have on access to information. Specifically, she documents how the Library of Congress Subject Headings privilege masculinity by treating women as exceptions to the male norm. In the case of the Dewey Decimal Classification, Olson documents how “American Literature in English” is grouped on the same level as “Slavic, Celtic, Asian, African, American Aboriginal, and many other” literatures, demonstrating that “the external organizing force, rather than the contents, determines the correct shape” [41, p. 651]. Olson’s solution, following Drucilla Cornell’s [42] Philosophy of the Limit, resonates with Donna Haraway’s [43] advocacy of articulation over representation, as both are based on many of the same influences, including bell hooks [44] and Trinh T. Minh‐Ha [45]. Noting the advantages of techniques such as free text searching, Olson suggests that technology may be helpful in leveling the playing field and facilitating access to information. Thus, Olson’s work leads smoothly into the next topic, digital libraries with embedded values. 7.  References to specific values attributed to various LIS scholars in this section and the following section are in some cases the result of a reading of particular works with a particular emphasis on the concept of values, broadly defined. Digital Libraries with Embedded Values The emerging literature on digital libraries has already paid some attention to the issue of values. For example, Bonnie A. Nardi and Vicki L. O’Day [46] see values as one component of larger information ecologies—which interact with people, technologies, and practices—and they relate this perspective directly to digital libraries [47]. Similarly, in the case of one digital library, the Afya Project, Ann Peterson Bishop and colleagues [48] consider social values along with practice and consequences. Scholars have already focused on some particular values of digital libraries, including usability [49] and transparency [50]. The overall user‐centered focus of many digital library projects [e.g., 49, 51–53] is also indicative of attention to the values of the users of digital libraries. As Ross Atkinson [54] explains, “Information services are defined and distinguished not only by their operations but also by their social goals and motivating values” [54, p. 245]. Atkinson relates this argument to the design of digital libraries, emphasizing that the selection of materials to be included in physical and especially digital libraries is a key service function of a library. Peter Morville [55] argues that libraries and the Internet share common values, including privacy, intellectual freedom, free expression, free and equal access to ideas and information, and resistance to censorship. Similarly, Brewster Kahle, Rick Prelinger, and Mary E. Jackson [56] argue that libraries, including digital libraries, serve the values of democracy, education, and the advancement of the underprivileged. Jeffrey T. Penka [57] argues that digital libraries should endeavor to adopt the same values as physical libraries, building on Gorman’s [35] writings about the values of librarianship. Finally, Lorna Peterson [58] argues that values are an often‐overlooked yet important underlying consideration in digital library design and use. Summary of the Literature to Date Overall, there are valuable preliminary studies that can contribute to an understanding of the values embedded in various forms of IT, including physical and digital libraries. This analysis of the literature demonstrates the utility of focusing on the values embedded in IT for understanding the human aspects of the design and use of various IT systems. At the same time, the literature on the social, cultural, ethical, and political dimensions of digital libraries discussed above demonstrates that there are values embedded in digital libraries and provides some indications that these embedded values have a significant impact on how digital libraries are designed and used.8 Certainly, the literature to date is a good starting point for studying the values embedded in digital libraries. There are two major limitations of the literature on the values embedded in digital libraries. The first limitation is that there is a lack of comparative empirical research. Most of the studies reviewed above examine values either in an abstract way or in relation to one specific digital library project. Certainly this work is important at this early stage of research on digital libraries and, when carefully put together, can yield some valuable insights, such as the range of values that can be embedded in digital libraries, as shown in this article. Yet, there is also a need for broader empirically oriented comparative research that focuses on a broad spectrum of digital library projects rather than a single digital library, while taking care to incorporate the perspectives of the relevant stakeholders. Trying to compare the values embedded in different digital libraries by reading various studies using different frameworks, concepts, and methods has severe limitations in terms of how comparable the data are in practice. Certainly, it would be a valuable contribution to this literature to do a broader comparative study that incorporates a variety of digital library projects as research subjects while incorporating as many of the relevant stakeholders for each of these projects as possible. A related limitation of the current literature on values embedded in digital libraries is the lack of a broad, robust, and inclusive theoretical framework that can simultaneously consider issues related to the design, use, and maintenance of digital libraries as well as, once again, the varying perspectives of the relevant stakeholders. Here, it is important to consider how people and IT (in this specific case digital libraries) mutually shape each other. The STS literature can prove useful, given its emphasis on the mutual shaping of technology and society. This article adapts a theoretical framework from the STS literature as a starting point for developing a theoretical framework for understanding the values of digital libraries, how they come into being, and what their implications are for digital library design and use. 8.  Here, the umbrella term “social, cultural, ethical, and political” is artificially introduced in an attempt to focus on a particular type of digital library scholarship. As the emphasis on designing and using digital libraries continues to increase, the scholarly studies of digital libraries are also beginning to proliferate. Yet, because this literature currently appears to be held together only by a common subject matter, digital libraries, it seems useful to develop other ways to hold this literature together, such as the emphasis on values stressed in this article. Applying the Boundary Objects with Agency Framework to Digital Libraries As noted above, the literature on values embedded in digital libraries contains two major limitations: a lack of comparative research and a lack of a theoretical framework. This section addresses the latter limitation, demonstrating the potential applicability of the boundary objects with agency framework for studying the design and use of digital libraries. The following section will then demonstrate how this theoretical framework can be applied to address the former limitation by proposing a comparative study of values embedded in digital libraries. The boundary objects with agency framework builds on three concepts from the social sciences and especially the STS literature. The first concept is the social world. The social world concept [59–61] is related to the Chicago School of Sociology's symbolic interactionist theory [62]. As defined by Anselm Strauss [60], social worlds are characterized by their common activities, sites, technologies, and organizations. The next important concept is the boundary object. Boundary objects [63, 64] are hybrid entities that bridge multiple social worlds. As such, they allow for communication and interaction across the social worlds. They are a product of these overlapping social worlds and could not come into being without preexisting intersections among the social worlds, caused in part by hybrid individuals who simultaneously belong to multiple social worlds. The third concept for this framework is nonhuman agency. Nonhuman agency can be linked to multiple theoretical camps, but it is perhaps most directly descended from actor‐network theory [65, 66], which holds that nonhuman actants can be enrolled by different sides within a conflict and thus can exhibit agency in determining the outcome of the conflict.9 In the boundary objects with agency framework, boundary objects exhibit agency by reshaping the relationships among the constituent social worlds. That is, once a boundary object is created at the intersection of multiple social worlds, it does not passively sit at the intersection of the social worlds but, rather, plays an active role in reshaping the relationships within and among the constituent social worlds. Thus, just as social worlds influence the development of boundary objects, boundary objects influence the development of social worlds. Thus, the boundary objects with agency framework involves three stages of analysis. First, it is important to study the social worlds that predate the creation of the boundary object. In doing so, it is possible to map out the value conflicts that existed prior to the development of a new technology. Next, it is important to study how the boundary object emerges at the intersection of the social worlds. This allows for a better understanding of how value conflicts shape the development of a technology. Finally, it is important to study the agency exhibited by the boundary object in reshaping the relationships among the constituent social worlds. In this last stage, the goal is to learn how the technology reshapes and reconfigures value conflicts. The boundary objects with agency framework, including intersecting social worlds and a boundary object formed at the intersection of these social worlds, is depicted in figure 1. Through these three stages, it is possible to understand the complex relationships among people, technologies, and values. Fig. 1.— A boundary object at the intersection of social worlds The boundary objects with agency framework emerged from a study of the values embedded in educational simulations [69–74].10 This study found that values play an important role in the design, marketing, and use of educational software. For example, the degree to which frog dissection simulation software either reproduces or reimagines frog dissection has implications for whether the software is used to simulate or to substitute for the activity of frog dissection, which in turn is connected to teachers’ and students’ values in the form of their adherence to animal advocacy beliefs [69, 70]. Similarly, in the case of human anatomy simulation software, the same choice is affected by and in turn affects the debate between gross anatomy instructors and educational administrators over the relative merits of hands‐on learning and temporal, spatial, and economic efficiency [70, 73]. The boundary objects with agency framework emerged from these two case studies. In each case, it was clear that the educational simulation did not spontaneously arise from nowhere but, rather, was a direct result of ongoing processes of conflict and cooperation among various groups. The software was shaped by the conflict and cooperation, leading to values being embedded within the software. At the same time, the software played an important role in reshaping the relationships among these different groups. For human anatomy simulation, the groups involved in the creation of the software were gross anatomy instructors, educational administrators, and simulation designers [70, 73]. In the frog dissection simulation case study, the groups were biology educators, animal advocates, and simulation designers [69, 70]. Both of these studies led to the development of the boundary objects with agency framework. This article argues that the boundary objects with agency framework [73] can be a useful concept for understanding the connection between values and other forms of IT, including digital libraries. Perhaps the most closely related study to date that can provide evidence of the relevance of this framework for studying digital libraries is Nancy A. Van House’s [53] study of the University of California, Berkeley, Digital Library Project. In her analysis of this project, Van House also discusses the relevance of the conceptual building blocks of the boundary objects with agency framework, including social worlds, boundary objects, and actor‐network theory, for studies of digital libraries. For example, Van House argues that digital libraries are boundary objects that arise at the intersection of multiple social worlds, including those of designers, librarians, and patrons. Van House argues that as such, digital libraries are part of complex sociotechnical actor networks. Values figure into Van House’s analysis, especially trust and credibility, although studying the values embedded in digital libraries does not appear to be an explicit goal of her research. Importantly, Van House does not unify these concepts into a framework such as the boundary objects with agency framework. Rather, Van House focuses on relating her findings to knowledge management in general, emphasizing a similar goal of improving digital library design and use and, again, building on similar theoretical foundations but taking a slightly different path to get there. As such, Van House’s chapter is a complementary work that demonstrates the utility of these concepts for studying digital libraries, but the boundary objects with agency framework goes beyond Van House’s study in important ways, which will be discussed in more detail in the following section. 9.  Prominent theorists of nonhuman agency who do not necessary fit within the umbrella of actor‐network theory include Haraway [67] and Pickering [68]. 10.  This earlier study was funded by two awards from the National Science Foundation, a Graduate Research Fellowship, and a Dissertation Research Improvement grant. Studying Digital Libraries as Boundary Objects with Agency To better understand the role that values play in the design and use of digital libraries, it is useful to apply the boundary objects with agency framework [73]. As demonstrated by Van House [53], social worlds, boundary objects, and actor‐network theory can be fruitfully applied to studying digital library design and use. The application of this framework to the issue of the values embedded in digital libraries allows for a better understanding of the social worlds that come together to create digital libraries, the stages of development of the digital libraries themselves, and finally how digital libraries reshape the relationships within and among the constituent social worlds. To achieve this, it is important to identify the major stakeholders within a given digital library project. Based on the literature to date, it appears that there are three major stakeholder groups. First, there are the designers who create the digital libraries. Next, there are the librarians who maintain the digital libraries. Finally, there are the patrons who use digital libraries. To understand how values influence the design and use of digital libraries, it is useful to consider the different perspectives and values of each of these groups as well as the interactions and relationships among these groups. Specific digital libraries are created by members of these social worlds. One research question would be: how do the power relations among the social worlds vary from one digital library to another, and what are the implications of these power relations for conceptualizing each digital library? Certainly, it seems likely that there are some differences, for example, between the user‐centered digital library projects cited above and digital libraries designed using a more traditional top‐down approach to information technology design. Yet, to explore this issue in more detail, empirical research is necessary. Digital libraries emerge at the intersection of these constituent social worlds. For this stage, a second research question would be: how do different digital libraries come into being, and in what ways are digital libraries shaped by the different values of the constituent social worlds? Here, the literature cited above points at some starting points for the analysis, as discussed above, yet there is still a need for systematic investigation of the values embedded in digital libraries and how they are connected to the constituent social worlds. Following the boundary objects with agency framework, digital libraries also have agency, in that they have the ability to reshape the relationships among designers, librarians, and patrons. Here, a third research question would be: how do digital libraries transform the relationships among designers, librarians, and patrons, and how does this reshape the values of these respective social worlds? An earlier study of frog dissection simulation [69, 70] found that technological boundary objects have the ability to cause social worlds to latch onto new peripheral values. Presumably, digital libraries have some unintended consequences and unexpected societal impacts, yet once again empirical research is required to answer this question. To answer these three research questions, it would be useful to undertake a comparative study that applies the boundary objects with agency theoretical framework to understanding how values are embedded in digital libraries and the implications of these embedded values. First, it would be useful to apply the same ethnographic approach, primarily including interviews and participant observation, employed in the earlier study of values embedded in educational simulations. In addition, it would also be fruitful to apply research methods from the field of human‐computer interaction, such as contextual inquiry and think‐aloud. Finally, online quantitative methods can also be beneficial, including online surveys and online monitoring. Applying these research methods to study how digital libraries emerge as boundary objects at the intersection of the relevant social worlds as well as the agency that they exhibit in reshaping the relationships among these social worlds can lead to theoretically and empirically rich comparative studies that address both of the major limitations of the existing literature on the values embedded in digital libraries. Thus, it seems useful to apply the boundary objects with agency framework to digital libraries, as illustrated in figure 2. This research would provide insights into the stakeholders of digital libraries, how digital libraries come into being, and the broader implications of digital libraries. This research would also be of benefit to both the STS and LIS literatures, as a conceptual framework adopted from the former can be fruitfully applied to the latter. Overall, the goal of an emphasis on the values of digital libraries is to ensure that digital libraries are built and maintained to meet the needs of all stakeholders, especially the diverse and dynamic population of digital library patrons. Fig. 2.— A digital library as a boundary object Some modifications of the boundary objects with agency framework will be necessary to ensure the success of the proposed study. For example, the earlier application of the boundary objects with agency framework focused on educational simulations, which were found to be one specific type of boundary object, using Susan Leigh Star’s [63] typology, namely, a terrain with coincident boundaries. As Van House [53] argues, digital libraries belong to a different type of boundary object: repositories. In addition, the constituent social worlds are obviously different, and indeed, it may not be possible to know with certainty that these are the only three relevant social worlds, since data may contradict the hypothesized social worlds. Until data have been collected and analyzed, the hypotheses stated here will remain open questions, although they do seem to be supported by the literature, especially the work of Van House [53]. The proposed application of the boundary objects with agency framework to digital libraries diverges from and goes beyond in important ways the earlier application of the boundary objects with agency framework to educational simulations as well as an earlier study of digital libraries that used similar concepts. For example, Van House’s [53] study, as is the norm in the digital library literature to date, focused on one particular digital library. In contrast, this article proposes research that would instead compare many different digital library projects, in order to gain a broader perspective on digital libraries. Thus, this study would provide data that could be used for a fruitful comparative analysis of the values embedded in different digital libraries. This study would also go beyond earlier applications of the boundary objects with agency framework. Specifically, the previous study of the values embedded in educational simulations [69–74] concentrated almost exclusively on technologies that were already built and in wide release. In contrast, I am currently undertaking a collaborative study of the values embedded in computational models, which focuses on studying technologies as they are being built.11 The proposed research would unite the strengths of each of these two projects by studying digital libraries at various stages in the design process, so that it can be possible to study the same technology both as it is being built and after it has been built. Data from the proposed study will thus provide a more complete understanding of the values embedded in digital libraries. Both of these points speak to the potentially broad applicability of the findings of this proposed study. Because it will examine a wide range of digital libraries, including digital libraries that have been built and digital libraries that are being built, it is hoped that the findings of this proposed research will be of use to a broad range of digital library designers, digital librarians, and digital library patrons. Since digital libraries are such an important emerging technology, it may thus be possible to have a substantive impact on their development, reinforcing the already ongoing efforts discussed above that focus on user‐centered design by ensuring that the needs and values of all of the stakeholders in digital libraries are explicitly considered and built into the their design. The boundary objects with agency framework has already demonstrated its worth in studying the values embedded in educational simulations [69–74]. This theoretical framework should also be valuable in studying the design and use of digital libraries because of the emphasis on the social worlds involved in the design and use of digital libraries and how their conflicts and cooperation both (re)shape and are (re)shaped by digital libraries. In this way, the boundary objects with agency framework demonstrates an important commonality between the fields of STS and LIS—a shared emphasis on the human dimension of technology. 11.  This ongoing study [75] is being conducted in collaboration with William A. Wallace of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute and is funded by two grants for collaborative research from the National Science Foundation.