Teens, Technology, and Libraries: An Uncertain Relationship Denise E. Agosto, Rachel M. Magee, Michael Dickard, and Andrea Forte ABSTRACT A growing body of research examines teens’ use of digital technologies to meet their academic and personal information needs, but few studies have considered how public and school libraries fit into modern teens’ information practices. This study uses data from surveys of and interviews with 25 teens enrolled in a highly technological urban US high school to consider how the prevalence of technology in their daily lives has influenced their perceptions and use of libraries. The results indicated that this group of students tended to think of libraries as largely outdated institutions with little connection to their technology-focused daily information practices. Thus, libraries might better serve teens with high levels of technology access by reframing their services in terms of promoting social interaction and community building as well as focusing less on providing materials and technology access and more on teaching how to search and evaluate information housed outside of libraries’ physical and virtual boundaries. W hile researchers increasingly challenge the idea that all teens exhibit advancedtechnology knowledge and skills (e.g., Agosto and Abbas 2010; Jones and Czer-niewicz 2010; Bayne and Ross 2011), recent figures from the Pew Research Center (Madden et al. 2013) indicate that computer use among US teens is nearly ubiquitous, with 93% owning a computer or having access to one at home. These figures also reveal that Internet-enabled cell phones are often the first-choice access method for US teens, 78% of whom have a cell phone, and 37% of whom have a smart phone. Our own work (Forte et al. 2014) has found that US teens are active users of social media for answering and asking questions of their peers and others, turning to different online communities to reach different audiences based on the types of information needed or being distributed. One area that re- mains largely unexplored is the role of public and school libraries in this technology-heavy environment. This article considers how the prevalence of technology in teens’ daily lives in- fluences their perceptions and uses of libraries. This project was funded by the Institute of Museum and Library Services, Award LG-06-11-0261-11. Library Quarterly: Information, Community, Policy, vol. 86, no. 3, pp. 248–269. © 2016 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-2519/2016/8603-0002$10.00 248
Teens, Technology, and Libraries • 249 Problem Statement and Research Questions A large body of research spanning multiple domains and disciplines investigates teens’ tech- nology use, such as how they use technology in school settings (e.g., Çepni, Tas, and Köse 2006; Lim et al. 2013); technology use attitudes (e.g., Robertson et al. 1995; Tsai and Tsai 2010; Zhua, Chen, Chen, and Chern 2011); and cyberbullying, sexting, and other risky online behaviors (e.g., Parris et al. 2012; Livingstone and Gorzig 2014), but little work has examined the extent to which teens are integrating libraries into their technology use patterns. A clearer under- standing of teens’ perceptions of libraries and their library use patterns would enable librar- ians to design programs and services that better support and enhance teens’ digital infor- mation behaviors. Within the library and information science (LIS) community, there has been a heavy focus on research conducted from an adult-centered perspective—work that privileges librarians’ and other adults’ prescriptive ideals about how young people should use technology, analog information resources, and, more broadly, library services and resources (Agosto 2013). This study is part of a larger project investigating how teens engage in social search practices online and how they use social technologies in their daily lives. We take a youth-centered approach in our work to better understand teens’ technological behaviors and preferences and how they intersect with their perceptions and use of public and school libraries, focusing not on how youth should use technology and libraries but on how they do use them. Teens’ information practices are tightly connected with their social and community re- lationships (e.g., boyd 2008). Many of these practices are increasingly mediated through so- cial media/social technologies, as evidenced by behaviors such as online question asking and answering. Understanding how libraries fit into these information practices is an important part of understanding the complete information ecologies of today’s teens. Against this chang- ing technology backdrop, we addressed the following research questions: 1. What are teens’ attitudes and perceptions of libraries in this new information ecology? 2. How has technology influenced teens’ use or nonuse of libraries? 3. What barriers exist that prevent today’s teens from taking full advantage of library resources and services? Literature Review Research into teens’ use of digital information technology has been conducted primarily outside the traditional boundaries of LIS. To enable LIS researchers and practitioners to bet- ter understand the connections between the study of teens’ digital information behaviors and practices and their perceptions and use of libraries, this article reviews research across several domains and disciplines, including LIS, human–computer interaction, and other areas.
250 • The Library Quarterly Teens’ Use (and Nonuse) of Libraries Although there is a long history of research into public library use, most studies have focused on adults (Sin 2012). In the few studies that have focused on teens, recurring themes include teens’ negative impressions of public library facilities and services (Meyers 1999; Agosto and Hughes-Hassell 2005; Abbas et al. 2008) and a preference for Internet and other technology use over public library use (Vavrek 2004; Abbas et al. 2008). Teens tend to rank libraries and librarians low on the list of resources that could help meet their everyday-life information needs because they do not perceive them as relevant or useful (Poston-Anderson and Edwards 1993; Latrobe and Havener 1997; Agosto and Hughes-Hassell 2005). When teens are the focus of library use studies, the literature tends heavily to favor li- brary users as research participants (e.g., Agosto 2007; Luo and Weak 2013), meaning that we know more about the library attitudes and behaviors of frequent users than infrequent users. Studies of US teens who are public library users typically find that about 70% of US teens use their public libraries at least occasionally (e.g., Vavrek 2004; Abbas et al. 2008; Sin 2012). These studies operationalize “use” in the broadest sense, providing little detail of its nature. As for factors predicting library use and nonuse, Sin (2012) used structural equation mod- eling to show that school information environment, frequency of school library use, race/ ethnicity, and home computer availability are tied to US teens’ frequency of public library use. Levels of public library service provision were also a factor, with teens living near well- supported public libraries using them more frequently than teens who live farther away, even when differences such as socioeconomic status and achievement motivation were taken into account. June Abbas, Melanie Kimball, Kay Bishop, and George D’Elia (2008) surveyed more than 4,000 fifth- through twelfth-grade students in New York State and found the most popular reasons for public library nonuse to include negative opinions about libraries, inconvenience, dislike of reading, preference for using school libraries, and preference for using the Internet to search for information. Bernard Vavrek (2004) surveyed 4,000 US households with teens in sixth- through twelfth-grades and found teens to favor Internet use over public and school library use and to hold generally more favorable views of bookstores than of public libraries. Lack of awareness of available services has also been tied to nonuse (Luo and Weak 2013). Additionally, gender has been tied to varying levels of public library use. Adolescent girls in general tend to view public libraries more favorably than boys (Cook, Parker, and Pettijohn 2005; Agosto, Paone, and Ipock 2007), and girls tend to use public libraries more frequently (D’Elia et al. 2007). Teens and Social Technology Teens’ social relationships are important to consider when examining how and why they en- gage with technology. Some research has focused on the ways teens use individual technolo-
Teens, Technology, and Libraries • 251 gies for social purposes (e.g., Grinter, Palen, and Eldridge 2006). In their work examining the ways teens use video chat online, Tatiana Buhler, Carmen Neustaedter, and Serena Hillman (2013) found that teens use these services for a multitude of activities, including shared home- work sessions, show and tell, performances, gossip, flirting, and the expression of sexuality. Research has also focused on the use of social media and social networking services (SNS). In her 2008 work, danah boyd stressed that SNS use is influenced by where teens’ friends are online. Her work highlights the social and identity-building roles of SNS use: “What the drive- in was to teens in the 1950s and the mall in the 1980s, Facebook, texting, twitter, instant messaging, and other social media are to teens now. Teens flock to them knowing that they can socialize with friends and become better acquainted with classmates and peers they don’t know as well” (boyd 2014, 20). Kerry Mallan (2009) worked with Australian teenagers to study their SNS use and sug- gested that “the technology itself is a key player in shaping how a community can operate in complementing offline identity and social activities” (64). The connection between online and off-line interaction is also noted in Raul Katz, Max Felix, and Malden Gubernick’s (2013) work, which compared adolescent technology use in populations from a public school in New York City and a private Episcopal boarding school in Concord, New Hampshire. Based on comparisons of students’ use of technologies, including cell phones, computers, games, tele- vision, and SNS, the authors state that, “contrary to the presumed homogenization of infor- mation goods consumptions and communication patterns, the adoption and patterns of tech- nology use are shaped by the individuals’ residing environment and context” (865). The complicated nature of social technology use is also seen in work examining teens’ decision making and device choices. Denise Agosto, June Abbas, and Robin Naughton (2012) found that teens have definite preferences for information and communication technology (ICT) use, prioritizing face-to-face interaction and verbal phone calling for deep information exchange and informal communication with close friends and immediate family. They also identified teens’ inclination toward texting to engage in small information exchange and to address urgent information needs. When information needs are less urgent, teens rely on SNS and e-mail. The authors concluded that “the fact that these teens used such a wide range of ICT selection criteria indicates that teens’ social media selection decisions need to be viewed as complex and varying according to context” (Agosto et al. 2012, 1119). Similarly, Bethany Blair, Anne Fletcher, and Erin Gaskin (2013) examined how and why adolescents make decisions between texting and calling. They found that teens perceive texting as easier than calling because it maximizes opportunities for multitasking, minimizes required forethought, and accommodates peers’ preferences. Together these studies tell us that technology use and preferences are informed by friend- ships and social relationships. Given that libraries are places where technology is used, it is important to consider the impact of social context when studying teens’ library use patterns and perceptions.
252 • The Library Quarterly Continuums of Inclusion Related to teens’ use of social technology is the concept of digital inclusion. Sonia Living- stone and Ellen Helsper (2007) argued for a shift in focus from the digital divide to “a con- tinuum of inclusion,” building on Mark Warschauer’s (2003) call for technology for social in- clusion and other work examining differences in technology use, including that of Paul Foley, Ximena Alfonso, Karl Brown, and John Fisher (2003); Eszter Hargittai (2002); and Graham Murdock (2002). These studies demonstrate that effective inclusion entails not just access but social and cultural support, higher-level engagement, and progression in experience with dig- ital technologies. We examine teen library use with a similar stance by considering not just access but the social relationships and contextual factors that inform library use. Method To examine these questions, we conducted written surveys and individual interviews with 25 high school students during April and May 2013. We recruited study participants on a volunteer basis at a competitive-entry urban magnet public school. The school has a curricular focus on science, technology, mathematics, and entrepreneurship. There were 488 students enrolled for the 2012–13 academic year. About 30% came from economically disadvantaged families, and about 65% were minorities. We chose this school for gathering a purposive sam- ple of teens likely to be technology leaders among their generation, with easy access to a wide variety of technologies and with well-developed technology practices, in order to understand their attitudes toward and relationships with libraries. After completing consent and assent procedures, students completed online surveys and took part in interviews. Participants were recruited on a volunteer basis via an informational session during a school assembly and informational sessions in homeroom classes, during which we explained the study and asked for volunteers. Each student who took part in the study was paid a total of $20 for completing a survey and an interview. The surveys asked for back- ground information, including age, grade in school, frequency of computer use, and online question asking and answering behaviors. (For a more detailed explanation of the survey de- sign, see Forte et al. 2014). Although informed by the survey responses, this article focuses on analyzing the individ- ual interview data, because only the individual interviews were designed to investigate par- ticipants’ uses and perceptions of libraries. A total of 25 students completed surveys and individual interviews. See table 1 for de- mographic snapshots of the study participants. Roughly one-third were male and two-thirds were female. Participants ranged in age from 14 to 18, with the largest percentage (40%) in the age 18 group. Students age 18 or older did not need parental consent to participate, so they were able to complete consent procedures more rapidly than minors, resulting in more 18-year-olds taking part in the study. Participants reported generally high levels of parental
Teens, Technology, and Libraries • 253 Table 1. Participant Demographics N % Sex: Male 8 32 Female 17 68 Age: 14 1 4 15 3 12 16 8 32 17 3 12 18 10 40 Parental education: Don’t know 2 8 Some high school 2 8 High school diploma 7 28 College degree 3 12 Advanced graduate degree 9 36 Not reported 2 8 Race/ethnicity: Asian 1 4 Black/African American 7 28 White 7 28 Hispanic or Latino 4 16 Biracial/other 1 4 Not reported 5 20 Web-use skills (mean, not %) 25 3.28 education, with nearly half (48%) reporting that at least one parent had completed college. In comparison, just 23.2% of adults the city where the school is located have a bachelor’s de- gree or higher (US Census Bureau 2014). Roughly a quarter of the students identified themselves as black/African American, and about a quarter identified themselves as white. Nearly one- fifth identified themselves as Hispanic/Latino. The survey also measured students’ self-reported web-use skill levels using Eszter Hargittai and Yuli Hsieh’s (2012) validated 10-item survey instrument. Researchers have found that web- use skills are important predictors of technology adoption and usage. For example, multiple studies have found that these skills play an influential role in sharing practices, with web-use skills related to increased online content creation and sharing (Hargittai and Walejko 2008, Correa 2010, Livingstone and Helsper 2010). As such, these measures provide important con- textual information about the population being studied. Students were asked “How famil- iar are you with the following computer and Internet-related items?” with 10 items provided and answers scored on a 5-point Likert-type scale, ranging from 1 (no understanding) to 5 (full understanding), to assess their understanding of each concept. Participants’ scores were combined and averaged to generate a measure of group Internet skills. These scores can
254 • The Library Quarterly serve as a useful proxy for people’s actual online abilities in searching for information (Har- gittai and Hsieh 2012). The web-use skills items have been used in many studies and have consistently shown high internal consistency across data sets (Hargittai and Hsieh 2012). Our data also exhibit excellent internal consistency with a Cronbach’s alpha of 0.88. Our participants evidenced diverse web-use skill levels, ranging from 1.4 to 5.0, with a mean score of 3.28 and a standard deviation of 0.81. Comparing the average web-use skills of our sample to those reviewed by Hargittai and Hsieh (2012)—in which average scores ranged from 2.80 to 3.24—we find that the teens in our sample averaged slightly higher-than- average skill levels, which makes sense since they were enrolled in a technology-focused school. It is important to note that, although the school had a physical space that housed a library collection, at the time of the study there was no librarian on staff. The seniors in our study were the only students who had had a librarian on staff during their high school years; the school librarian position had been cut due to budget issues after their freshman year. The circulating collection was still in use, but without a librarian on staff to oversee the library program. Unfortunately, this lack of staffing reflects the current status of many urban school li- braries. In its 2011 report on urban schools, the American Association of School Librarians found that “only 37% of respondents indicated that their [school] libraries are staffed by one or more full-time, professionally credentialed librarians” (American Association of School Librarians 2011). In many US school districts—especially in urban areas—attending a school without a librarian on staff is more common than attending a school with an employed librarian. The majority of the school-based research investigating students’ perceptions and use of libraries has been conducted in schools staffed with librarians. However, the opinions and behaviors of students in understaffed schools are equally valid and merit study; these students also have valuable opinions and perceptions of libraries. As a field we want to study them and serve their needs, too. Although the culture and context of this school are unique, the findings from our work there can inform research and practice for others interested in understanding high school students’ perceptions of public and school libraries, especially given the reality of current tight funding and staffing for many libraries endeavoring to serve teens. Data Analysis The survey and interview guide were based on a review of the teens and social technology literatures and on the 28 everyday life information needs categories presented in Denise Agosto and Sandra Hughes-Hassell (2006). The interview questions asked participants about their use of social media and other technologies, their favorite activities online, their online question asking and answering experiences, their social media interactions with teachers
Teens, Technology, and Libraries • 255 and school administrators, and their use of school and public libraries. Specifically, we asked participants to tell us about the last time they had used a library, allowing them to de- fine library use for themselves. We then used probe questions to learn more about their experiences. Each interview lasted roughly half an hour. Together the interviews totaled more than 16 hours of audio recordings. The written transcripts totaled 289 pages of raw data, or more than 128,000 words. We used qualitative content analysis, a common method for coding qualitative interview transcripts, to analyze the data (Wildemuth 2009). Qualitative content analysis enables the interpretation of textual data through the systematic coding and iden- tification of significant themes (Hsieh and Shannon 2005). We used inductive category de- velopment (Mayring 2000) to analyze the transcripts with the individual theme as the unit of analysis. Inductive category development uses the research questions as a starting place for developing the coding scheme. The researchers first divide the research questions into abstract categories and then conduct iterative rounds of coding, refining the categories with each round. Depending on the size of the body of data, the researchers usually conduct ini- tial rounds of coding and category development with 10–50% of the data. After a coding scheme that fits that portion of the data is developed, the researchers then return to the full body of data for additional rounds of coding, refining the coding scheme to ensure a fit to the full body of data. “The main idea of the procedure is to formulate a criterion of defini- tion, derived from [the] theoretical background and research questions, which determines the aspects of the textual material taken into account. Following this criterion the material is worked through and categories are tentatively and step-by-step deduced. Within a feed- back loop those categories are revised, eventually reduced to main categories and checked in respect to their reliability” (Mayring 2000, par. 4.1). This approach is similar to Hsieh and Shannon’s (2005) process of conventional qualita- tive content analysis, in which categories are derived during the iterative data analysis pro- cess. However, Philipp Mayring’s (2000) inductive category development enables researchers to begin category derivation with the concepts embedded in the research questions, providing direction and increasing the likelihood of conceptual relevance of the coding scheme. In this case, inductive category development enabled us to focus data analysis on understanding the participants’ perceptions and use of public and school libraries. The final coding scheme is summarized as follows: Reasons for Library Nonuse 19 “library” equals “books” 13 inadequate resources 10 libraries are obsolete 6 uninviting atmospheres and staffs
256 • The Library Quarterly Reasons for Library Use 9 social interaction 9 leisure opportunities 5 schoolwork space and resources 2 technology access 2 personal development Influence of Technology on Library Use 9 ubiquitous access 8 convenience/accessibility 7 changing perceptions of books and technology 6 ease of use Barriers to Library Use 8 policy barriers 6 knowledge barriers 4 access barriers The numbers to the left of each category indicate the number of participants who dis- cussed it. In the case of multiple references within a single interview, all references were combined to count as one occurrence. For example, 13 of the 25 participants expressed the idea that libraries offer inadequate resources, even though there were more than 13 unique comments about inadequate resources. Counting theme occurrences is a common practice in qualitative content analysis, but there is disagreement about the reliability and validity of the counts. As a result, caution must be used in applying quantitative measures to qualitative data (Pratt 2009). Numbers are included here to provide a general idea about the relative frequency of category occurrence, but they should not be read as absolute statements about their relative importance in relation to the research questions. Findings The interview questions asked participants to think about the last time they had been to a library and to describe the activities they had conducted there. In general, the students were infrequent school and public library users, although most were able to recall experiences using their school and/or public libraries at some point in the past. One likely reason for their collective infrequent use of their school library was the lack of a librarian in the school for the prior three years. Students explained that the space still contained a library collection, but there were no librarian-led lessons or activities. Many of the students were now using the
Teens, Technology, and Libraries • 257 library as a place to eat lunch or to spend open periods and free time, and part of the library had been turned into a makeshift music room. A number of additional factors contributed to their infrequent library use, including neg- ative perceptions of libraries (both public and school), policy barriers, knowledge barriers, re- source inadequacies, access barriers, and a preference for technology. On the other hand, some of the students did use libraries more frequently than others. They identified several factors motivating their use, including social interaction, leisure opportunities, book availability, and reading and schoolwork space. Reasons for Nonuse of Libraries When discussing libraries, the participants overwhelmingly focused on books as the core product or service for both public and school libraries. This is not surprising, as the vast ma- jority of the US public tends to think of libraries mainly as book providers (De Rosa et al. 2011). Fully three-quarters of the participants (19, or 76%) expressed the idea that “library” equals “books.” This limited perception meant they would mainly think to use a library when looking for a paper book, not for socializing or for entertainment opportunities or to take advantage of the many other services libraries offer. And since most of the participants ex- pressed a preference for technology over paper books, they tended to view technology as more appealing than libraries. As one of the 18-year-old girls said, she didn’t use libraries because “I’m not a book person.” Similarly, the next most commonly discussed reason for limited library use was the per- ception that libraries had inadequate resources—a reason discussed by slightly over half of the students (13, or 52%). Part of this perception likely stemmed from the school’s lack of a school librarian and consequent lack of conscious materials collection: “[The school library] doesn’t really have books that you can use in class. . . . There are a few language books and there are a few cookbooks. Because we have our laptops . . . the books are mostly there for entertainment” (female, age 18). However, the public library received similar criticism de- spite ongoing collection building and maintenance: “The [public] library near my house isn’t very good. It doesn’t have a wide selection of books that I like to read. So typically if I want to read a book, I either already have it, I buy it off Amazon, or I have to go to a different library, further away from me” (female, age 15). In addition, 10 (40%) of the participants held the view that in today’s technology-driven society, libraries are obsolete. They felt that rather than being complementary, libraries and technology were in competition for their time and interest, and the Internet and online con- tent providers such as iTunes have made libraries an artifact of the past. With nearly ubiqui- tous connectivity at home, school, and elsewhere, and with portable technologies such as cell phones and MP3 players nearly always at hand, they felt no need to go to libraries for
258 • The Library Quarterly technology access. These students also tended to view technology as easier and quicker to use than libraries. As one of the boys explained: “Because everyone is so tech-based, it is kind of pointless to go into the library anymore” (age 17). The first three categories of reasons for nonuse all address library resources. The next category reflects about a quarter of the students’ (6, or 24%) perceptions of libraries as hav- ing uninviting atmospheres and staffs. Several students recounted past negative experiences with librarians and other staff, which led them to develop unpleasant associations with li- braries. For example, one of the senior-year students critiqued both the inconsistent staffing of the school library and inconsistent rules for use of the space: “The first year the librarian ran it differently than the second year, and then she left. The third year, we didn’t have anyone, so it was even more of a hangout spot. Then the next year we got a new librarian that was like, ‘No food! No drinks! No talking!’ People were no longer interested in going there” (female, age 18). This negative association with library employees and environments extended to public libraries as well. For instance, one of the boys felt uncomfortable going to the public library because of the restrictive rules: “I wouldn’t do anything that would distract others. Not because I’m a nice person, but I am totally anticonfrontational, so if [library staff] got mad at me I wouldn’t even know what to do. I would be like ‘I’m sorry man, please, please!’” (male, age 18). Reasons for Library Use Still, perceptions of libraries were not entirely negative. The most frequently stated reason for library use was social interaction (cited by 9 students, or 36%). This included hanging out, socializing, and eating in library spaces, which was particularly common in the school library. Nine participants (36%) also discussed using libraries for leisure opportunities, including using public and school libraries to get books for leisure reading and as a space for leisure reading, using the public library for checking out leisure music, and attending planned library programs such as movies and games. For example, one of the girls explained that the last time she had gone to the public library was last Tuesday. But that was actually the first time in years that I went. I actually went there because my friend needed a book for his class, and he was going to get a library card, and he wanted me to come. He had money, but he owed [more in fines], so I allowed him to use my card, and we actually ended up staying because it had this program going on in the back, and they told us if we stayed there was going to be food, so we stayed and played some games. . . . [We learned that] they have these things every Tuesday, these teen programs that they have, and all these teens from different
Teens, Technology, and Libraries • 259 places come and meet, and they play all these games, and eat, and just hang out. It was really fun. We actually started going on Tuesdays, because it was really fun. . . . We were making poems out of the titles of the books. It was really fun. We played Dance, Dance, Revolution. [And] they do things like karaoke. (age 16) Other students had used their public libraries for schoolwork space and resources: It started out as part of an English assignment that we were doing an independent reading, so you could do an author study, or a genre study, and I chose an author study. So my English teacher had two of the books I wanted to read, but there were two more that I didn’t have and nobody that I could find in the school had them, and our school library didn’t have them. So we took a school trip to the library and I was like, “Oh wait, I have a library card!” But it’s like from when I was in fifth grade. . . . So I got my library card renewed and now I’ve been back a bunch of times since then, because it was such a great experience. I was like, “Hey! The library is quiet. There’s every- thing I need.” I forgot what a good source it was. . . . Yeah, it was like: “Hey! The library’s kind of awesome.” (female, age 18) For some students library materials were the draw, but for others the physical building itself was the attraction: “[I go to the library] not really because it’s in the library, but I can finish my work just because there is not a lot of people in there. That really has nothing to do with it being the library itself ” (male, age 17). Although the professional library literature often emphasizes the role of technology access for teens, only 2 (8%) of the 25 participants discussed having used libraries for this pur- pose. One had used the public library when her personal technology had malfunctioned: “I think the last time [I used the public library was when] I ran out of ink in my printer” (female, age 15). The others tended to dismiss library technology as unnecessary due to the ubiquity of devices and access in their lives: “I have Wi-Fi at my house, so it’s not like I need to go somewhere to get connected to the Internet” (female, 15). Finally, under reasons for library use, 2 participants (8%) identified their public libraries as places for personal development or for self-improvement and to fulfill volunteering require- ments for school. A common theme running through the interviews and reflected in several of the catego- ries for library use and nonuse was the influence of technology on library use. Nine of the participants (36%) explained that ubiquitous access reduced their need to use libraries. For example, “I never use the library that often because I have mostly everything at home and I have a whole bunch of like [devices]. . . . If the one thing don’t work, such as my laptop, I have a desktop. My grandma has a laptop. Then I have game systems that are connected to the Internet, and I have a lot of them. So I really don’t need to go to the library because I have everything at home” (female, age 15).
260 • The Library Quarterly The convenience/accessibility of technology was also attributed to reduced library use (8 participants, or 32%). These students felt that accessing information resources at home via digital devices was more comfortable and more convenient than going to a library. The perception of access to any desirable resources “comfortably at my home” (female, age 15) was repeated throughout the interviews. In addition, changing perceptions of books and technology contributed to reduced library use, noted by 7 participants (25%). Students tended to equate libraries with paper books and leisure reading, and digital device use with schoolwork and information searching. Pref- erences for paper books or e-books for leisure reading varied, with some students feeling that paper books provided fewer distractions than reading on digital devices and others sug- gesting that the current availability of free online books meant no need for libraries. For example: When I was a freshman, and my mom was really into me reading and stuff, I used to visit the public library to get books, but then it just faded away. I usually just read stuff online [now]. I have a Google Books account now that I read. I’m reading The Three Musketeers now, mostly because it’s free. It’s one of those preloaded books that I’m reading now. They have such a vast collection and they are relatively inexpensive to get a book online. There are so many apps that give you free books now. Traveling to the library and doing that whole process of signing it out and have to return it, it’s just more convenient to just read on your phone. You don’t have to carry a book around with you all the time. (male, age 18) In contrast, another student expressed a different point of view: “I feel like it’s better to have the hard copy of a book than the online version of it, because I’m more into actually reading and I’m focused on that, instead of having a laptop where I can go anywhere I want. I just stay away from that and actually read” (female, age 18). The participants expressed more uniform opinions about the relative ease of use of paper and digital resources. All 6 participants (24%) who made comparisons agreed that digital resources are easier to use than paper books. They explained that Google and the web are easier to use for school research than school library databases, that e-books are quicker and easier to access than paper books, and that paper books are generally harder to use due to teens’ greater familiarity with digital formats. Barriers to Library Use Nearly one-third of the participants (8, or 32%) discussed policy barriers, including fines, due dates, public library noise restrictions, time limits for the use of public library comput- ers, and high noise levels in the school library. Materials use policies were also seen as de- terrents to library use: “I used to [use the public library]. What ended up happening was
Teens, Technology, and Libraries • 261 a thirty-dollar fine for a video that I didn’t even check out, so I never ended up going back and finding out how to solve the problem” (female, age 16). About a quarter of the teens (6, or 24%) also identified knowledge barriers as deterrents to library use, including lack of knowledge of how libraries operate, how library collections are organized, and how to use paper books. For example: “I took statistics class last year, and I needed to have a textbook. But instead of actually going to get the textbook, I ended up finding it online and downloading it, and just using my computer. They gave me a textbook, but I didn’t know how to use it. I couldn’t understand how to use the textbook anymore, because it’s been so long” (female, age 18). Access barriers also proved problematic for 4 students (16%). They expressed a sense of difficulty getting to the public library and a perceived lack of organization of the school library collection. As one of the girls explained: “I love reading—big book nerd. I’ve taken several books from our school library, and I used to have a library card for the [public] library, around my way. And I used to take books all the time, but recently, since I got into high school, it’s harder for me to touch base with the library, just because sometimes it’s out of the way” (female, age 16). Discussion Looking more broadly at the categories in the coding scheme, together they add up to a widely held perception that libraries represent an outdated past, whereas technology repre- sents these teens’ everyday reality. Few saw libraries as relevant to their daily lives, yet most saw technology as relevant. This is likely due in part to the fact that they were attending a technology-focused school and had self-selected as being interested in technology. The lack of a school librarian for the past three years was also likely a contributor. Still, the point to be learned here is that libraries have not successfully marketed their relevance to this group of teens. Although public libraries often try to market themselves as places to turn for technology access (e.g., Chapman 2014), these teens’ views of libraries as competing with technology seems to diminish the likely effectiveness of such campaigns. Recent work examining tech- nology access and use has complicated the idea that access is the most important factor in one’s ability to capably use digital technology. Neil Selwyn (2006) has highlighted the im- portance of agency as a factor, demonstrating that, for some people, nonuse of technology is a personal choice and that use can occur through proxy users who interact with technolo- gies such as computers and the Internet on their behalf. Eszter Hargittai (2010) has found that, for young adults early in their college careers, there are important differences in the level of “Web know-how” (108) using the Internet that are correlated to socioeconomic status, gen- der, and race and ethnicity. She found that individuals from lower-income backgrounds, women, and Hispanic and African Americans demonstrate lower levels of Internet skills. These
262 • The Library Quarterly works join a growing body of critiques that take down traditional understandings of the digi- tal divide (e.g., van Dijk and Hacker 2003; Selwyn 2009; Agosto et al. 2012) and stress that per- sonal background, experiences, knowledge, and choice are all important factors when trying to understand technology use practices. These ideas may be analogous to our understandings of teens’ use of libraries. While ac- cess is an important factor to consider, including physical distance from libraries as well as factors such as open hours and the climate of youth spaces in buildings, access alone does not solve the issue of promoting and supporting library use. Taking factors such as agency, proxy use, background, and skill levels into account may help to overcome nonuse and low levels of use of libraries and their services. This is not to suggest that libraries play no roles in these teens’ lives. On the contrary, all 25 participants—even those who characterized themselves as current nonusers—had used libraries in the past at least once. Thus, this study shows the importance of thinking about library use and nonuse not as binary but as a continuum of use, as is the case with technology use. In fact, several library use patterns were present within the data set. About one-quarter of the participants (6, or 24%) identified themselves as having been frequent public library users as children but current nonusers. They explained that as preteens or teens they had stopped using public libraries because their parents or guardians had stopped taking them, they had less free time, or both. On the other hand, two students (8%) had recently redis- covered and become enthusiastic supporters of the public library after having been infre- quent users for years, showing the potential effectiveness of reintroducing teens to libraries and library services. Also notable were social factors motivating use. One-fifth of the participants (5, or 20%) explained that they would only go to their public library to accompany a friend or family member or that they would only do schoolwork or hang out in the school library if friends or project collaborators were there. This is an important finding, because there is a shortage of public spaces where teens can meet and interact (Owens 2002), and it offers a potentially fruitful avenue for making libraries more relevant to teens’ lives. It suggests that, just as youths’ technology practices are tightly connected with social and community re- lationships, so are their library use practices. Another general theme was participants’ perceptions of information resources. Opinions about the relative ease of use of paper and digital resources varied, with some students identifying paper books as more difficult to use and less familiar than digital resources and others identifying paper books as preferred for leisure reading and digital resources pre- ferred for research and information searching. All who compared the two types of resources, however, agreed that they had greater access to digital resources than to print and for that reason used the digital resources more.
Teens, Technology, and Libraries • 263 Overall, these data provide us with an introductory picture of these students’ library experiences and perceptions. The question now becomes how best to use these findings to improve library services and to make libraries more relevant to teens. These teens were most likely to use school and public libraries as social and community gathering spaces, for entertainment opportunities, as places for volunteering opportunities, and as places for quiet study/reading/contemplation. Some also looked to libraries for information access, but less so on the whole. Still, the professional literature indicates an enduring overwhelming em- phasis on libraries as resource providers, and on libraries as paper book providers in partic- ular (Agosto 2013). Based on these data, it makes sense for library service providers, at least in part, to shift the traditional focus on libraries as resource providers to libraries as social opportunity and physical space providers. This is not to suggest abandoning resource provi- sion as a core of library services, but it does suggest bolstering other aspects of library ser- vices such as libraries as social gathering and community-building and collaboration spaces. Again, the social support aspects of libraries are key, especially for teens, who often have limited mobility or limited access to places where they can safely or easily hang out and socialize. Libraries interested in increasing teen participation should look toward providing services that facilitate social interaction, and they should focus on promoting libraries as so- cial organizations. Just because the teens in this study tended to be infrequent library users does not mean that they were infrequent information users or infrequent information searchers. In some cases, these students were learning how to tailor their use of technology to find information in sophisticated ways other than going through libraries. For example, one of the girls (age 18) had downloaded a search interface for a database of peer-reviewed publications, which she used for her chemistry class. There are many teens who might benefit from learning about these kinds of resources outside of the physical and virtual boundaries of formal libraries. For students with high levels of technology access, such as those in our study, librarians acting as technology educators to teach teens sophisticated information searching and resource eval- uation and how to arm their phones or computers with available resources would probably be more useful than positioning libraries as technology access points. Thus, this work sug- gests an additional shift from the traditional focus on librarians as resource providers to librarians as information educators. Again, this was a specific group of teens with easy access to technology and generally high technology skills. In reframing library services to appeal to the broader field of today’s teens, librarians should consider how to balance varying expectations of different groups with different backgrounds and needs within the library community, such as balancing tensions between groups wanting socialization spaces and those looking for study spaces, and groups of teens still looking mainly to libraries to provide them with information resources. De- pending on the demographic composition of a community, the balance of needs will vary. In
264 • The Library Quarterly economically advantaged and/or technology-saturated communities, teens are likely to have lower needs for technology access, as was the case here. In these types of communities, the most effective approach might be to focus on providing community engagement opportu- nities, civic participation outlets, social activities, and information education instead of fo- cusing on information resource provision and on technology access provision. For more dis- advantaged communities, public and school libraries might better serve teens by focusing resources and energy on providing technology access, infrastructure, and education and by providing information resources teens can’t get elsewhere. As is so often the case, under- standing context and community is key to developing effective services to meet community needs and to show teens that libraries are relevant to their needs and interests. Limitations This study provides rich understandings of how teens perceive and use libraries, but there are limitations to this work. Due to ethics board requirements, it was easier for students who were legal adults (age 18 and older) to complete the consent process than it was for younger students. This resulted in participants’ ages skewing older. Additionally, this study relies on self-reported data, which, although good for illuminating thoughts, perceptions, and atti- tudes, does not include external measures of access or use. Moreover, this work is not generalizable to the full range of US teen populations. All participants came from one unique context, living and attending school in a large city—a school with a science and technology curriculum focus that did not offer current access to a school librarian. The generally high levels of parental educational attainment should also be noted here, with 38% of students having at least one parent with an advanced degree. This is quite a bit higher than the national average of 11% (US Census Bureau, 2013). As is the case with any qualitative research study, those wishing to apply the results to other contexts need to consider how the contexts vary and determine which aspects of the findings are likely transferable (Lincoln and Guba 1985). Conclusion Overall, this study suggests that libraries might be better able to serve teens—especially teens living in tech-heavy school and home contexts—if they focused on creating and promoting services that could be more easily integrated into the teens’ existing technology use patterns. Although the frequency of social media use varied among the participants, it was clear that, on the whole, technology use was a central feature of their everyday lives. Libraries, on the other hand, did not play a central role in any of their lives. It is up to libraries to show teens that libraries and technology are not conflicting concepts. Of course, most US public and school libraries do offer some technologically mediated services and provide a range of digital resources. More than 97% offer public Wi-Fi; 98% offer
Teens, Technology, and Libraries • 265 technology training; 89.5% offer e-books; and 96.5% offer online homework help (American Library Association 2014). Still, many of the participants were largely unfamiliar with their libraries and were unaware of the range of available library resources and services; the dominant image of libraries in their collective thinking was as providers of only paper books. One of the boys even suggested that “Today’s youth have quit libraries” (age 18). He obviously can’t speak for an entire generation, but his comment—and many others from this study— show that this belief is held by at least some members of his generation, and it signifies a public relations crisis for libraries. Thus, perhaps the most urgent message of this work is that, to some teens in the United States today, libraries represent the past—a largely nontechnical past that has little relevance to their tech-heavy daily lives. The onus for changing this perception lies with the field of librarianship, whose members must show today’s youth that, rather than existing apart from networked society, libraries have evolved with it and are places where technology is both a driving force and raison d’être. If the field of librarianship cannot get this message of 21st- century relevance across to more young people, then it risks losing an entire generation of potential library users and supporters and reifying the ominous pronouncement that “today’s youth have quit libraries.” References Abbas, June, Melanie Kimball, Kay Bishop, and George D’Elia. 2008. “Youth, Public Libraries, and the Internet: Part Four: Why Youth Do Not Use the Public Library.” Public Libraries 47 (1): 80–86. Agosto, Denise E. 2007. “Why Do Teens Use Libraries? Results of a Public Library User Survey.” Public Libraries 46 (3): 55–62. Agosto, Denise E. 2013. “Envisaging Young Adult Librarianship from a Teen-Centered Perspective.” In Transforming Young Adult Services, edited by Anthony Bernier. Chicago: Neal-Schuman. Agosto, Denise E., and June Abbas. 2010. “High School Seniors’ Social Network and Other ICT Preferences and Concerns.” Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 47:1–10. Agosto, Denise E., June Abbas, J., and Robin Naughton. 2012. “Relationships and Social Rules: Teens’ Social Network and Other ICT Selection Practices.” Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 63 (6): 1108–24. Agosto, Denise E., and Sandra Hughes-Hassell. 2005. “People, Places, and Questions: An Investigation of the Everyday Life Information Seeking Behaviors of Urban Young Adults.” Library and Information Science Research 27 (2): 141–63. Agosto, Denise E., and Sandra Hughes-Hassell. 2006. “Toward a Model of the Everyday Life Information Needs of Urban Teenagers, Part 2: Empirical Model.” Journal of the American Society for Information Science 57 (11): 1418–26. Agosto, Denise E., D. E., Kimberly L. Paone, and Gretchen S. Ipock. 2007. “The Female-Friendly Public Library: Gender Differences in Adolescents’ Uses and Perceptions of U.S. Public Libraries.” Library Trends 56 (2): 387–401.
266 • The Library Quarterly American Association of School Librarians. 2011. AASL Urban Schools Task Force Survey Report, January 8. http:// www.ala.org/aasl/sites/ala.org.aasl/files/content/researchandstatistics/AASL%20Urban%20Schools %20Taskforce%20Report_v2.pdf. American Library Association. 2014. Digital Inclusion: Public Libraries Lead the Way. http://www.ala.org/offices /ors/public-libraries-lead-way-digital-inclusion. Bayne, Sian, and Jen Ross. 2011. “‘Digital Native’ and ‘Digital Immigrant’ Discourses: A Critique.” In Digital Difference: Perspectives on Online Learning, edited by Ray Land and Sian Bayne. Rotterdam: Sense. Blair, Bethany L., Anne C. Fletcher, and Erin R. Gaskin. 2013. “Cell Phone Decision Making: Adolescents’ Perceptions of How and Why They Make the Choice to Text or Call.” Youth and Society 47 (3): 1–17. boyd, danah. 2008. “Why Youth (Heart) Social Network Sites: The Role of Networked Publics in Teenage Social Life.” In Youth, Identity, and Digital Media, edited by David Buckingham. John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation Series on Digital Media and Learning. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. boyd, danah. 2014. It’s Complicated: The Social Lives of Networked Teens. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. Buhler, Tatiana, Carmen Neustaedter, and Serena Hillman. 2013. “How and Why Teenagers Use Video Chat.” In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, CSCW 2013. New York: Association for Computing Machinery. Çepni, Salih, Erol Tas, and Sacit Köse. 2006. “The Effects of Computer-Assisted Material on Students’ Cognitive Levels, Misconceptions and Attitudes Towards Science.” Computers and Education 46 (2): 192–205. Chapman, Jan. 2014. “YALSA and Best Buy Partnership Brings Digital Literacy to Teens.” Young Adult Library Services 12 (3): 6–7. Cook, Sherry J., Stephen Parker, and Charles E. Pettijohn. 2005. “The Public Library: An Early Teen’s Perspective.” Public Libraries 44 (3): 157–61. Correa, Teresa. 2010. “The Participation Divide among ‘Online Experts’: Experience, Skills and Psycho- logical Factors as Predictors of College Students’ Web Content Creation.” Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 16 (1): 71–92. D’Elia, George, June Abbas, Kay Bishop, Donald Jacobs, and Eleanor Jo Rodger. 2007. “The Impact of Youth’s Use of the Internet on Their Use of the Public Library.” Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 58 (14): 2180–96. De Rosa, Cathy, et al. 2011. Perceptions of Libraries, 2010: Context and Community. Dublin OH: OCLC Online Computer Library Center. http://www.oclc.org/reports/2010perceptions/2010perceptions_all.pdf. Foley, Paul D., Ximena Alfonso, Karl Brown, and John Fisher. 2003. Connecting People: Tackling Exclusion? An Examination of the Impact on and Use of the Internet by Socially Excluded Groups in London. London: De- Montfort University/IECRC/CitizensOnline. Forte, Andrea, Michael Dickard, Rachel M. Magee, and Denise E. Agosto. 2014. “What Do Teens Ask Their Online Social Networks? Social Search Practices among High School Students.” Paper presented at the 17th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing (CSCW 2014), Workshop on Social Media Question Answering, Baltimore. Grinter, Rebecca E., Leysia Palen, and Margery Eldridge. 2006. “Chatting with Teenagers: Considering the Place of Chat Technologies in Teen Life.” ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction 13 (4): 423–47. Hargittai, Eszter. 2002. “Second-Level Digital Divide: Differences in People’s Online Skills.” First Monday 7 (4). http://firstmonday.org/article/view/942/864. Hargittai, Eszter. 2010. “Digital Na(t)ives? Variation in Internet Skills and Uses among Members of the ‘Net Generation.’” Sociological Inquiry 80 (1): 92–113.
Teens, Technology, and Libraries • 267 Hargittai, Eszter, and Yuli P. Hsieh. 2012. “Succinct Survey Measures of Web-Use Skills.” Social Science Computer Review 30 (1): 95–107. Hargittai, Eszter, and Gina Walejko. 2008. “The Participation Divide: Content Creation and Sharing in the Digital Age.” Information, Communication and Society 11 (2): 239–56. Hsieh, Hsiu-Fang, and Kaohsiung Shannon. 2005. “Three Approaches to Qualitative Content Analysis.” Qualitative Health Research 15 (9): 1277–88. Jones, Chris, and Laura Czerniewicz. 2010. “Describing or Debunking? The Net Generation and Digital Natives.” Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 26 (5): 317–20. Katz, Raul L., Max Felix, and Malden Gubernick. 2013. “Technology and Adolescents: Perspectives on the Things to Come.” Education and Information Technologies 19 (4): 863–68. Latrobe, Kathy, and W. M. Havener. 1997. “Information Seeking Behavior of High School Honors Stu- dents: An Exploratory Study.” Journal of Youth Services in Libraries 10 (2): 188–200. Lim, Cher Ping, Yong Zhao, Jo Tondeur, Ching Sing Chai, and Chin-Chung Tsai. 2013. “Bridging the Gap: Technology Trends and Use of Technology in Schools.” Educational Technology and Society 16 (2): 59–68. Lincoln, Yvonna, and Egon G. Guba. 1985. Naturalistic Inquiry. Newbury Park, CA: Sage. Livingstone, Sonia, and Anke Gorzig. 2014. “When Adolescents Receive Sexual Messages on the Internet: Explaining Experiences of Risk and Harm.” Computers in Human Behavior 33:8–15. Livingstone, Sonia, and Ellen J. Helsper. 2007. “Taking Risks When Communicating on the Internet: The Role of Offline Social-Psychological Factors in Young People’s Vulnerability to Online Risks.” Infor- mation, Communication and Society 10 (5): 619–43. Livingstone, Sonia, and Ellen J. Helsper. 2010. “Balancing Opportunities and Risks in Teenagers’ Use of the Internet: The Role of Online Skills and Internet Self-Efficacy.” New Media and Society 12 (2): 309–29. Luo, Lili, and Emily Weak. 2013. “Text Reference Service: Teens’ Perception and Use.” Library and Infor- mation Science Research 35 (1): 14–23. Madden, Mary, Amanda Lenhart, Maeve Duggan, Sandra Cortesi, and Urs Gasser. 2013. Teens and Technology 2013. Pew Internet and American Life Project. http://www.pewinternet.org/∼/media//Files/Reports /2013/PIP_TeensandTechnology2013.pdf. Mallan, Kerry. 2009. “Look at Me! Look at Me! Self-Representation and Self-Exposure through Online Networks.” Digital Culture and Education 1:51–66. Mayring, Philipp. 2000. “Qualitative Content Analysis.” Forum: Qualitative Social Research 1 (2). http://nbn -resolving.de/urn:nbn:de:0114-fqs0002204. Meyers, Elaine. 1999. “The Coolness Factor: Ten Libraries Listen to Youth.” American Libraries 30 (10): 42–45. Murdock, Graham. 2002. “Review Article: Debating Digital Divides.” In The Digital Divide: Facing a Crisis or Creating a Myth? edited by Benjamin M. Compaine. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Owens, Patsy E. 2002. “No Teens Allowed: The Exclusion of Adolescents from Public Spaces.” Landscape Journal 21:156–63. Parris, Leandra, Kris Varjas, Joel Meyers, and Hayley Cutts. 2012. “High School Students’ Perceptions of Coping with Cyberbullying.” Youth and Society 44 (2): 284–306. Poston-Anderson, Barbara, and Susan Edwards. 1993. “The Role of Information in Helping Adolescent Girls with Their Life Concerns.” School Library Media Quarterly 22:25–30. Pratt, Michael G. 2009. “For the Lack of a Boilerplate: Tips on Writing Up (and Reviewing) Qualitative Research.” Academy of Management Journal 52:856–62. Robertson, S. Ian, Judith Calder, Pat Fung, Ann Jones, and Tim O’Shea. 1995. “Computer Attitudes in an English Secondary School.” Computers and Education 24 (2): 73–81.
268 • The Library Quarterly Selwyn, Neil. 2006. “Digital Division or Digital Decision? A Study of Non-Users and Low-Users of Com- puters.” Poetics 34 (4–5): 273–92. Selwyn, Neil. 2009. “The Digital Native: Myth and Reality.” Aslib Proceedings: New Information Perspectives 61 (4): 364–79. Sin, Sei-Ching Joanna. 2012. “Modeling the Impact of Individuals’ Characteristics and Library Service Levels on High School Students’ Public Library Usage: A National Analysis.” Library and Information Science Research 34 (3): 228–37. Tsai, Meng-Jung, and Chin-Chung Tsai. 2010. “Junior High School Students’ Internet Usage and Self- Efficacy: A Re-Examination of the Gender Gap.” Computers and Education 54 (4): 1182–92. US Census Bureau. 2013. American Fact Finder. http://factfinder.census.gov/faces/tableservices/jsf/pages /productview.xhtml?pid5ACS_13_5YR_S1501&src5pt. US Census Bureau. 2014. Quick Facts. http://quickfacts.census.gov/. van Dijk, Jan, and Kenneth Hacker. 2003. “The Digital Divide as a Complex and Dynamic Phenomenon.” Information Society: An International Journal 19 (4): 315–26. Vavrek, Bernard. 2004. “Teens: Bullish on Public Libraries.” Public Library Quarterly 23 (1): 3–12. Warschauer, Mark. 2003. Technology and Social Inclusion: Rethinking the Digital Divide. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Wildemuth, Barbara M. 2009. Applications of Social Research Methods to Questions in Information and Library Science. Westport, CT: Libraries Unlimited. Zhu, Yu-Qian, Li-Yueh Chen, Houn-Gee Chen, and Ching-Chin Chern. “How Does Internet Information Seeking Help Academic Performance? The Moderating and Mediating Roles of Academic Self-Efficacy.” Computers and Education 57 (4): 2476–84. Denise E. Agosto: professor, College of Computing and Informatics at Drexel University; executive director of the Center for the Study of Libraries, Information and Society; and editor of Journal of Research on Libraries and Young Adults. Agosto’s research and teaching interests focus on children’s and teens’ information behavior and practices, youths’ use of social media, and public library services. She is widely published in these areas and is the recipient of numerous teaching and research awards and grants. E-mail (corresponding author): dea22@drexel.edu. Rachel M. Magee: assistant professor, Graduate School of Library and Information Science, Uni- versity of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.Magee is a youth advocatewho teaches about and researches youth technology and information practices, informed by her background as a public librarian. She holds a PhD in information studies from Drexel University, a master’s degree in information re- sources and library science from the University of Arizona, and a BS in radio-television-film and a BA in English from the University of Texas at Austin. E-mail: rmmagee@illinois.edu. Michael Dickard: doctoral candidate, Drexel University College of Computing and Informatics. Dickard received his BA and MA in sociology from Ohio University, and he uses this background to inform his research in the areas of social computing, social media, and human–computer inter- action. He is interested in how people’s use of social media evolves during periods of transition in their lives and how technologies might be better designed to meet the changing needs of people over time. His dissertation focuses on these changes in the context of photo-sharing and privacy practices among youth transitioning to young adulthood. E-mail: mdickard87@gmail.com.
Teens, Technology, and Libraries • 269 Andrea Forte: assistant professor, Drexel University College of Computing and Informatics. Forte’s interdisciplinary research group investigates the information and computational literacies that are required for participation in an increasingly technologically mediated society. She holds an MLIS from the University of Texas at Austin and a PhD in human-centered computing from Georgia Institute of Technology. E-mail: af468@drexel.edu.