THE INTERDEPENDENCE OF KNOWLEDGE AND INFORMATION IN THE WORLD TODAY MALURICE B. VISSCHER fact that a conference should be held to consider international as- I pects of library functions is sig- nificant in several respects. To a scientist the principle of universality of scientific knowledge seems so self-evident that it seems nearly impossible that it could be doubted. Yet there are many forces at work in the world which are operating to make the international exchange of in- formation difficult. The librarian is usually acutely aware of these problems. Nevertheless, it may be of interest to professional librarians to consider the difficulties from the viewpoint of the professional scientist. It is not my intention to deal at length with the technical aspects of bibliograph- ic control because many librarians are better qualified for that task. My own experiences in connection with the work of Biological Abstracts and with the ac- tivities of UNESCO in the scientific lit- erature field have brought me in close contact with the practical problems of the dissemination of scientific knowledge and of information about knowledge. Nevertheless, my primary interest has been in the broader objectives rather than in the mechanics of such dissemi- nation. The present-day problem of scholars and librarians arises from several causes. The first and central core problem lies in the gigantic growth of scientific literature within the last century. Figure 1 presents a graph showing the rise in the rate of publication of scientific communications since 1800. The numbers given are esti- mates, but it is unlikely that the figures carry an erroneous implication. The im- portant point to note is the obviously exponential nature of the growth curve. Every science librarian knows this story well from practical experience. Shelf space necessary for storage of scientific literature in many libraries is said to double every fifteen years. The scientific enterprise is a relatively new feature in human history, and we, at mid-twentieth century, have no reason to believe that we have seen its full flower. In the United States no estimate of research outlay places the figure at more than 1 per cent of the national in- come. Even this figure includes a major fraction in the category of development and control rather than bona fide inves- tigation. It would not be surprising if the years ahead saw a continuation of the present geometric progression in volume of research publication, because one can- not see a valid reason for deliberate limitation of research support at its present level. To be sure, there are romantic souls who are urging a moratorium on research until our standards of moral behavior catch up with our advances in knowl- edge; but at the same moment new mil- lions of dollars, pounds, rubles, and pesos are being appropriated for research on novel and more deadly weapons. There is, in other words, no sign of a slowdown, even in the field of research for destruc- tion. And as to the areas of research in 81
82 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY science related to health, agriculture, and peacetime industry, there are very few signs of a recession. The largest limiting factor today in the United States is not money but scientific manpower. There may be a limit near the present level in manpower, but it must be pointed out that several factors extraneous to inter- est in science are mainly responsible for the current lag in recruitment for careers in science. The unfavorable salary scales are deterrents, as is the current policy re- garding military service for young men. Both these factors are capable of altera- tion. The mountains of publications which constitute the present output of research workers are already so over- whelming that few scholars are able to search the world literature in their fields of research with any degree of confidence in the completeness of the result. Fur- thermore, in any field that is not very recently opened, the labor involved is so time-consuming that the task often be- comes a major occupation for months or years. At the present time, with one of my colleagues I am preparing a critical re- view of the literature on a very small physiological topic, pulmonary edema. We have identified in three months about fifteen hundred relevant references and are in the process of scanning the papers and studying those which appear to us to be important. There have been a dozen fragmentary reviews of this topic in the last decade, but we find that some of the most important papers are not men- 3 I. Growth In Scientific Publications , From Citations by J. Murray Luck 1951 a* ,I - - No I IL- C 0'. : \ %. U I 8\F a~ ~ a ?~~~~~~~~~~~ ^ aM~~~~~~~~~~~FG
INTERDEPENDENCE OF KNOWLEDGE AND INFORMATION 83 tioned. And, especially, we have found that many of the more important con- tributions are not abstracted or indexed under headings identifying them as being relevant. I mention this personal experience pri- marily to stress the point that much sci- entific information is at present buried in the libraries of the very institutions in which people are as busy as bees repeat- ing the same studies and spending pre- cious years rediscovering established facts. Even more deplorable is the failure to take the established facts iMto account in planning studies on facets of problems indirectly related to them. For this rea- son the new studies are not so well orient- ed as they could be. Although the volume of publication today is the central fact in the difficulty in searching out scientific data and rea- soning therefrom, there are other impor- tant difficulties. One of these is the lan- guage problem. Until three centuries ago scholars used classical Latin for their communications. For most of the inter- vening time French, German, and Eng- lish were the main media of scientific in- tercourse. But in the last half-century increasingly large numbers of increasing- ly important contributions are being pre- sented in other languages. The trend to- day is toward more, rather than less, use of other languages. The rise of national- ism in the world could scarcely have any other result. It may be a bright ideal to wish that every scholar might be equipped to read in all languages in which literature is published in his or her field. But it becomes pure fantasy when such literature appears in a half-dozen Slavic languages and in several oriental, Romance, Germanic, and Near Eastern tongues. There are some xenophobes who have said that nothing in languages strange to them is worth reading, but the facts are otherwise. To take some recent examples, stereovectorelectrocardiogra- phy was developed in Japan and pub- lished about extensively in Chinese char- acters in 1939. In 1947 and since, hun- dreds of thousands of dollars have been spent in the United States by scholars who did not learn of the Japanese work until 1952, after they had repeated much of it unnecessarily. Another example is the development of blood banks. The first demonstration that stored blood could be used safely for transfusion pur- poses was published in Russian in the early thirties. This work came to the notice of western European and Ameri- can students of the problem some years later and provided the impetus for fur- ther studies, which have made the ex- pression "blood bank" common usage and have saved hundreds of thousands of human lives. Absolute unfamiliarity with a lan- guage is, unfortunately, not the only bar to international exchange of information. In many countries with currency control or severe budget limitations, the pur- chase of foreign publications is sharply limited. Furthermore, there are differ- ences in common or traditional habits of thought and expression which make it difficult to comprehend the thought- processes of persons from entirely differ- ent cultural backgrounds. Or, if the thought is comprehended, it is often re- jected summarily as incompletely estab- lished and therefore worthless. Scientists are, in other words, not entirely free from parochialism. But the most important contributor to the sin of chauvinism is, I believe, some- thing still more practical. Scientists may live in an international intellectual world, but they also live in a very nation- al practical world. Scientists and other scholars in general need salaried jobs to
84 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY live. To get such jobs and to get promo- tion, they must have the respect, first and foremost, of their own countrymen. The national and regional character of most scientific meetings also contributes to the greater interest in and familiarity with the work of near-by colleagues than with that of students in other regions. Thus many factors combine to discour- age full awareness of contributions to knowledge from abroad. Language bar- riers, lack of funds to buy the less fre- quently used publications, cultural idio- syncrasies, career motivations, and pro- pinquity conspire to make us provincial to the disadvantage of both the utiliza- tion and the progress of knowledge. How real this provincialism is can be seen readily from a compilation I have made of citations in two important jour- nals in my own field. In Table 1 you will see statistics from the May, 1953, issues of the American Journal of Physiology and the Journal of Physiology (London, England). In the American journal 84 per cent of the citations are to United States publications. Only 8 per cent are to publications outside the United States and the British Commonwealth. Among these are several multilingual journals, so that the foreign-language citations are about 5 per cent. Although a qualitative evaluation of the amount of important foreign-language publication is difficult, it is not plausible that the ratio is 95 in English to 5 in all other languages. As to volume of publications, the ratio is not known with certainty, but my guess would be about 1 to 1. One cannot do more than guess, because the Slavic and Chinese literature is largely unavailable to us in the United States. Since in 1935, at the time of the International Physio- logical Congress in Moscow, it was claimed that there were one thousand members of the Physiological Society of the U.S.S.R., a number considerably larger than the membership at that time of the American Physiological Society, one might expect a fairly large volume of publication in the Russian language. Moreover, the Scandinavian, German, Swiss, Latin American, Dutch, Belgian, Italian, Japanese, Israeli, Spanish, and Turkish physiological scientists are all productive, some very highly so, particu- larly among the first seven mentioned. The British journal statistics are slightly different. A slightly higher per cent of citations are to journals from non- English-speaking countries, but a much larger share of references are to United States publications than was true of ref- erences to British publications in the American journal. A part of the apparent provincialism might be due to the fact TABLE 1 REFERENCES TO LITERATURE IN Two CURRENT JOURNALS American Journal of Journal of Physiology Physiology (May, 1953) (London, May, 1953) No. of papers in issue..-.. . ...................... 32 19 Total no. of citations .............................. 422 (13.2 per paper) 226 (10.6 per paper) Total no. of citations to American literature .359 (11.2 per paper) 78 ( 3. 1 per paper) Total no of citations to British Commonwealth litera- ture ............................... ..... 31 ( 1.0 per paper) 120 ( 6.2 per paper) Total no. of citations to all other literature. 32 ( 1.0 per paper) 28 ( 1.3 per paper) Per cent with no citations to "other literature" ... 50 55
INTERDEPENDENCE OF KNOWLEDGE AND INFORMATION 85 that interest may center on particular problems in a country on occasion, but on looking at the subject matter I did not see that this was a plausible explanation. The subjects treated were those under- going study in various parts of the world. [ conclude that the language barrier and a conscious or unconscious chauvinism are important factors. In regard to the language problem and the availability of the publications, there is more to be said. Indexing and abstract- ing services do provide some degree of coverage of foreign-language literature in most areas of science. The UNESCO Scientific Abstracting Conference Report in 1949 accepted one-third as the fraction of scientific papers published which are abstracted in some way. Presumably, there had been considerable selection, and the papers deemed more important are concentrated in those abstracted. Some light has been shed on the ques- tion of the completeness of abstracting endeavors by a study sponsored by the Committee for the Survey of the Physio- logical Sciences of the American Physi- ological Society. An analysis was made of the countries of origin and the coverage in abstract journals of 2,051 papers bear- ing on the cerebral circulation published in 1952 in Physiological Reviews. Of the total number of papers published in a 10-year period referred to in this bibli- ography, 41 per cent originated in the United States, 8 per cent came from British Commonwealth countries, and the remainder from other parts of the world. Some of the details of this study are shown in Table 2. It will be apparent that the percentage of the papers arising in various countries abstracted in ab- stract journals published in the United States ranged from 6 to 28 per cent. As might be expected, the largest percentage was for United States papers. Although this may be most understandable in terms of the mechanics of operation of abstracting journals, it is not necessarily the most advantageous as regards the provision of information for scholars and persons who may wish to apply the knowledge in question. The journals from Eastern Europe and the Orient are, in general, the most difficult to gain ac- cess to in the original, and therefore it might be much more important to have adequate abstracting of papers from those countries. Likewise in the case of western Europe, where the papers are published mainly in German and French, the per cent coverage by United States abstracting agencies was very low. Even when one considers papers ab- stracted by any of the four major services in the world at large, the percentage of TABLE 2* CEREBRAL CIRCULATION United B Western Eastern Latin States wealth Europe Europe America wealth No. of papers ...................... 838 169 796 109 100 39 2,051 Per cent of total .40.9 8.2 38.8 5.3 4S9 1.9 ........ Per cent abstracted in US ........... 27.9 25.4 10.1 5.7 20.5 18.4 No. abstracted by 4 major services. . . 412 99 336 72 10 929 Per cent abstracted ................. 49 59 42 35 26 45 * Rearranged from Survey of Physiological Sciences Report of Pilot Phase 1953. 2,051 papers (10-year bibliography, 1952).
86 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY all papers covered is only 45. It is of some interest to note that the highest percent- age coverage is for papers arising in the British Commonwealth and the lowest those from Latin America. A part of this difference may possibly be due to a quali- tative evaluation of the importance of the contributions from various parts of the world, but it is unlikely that this is the entire explanation. Another way of looking at the problem is to consider the distribution as to na- tional origin of papers which are ab- stracted in a large service. Such a study TABLE 3* SAMPLE ANALYSIS OF Biological Abstracts COVERAGE Country of Origin No. in of Original Article Sample Per Cent United States ........... 1,494 48.3 British Commonwealth 469 14.9 France ................ 159 5.1 Japan ....... .... 131 4.2 Germany .123 3.9 Switzerland ............. 97 3.1 Scandinavia ....... 97 3.1 India ............64 2.0 Holland ...5...2 ....... 1. 7 Italy .... ........... 51 1.6 Argentina .............. 39 1.2 U.S.S.R .............. 33 1.1 All others (40 countries) 309 9.9 * Based on an 8 per cent random sample of 37,357 abstracts published by Biological Abstracts in 1952 (based on data from Bentley Glass survey). is being made by Dr. Bentley Glass for Biological Abstracts. Excerpts from his data are shown in Table 3. Here it will be seen that nearly half of all abstracts are of United States papers, 15 per cent from the British Commonwealth, and consid- erably smaller percentages from any other country. These results can be ex- plained in part by the policies of the ab- stracting journal. A large number of United States publications supply author abstracts to Biological Abstracts. Very few journals from other countries do so. The very low figures from the U.S.S.R., for example, are related in part, at least, to poor availability from that country in the United States. Nevertheless, in spite of factors which would tend to bias the results in favor of United States and English-language journals, it is signifi- cant that 37 per cent of all material in Biological Abstracts arose from non- English-speaking countries in 1952. It is my opinion that if the biasing factors were eliminated, the proportion from the non-English-speaking world would rise to considerably more than 50 per cent. It will, I believe, be obvious from these data that at the present time foreign con- tributions to the scientific literature as judged by the examples I have given are very large. It would be unwise to attempt to evaluate the relative importance of papers appearing from one or another country. Such evaluations are difficult at best; and even if they are valid at a given point in history, one is not justified in assuming that the same situation will continue indefinitely. Most physiologists would, I believe, agree that in the first quarter of the present century British physiologists were making many con- tributions of the first order of impor- tance. Many physiologists would also agree that within the last quarter-cen- tury extremely important developments have been made in Britain and the Com- monwealth nations. Merely to mention the names of Adrian, Sherrington, Bar- croft, Hopkins, and Hill, among others active during the last quarter-century, will bring from physiologists general rec- ognition of the merit of their work. And right at the present moment the British school of investigators of the chemistry of nerve-fiber function is making impor- tant history. But many physiologists today might
INTERDEPENDENCE OF KNOWLEDGE AND INFORMATION 87 consider that the Scandinavian group is at present making the most fundamental contributions by virtue of the studies of such investigators as Tiselius, Linder- strom-Lang, Ussing, Hevesy, and Lunds- gaard, to name a few. However, in many instances it is really impossible to credit a single national group with anything like full credit for major developments. For example, one may take the brilliant new discoveries in the field of muscle chemistry. They started with the dis- covery of an enzymatic function of myo- sin by the Russian physiologist, Engel- hardt. Great progress was made by the Hungarian, Szent-Gydrgyi. Other impor- tant work was done by Cori in the United States, and research on these problems is being prosecuted actively in Belgium, Sweden, Britain, and elsewhere. Thus the newer knowledge of the function of muscle proteins in relation to the con- tractile process might be taken as a per- fect example of the importance of inter- national co-operation in an important area of science. If walls had existed be- tween the several countries that I have mentioned with respect to the flow of scientific knowledge, it is virtually a certainty that world knowledge in the field would be very much less than it is today. Besides the current situation, it is not without importance to consider the reser- voirs of knowledge in the literature of science. There are many millions of scien- tific papers collecting dust in the libraries of the world. By no means all the meat has been extracted from scientific papers that are ten, twenty, or more years old. It is not only the scientific historian and the student of the philosophy and logic of science who are interested in the older literature. It is true that, with improve- ments in methodology, much older litera- ture becomes obsolete because more ac- curate observations have been made. However, there are many areas of science in which the methods of study have not changed so appreciably over the years and in which older observational data are quite as accurate as the new. In such areas buried knowledge is a very real waste. When one considers the national ori- gins of information over the last hundred years, one finds that the United States and the English-speaking world generally have made much smaller relative con- tributions than at present. I noted above that one of my associates and I have been preparing a review on the subject of pul- monary edema. In Table 4 appear the TABLE 4* PULMONARY EDEMA PLACIE OF PUB5LICATION United British Other States Common- Countries wealth Number ......... 191 100 476 Per cent of total. . 25 13 62 * Literature search by F. J. Haddy and M. B. Visscher, made in 1953. Analysis of 767 references selected at random from total of 1,500. results of an analysis of the origin of this material. The percentages may not hold exactly for other subjects in the field of physiology or in other sciences, but it is likely that the figures would not be differ- ent in principle. Here it appears that al- most two-thirds of the literature relevant to this subject has arisen in non-English- speaking countries. Certainly, if one is to tap the reservoirs of information now stored in our libraries, it is completely impossible to ignore the contributions from the non-English-speaking world. Another interesting facet of the prob- lem of international exchange of informa-
88 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY tion is the extent to which foreign readers use our journals. I have tabulated in Table 5 some of the current data regard- ing subscriptions to Biologwal A bstracts. As might be expected, United States sub- scriptions made up more than half the list, but the striking fact is the large number of foreign subscribers. Forty-five non-English-speaking countries are on the list. Obviously, the scientists in those countries are demanding the best that there is available in world coverage of literature in the biological sciences. TABLE S CURRENT SUBSCRIPTIONS TO Biologcal Abstracts BY COUNTRIES Country No. Country No. United States 4,515 Germany . 109 British Com- Holland . 94 monwealth... 710 Brazil ... .. 74 Scandinavia, - * 242 Belgium ....... 65 Japan ......... 223 Hungary. 54 Italy .......... 157 Switzerland 50 India . ........ 157 Argentina 48 France ........ 138 All others (32) 554 Russia ........ 119 I have tried to present some factual data which I believe may provide a basis for valid discussion. The world literature in science has grown and very probably will continue to grow at a staggering pace. In spite of the fact that a somewbat larger fraction of the total output of pub- lications seems to be arising from the United States at the present time, it would be rank nonsense to suggest that United States scientists could afford to ignore the contributions from the rest of the world. Very few scientists, in fact, hold such a naive view, but many scien- tists act much as though they did. This is evidenced by our failure to cite publi- cations from other countries, by our fail- ure to abstract and index as completely the literature from other countries as from our own, and by the decreasing em- phasis that is being placed in graduate education in the United States today on training in the foreign languages. However, if it is our complaint that it is difficult to keep up with the foreign literature, it would be an even more jus- tified complaint to point out that it is difficult to keep up with domestic litera- ture. It is really impossible to think about the problem of making fuller use of scientific information from abroad without considering the general problem of making better use of all scientific in- formation. I therefore suggest that one reconsider the implications of the phe- nomenal rise in world scientific output. It is becoming such a task to review even relatively small segments of the litera- ture of science that productive investiga- tors are becoming more and more reluc- tant to devote the time necessary to it. Reviews covering a thousand scientific papers cannot be made without the ex- penditure of several thousands of hours. Thus it becomes increasingly unlikely that in the future critical reviews will be undertaken by many active research workers. This time has not yet arrived, because there is as yet no satisfactory mechanism to replace the critical review. Nevertheless, as the labor becomes more arduous than it is at present, the prob- lem of finding suitable authors for critical reviews will become more and more difficult. There is no obvious solution to all the problems involved in inter- and intra- national exchange of scientific informa- tion. It might be, and has been, suggest- ed that an optimal solution would be for interested persons to work at the prob- lem of improving bibliographic services in their own countries. Unfortunately, however, services of this sort do not by themselves, in a given country, meet the
INTERDEPENDENCE OF KNOWLEDGE AND INFORMATION 89 needs of scientists in those countries. Let us consider for a moment what would happen to Biological Abstracts if it aban- doned abstracting material from foreign countries. It would almost certainly have to abandon publication because it would not be serving a sufficiently useful func- tion for its subscribers. The very fact that no such abstracting journal has ever been proposed is silent testimony to the recognition of the crucial importance of international exchange of information in science. As a responsible officer of such an abstracting agency, I would never consider jeopardizing its present useful- ness by such a move unless and until a working plan was in operation to bring abstracts from foreign sources to the sub- scribers and users of the abstract journal in question. Having had some little contact with the financial and operational problems of a bibliographic service, I believe that no ultimately satisfactory service to the stu- dents of science and the consumers of scientific knowledge will be possible on the basis of subscription income from li- braries and individuals. A modest com- promise with the ideal is being made on the basis of such financing, but this com- promise leaves much to be desired from many viewpoints. For example, the scholar is unhappy with the incomplete- ness of coverage, making it impossible for him to locate knowledge that exists with- out exorbitant expenditures of time. Everyone, including the public that pays for research, should be unhappy about the waste in funds resulting from ignor- ance of existing knowledge. Librarians are justified in being unhappy, too, over their inability to lay their hands on mate- rial that may be of importance to their consuming public. In all the conferences on scientific doc- umentation which have been held in re- oent years, many of them under the im- petus of UNESCO, there has been one point about which there has been univer- sal agreement: the present situation with regard to scientific bibliographic control is unsatisfactory. There has also been agreement with regard to some principles of procedure as to improvement. There has been no agreement that has resulted in any great practical amelioration of our present problem. It is not hard to understand why the question of a major solution is unsolved. Two difficulties stand in the way. First, there is no agreement as to what an opti- mal mechanism for scientific communi- cation might be. The second difficulty lies in the fact that no one sees exactly where the financial subsidy would come from to implement any satisfactory solution. The first of these two problems is, in my opinion, the more difficult. This is true because it would require a prophet to know what is going to happen to such an important thing as the volume of sci- entific publication in the next ten years. Furthermore, no one can predict what advantages may accrue from new elec- trical and mechanical mechanisms of identification and correlation of 'infor- mation. However, we live in a real world in which we have to accept compromises and improvisations. We have to do with what is good if we cannot get what is best. Thus, as a pragmatist, I advocate that we keep on improving our present machinery until a definitely superior machine is available and operating to do the job we want done. Therefore, I be- lieve we must perfect existing types of abstracting and indexing procedures at the same time that we move in the direc- tion of trying to develop more adequate ones. Work in the field of scientific docu-
90 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY mentation is a specialty which should re- ceive more and more encouragement, be- cause, as the literature problems acquire greater magnitude, it will be increasingly essential that the persons who index sci- entific papers will not contribute to their being lost by failing to recognize the categories in which they should be men- tioned. In order to make foreign litera- ture valuable, it will be necessary for such bibliographic experts to be not only familiar with the science in question but also accomplished linguists. All too fre- quently one finds evidence of complete misunderstanding based upon language difficulties in scientific bibliography. One topic pertinent to this discussion I have deliberately omitted until the more basic problems have been dealt with. I wish now to refer briefly to the complications which military policy and necessity and political expediency bring into the picture. I have deferred their introduction until now because they bring in special considerations not ger- mane to the central problem. In the real world of tension today, one cannot seriously doubt the necessity for secrecy about some aspects of applied science. There is, however, room for grave doubt as to whether the limitations which have been placed on the free circu- lation of the basic science knowledge so restricted have been justified or wise. Much information which was known to be in the hands of nations unfriendly to the United States has, for example, been unavailable to most United States citi- zens. Thus we simply deprive ourselves of the possible advantages of knowledge to no good purpose whatsoever. Even in the cases where basic knowledge is pos- sessed uniquely by one national group, there is doubt that its interest is served by secrecy. This is true because, if a very small group of scholars have access to in- formation, the chance of further develop- ments diminishes with the size of the in- fonmed group. Scientific discovery de- pends upon many factors. No two schol- ars approach problems with exactly the same background information and train- ing. The educated hunch that leads one to a fruitful solution does not occur to every equally competent scholar. I have no doubt that hundreds of bacteriologists saw the same effects of culture contami- nation by molds that led Sir Alexander Fleming to his discovery of penicillin and that their only reaction was one of exas- peration over a spoiled plate. But out of a unique constellation of information and logic in Fleming came the greatest boon to humanity through medical science that our times have seen. But Fleming did not eventually make a fruitful dis- covery alone. He had the assistance of scholars trained in fields in which he was unfamiliar, who made his basic discovery practically useful. There were very many minds and laboratories that were essen- tial to the development of antibiotics to the point of usefulness they have today. And there can be no reasonable doubt that the future holds new and more im- portant developments in store, if there is free exchange of knowledge so that many minds may be applied to the problems. These points need stress because the layman does not in general perceive the great importance of free exchange of basic information to scientific progress even in military affairs. But the point that I believe is most important is that the political climate in tense times tends to make people think that security is necessarily bound up with secrecy in science. For example, work on penicillin was secret during World War II. I fail to find any valid justification for such a classification, and I believe that political,
INTERDEPENDENCE OF KNOWLEDGE AND INFORMATION 91 rather than national defense, considera- tions necessitated such classification. Fear and other emotions cloud judgment, especially when full information is lacking. There is also another side to the coin to be examined in connection with national secrecy. Not only is it disadvantageous to scientific progress in a nation to hold basic knowledge secret, but such action also has extremely adverse effects upon public opinion abroad. Just as fear breeds secrecy, so secrecy breeds fear, and, with it, dislike. The human being ordinarily responds to trust by being trustworthy. He ordi- narily responds to treatment as an equal by reciprocation. There are, of course, exceptions. There are psychopathic per- sonalities in every race and every nation. In some, unfortunately, the psychopaths have great power. We in the United States have a great problem on our hands to make sure that psychopathic person- alities do not exploit our national troubles by unreasonable and unwise re- strictions on the intra- and international exchange of knowledge. This must be prevented in order to protect our own future progress and safety and also to improve the attitudes, which are rapidly deteriorating, of foreigners toward our country. In the scientific enterprise there is no doubt that we live in one world. It is, to be sure, perverted in spots. The ideologi- cal sphere that is this "one world" is in parts defective, just as the earth is, but there is no national monopoly on brains or ideas. There are, of course, cultural differences in the cultivation of scientific manpower and production. The history of science to date would have been a very different one and a tragic one if science had been confined within national bounds. We cannot guess about the fu- ture without taking into account our knowledge of the past. If we do propose to make some such guesses, we may pre- sume-I believe with safety-that great advantage will accrue to the science and to the people of every country if mech- anisms are improved for the free ex- change of scientific information and knowledge. We must sharpen and strengthen the tools we now have, but we must also be bold in experimenting with new methods, calculated to meet more effectively the needs of the decades to come, when existing tools may become as outmoded as the oxcart in the days of jet propulsion.