THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Volume 68 JULY 1998 Number 3 AMERICAN GIRLHOOD IN THE EARLY TWENTIETH CENTURY: THE IDEOLOGY OF GIRL SCOUT LITERATURE, 1913-1930 Rebekah E. Revzin' Juliette Gordon Low, a wealthy widow from Savannah, Georgia, founded the Girl Scouts of America on March 12, 1912. This organization, the first of its kind in the United States, promoted independence, patriotism, and self-sufficiency among young girls. This article's focus on the Girl Scout handbooks and the additional periodical literature produced by the organiza- tion provides important clues as to the kind of advice Low felt necessary to impart to these girls and the types of activities the organization promoted. Girl Scout handbooks and magazines provide insight into the degree to which the Girl Scout organization (1) promoted feminist ideology to young girls in the early 1900s, (2) expected a woman's sphere to be restricted to the realm of children, religion, and the home, and (3) encouraged women to display independence either surreptitiously or overtly. The Girl Scout handbooks lend insight into the evolving definition of gender roles through the instruction they imparted to young girls. The intended goals of the Girl Scouts, through a study of the Girl Scout literature, will help elucidate the expectations grown women, like Juliette Low, maintained for their youthful counterparts. The real work of the Scouts is . . . to make character building through its influence an ideal pastime, a valuable investment and a complete program for growing girls who may emerge .. . as strong members of society, progressive business women, or nicely trained little helpers of the home. (LILLLAN GARIs, Girl Scout Pioneers [1, p. 16]) 1. Department of History, Emory University, 200 Bowden Hall, Atlanta, Georgia 30322. Tele- phone 404-325-0101. [Library Quarterly, vol. 68, no. 3, pp. 261-275] i 1998 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-2519/98/6803-0002$02.00 261
262 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Introduction The Girl Scouts, an organization founded in 1912 for young girls, usu- ally conjures up images of cookies, uniforms, and camping trips. Histor- ical scholarship on the Girl Scouts often associates the members with upholding Victorian gender norms, bringing to mind notions of housekeeping and other traditionally female activities. However, closer scrutiny of the early Girl Scouts reveals a different picture, an organiza- tion that was a composite of domestic instruction and independent motivation, child care advice and career opportunities, entertainment suggestions and lifesaving techniques. The original Girl Scouts, founded by southern reformer Juliette Low, participated in activities that stressed accomplishment of personal goals and individual inde- pendence while maintaining strains of traditional feminine activity. The literature produced by the early Girl Scouts between the years 1913 and 1930 provides important clues as to the kind of advice their leaders felt necessary to impart to these girls and the types of activities the organization promoted.2 Girl Scout handbooks, novels, and periodical literature provide insight into the degree to which the Girl Scout orga- nization promoted gender equality; expected women's spheres to be expanded outside the realm of children, the home, and morality; and encouraged women to display their independence, either surrepti- tiously or overtly. The Girl Scouts evolved within a context of significant change for women's social and public roles. In the late nineteenth century, south- ern women began to expand their spheres of influence through partici- pation in women's clubs and other organizations. This activity usually began within a religious framework but quickly advanced into the social and eventually political realms. The Women's Christian Temperance Union (WCTU) exemplifies this development from religion to politics. As early as 1880, southern women in the WCTU, under the guise of removing the sins that accompanied alcohol, also asserted themselves as social reformers, attempting to alleviate the social ills of the postbel- lum and increasingly urban South. Women's literary clubs, founded to promote intellectual growth, soon followed the WCTU, and shortly thereafter southern women became active in the suffrage movement. By the twentieth century, southern women had carved out for them- selves a public role; within this atmosphereJuliette Gordon Low began her organization for the youngest of women. 2. For more on Girl Scout history before World War II, see the Girl Scout home page at www.gsusa.org. See also the attached bibliography for a listing of selected literature used to produce this article.
AMERICAN GIRLHOOD 263 The appearance of numerous women's clubs and organizations at the turn of the century illustrated the relatively rapid development of the southern women's movement. Some of these associations were southern specific, such as the Women's Campaign Against Lynching, although others, like the National American Woman Suffrage Associa- tion, were simply southern annexes of established northern organiza- tions. A few organizations were actually initiated in the South and even- tually became national in scope and popularity. The Girl Scouts of America was one such organization. Founded with sixteen members, the organization spread rapidly throughout the South and the nation. The life ofJuliette Gordon Low spans the half-century evolution of the southern women's movement. Low was born in 1860, the same year the nation elected Lincoln to his first term. Her life parallels the South's emergence from an agrarian planter society to a modern region char- acterized by its industrial, social, and political activity. Low and the Girl Scouts mirror the development of the region's women from relative isolation to a flourishing and socially proactive community. Juliette Gordon Low The early years ofJuliette Gordon Low, the founder of the Girl Scouts, are essentially a study in paradoxes. A short sketch of her experiences before and during development of this movement illustrates the transi- tion from traditional woman to new woman that many women under- went at the turn of the century. Although her family raised her within the strictest southern social traditions, Juliette Low proceeded along a path that deviated far from what was expected of her. Martha Saxton, in a biographical account of the Girl Scout leader, writes that Low "never felt prepared for anything-not for the elegant Savannah soci- ety into which she was born, nor for the Civil War that rocked her family, not for her disastrous marriage, and not for her volcanic mother" [2]. This vulnerability did not stem from neglect, for Low was educated in the best schools, introduced to Savannah society as a debutante, and sent to Europe to cultivate her cultural vocabulary; the Gordon family "groomed" their daughter to become the perfect southern lady. While abroad, she met and married English playboy Wil- liam Low. His wandering tendencies, his long hunting excursions, and their inability to have children left Low increasingly alienated from her husband. In 1905 William Low died, leaving most of his estate to his mistress who, according to the will, was to distribute an allowance to Juliette every month. Low contested the will and eventually received her fair share of the inheritance [3, p. 258].
264 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Historian Charles Strickland suggests that following this personal cri- sis Low felt aimless, humiliated, and without purpose [4]. Her disas- trous and childless marriage left her without the emotional stability and security her wealthy southern upbringing had promised. Again, this sense of uncertainty affected Low's personal consciousness and her understanding of where women belonged in society. Low had followed all of the "rules," yet her failed marriage and failed sense of contribu- tion left her disillusioned. She began to focus on her painting and sculpting and continued to travel through Europe. In 1911, she met Sir Robert Baden-Powell, founder of the British youth movement, the Boy Scouts. Powell's visionary organization encouraged obedience, discipline, and development of character through outdoor military- inspired activities. Helping others, following a moral code, displaying honesty, and maintaining a cheerful disposition were central tenets of the Boy Scout movement [5]. Low was inspired by Powell's philosophy, particularly its emphasis on protocol and self-sufficiency. Consequently, she decided to try it for herself, and while spending a summer in a Scottish Glen (Lochs), she formed a female youth group and encouraged the girls to learn British history, knot tying, livestock care, and wool spinning. Low's new ideas about women's activities and responsibilities had already begun to develop. Instead of focusing exclusively on domestic expertise, Low advocated activities, like wool spinning and livestock care, in an effort to teach the girls self-sufficiency skills. She wanted to provide them with ways to support themselves (selling wool or chickens) that would keep the young women away from the urban factories and the terrible conditions inherent in the manufacturing industry [3, p. 3001. Low's personal crisis also led her to an understanding that to succeed, women needed a set of survival skills. Although she was unwilling to renounce traditional femininity, she was able, through this early experience, to identify ways in which women could develop independent strategies for self-sufficiency. Juliette Low realized, although perhaps subcon- sciously, that the "adolescence" of the American women's movement demanded an organization like the Girl Scouts to help guide young women through the conflicts that confronted them in this new era. Girl Scout Literature While Juliette Low's life experiences suggest some of the reasons why she founded the more progressive American version of this female youth movement, the literature produced by the Girl Scouts indicates how the organization actually envisioned itself and the roles of women
AMERICAN GIRLHOOD 265 at this time. This literature supplies an invaluable tool to help us fur- ther understand the issues facing women in the early decades of the 1900s as well as providing a true picture of how the Girl Scouts strug- gled to reconcile their traditional obligations with their progressive de- sires. The Girl Scout literature provides important clues as to the kind of advice their leaders felt necessary to impart to these girls and the types of activities the organization promoted. Girl Scout handbooks, novels, and periodical literature provide insight into the degree to which the Girl Scout organization promoted gender equality; expected a woman's sphere to be expanded outside the realm of children, the home, and morality; and encouraged women to display their indepen- dence, either surreptitiously or overtly. Although the Girl Scout movement initially focused only on middle- class white girls, it very quickly diversified, beginning in 1915 with im- migrant troops in the overcrowded metropolitan areas like New York and Chicago. The organization expanded further to include African- American girls as early as the 1920s; however, the exclusively white re- gional councils did not officially recognize many of these groups until the late 1930s [6-11].3 The Girl Scouts' membership also included troops made up primarily of disabled girls and also Native Americans. Because most troops were organized according to neighborhood, girls from different ethnic and economic backgrounds often remained sepa- rate from each other. In the case of African Americans, however, segre- gation was standard throughout the South until 1960, when the Girl Scout policy officially changed to promote integration [6]. Race was debated frequently within the national offices from the or- ganization's inception, according to Elisabeth Israels Perry [6, p. 85]. However, what is most significant is that young women from many groups-African American, middle-class white, disabled, and immi- grant-all participated in a single organization that made no distinc- tions for the individual groups. The tenets of physical fitness, domestic activity, philanthropy, and community participation appealed and were available to all of these girls. Although not addressed in this article, it is likely these ideals did not necessarily have the same inherent conflicts for other groups' gender ideologies as they did with the traditional ideals for young, white, middle-class women. Perry's study of African- American Tennessee Girl Scouts found that Josephine Holloway, who began the first African-American troop in Nashville, felt Girl Scouting to be "the very best influence for girls" [6, p. 81]. Regardless of the 3. For information about African-Amefican scouts, see [6]; for immigrant scouting informa- tion, see [7-9]; for information about disabled scouting programs, see [101; for Native American troops, see [11], and the GSUSA home page at www.gsusa.org.
266 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY intended socializing nature, the inherent paradoxes, or the difficulties of establishing minority troops, the Girl Scout message appealed to girls and women from a variety of racial, ethnic, and economic back- grounds. By 1915 Low had registered five thousand girls in more than one hundred cities for participation in her program. Any girl could become a Girl Scout; she only had to promise to earn her dues, to obey the Girl Scout laws (to be obedient and help other people), and to follow the Girl Scout promise (to do duty to God and Country; to help other people at all times; to obey the laws of the scouts). The premise of the Girl Scouts was to encourage the development of character and leadership among young girls through activities considered fun and instructive. Leaders intended activities such as camping to inspire coop- eration, achievement, and development of sound minds and bodies. The final goal was to produce the qualities in young women that would make them wholesome, productive citizens [12, pp. 9-12]. To initiate the development of the Girl Scouts, Low began by adver- tising her organization in newspapers and magazines and by training women who expressed interest in leadership positions. At the top of Low's agenda was the production and distribution of a handbook. The original Girl Scout handbook, How Girls Can Help Their Country: The Handbook for Girl Scouts, published in 1913, was the first piece of litera- ture produced by the organization [13].' Modeled after (and quite of- ten a verbatim replication of) the Boy Scouts' version, The Handbook for Boys, the Girl Scout handbook illuminates the strategy, goals, and ideology of the Girl Scout movement. Additional periodical literature produced by the organization, such as the Rally, first published in October 1917, a magazine for Scout lead- ers, and American Girl (which evolved out of the Rally as the members expressed a desire for a publication geared toward the youth), also reveals Girl Scout ideas about gender roles. The Rally's popularity is evident by its circulation: 6,500 copies were distributed in its second year, and by 1927, 42,000 people received the magazine. The Rally con- tained articles about scouting activities; regular features, such as a mail- box column and troop news; and editorials from the national leaders. In addition, fiction and book reviews were added to the magazine's format a few years after its founding [12, p. 185]. 4. Throughout this text, evidence of Girl Scout principles and ideology are pulled from both the 1913 and 1920 editions of the Girl Scout handbooks. I use these handbooks inter- changeably, as there is virtually no difference between them. The 1920 handbook is essen- tially an expanded and polished version of the 1913 edition. The handbook's tone did change, however, between 1930 and 1940 (see [13]).
AMERICAN GIRLHOOD 267 Independent authors also published children's novels based on the ideals of the Girl Scouts. Many of these novels, though about Girl Scouts, were neither approved nor regulated by the organization. Al- though these books are not official publications, they do highlight the popular perceptions of and reactions to the Girl Scouts. One such book, A Girl Scout of Red Rose Troop, by Amy Blanchard, was part of a series produced in the early 1920s, a sort of Nancy Drew of its time [12, p. 187]. The appearance and subsequent popularity of such litera- ture, a mere five years after the conception of the Girl Scouts, speaks to the books' representation of the organization's ideals.5 A significant portion of the Girl Scout literature focuses on tradi- tional notions of femininity. The 1913 handbook reminds young women that "Girl Scouts should do everything in their power to make and keep their homes healthy as well as happy" [14, p. 66]. The second Girl Scout handbook, published in 1920, explains that Girl Scouts are required to do a good turn every day because "this is the spirit that makes the older Scout into a fine, useful, dependable woman who does so much good in her community that she becomes naturally one of its leading citizens on whom everyone relies" [15, p. 6]. A large compo- nent of this model of citizenship includes housework, for the handbook continues, "to direct her household has always been a woman's job in every century . .. the girl of today has [to] learn about these things in a scientific businesslike way in order to get it all done with the quickest most efficient methods.... We no longer believe that housekeeping should take up all a woman's time; and many an older woman envies the little badges on a Scout's sleeve that show the world she has learned how to manage her cleaning and her cooking" [15, p. 26]. As much as the literature stresses efficiency, little question remains that house- work was still considered one of the woman's central responsibilities. Girl Scout materials also addressed this wish to "help others help themselves" in the realm of housekeeping. A motion picture produced by the Girl Scouts in 1918 exemplifies the combination of housekeep- ing and helping others. The black-and-white silent film depicts a Girl Scout troop helping a soldier's family during World War I. This section of the film, entitled "The Scouts as Little Citizens," depicts Girl Scouts cleaning the front yard, tidying the kitchen, making beds, bathing chil- dren, and scrubbing floors. In the hope that the daughter of the poor 5. I feel confident including these "nonofficial" books in this study of Girl Scout literature, because they follow closely Girl Scout policy and often adopt identical language to the handbooks when describing Girl Scout activities and defining the organization's goals. In addition, many Girl Scout-supported repositories hold extensive collections of these books, which further indicates their adherence to Girl Scout ideals.
268 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY family can continue this work, the Girl Scouts instruct her on the ele- ments of housekeeping. At the end of the segment, the Girl Scouts declare, "Housework is not so bad when you do it for your coun- try!" [16] Housework was not the only traditional activity stressed by the orga- nization. The Rally continuously addressed concerns and suggested ac- tivities that encouraged conservative roles for girls. The magazine con- tained a monthly highlight entitled "Our Party Page." The first issue to feature this page provided the following explanation: "All girls like to give parties and certainly Girl Scouts are no exception.... We have therefore decided to give every month in the Rally a number of party suggestions" [17]. The "Party Page" administered advice on devel- oping guest lists, issuing invitations, preparing food, and choosing en- tertainment. The Rally also regularly offered advice on domestic activi- ties such as sewing, cleaning, and gardening. From the previous examples, the movement appears to have pro- moted a traditional ideology of female domesticity. However, a com- plete reading of the handbook renders a different impression. In fact, all of the Girl Scout literature produced before World War II contains a significant amount of material that challenges the more conventional feminine doctrine espoused at the time. The Girl Scout literature en- couraged girls to be strong, educated, self-reliant, and goal oriented, rather than timid, meek, subservient, and helpless. Female indepen- dence was expressed not only in the emphasis on efficiency in the housekeeping sections but also in a more deliberate manner through- out the literature. One of the most persistent themes within the Girl Scout handbook is the notion of self-sufficiency. Girl Scouts were taught not only to help others become self-sufficient but also were fully encouraged to do the same for themselves. Because traditional views of women, partic- ularly in the South, implied that dependent or weak women were more desirable, the Girl Scout emphasis on female self-sufficiency appears particularly progressive. The Girl Scout dues epitomize the attitude of self-reliance promoted by the organization. Girls were expected to earn their own dues and to learn to manage money. One of the "Laws of the Girl Scouts" reads, "Money is a very useful thing to have and the Girl Scout decides how much she can afford to save and does it so as to have it in an emergency.... A Girl Scout saves as she spends on some system. Did you ever stop to think that no matter how much money a man may earn, the women of the family generally have the spending of most of it?" [15, p. 10] Helen and Carol, the two main characters in the scouting story A Girl Scout of Red Rose Troop, discuss the earning of their dues in an early
AMERICAN GIRLHOOD 269 passage. Carol tells Helen, "I delivered groceries for Mr. Donovan. He was short of errand boys . . . so I just ups and asks him if I couldn't take the rush orders.... He gave me a quarter so I was five cents over and above the amount I needed" [18, p. 46]. The original Girl Scout handbook further instructs girls that "some of you are certain to be- come rich and some of you may die of poverty and misery. And it just depends on your own selves which you are going to do ... the girl who begins making money young will go on making it as a woman.... As a first-class Scout, you have to have a certain amount in the savings bank before you can become entitled to wear a badge" [14, pp. 111- 12]. The Girl Scouts taught girls the practicalities involved in saving money and supporting themselves, reminding them that "by saving up ... it enables you to keep yourself and not be a burden to others" [14, p. 112]. Part of providing for oneself included cultivation of the body through physical activities that further empowered girls by giving them a sense of a strong physical ability. The "Scribe's Corner Home Scout News," a section of the American Girl, relays troop activities to the maga- zine's subscribers. A troop from Stonington, Connecticut, reports, "During the summer of 1918 we went on several hikes to the woods where we made fires and cooked our supper. We also took several trips to Fisher's Island, where the U.S. Coast Guard entertained us by giving an exhibition of their life saving drill. Afterwards we went swimming with some of the crew who demonstrated various strokes.... The girls have had instruction in rifle shooting and very helpful and interesting talks on first aid" [19]. In an article entitled "Physical Education and the Girl Scout Movement," members of the Girl Scout organization and physical education experts alike applaud the physical components of the movement. Comments from leaders include "hiking seems to me the most important physical part of Scout work" and "camping seems to me the best physical feature of our work because it includes within itself many desirable forms of exercise and affords opportunity for wide and varied activities." In this same article, Mary E. Gross, the assistant director of physical education in Cincinnati's public schools, wrote that "the aims of the Girl Scout movement coincide with the best aims of modern physical education.... The Girl Scout organiza- tion aims to give the girl an opportunity to do the things that the girl naturally wishes to do" [20]. This understanding of physical fitness within the Girl Scout movement attributes a "natural" desire for out- door exercise to young girls, an innovative idea for its time [21]. Along the same lines of physical fitness and endurance, the hand- books also encouraged activities specifically to develop strength such as "skipping, rowing, fencing, swimming, tennis, and handball" [14,
270 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY p. 74]. The 1920 handbook includes an "athlete" proficiency test that required the scouts to be able to both play and coach ice hockey, bas- ketball, and dodgeball [15, p. 499]. Girl Scout literature also encour- aged girls to understand their own bodies. In hopes that the girls would develop a daily physical routine, the first handbook enumerates the daily exercises, advising, for example, that girls, "make the heart strong in order to pump the blood properly to every part of the body, and so to build up flesh, bone, and muscle. Exercise: 'Swimming and Wrist Pushing'" [14, p. 70]. The effort made to explain physiology not only contributes to physical health but also allows these girls to develop a sense of autonomy and control over their own bodies. Stemming naturally from its promotion of self-sufficiency, the orga- nization advocated professional careers for women. Both the activities the Girl Scouts fostered and the actual career section of the handbook encouraged women to enter the work force. The Girl Scouts were ex- posed to a multitude of skills that provided a solid foundation for what- ever line of work they chose, be it domestic or more public in nature. The Girl Scout handbook did not merely imply that self-sufficiency for women is important, for it explicitly teaches, "if you ever had to earn your own livelihood, there are many ways you could get it, provided that your head is screwed on the right way" [14, p. 112]. The Career section shortly following this advice instructs young girls that to pursue careers previously inaccessible to women is admirable. The section be- gins, "really well-educated women can make a good income by taking up translating, dispensing to be a doctor or in a hospital, as stock bro- kers, house decorators, or agents, managers of laundries, accountants, architects. In the new libraries at Deptford girls will now take the place of boys as assistants.... In Russia the municipal fire brigade has been commanded by a young lady, Mlle. Yermoloff" [14, p. 114]. This en- couragement of women outside of "normal" realms and into profes- sions such as doctor or fire chief indicates, again, the progressive na- ture of the American scouting philosophy. The Girl Scout organization's focus on self-sufficiency and survival also manifested itself in the program's emphasis on the development of research skills. The requirements for almost every badge included some type of outside reading and research. For example, in order to pass the citizenship test, the girls were expected to thoroughly research the laws of the United States. Even the athlete badge required a compi- lation of rules for sporting events. The Girl Scout organization also promoted a strong familiarity with books. The "scribe" proficiency badge was symbolized by an open book. To complete the "scribe" badge, girls were encouraged to read and expected to understand the different literary forms. They studied drama, novels, and short fiction
AMERICAN GIRLHOOD 271 and even memorized poems and biographical information about their authors [15, p. 445]. Individual Girl Scout troops often participated in philanthropy at local libraries, cataloging and reshelving the books. This familiarity with research resources provided young girls with a means to answer their questions about the world and consequently en- couraged the development of their intellect. The organization itself provided women with many opportunities to hone their business skills. The founding of the Girl Scouts' National Headquarters in 1913 officially rendered the organization a business. Women participated in various promotional activities including adver- tising, registering new troops, submitting applications for patents, fundraising, and conference planning. Edith Duncan Johnston writes of her experience as the first national secretary. She was responsible for press releases and publicity as well as for keeping the books and inventory. She also forged relationships between the Girl Scouts and various other women's groups, such as the Red Cross and Jane Adams' Hull House [22]. The Girl Scouts was more than a social club; it em- ployed a number of full-time employees, established an organizational protocol, and arranged conventions in attempts to maintain continuity and to foster creative developments [12, pp. 11-13]. The troop organization also urged girls to explore leadership posi- tions and fostered the development of qualities that would later allow girls to become good leaders. The 1920 handbook describes the organi- zation of the Girl Scouts in the following way: The ideal unit and the keystone of the organization is the patrol, consisting of eight girls ... they are a self-selected and under the regulations and customs of the organization, a selfgoverning little body who learn through practical experiment how to translate into democratic team play, their recreation, patri- otic or community work, camp life and athletics.... From one to four of these patrols constitutes a troop, the administrative unit of the organization. Girl Scouts are registered and chartered by troops, and the troop meeting is their official gathering. The troop has the privilege of owning a flag and choosing ... its own personal crest and title. [15, pp. 13-14] Girls were given the opportunity to run their own troops, and many girls eventually joined the national staff of the Girl Scouts or contrib- uted in other administrative capacities. Most Girl Scout leaders were once members of troops, and many women found networks within these troops for collaboration on outside projects. During the 1920 publicity campaign, the Rally encouraged captains to "get together with other captains" and undertake community exposure efforts [23]. The Girl Scout organization, in its pursuit to develop young women's potential, also advocated the higher education of its members and lead- ers. Breaking from traditional philosophies that discouraged education
272 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY for women, the Girl Scouts not only promoted higher education, but insisted its leaders obtain certain skills before assuming their positions. The original handbook held up women such as Marie Curie and Eliza- beth Garrett Anderson (described as "a very clever lady doctor") as models for girls who persevered in their studies. According to the hand- book, "When studying for the medical profession, which no woman had then attempted to do, she [Anderson] had to go to France.... Her great success and her zeal in starting the Hospital for Women, in which all the doctors are women has been a benefit to hundreds of women [and] . . . a great encouragement to all girls"6 [14, p. 115]. Girl Scout leaders were also offered opportunities for graduate study, such as a Boy Scout work adaptation program at the University of Wis- consin [24]. Additionally, the Rally reported in 1918, "Still another great university has opened its doors to graduate study in scouting for girls." The scholarship referred to in this notice consisted of a five- hundred dollar fellowship to be awarded for graduate study in social sciences at New York University [25]. The Girl Scout organization further demonstrated its progressive na- ture by fostering meaningful friendships among girls rather than en- couraging flirtation with boys. Traditional middle-class socialization for young women in the Victorian period included instruction in the art of coquettish flirtation, culminating when women "caught" a man. The Girl Scouts gave young women the opportunity to form relation- ships with other women, providing them with space in which they could develop identities, strengthen self-esteem, and stimulate intellectual growth. The Girl Scouts created a constructive environment, perfect for cultivating female bonds. In A Girl Scout of Red Rose Troop, the Scout patrol leader Carol and her "colonel" Helen experienced a friendship representative of this female bond. Shunning traditional flirtation with men, Carol informs her mother, "'I like boys, real nice boys, but I don't want to be foolish and, that giggly, whisper kind of foolish' " [18, p. 124]. She preferred, instead, her friendship with Helen, with whom she shares interests in gardening, hiking, and leading their Girl Scout troop. Carol, Helen, and the girls in their troop work together as they encounter adventures (for example, saving a woman stranded in the woods with a broken leg) and moral dilemmas (for example, confront- ing a fellow Scout who stole from her troop because her family did not have enough money for food). For Carol and the young women read- ing this novel, this sense of dedication to the troop and to her Girl Scout promise endorses the importance of friendship. 6. Elizabeth Garrett Anderson was the first British woman physician. She was entered into the English Medical Register in 1866.
AMERICAN GIRLHOOD 273 In addition to fictional accounts, emphasis on female friendship also can be found in the Girl Scout handbook. One of the Girl Scout laws, "A Girl Scout is a friend to all and a sister to every other Girl Scout," advises young women that "Women are said to be inclined to cliques and snobbishness and the world looks to great organizations like the Girl Scouts to break down their petty barriers of race and class and make our sex a great power for democracy in the days to come" [15, pp. 6-7]. The Girl Scouts gave these young women a space in which they could operate with a moral code and could foster, through shared experience, a self-identity founded on accountability and a sense of importance. Conclusion The Girl Scout organization intended to be more than a social club for girls. Their literature suggests a variety of activities aimed at prepar- ing them both for domestic activities and more progressive roles. As women began to participate in the public realm, Juliette Low's scouts prepared for a similar future. The printed materials produced by the organization consistently emphasize physical strength, professional ca- reers, healthy living, and efficient housekeeping. Taken in its entirety, the literature indicates that the leaders and the participants aspired to be more than mere representatives of the myth of "true womanhood." Many of America's "new women" began their path toward social activ- ity and political participation under the guiding influence of the Girl Scouts of America. These young women desired a forum in which they could express their independence, take part in outdoor activities, and provide help to others. Although the organization never explicitly as- serted the equality of the sexes and continued to maintain certain con- servative ideas, the Girl Scouts did advance women's place in the public arena and their right to lead strong independent lives. Through the Girl Scouts and its female-centered environment, young women devel- oped sound minds, strong bodies, and a social consciousness that ex- tended far beyond the traditional domain. Appendix Additional Listing of Girl Scout Literature Produced before World War II Brown, P. H. "The One and Only Band." St. Nicholas 54 (November 1926): 24.
274 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Crenshaw, Mary Mayo. "A Good Little Scout." St. Nicholas 53 (Novem- ber 1925): 66-69. Kimball, Alice Mary. "Girls Who Stood Up against an Earthquake." St. Nicholas 54 (December 1926): 89-92. Lavell, Edith. "Is Your Daughter a Girl Scout?" Ladies HomeJournal 37 (June 1920): 145-46. Speer, Margaret H. "Some Strange Girl Scout Camps." St. Nicholas 55 (August 1928): 798-99. Stearns, Myron M. "Scout Magic." Ladies HomeJournal 44 (June 1927): 158-61. Wright, Katherine 0. Twenty-Five Years of Girl Scouting: 1912-1937. New York: Girl Scouts of America, Inc., 1937. "What Are Scouts Good For?" Literaiy Digest 83 (November 29, 1924): 44-55. The Rally: Vol. 1, no. 1 (October 1917). Vol. 1, no. 2 (November 1917). Vol. 1, no. 4 (January 1918). Vol. 1, no. 9 (June 1918). Vol. 1, no. 12 (September 1918). Vol. 2, no. 6 (March 1919). Vol. 3, no. 1 (October 1919). Vol. 3, no. 6 (March 1920). Vol. 3, no. 9 (June 1920). The American Girl: Vol. 4, no. 1 (October 1920). Vol. 4, no. 6 (March 1921). Vol. 4, no. 7 (April 1921). Vol. 5, no. 1 (October 1921). Vol. 5, no. 9 (July 1922). Vol. 6, no. 4 (January 1923). REFERENCES 1. Garis, Lillian C. The Girl Scout Pioneers. New York: Cupples Leon Co., 1920. 2. Saxton, Martha. "The Very Best Girl Scout of Them All." American Heritage 33 (1982): 38. 3. Lawrence, Daisy, and Schultz, Gladys. Ladyfrom Savannah: The Life ofJuliette Low. Philadel- phia: J. B. Lippincott, 1958. 4. Strickland, Charles. "Juliette Low, the Girl Scouts, and the Role of American Women." In Woman's Being, Woman's Place: Female Identity and Vocation in Amencan History, edited by Mary Kelly, pp. 255-57. Boston: G. K Hall & Co., 1979.
AMERICAN GIRLHOOD 275 5. Rosenthal, Michael. The Character Factory: Baden Powell and the Origins of the Boy Scout Move- ment, pp. 161-90. New York: Pantheon Books, 1984. 6. Perry, Elisabeth Israels. "The Very Best Influence: Josephine Holloway and Girl Scouting in Nashville's African American Community." Tennessee Historical Quarterly 52, no. 2 (1993): 73-85. 7. Rothschild, Mary Aiken. "To Scout or to Guide?" Frontiers 6 (1981): 116. 8. Wright, Katherine. 25 Years of Girl Scouting. New York: Girl Scouts of America, Inc., 1937. 9. "Girl Scout Movements in Rural Communities." Playground 41 (September 1920): 371- 73. 10. "Blind Girl Scouts." Rally 4, no. 3 (December 1920): 11. 11. Girl Scouts of America. 75 Years of Girl Scouting. New York: Girl Scouts of America, Inc., 1986. 12. Degenhardt, Mary, and Kirsch, Judith. The Girl Scout Collector's Guide. Lombard, Ill.: Wallace-Homestead Book Co., 1987. 13. Perry, Elizabeth Israels. "From Achievement to Happiness: Girl Scouting in Middle Ten- nessee, 1910's to 1960's." Journal of Women's History 5 (1993): 75-94. 14. Hoxie, W. J. How Girls Can Help Their Country: The 1913 Handbookfor Girl Scouts. Facsimile ed. New York: Girl Scouts of America, 1972. 15. Girl Scouts, Inc. Scoutingfor Girls: Official Handbook of the Girl Scouts. New York: Girl Scouts, Inc., 1920. 16. Golden Eaglet. 18 min. Lincoln and Parker Film Company, Girl Scouts, Inc., 1918. 17. "Our Party Page." Rally 3 (March 1920): 16. 18. Blanchard, Amy. A Girl Scout of Red Rose Troop. Boston: W. A. Wilde & Co., 1918. 19. "Stonington, Conn." American Girl 4 (March 1921): 28. 20. "Scout Magic." Ladies HomeJournal (June 1927), p. 161. 21. Formanek-Brunell, Miriam. Made to Play House: Dolls and the Commercialization of American Girlhood, 1830-1930. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press. 22. Johnston, Edith Duncan. Memoirs of Girl Scout Experience. Edith D. Johnston Collection. No. 433, box no. 2. Savannah: Georgia Historical Society, 1952, p. 96. 23. "Our Captains Page." Rally 4 (October 1920): 5. 24. "Questions and Answers." Rally 1 (October 1917): 3. 25. "Another Fellowship." Rally 1 (January 1918): 8.