In 1981, the Gerber/Hart Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Information Resource and Archives in Chicago opened its doors to the public. Only five years later, the Quatrefoil Library in St. Paul, Minnesota, with assistance from the Minnesota Civil Liberties Union, went public with more than fifteen hundred volumes of LGBT (lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender/transexual) literature collected by David Irwin and Dick Hewetson. Together, they have become two of the largest LGBT circulating libraries in the United States, followed by smaller sites and collections such as the Stonewall Library and Archives in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, and the James C. Hormel Gay and Lesbian Center at the San Francisco Public Library. These spaces serve as the de facto guardians of collected LGBT knowledge, heritage, and history—narratives accessible for public consumption—but in order for these spaces to benefit the LGBT community beyond their role as repository and site of private reading and contemplation, readers must come together to discuss the texts, whether informally or through the organized structure of a book club. Since Oprah Winfrey exposed her book club to international audiences in 1996 [1–3], commercial Web sites such as Book Browse and the Reading Club have profited from advertising a host of advantages of joining discussion groups: lifelong learning, polished communication skills, inspiration to write creatively, the unification of families, and so on. As arbiters of cultural authority, these clubs profess to guide participants through pleasurable and suitable reading experiences. The Literary Guild and the Book‐of‐the‐Month Club since their inception have chosen appropriate books and provided advice on reading them in order to uphold bourgeois American values. Furthermore, teachers rely on book clubs for shaping reading habits [4–5], and publishers such as Penguin and Harcourt administer reading guides to continue the effort once students leave the classroom [6–7]. Many studies suggest that these social and intellectual venues may also complement grassroots political movements by constructing the identities of the historically underrepresented readers who resist oppressive sources of power that have reduced them to a less equal status [8–10]. In part, book selection often opens the established, commercial literary canon to legitimize LGBT, women’s, and ethnic voices. In fact, as June Dwyer argues, book clubs transcend selected authors and texts to focus on book club participants and discussion, in this way defining “part of the postmodern movement, where accepted authority has been undermined and voices from the margins have gained authenticity” [11, p. 177]. Reminiscing about a gay men’s book discussion group that he once frequented, Ed Cohen reveals his own ambivalence toward identity legitimation: “One reading group participant recently characterized his feeling about gay bars in the 1970s—that gay and lesbian studies was a place where we didn’t have to explain to anyone ‘who we are.’ However my visceral response belies this characterization: the more often I find myself at these collocations, the more often the nausea in my stomach seems to tell me that ‘I’ have no idea ‘who “we” are’” [12, p. 72]. If grassroots democracy tends toward designing political processes from the lowest level of organization, Cohen’s anxious discovery clarifies that these gatherings contribute to the multiple political debates over identity formation. By considering Dwyer’s postmodern reading spaces and Cohen’s collective identity crisis, this study addresses the reluctance of five gay men’s book discussion groups throughout Wisconsin to utilize the institutionalized setting of the public library as a venue for debating over and constructing a gay identity via their reading selections. According to the mission statements of the state’s public libraries, these institutions seek to provide open access to cultural and intellectual resources that meet the changing informational needs of a diverse population. For example, on a local level, the Portage County Public Library in central Wisconsin “provides equal opportunity access to information, high quality materials, programs, and on‐line resources to meet the needs of our diverse community for lifelong learning, cultural enrichment, and intellectual stimulation” [13]. On a broader level, the Eastern Shores Library System, which includes thirteen member libraries, seeks “to improve and extend public library service to all residents of the library system” [14]. However, according to statewide book discussion groups catering to the gay male population—arguably one of the diverse populations addressed by these mission statements—public libraries must work more diligently to provide access to the appropriate resources for these patrons. As it stands, the gay community and public libraries seem to uphold a rather tense relationship. Whereas librarians admittedly would like to accommodate them, gay male patrons reinforce the conclusions of many ethnographic studies, detailed below, as they interpret the library’s role as unsympathetic to their social movements. In fact, many find public libraries as cultural institutions complicit with overlooking homosexual histories, cultures, and reading habits, hence the need for community dialogue. As gay book club member Michael confessed, “In my forty‐odd years in Madison, I’ve never seen a library display books by gay authors in observance of Gay and Lesbian Pride Month. I mean, when has a public library ever marched in a gay pride parade as our ally?” Methodology and Participants Such articulation of political movements and identity construction inspired this investigation into how Wisconsin’s gay male book discussion groups perceive the social, cultural, and economic spheres inhabited by themselves and others and how this perception affects their relationships with public libraries. As an English professor in the University of Wisconsin system, president of the Friends Board of Trustees at Hedberg Public Library in Janesville, Wisconsin, and volunteer at Outreach, Inc.—Madison’s LGBT center—I chose to focus on the state’s public sectors that I directly affect and that affect me and those I seek to benefit. Many of the 387 member public libraries in the eight public library systems throughout Wisconsin enjoy providing meeting space to book discussion groups, but the gender‐specific groups focus specifically on women readers and texts. For example, the City of Muskego Public Library in the southeast hosts the Women’s View book discussion group, and the Neenah Public Library in east central Wisconsin hosts the Girlfriends Read Book Club and the Girlfriends Read Teen Edition, which feature books with strong female characters by women authors. However, no book discussion groups for the gay male population, that is, discussions for the community and its allies and centering on gay themes as defined by the group members, meet at any of the state’s public libraries. Furthermore, scholarship on book discussion groups and on relationships with public libraries gives prominence to women in general and lesbian readers, thus opening a space for the perspectives of gay men as well. Studies of several hundred women’s book clubs reveal that middle‐class, well‐educated, employed women over age forty dominate these gatherings in a stimulating search for knowledge, the creation of social bonds, and a yearning for fervent discussion. In other words, these women find occasional refuge from their quotidian obligations of marriage, family, and career to investigate their interests, differences, and political allegiances via metaphorical progression through both fictional and nonfictional terrain. In this context, women who belong to book discussion groups collectively interpret their selections via processes of creating meaning simultaneously informed by and informing both public and private spaces, including the book club community itself [15–17]. I received ninety‐four responses (34 percent) to a three‐question survey distributed to 263 Wisconsin public library directors via SurveyMonkey.com regarding interest in organizing gay book discussion groups in their outreach efforts (see app. A). Of the ninety‐four, eighty came from libraries in small cities, towns, and villages with populations under 40,000 with directors who acknowledge the budgetary and political difficulties that would complicate such a project. First, for budgetary reasons, “We do have some LGBT titles, but in a collection of less than 32,000 books total, we don’t have the ability to provide a large number of titles in any category beyond the very general ones,” and “Right now we do not host ANY book discussion groups, in our town of 1600 it’s been difficult to keep any discussion going.” Second, based on circulation records, “I have regularly purchased a variety of books with [the LGBT] population in mind and the number of checkouts after six months on the new shelf is always very small (0–3) and there is obviously no way to tell if the users were or were not gay, in order to use those statistics as a gauge.” Third and most prevalent stands the problem of geography and political alliances of the local patrons. In one instance, “Our Library would certainly not be opposed to hosting a LGBT book group but given our population and our location, I’m thinking there might not be much of a demand for it.” More disturbing, though, is the prediction that, “As a librarian in a fairly conservative community, I would have to consider that a LGBT book group may lead to the loss of some patrons and may or may not attract others.” In defense of these libraries, each of the ninety‐four surveys included a welcoming version of the following statement: “If we were approached to host an LGBT book discussion we would accommodate their request by providing public meeting space and placing books on hold for members. These are services we provide for other book clubs.” In the meantime, gay men and the broader LGBT community seek out literacy enhancement in what they perceive to be more welcoming environments, both electronic and brick‐and‐mortar [18–19]. Additional seminal work on lesbian library patrons conducted by Janet A. E. Creelman and Roma M. Harris and others systematically investigates the information needs and expectations of this population, which seeks more updated collections, broader genres, and more accommodating subject indexing [20–22]. At the same time, through the lens of Michel de Certeau’s theory of the “practiced place” of space, Paulette Rothbauer challenges the heterosexist concept of the public library as metaphorical closet and banal storehouse of books. While citing studies of anxious lesbian patrons clandestinely browsing the stacks for and reading materials on sexual orientations while stifled in dark corners, Rothbauer argues that the social power embedded in the act of reading these print and electronic texts within public library walls contributes to the creation of a safe, community space [23]. Literacy, fundamental, of course, to identity, culture, and survival, allows readers and writers of all abilities to challenge and reinforce power dynamics both inside and beyond traditional and nontraditional learning environments. Subscription databases such as Teen Health and Wellness, SIRS Knowledge Source, and Opposing ViewPoints Resource Center acquaint Wisconsin’s library patrons with current debates, definitions, opinions, scientific research, and commentaries of interest to those seeking information about what it means to declare one’s sexual orientation or identity. However, these studies on the library’s role in identity construction focus primarily on the lone patron. While Steven Joyce and Alvin Schrader’s empirical study of the needs of gay men from the Edmonton Public Library provides interesting data pursuant to this population [24], my qualitative study of gay male book discussion groups carefully examines the complex questions that can be difficult or impossible through quantitative methodologies. I began my search for these groups with the Lavender Salon Reader: The Online Forum for Gay and Lesbian Reading Clubs. Because the last site update occurred on October 16, 2006, much of the information was outdated; however, through this database I successfully contacted the owner of Outwords bookstore in Milwaukee, who refused to allow me to interview his men’s book club because of concern that the participants might move their discussions to the public library and borrow rather than purchase their selections. In June 2008 I turned to Outreach, Inc., which, through a series of e‐mail and telephone channels, led me to five gay men’s book groups who meet in various locations other than public libraries in Madison, Milwaukee, Green Bay, and Kenosha. I mailed photocopies of the outline of my study and approval from the University of Wisconsin Colleges Institutional Review Board to each contact person, who distributed the documents among the book club participants in each city. By the end of August 2008, I had been invited to interview the members during their scheduled gatherings between September and December 2008 about the rationales behind holding all discussions in homes or in openly gay‐friendly environments rather than in public libraries and about their perceptions of public libraries. Because the participants were hesitant about documentation via digital camcorder, I recorded only audio group conversations and individual interviews with the thirty‐seven participants and kept copious field notes. Finally, I analyzed the data through processes of open and selective coding through the lens of grounded theory—a qualitative research method designed to gather a thorough and detailed understanding of human behavior from small, focused samples [25]. The discussion begins with an introduction to the library systems, group members, and their recent reading selections. All names are pseudonymous, and unless otherwise noted all quotations come from the interviews. Madison (South Central Library System) Counties Adams, Columbia, Dane, Green, Portage, Sauk, Wood Member libraries 52 Operating revenue $39,048,909 Operating expenditures $36,492,276 Total circulation 12,339,201 volumes Source.—2007 Wisconsin Public Library Service Data, Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction. This group of eight men have met monthly at a given member’s home for the past four years. The participants themselves vary in age from thirty‐five to fifty‐eight and are all employed, middle‐class, white‐collar workers. The members alternate the book selection by giving two months' notice and choosing only fiction and nonfiction focusing strictly on gay male authors and subjects with gay men as the target audience. This interview took place at Stephen’s house in the Madison suburb of Sun Prairie. The men met in his large kitchen and informal dining area where two lap dogs rested on the checkered black and white tiles under a chrome and plastic laminate table. “I’m a queer cliché,” he admits. This month the book club read Eddie’s selection, James T. Sears’s Behind the Mask of the Mattachine: The Hal Call Chronicles and the Early Movement for Homosexual Emancipation (2006). A local activist for more than twenty years, Eddie discovered the book through the list of Lambda Literary Award winners and revealed that “I was living in San Francisco in '78 when Dan White shot Harvey Milk, and let’s say that the injustice and need for community involvement just stuck with me.” Isaac, also in his fifties, appreciated the selection because “a lot of young people think that gay liberation started after Stonewall, so I, I don’t know, I want to give credit to earlier movements.” Bruce enjoyed the selection because “I like to keep my mind sharp,” but prefers lighter reading because “I sit in a cubicle all day and wear a tie and answer a phone and look at a computer so I need some down time. And it’s good to get away from those serious straight people.” For that reason, he asked the group to read George Baxt’s classic murder mystery A Queer Kind of Death (1966) for the following meeting: “A little smut, a little killing, Detective Pharoah—I’ve read all the Pharoah and Daniel Valentine mysteries.” Philip, also a fan of pulp fiction but “inquisitive scholar” who teaches at the University of Wisconsin–Madison, recently selected The Invention of Heterosexuality by Jonathan Ned Katz (2007), which he drew from his extensive reading list on the political and philosophical debates about the nature of sexual orientations, such as Havelock Ellis’s Sexual Inversion (1897), Martin Weinberg and Colin Williams’s Male Homosexuals: Their Problems and Adaptations (1974), and William Masters and Virginia Johnson’s Homosexuality in Perspective (1979). “The terms [homosexual and heterosexual] are simply labels,” Philip adds, “and neither is normal or abnormal.” Pursuing the same subject, Wes and Michael, both teachers in the Dane County public school system, selected books on the plight of gay youth through Patrick Moore’s Tweaked: A Crystal Meth Memoir (2006) and Ritch C. Savin‐Williams’s The New Gay Teenager (2006). “I read an article in Time about gay teens a few years ago,” shares Wes, “and I want to help these kids who suffer from emotional trauma and self‐loathing.” Tim and Isaac, each with teenage children, agree that teens must respect themselves and their peers and that parents have an important role in that process. “I know that teens experiment—my kids do—and can be cruel to one another, so they all need strong support groups,” adds Tim, “I think it’s impossible to know how teens are going to act and what they’re going to think. We just have to hope that what we teach them sticks.” Milwaukee I (Milwaukee County Federated Library System) County Milwaukee Member libraries 15 Operating revenue $40,138,772 Operating expenditures $38,421,574 Total circulation 7,441,915 volumes Source.—2007 Wisconsin Public Library Service Data, Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction. The Fuel Café was recently designated as nonsmoker friendly, to the delight of the six men who meet to discuss their monthly selection and speak over the casual chatting and keyboard tapping. “It’s gay friendly and conveniently located,” says Brad, setting his mug on his copy of Charles Winecoff’s Anthony Perkins: Split Image (2006). Brad is in his late thirties and works as a project manager, fortunately avoiding the despairing trend of corporate layoffs. “Who needs that stress?” asks Brad. “My boys keep me human.” “You’re not really that human, you’re a Republican, but I love you anyway,” proclaims Travis, Brad’s partner, also in his late thirties but a registered Democrat, social worker specializing in poverty, and old movie fan who selected this month’s topic of discussion from his favorite Hollywood biographies: “I discovered Anthony Perkins in Green Mansions when I was a kid, and it just sort of spiraled from there.” Like other Perkins biographies, Winecoff addresses the actor’s sexuality in the age of Joseph McCarthy, an era preceding the births of the book club members but distressingly relevant to the contemporary United States. “For me, the book was about more than just Perkins,” reveals Calvin, also an old Hollywood aficionado and volunteer at the Milwaukee LGBT Community Center. “We can still be discriminated against for being gay in too many contexts, just like Perkins was in Hollywood, so he got married so people would think he’s straight.” Such a philosophy echoed the previous month’s discussion of David Feinberg’s novel Eighty‐Sixed (1989) and trying to come to terms with a lost past through the lens of the AIDS epidemic. Devin, also a volunteer at the Milwaukee LGBT Community Center, connected Feinberg’s AIDS narrative and Perkins’s death from complications from AIDS in 1992 to the current revival of unsafe sex: “I know we’ve all heard it, but teens and a lot of adults think they’re immune. It’s like, if sex involves your own penis or someone else’s, cover it!” Milwaukee II This group met in the southwest Milwaukee suburb of Franklin, which can be a timely drive for some of the other club members who commute from Glendale, Wauwatosa, and the downtown Milwaukee area. Derek greets the five men with coffee and pastries in the employee break room of his small business, a relatively recent endeavor, explaining his collection of books on marketing, accounting, and especially business strategies such as Jack Welch’s Winning (2005) and Jim Collins’s Good to Great: Why Some Companies Make the Leap … and Others Don’t (2001). “I had to bring it into the book club so I can keep my focus—I’m still a little new to this,” Derek explains regarding his selection, Robert Witeck and Wesley Combs’s Business Inside Out: Capturing Millions of Brand‐Loyal Gay Customers (2006). Also a reader of Echelon Magazine for gay business professionals and a consumer who reaches out to local LGBT‐owned and ‐friendly businesses before darkening the doors of large corporations, Derek “wanted to find out how gay people in marketing see us since straight people have been trying to figure that out for years.” Greg, a middle manager for a vilified corporation, agreed that the selection helped him better understand marketing and promotion. “I just heard a story that sex doesn’t sell in advertising because we focus more on the sex than the product, so this could give Derek and me some new ideas and business approaches,” he says as he and Derek clink coffee cups. Josh, a senior in the School of Architecture and Urban Planning at the University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee, also enjoyed this month’s selection, a logical choice stemming from his own selection three months earlier, Will Fellows’s A Passion to Preserve: Gay Men as Keepers of Culture (2004). Although he’s admittedly overwhelmed with his senior project and internship, he revels in congregating with peers outside of academia who share different interests because “it’s fun to show everybody what led up to Queer Eye for the Straight Guy and how [Milwaukee] neighborhoods like the Third Ward and Walker’s Point got their coolness.” Gabriel, a fourth member of the group, admits that he would never consider reading these books otherwise, so he giddily reveals his selection for the following month, Mack Friedman’s Strapped for Cash: A History of American Hustler Culture (2003). Gabriel, a thirty‐eight‐year‐old retail manager, delved into this book when one of his unemployed friends chose to sign up to work for an escort service. “It’s a little disturbing and a little interesting at the same time,” Gabriel argues. “If I’d had a body like the men in that book, I might’ve stripped my way through college myself.” “It’s just another form of sex trafficking,” observes Martin, a forty‐one‐year‐old journalist and long‐time volunteer with the AIDS Resource Center of Wisconsin. “It’s bad enough that the Right believes we’re all promiscuous, and with that on top of kids being kidnapped from Thailand and Mexico and other countries to be sex slaves even in this country all over the news, it could all escalate into more reasons to think we’re all deviants.” Green Bay (Nicolet Federated Library System) Counties Brown, Door, Florence, Kewaunee, Marinette, Menominee, Oconto, Shawano Member libraries 42 Operating revenue $13,004,991 Operating expenditures $12,028,717 Total circulation 3,690,018 volumes Source.—2007 Wisconsin Public Library Service Data, Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction. This group in northeast Wisconsin, known for Brett Favre and the Packers football team, includes four sports enthusiasts and three athletically apathetic members. Such interest drew Vince—a forty‐five‐year‐old Web site designer—to former Green Bay Packer nose tackle Esera Tuaolo’s memoir Alone in the Trenches: My Life as a Gay Man in the NFL (2007). Considering that his bookshelves include similar memoirs and confessionals—Greg Louganis’s Breaking the Surface (2006) and Billy Bean’s Going the Other Way: Lessons from a Life in and out of Major League Baseball (2004)—and his own memories as a college football player, the choice of a reading selection seems fitting. According to Eric, a member of the book club for two years, “we knew it would come to this. The football parties are fun, but I don’t really like reading about it. But we give everybody a turn.” Eric, who teaches in the Green Bay public school system and belongs to the Green Bay Area Unitarian Universalist Fellowship, admits to receiving a yawn when he selected Donald L. Boisvert’s Sanctity and Male Desire: A Gay Reading of Saints (2004). Eric likes “to read Christian mythology, because it’s all just fiction that makes people hate each other.” Most of the members, though, did enjoy the reading and discussion, not particularly because of the subversion, but because of the connections to social activism. Roger, a graduate student in Environmental Science and Policy and volunteer with the University of Wisconsin–Green Bay’s Sexuality and Gender Alliance, appreciated the book’s application of Jesus’s altruism and mercy: “Maybe the gay men here would stop being so narcissistic and back‐biting if they would start respecting each other.” Adding to Roger’s apprehension toward social conservatism, Jason, the only African‐American among all book club members I interviewed, selected J. L. King’s On the Down Low: A Journey into the Lives of “Straight” Black Men Who Sleep with Men (2004), which contributes to the dialogue on the precarious intersections between race and sexual orientation. When the group read the book in September 2008, several members connected the study to Patrik‐Ian Polk’s television series Noah’s Arc and to Rodney Evans’s film Brother to Brother, each addressing the complex dynamics of homosexuality in black communities. “I’m an HIV counselor and member of the National Black Gay Men’s Advocacy Coalition,” Jason announces proudly, “and one of my personal missions is to end homophobia in the black community and encourage these men to practice safer sex with each other, even if they feel that they have to do it on the down low.” Kenosha (Kenosha County Library System) County Kenosha Member libraries 2 Operating revenue $7,719,377 Operating expenditures $7,440,140 Total circulation 1,308,268 volumes Source.—2007 Wisconsin Public Library Service Data, Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction. The bedroom community of Kenosha lies at the southeast corner of the state just fifty miles north of Chicago. Jack, a police officer at the University of Wisconsin–Parkside, hosts this month’s gathering in his modest house in Pleasant Prairie, just outside of Kenosha, with Dan, his partner of ten years. This particular reading group is a collection of couples united for at least eight years—Ethan with Jose, Connor with Alex, Henry with Jake, and Arthur with Frank—talking over Harold Kooden’s Golden Men: The Power of Gay Midlife (2000). “I can’t believe Dan chose this book,” adds Ethan, a bartender and waiter of fifteen years and volunteer at the AIDS Resource Center of Wisconsin. “We’re all just in our forties and fifties, still young.” Dan admits that the selection might have been insulting, but it was inspired by an excursion to Kenosha’s gay bar Club Icon, where a young man asked him and Jack if it was senior citizens night. “It’s a completely different culture each decade,” adds Connor, an alcohol and drug treatment counselor. “The book didn’t insult me so much, but it helped me realize that youth culture isn’t the only gay culture, and I don’t want to hang out with young guys.” “They can be nice to look at until they start thinking and speaking,” adds Jose, who asked the group to read Michael Thomas Ford’s My Big Fat Queer Life (2003) two months earlier. “I got my copy at a signing he did in New York a few years ago—the guy’s got it.” This yearning for comedy inspired Jake to request David Sedaris’s book of essays When You Are Engulfed in Flames (2008) following the Ford, and Frank to return to the essay form with Edmund White’s The Burning Library (1995) after the bout with midlife crises. According to Arthur, an auto mechanic who admittedly reads only because it gives him and Frank time away from television, the condensed form of an essay appeals to his short attention span, especially when it reflects on the amusing idiosyncrasies of gay life rather than on serious contemplation. The Politics of Gender and Reading Group Dynamics According to the interviews and conversations, the link between public library space and book discussion groups in their collaborative roles of building community, developing individual and collective identities, and expanding literacy remain ambiguous. Paul Keith, general collections and technology librarian, reveals the important connection between book club meetings and community relations at the Gerber/Hart: “Like groups sponsored by book stores, the whole point of having the groups is to bring people into our space. In the past, people have looked on Gerber/Hart as a ‘safe space’ where people can explore their sexual orientation, and we were often contrasted with public libraries, which were not seen thus. However, I do not think that this comparison still holds up.”3 The gay book discussion groups I interviewed, however, disagree with Keith, which opens a window into a healthy debate. The clubs themselves appear definable as safe spaces for the community to gather, exchange ideas, and construct queer identities. However, the problem stems from their perception that public libraries, as much as other public institutions, signify homophobia and heterosexism. 3.  Personal e‐mail from Paul Keith regarding book discussion groups, April 20, 2008. Exclusive Spaces for Gay Men The five groups themselves and their reading selections revealed telling absences of women members and authors. “I love my lesbian sisters, and I support all of their causes since many of them are ours,” chimes in Jack, “but this club is for gay men to talk to other gay men about topics of interest to gay men.” Like the women’s groups detailed in the literature, the men in their own book clubs agree that participation aligns with identity formation—as Jack argues—and with political interest and action: the acrimonious relationship with conservative factions, the movements predating the Stonewall uprisings, nostalgia for a time before AIDS, the cult of gay celebrity, and so on. Such an articulation of political identity suggests that the reading material proposes general group identities providing room for individualistic response through autonomous reading. However, the discussions serve a more important purpose for these readers. First, they act as a means of acquiring cultural capital for white‐collar professionals such as Josh, Derek, and Greg, for educators such as Philip, Wes, and Michael, and for volunteers such as Devin, Roger, and Jason. Second, these men interact daily with the dominant capitalist, heterosexual American culture but choose to seek solace by secluding themselves with other gay men on a social and intellectual level. Of course, the need for solidarity among peers is understandable. Book discussions foster friendships, support systems, socializing, and mutual respect [26–27]. Sociologist Peter Nardi carries the ramifications of friendship into a larger political and cultural public sphere: “for new social movements to become mobilized and continue, personal networks of communication, mass media, and ‘high interpersonal interaction density’ among members of a value community must play central roles” [28, p. 198]. The men in this study also argue that the prevalence of gynocentric spaces inspired their own segregation. According to Dustin from Green Bay, “Sometimes it’s nice to be away from my women friends because I have more in common with these guys.” Owen from Milwaukee concurs but with misogynist overtones: “I hate it when women talk about their bodies and that nonsense. They wouldn’t want us talking about penises if it came up during one of our discussions, so we’ll call it a courtesy.” Such separatism persists as a significantly active and vocal element within many facets of LGBT communities and can certainly extend to misandry, misogyny, and—even within queer culture—biphobia and transphobia. Owen’s statement suggests that particularly he but also the other men who prefer to meet only with other gay men perceive the inclusion of other sexes and genders as a formidable challenge to both their personal identities and movement politics. Travis, for example, agrees with Owen on a more political level: “I respect the lesbian community’s concerns about the place of women in society and the obstacles they face, but men have different obstacles … like people thinking we’re promiscuous, recruiters, pedophiles, and all that. That’s why we read books about subjects of interest just to gay men.” Owen’s particular hostility toward women appears to define this culture of gay readers and to influence the relegated social and discursive gay spaces from Madison to Green Bay, both determining and determined by the reading selections. The readers refrain from negating or erasing the political concerns of the lesbian community, but the refusal to include them in discussions and selections appears to serve as an index of the political threat that lesbians and other queer communities pose to gay male identity and culture. While each group demands legitimation, they push one another aside. Topical Interest and Competition from Alternative Cultural Venues The reading club members’ relationships with libraries reveal an additional separation between their activism and the broader community. Of the thirty‐seven members present for interviews, none would prefer extending the meetings to a public library. Although most of them receive mailings about library events, support programming, and occasionally contribute financially to foundations, none visits more often than twice per year. According to Roger, who voices the sentiment, “the majority of programs target children, families, and senior citizens, and none of that concerns me.” Roger’s local Brown County Public Library Web site reveals his accuracy, with links to children’s programs and events, the TeenZone, an evening book group that discusses the traditional Great Books, and another that broadens the canon but meets at 10 a.m. on the second Thursday of each month when the men are working. Competition from cultural venues also determines visits to public libraries. According to Isaac, “there’s already more than I can attend on campus.” Indeed the University of Wisconsin–Madison is rich with athletics, exhibits, lectures, performances, workshops, and an active LGBT Campus Center hosting speakers and sponsoring a variety of activities. When Isaac and I perused through the Madison Public Library’s Web site to see what might interest him, we discovered many compelling wellness and financial workshops. We also found an extensive list of titles and kits for book club discussions at branch libraries, but, to Isaac’s dismay, many focused on race and ethnicity but none on sexual orientation (e.g., Diane Ackerman’s The Zookeeper’s Wife, Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie’s Half of a Yellow Sun, and Amy Bloom’s Away). Furthermore, as Isaac noticed, Madison Public Library’s list of ongoing programs and partnerships listed American Indian Heritage Month and a former observation of African American History Month but no events to commemorate Gay and Lesbian Pride Month. Travis and I made a similar discovery on the Milwaukee Public Library Web site. With a searchable library calendar, the terms “gay,” “lesbian,” “LGBT,” and “GLBT” revealed no hits from a possible 653 events. Numbers of Titles Available Book selection at the libraries, however, proved unproblematic. After reviewing the catalogs of each public library system with its geographically corresponding book club, many of the members did applaud the number of gay titles but not the numbers of each title (shown in parentheses) for their book club discussions: South Central Library System • Sears’s Behind the Mask of the Mattachine (0) • Baxt’s A Queer Kind of Death (1) • Katz’s The Invention of Heterosexuality (1) • Moore’s Tweaked (3) • Savin‐Williams’s The New Gay Teenager (2) Milwaukee County Federated Library System • Winecoff’s Anthony Perkins (1) • Feinberg’s Eighty‐Sixed (1) • Witeck and Combs’s Business Inside Out (2) • Friedman’s Strapped for Cash (2) • Fellows’s A Passion to Preserve (0) Nicolet Federated Library System • King’s On the Down Low (1) • Tuaolo’s Alone in the Trenches (0) • Boisvert’s Sanctity and Male Desire (0) Kenosha County Library System • Sedaris’s When You Are Engulfed in Flames (3) • Ford’s My Big Fat Queer Life (0) • Kooden’s Golden Men (0) • White’s The Burning Library (0) Furthermore, when Gerald, Tim, Wes, Isaac, and I discovered this dearth of their chosen titles in the South Central Library System, we found that the Madison Public Library distributes book discussion kits with multiple copies of the same book with discussion questions and author information. After contemplating the absence of gay titles on these extensive lists, Tim vocally observed a perceived lack of knowledgeable library staff and the library’s willingness to accommodate reading selections: “I think established groups would want to continue to select books to be discussed, rather than relying on a library staff member to create a list from books in their system. Do you think Madison Public would order gay books for a gay reading group?” According to the survey of directors, public libraries would accommodate these book clubs with their selections to the best of their abilities. But at the core of Tim’s question lies a popular concern about what is at stake if public libraries successfully define what and whose knowledge is of most worth to the larger community. Marginalizing particular discourses while valorizing others perpetuates the cultural dualisms of which public libraries profess to disapprove in their mission statements proclaiming inclusivity. Safety in Numbers and in Private A more urgent discussion emerges because of an absence of safety, discretion, and shelter at public libraries, personal amenities provided instead by private homes and gay‐friendly businesses. The group from Madison once considered holding discussions at a bar or restaurant, but, according to Stephen, “The main reason we decided against that would also apply to meeting at a library, bookstore, or any other public place. Some of us are still partially in the closet, and the lack of confidentiality might be a little unsettling.” Furthermore, according to Philip, “Madison’s reputation for being openly gay does not apply to several public institutions,” including the public library. The significance of the public library to many of these men contributes to an intuited separation between city and county services and local gay populations. As a cultural institution, the public library has constructed channels of social interaction and created a discursive space encouraging conversation and debate [29]. But in the collective gay memory, cultural and political institutions primarily deny inclusive rights. As best expressed by Frank from Kenosha, “everything from local to the federal government bans gay marriage, underfunds AIDS research, challenges gay adoption, and prevents us from visiting our partners in the hospital. I use government resources and public utilities because I have to, but I’ll never go out of my way to support them.” Essential here are the communicative and institutional frameworks contributing to the creation of institutions such as museums, historical societies, and libraries. These institutions attempt to capture and celebrate the solidarity defining an authentic local character through collecting, preserving, arranging, and exhibiting artifacts in order to structure a branch of culture in the sense of what is materially available and of the individuals who respond to the invitation to create and fund these projects. Quite often the quest for an explanatory authentic past generates a conservative institutional framework laden with ideology and attempting to capture and memorialize the community’s common heritage. Because politics shapes interpretations of memory and heritage as cultural commodities, friction often intensifies between their possible sources, for the construction of broad cultural myths often determines and is determined by hegemonic perspectives on universal truths and values isolating those of historically underrepresented groups. However, the attempt to provide structure to culture often complements rupture, fracture, and conflict, for cultural institutions occasionally stage opposing and multiple debates and developments, both legitimating and questioning values and ideas in particular spatial and historical contexts [30–31]. Patrons cannot simply read local narratives from library displays, for example. Rather, ideas of the community are mediated through the complex interrelationships between exhibition and viewer, such as Isaac’s disillusionment with the Madison Public Library’s observations of American Indian Heritage Month and African American History Month without commemorating Gay and Lesbian Pride Month. While Isaac finds the absence homophobic, many Wisconsin library directors argue that their conservative patrons may resent acknowledging this population and history in such a community display, which, of course, opens further space for discussion. Perhaps we must follow David Carr’s advice: “When we examine cultural institutions, we ought to consider their purposes, missions, and variations; their programs, espoused advocacies, and public dimensions; the forms of assistance and access offered by each; the ways we have of interacting with others in them; and how thoughtful use of cultural institutions can overcome the occasional barriers of elitism and distance that might discourage learners” [32, p. xiv]. Approaching their public libraries about meeting space may actually begin to elicit a favorable response and clear paths for future programming. Indeed, part of the burden, according to members of the Green Bay and Kenosha groups, falls onto the public libraries’ outreach efforts to taxpayers. According to Eric, who shelved books in a public library while in high school, “Public libraries are public and should represent the broad array of public interests, and being public and having the readings on the library’s regular calendar and in display cases raises awareness.” Although Vince admittedly abhors paying taxes, he agrees with Eric: “The benefit is that gay people pay their taxes like everybody else and the public library is a community space supported by taxpayer money, so it should encourage gay community participation.” The second Milwaukee group, which meets in a private home, broadens the implications by admitting that public libraries might attract more members to the discussion group, but the men are comfortable with their current six for the purposes of manageable discussion. However, as Jeffrey suggests, “I think [meeting in a public library] would lend authenticity to our purpose,” a sentiment supported by Josh, who adds that “it might help build a connection between the gay community and city if we could pull fringe citizens into the larger community to make them feel welcome and valued. We might even show the city that we’re allies instead of pariahs.” Josh’s suggestion that alliances require dialogues emphasizes the potential for transformative effects between gay groups and city institutions. This suggestion also provides a crucial example of how the material and ideological conditions of daily living form and reform social movements and alliances. A critical understanding of the senses of all social actors—the gay community and the policy makers—may enable us to avoid the essentialism and reductionism entering into our work on the nature of enduring struggles over equal rights and legislation and the possibilities and limits of strategic alliances in a time of social and political conflicts. Conclusion and Application: Pursuing Dialogues As the work in LGBT library service has long proven, public libraries must continue improving in areas such as the archiving and cataloging of LGBT texts and overcoming heteronormative employee relations [33–39]. At the same time, as noted above, public library directors must tangle with operating budgets and the political philosophies of the communities they serve. Hence, again, the need for dialogue. By understanding the expectations of gay book discussion groups, public libraries may increase the diversity of their patrons and reinforce the philosophy that the library is a welcoming space open to all individuals in the community. In fact, work published by the American Library Association encourages library staff to continue working diligently to link to community cultures, even those deemed hidden or nonexistent [40–42]. Likewise, by understanding the concerns of public library directors, gay men and the broader LGBT community have the potential to help these institutions diversify patrons, collections, and services. Indeed, although recent opinion polls refreshingly suggest that most people oppose removing gay‐themed books from public libraries [43], “culture wars” will continue between groups who arguably hold widely differing moral visions and ethics of justice and see one another as a menace to American society [44–45]. Furthermore, as we know, long‐term change happens slowly and in small increments. Public libraries have the ability to support various underrepresented communities by utilizing their role as a focal point of the city, as a physical site of information gathering and dissemination. Furthermore, Max Kirsch’s concept of the “part‐culture” appropriately defines the need for gay men’s book discussion groups to meet in the settings of established cultural institutions for the benefit of their own and the broader community: “Part‐cultures comprise those norms and behaviors that are specific to groupings that hold beliefs and practices significantly differing from the ideology of the dominant culture. They form communities and direct energy to further their own ends, energy that is all the more effective because of solidarity. … While members of gay, lesbian, bisexual, transgendered, and queer communities may attempt to structure their individual lives primarily in relation to each other, a need persists to balance these networks with the demands of the outside world in order to secure the means for daily living” [46, p. 117]. If gay book discussion groups actually do serve as a form of grassroots activism, their successful policy campaigns depend on alliances between themselves and other constituencies, in this case public libraries, with all parties willing to participate. In order for gay communities to establish themselves in the city or county’s history, visible public discussion of gay texts as markers of an entire community’s cultural heritage must begin in the appropriate location. As employees in the public sector, we hear the cliché “There’s no money in the budget” much too frequently (a cliché because the phrase has lost its meaning, for we still manage). At the same time, those of us who educate the public in various capacities yearn to initiate programs and gratify our students, patrons, and clients through innovative teaching, grant writing, and collaborating with colleagues. Unconvinced that gay reading groups and public libraries remain incompatible based strictly on perceptions from both sides, I believe that we must further examine the political and social expediency of creating, promoting, and supporting alliances between gay communities and public institutions. Perhaps public libraries should take Michael’s advice and march in gay pride parades as allies. Perhaps Michael should invite his public library to join him.