DOCUMENTATION, INFORMATION RETRIEVAL, AND OTHER NEW TECHNIQUES MORTIMER TAUBE IN THE invitation which I received from Dean Asheim with reference to this paper, I was asked to cover the total area of development of docu- mentation and information retrieval from an objective and theoretical point of view, rather than from any narrowly conceived concern with special tech- niques or special equipment. The letter indicated that twenty-five years ago, when these library institutes were ini- tiated, the topic assigned to me was not even considered a part of librarianship. The fact that twenty-five years later the topic should be considered an essential part of your deliberations is the first important fact that should be noted. How did this new development arise out of traditional librarianship? What were the outside forces beyond librar- ianship whichcontributed to its develop- ment? Will it remain a separate enter- prise, or will it invest librarianship in general and change its very nature? Answers to questions like these make this subject germane to an institute or- ganized and sponsored by a graduate school of librarianship. Alfred. North Whitehead once re- marked tlat all knowledge begins with the enterprise of classification. This en- terprise involves naming things, sepa- rating things, and distinguishing be- tween things in simple terms of likeness and unlikeness. He went on to say that such classification is only the beginning of science and that, if you stop at classi- fication without going on to mathemat- ics, you have not progressed very far. What he meant by "going on to mathe- matics" is not necessarily going on to technical mathematics in the form of elaborate equations, deductions, proofs, theorems, etc., but going on to a rec- ognition that the differences with which science is concerned can be treated as differences along a variable. In other words, from a scientific point of view the differences between classes or kinds are not absolute but merely points of emphasis along continuous variables. This, of course, is the major theoretical insight of evolutionary theory in biology and distinguishes Darwin from Lin- naeus. We may classify things as red things and green things, and, if we re- main at this level, we have an absolute difference between green and red. Green is green, red is red, green is not red, red is not green, and that is the end of the matter. On the other hand, we may rec- ognize that the color phenomena repre- sent different wave lengths; and in such terms we can understand that there is a mathematical or a continuous varia- tion in color from red to green. Consider this same situation with ref- erence to the relationship between li- brarianship and documentation: one might say librarianship is librarianship, documentation is documentation, li- brarianship is not documentation, docu- mentation is not librarianship, and end the matter. But this is to end it on a low empirical or Linnaean level. If we are to be scientists in the modern sense, 90
DOCUMENTATION AND OTHER TECHNIQUES 91 we must look for a variable or a set of variables, such that traditional librar- ianship and new developments in docu- mentation and information retrieval represent different quantities or differ- ent modes of emphasis in a continuum. A more specific illustration of what we are after can be found in the following story: Early in 1952 I had arranged with the Graduate Library School of the University of Chicago to teach a course in some of the new developments in information-handling. I was asked for a name for the course which could be put in the catalog or the announcement to students, and I suggested the stand- ard term "cataloging" or, if you will, "advanced cataloging." I was advised not to use such a name because the stu- dents would not take such a course. I then suggested the more glamorous term "documentation." I may say that it got me students, but it has created a prob- lem ever since of explaining what docu- mentation is, and it is this explanation which still involves us at this time. One thing which seems completely obvious is that cataloging in the sense in which it is practiced in all libraries is a form of information retrieval. Items are described by catalogers in certain ways, the items are put away on shelves, and they are retrieved by using the descriptions placed on the catalog cards. The most elaborate mechanized system of information retrieval does no more than this. In one case, we talk of getting a book from the shelves; in the other, we talk of retrieving information, which is also getting a document or book from the shelves or other type of store. This is the first instance of the general re- quirement of understanding differences as variables along a continuum. There have been writers in this field who have made sharp distinctions between re- trieving "information" and retrieving a physical item which contains the infor- mation. I think it is a simple matter to show that the differences here are dif- ferences in degree. The information which is retrieved is always physical. It is a message of some kind. It may differ from a total article or book only in be- ing smaller or in being a summary state- ment of a larger work. But what is re- trieved is ultimately determined by what is stored, namely, the nature of the item that is indexed or cataloged. If I catalog a piece of data, such as the constitution of an alloy or the biological effect of a compound, this is the kind of data I will retrieve, and cataloging and retrieving such data do not differ in principle from cataloging and retrieving a book. What I am suggesting here is that the basic variable connecting librarianship with newer developments in documenta- tion and information retrieval is just the concept of information. This means that one of the essential differences be- tween standard library practices and the newer developments of documenta- tion and information storage and re- trieval is just the difference in degree of analysis and the size of the items stored. I must enter one important caveat at this point. In ordinary conversation people are likely to assume that, where- as differences in kind are important, dif- ferences in degree are unimportant. I think this view is completely and utter- ly wrong. All important differences are differences of degree, because these are the differences with which science is concerned and which determine the techniques and devices we require in operating different systems. Before I go on to discuss the impli- cations of the differences in degree be-
92 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY tween librarianship and documentation for such things as training of personnel, type of service, equipment, etc., some- thing must be said about the nature of the variable itself, namely, information. In the past several years there has been considerable discussion in both technical journals and the public press of the creation of a new basic theory, namely, information theory. Fortune magazine has gone so far as to say that the creation of information theory is an intellectual advance as important as the theory of gravitation and that it will have the kind of consequences in the field of information that Newton's the- ory of gravitation had in mechanics and physics.' Alongside this most laudatory view, there have been many who have been quite resentful of what they have called the pre-emption of a word like "information" to cover certain mathe- matical relationships which have noth- ing to do with "information" as ordinar- ily understood. It has been said that even Shannon himself regrets the fact that he used the word "information" to describe his theory. The fact that the word does have common meanings which are completely disparate from the spe- cial meaning in which he employed it has led to a great deal of confusion about the application of his theory. For my part, I think that the word "informa- tion" was a good choice and, even though as used in the theory it may not mean what the man in the street thinks it means, divergence between common and scientific meaning is not something which is peculiar to this instance; rather, it is a recurrent phenomenon in the development of scientific terminol- ogy. The man in the street thinks he knows exactly what words like "space," "time" "weight," and "gravity" mean, but certainly the meanings which most of us apply to such words in common speech have little relation to the mean- ings which physics assigns to such words. The quantities of information which are discussed and measured in Shannon's theory have little to do with the notion of "being informed." But the situation here is really no different from the use of the word "color" to describe a light wave of a certain frequency. Such waves are not colored, in just the same sense that the "information" in infor- mation theory is not the kind of infor- mation we mean when we talk of an "informed" person. I have tried to state this problem in another connection, and, rather than attempt another statement, I repeat the earlier presentation: Information can be interpreted "extensively" as a statistical property of "messages" with- out any reference to meaning and semantics. Much of the basic progress of science has consisted in similar discoveries of extensive measures of qualitative relations which in themselves resist the type of mathematical analysis which is the hallmark of science. Physics does not concern itself with the feel- ing of warmth, the perception of color, nor the hearing of sounds; but only with meas- urable energy transformations. It describes the color spectrum in terms of light rays of differ- ent wave length; it describes sounds as differ- ent rates of vibration; and it leaves to philos- ophers such questions as: Is heard sound really a vibration? or Is the color blue really identi- cal with a wave length of a certain size? The growing interest in information theory is symptomatic of a general awareness that a break-through has been achieved; that a hitherto intractable field of qualitative experi- ence has now yielded to extensive measure. The relation between inforrmation as a measurable extensive quantity and meaning as an act or attribute of human understanding is exactly analogous to the relation between wave lengths of light and the perception of color. Common sense tends to resist the transfor- mation from qualitative immediacy to quan- titative measures, and only the massive prac- 1 Francis Bello, "Information Theory," For- tune, XXVIII (December, 1953), 136ff.
DOCUMENTATION AND OTHER TECHNIQUES 93 tical success of physical theory from H-bombs to color television gains for its quantitative structures the grudging respect of the market place. In this new field of information theory, the abstraction from meaning is still looked upon by some as questionable sleight-of-hand. Shannon,2 Brillouin,3 and others have found it necessary to differentiate explicitly their con- cern with the quantitative aspect of messages from the common sense requirement that in- formation have meaning. Nevertheless the gen- eral success and wide circulation of Shannon's Mathematical Theory of Communication has gained general acceptance for the mathemati- cal definition of information within the special field of communication theory.4 In this paper I shall accept the use of the term "information" to designate cer- tain statistical properties of physical messages. The first thing to note, how- ever, is that the reason why these sta- tistical properties of messages are im- portant is that they are useful in con- veying meanings from one head to an- other. In just the same sense, our abil- ity to handle wave lengths of different sizes enables us to predict and control color experiences. It is, in fact, the rela- tionship of different wave lengths to different color experiences which makes the properties of the wave length signifi- cant rather than trivial. Similarly, it is the fact that certain physical properties of messages can convey meanings and increase understanding that makes these physical properties important. In other words, I am admitting here that what is important is meaning and understand- ing. But, as in many other goals which one wishes to achieve, it turns out that, if we are really interested in conveying meanings and understanding, we must abstract from them, forget them for a moment, and consider the physical prop- erties of messages which we can control statistically and thus in the end increase the potentiality for conveying mean- ings and understanding. There is a curious parallel here between this con- clusion and the insight of our great moral and religious leaders. We are told that anyone who searches directly for happiness will make himself acutely miserable; that happiness is achieved only indirectly, when it is not the speci- fied goal of activity. Similarly, we have witnessed in the last few years the ob- scuration and even nonsense that has come out of those activities dedicated to a search for the meaning of meaning or for the semantic key which will unlock the very storehouse of knowledge. There is no such key, any more than there is a one and true meaning to any word or a one and true color experience which is purely this hue and no other. Meaning is the eternal vestal virgin. She is to be saluted and not embraced. If we seek to possess her once and for all, we destroy her and remain with empty arms. What I am saying is that, if we concentrate on information as a physical property of meaning and on the best ways of organ- izing this kind of information, we can 2'The fundamental problem of communication is that of reproducing at one point either ex- actly or approximately a message selected at an- other point. Frequently the messages have mean- ing; that is, they refer to or are correlated according to some system with certain physical or conceptual entities. These semantic aspects of communication are irrelevant to the engineering problem" (Claude E. Shannon and Warren Weaver, The Mathematical Theory of Communi- cation [Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1949], p. 3). a"The theory developed in this book is based exclusively on statistical data. We have . . . com- pletely ignored another problem: that of mean- ilg. Whether or not the message made sense to either the sender or the receiver was regarded as completely irrelevant" (Leon Brillouin, Science and Information Theory [New York: Academic Press, Inc., 1956], p. 297). 'Mortimer Taube, "Meaning, Linguistic Struc- tures and Storage and Retrieval Systems," in The Mechanization of Data Retrieval ("Studies in Coordinate Indexing," Vol. IV [Washington, D.C.: Documentation Inc., 1957]), pp. 31-33.
94 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY approximate, as closely as we please, the meanings which are important to us. But, if we begin by trying to catch mean- ing in our gross physical nets, we will end in disaster and confusion or as a mystic cult. Libraries are storehouses of recorded information, that is, of physical mes- sages in various forms. The only in- struments we know which store mean- ings are human beings or, if you will, the brains of human beings. It is true that a library is a combination of physi- cal objects and the people who work with these physical objects. But, when we are concerned with improving the ways in which we index, catalog, store, and retrieve the physical objects in li- braries, we are not dealing with a branch of biology; that is, we are not dealing with the people who work in libraries. With so much, I will regard the first point as established. Both libraries and documentation centers, both cataloging and information storage and retrieval, are concerned with information as a property of physical records. They are distinguished from each other, as we have said, only in degree. What emerges from this general conclusion is the rec- ognition that techniques and devices which have been the basis of traditional librarianship are largely founded on the particular nature and physical form of the packages of information with which libraries have traditionally been con- cerned. This physical form, as the very name "library" indicates, is the book. The form of buildings, the type of shelves of libraries, are obviously deter- mined by the fact that they handle books, but it is not so clearly realized that the very apparatus of cataloging and indexing developed by the library profession is also determined by the fact that the item cataloged and indexed is a book. It is true that even traditional librar- ies have other materials besides books -journals, periodicals, etc.-but, whereas the library takes on the obliga- tion of cataloging its books, in general it buys indexes or catalogs of its peri- odical and journal holdings by buying another book, namely, a printed index, which some other agency has prepared. It is true that historically the libraries played a role in developing the type of indexing publications put out by the H. W. Wilson Company. The co-opera- tive activity of libraries was necessary with reference to these indexes because they are essentially general and there were no learned societies or special sci- entific bodies which could or would take responsibility for them. But when we come to consider specialized indexing services-such as Chemical Abstracts, Biological Abstracts, Physical Ab- stracts, etc., and their indexes-we must recognize that the library profes- sion as a whole took no responsibility for the preparation of these indexes or for the techniques and theories of informa- tion-handling on which they are based. I have remarked in other places, al- though it bears emphasis again here, that what caused the modern develop- ment of documentation and the modern concern of librarians with this topic was that a form of literature became impor- tant which was neither a book to be handled by the librarians nor a journal article to be handled by a scientific so- ciety, namely, the technical report. The technical report as a form of literature is certainly not nearly so important in our culture and our science as are books and journals, but, as a new form of lit- erature invading libraries and infor- mation centers, these reports created the
DOCUMENTATION AND OTHER TECHNIQUES 95 problem of establishing proper indexes and storage and retrieval devices to handle them. The traditional techniques of cataloging books were not adequate. The librarians or scientists who had been pre-empted for the purpose of run- ning information centers found it neces- sary to develop new techniques. Some- times these new techniques were de- veloped in complete independence of regular library activities. Sometimes they started from such techniques and added various refinements and develop- ments. But the important point is that the very problem made it necessary for the librarian to rethink the justification and reasons for his basic and fundamen- tal professional practices. Although Mr. Wilson's paper is con- cerned with the preparation and use of the professional staff, the topic which has been assigned to me cannot be fully covered without pointing out the im- plications of the doctrine of the infor- mnation continuum for the training of professional workers in this field. From the beginnings of librarianship as a field of professional activity through the thirty-four years in the life of the Grad- uate Library School there have been con- stant re-examinations of curriculums and a constant search for that touch- stone which might serve to define a pro- fessional librarian and distinguish him from a clerk or technician working in a building called a library. The Gradu- ate Library School found it necessary to develop a set of courses which would be academically respectable so that a university like the University of Chicago might grant its doctorate for studies and research in such courses. Over the years emphasis has shifted from public ad- ministration, to adult education, to sur- veys of reader attitudes and practices, to content courses in the literature of the various scientific and humanistic disciplines. There has always been a limited concern with technical matters, such as classification or indexing, but, in general, the library profession seemed to feel that the basic problems of cata- loging and classification had been re- solved around the turn of the century in the discussions among the giants of our profession, Cutter, Dewey, Brown, and Hanson. Today in library schools there is more and more a tendency to make cataloging a technical skill and treat it as a pre-professional course. The renewed interest in methods of organiz- ing information as a professional con- cern of librarians comes not from the li- brary profession per se (although in- dividual librarians may have been in- volved) but from this new field of docu- mentation and information retrieval, a field largely dominated by engjneers, chemists, computer specialists, and other groups most interested in information but also most disdainful of the tradition of professional librarianship. These outlanders have confronted us with a basic problem. Either we enlarge our horizons to encompass the basic theo- retical interest in information and make a new synthesis, or we will be reduced to a trade jealously guarding its know- how, with its eyes on the past rather than the future. For more than anything else, it is the emphasis on what has been done, rather than on what can be done, which defines a technical trade in distinction from a scientific profession. We must face this question: How can the cur- riculums of library schools be modified to make room for the profession of in- formation theorists? What I am saying is that librarian- ship, like supply-cataloging and data- processing, inventory control or traffic control, is a form of applied informa-
96 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY tion theory, and the study of informa- tion as a physical property of messages is the basic professional part of librar- ianship. To illustrate what this implies in more concrete terms, I present here an outline of a curriculum for the li- brarian who is concerned with informa- tion in just the same sense as the chem- ist is concerned with the chemical prop- erties of matter. 1. The political science of information.-By this I mean a consideration of the organiza- tions active in the field, their bases of power in the community, the way in which they comple- ment and compete with one another. Such or- ganizations are the government itself, its par- ticular agencies, learned societies, universities. trade associations, publishers, and industry. All such organizations play a part in the creation, dissemination, and utilization of information. An analysis of the parts they play and their interrelations would constitute the political sci- ence of information. 2. The logic of information.-This heading covers the general theory of organizing infor- mation from its creation through its collec- tion, organization, dissemination, and use. It would encompass theoretical studies ranging from indexing through information theory to pure studies in symbolic logic. 3. The mechanics of information.-Under this heading would be included all studies of instrumentation, ranging from 3 x 5 cards to large data-processing equipment. It would in- clude not only equipment for organizing but equipment for reproducing and disseminating. Hence, it would cover the printing and repro- duction arts. 4. The history of information.-Under this heading there would be included some of the material under "political science" heading 1, that is to say, the institutions studied as exist- ing centers of power under "political science" would here be studied as historical phenomena, in terms of their origin and growth. In addi- tion, this would include the history of scientific publication itself and the growth of various media for scientific communication. 5. The communication of information.- Under this heading there would be included a consideration of information as a communi- cation process imbedded within the total frame- work of modern society. In order to appreciate the particular channels developed and dedi- cated to library information, there would have to be an understanding of the general channels of communication developed by modem society. On the basis of his professional knowledge the librarian will structure the particular working environment in which he finds himself. By this, I mean that such factors as the type of clientele, size of collection, depth of indexing, rate of growth, etc., will determine how the librarian uses his basic theoretical knowledge of the physical properties of information to structure a particular li- brary, to select its devices, equipment, codes, catalogs, etc. Suppose a librarian to be faced with the problem of struc- turing a medium-sized public library or a college library. He may decide that the information in his library is best or- ganized in terms of a rough open-shelf classification which matches the general division of interests of his clientele. He may decide that, for those members of his clientele who approach material through authors, he will need an author catalog; and, for those people whose desires may intersect the classification of material on his shelf, he may provide a subject catalog. For special informa- tion needs which are not in general pre- dictable, he may provide a reference li- brarian with a collection of reference books. It should be apparent that what I have described is a standard library. What I wish to emphasize is that such a structure is really specialized for a par- ticular clientele, even though this par- ticular clientele may be made up of a very large group of people, and that for other types of clientele this type of structure may be completely unsuita- ble. It is true that in library literature we are likely- to find manv arguments in
DOCUMENTATION AND OTHER TECHNIQUES 97 favor of this or that type of shelf ar- rangement, in favor of dictionary cata- logs or divided catalogs, class catalogs or alphabetical catalogs. But, for the most part, these discussions in the lit- erature are completely ad hoc. Where they have any justification, it is usually in terms of the presumed habits or re- quirements of the readers. In the past ten years a considerable literature has accumulated, both in the library field proper and in the field of information storage and retrieval, on studies of use of literature and informa- tion centers. Various summary analyses of such studies have been compiled by Frarey, Lilley, Shaw, Tornudd, and my- self. What emerges is a consensus that studies of use cannot in themselves sup- ply information leading to decision about the type of equipment and sys- tem that should be used by any given li- brary or information center. Even in the Library of Congress, that citadel of tradition and conservatism, where one takes off one's shoes and genuflects be- fore the 3 X 5 card, it is generally rec- ognized by the professionals on the staff that the so-called Public Catalog is so called only to distinguish its loca- tion from that of the Official Catalog. It cannot be presumed that the public can use in any adequate sense the mil- lions of cards which are euphemistically called the "Public Catalog." The filing rules alone, not to mention the rules of entry, make up a good-sized book of esoteric information completely un- known to the public. What we can note in the Library of Congress is the exten- sion of a method devised for a stand- ard public library or small college li- brary to cover the collections of a great research library. Actually, most of the special research collections of the Li- brary of Congress have separate cata- logs, and it is recognized by the staff of the Library itself that the Public Cata- log is not adequate to exhibit the re- search potential of even the general col- lections of the Library. This has been recognized and set forth in a recent re- port of a subcommittee of the Senate Committee on Government Operations, which has been looking into "Documen- tation, Indexing, and Retrieval of Sci- entific Information.'5 If the standard shelf classification, the 3 X 5 dictionary catalog, or the di- vided catalog is the be-all and end-all of librarianship, then librarianship is a clerical operation at worst and a techni- cal operation at best. It is not a profes- sion. On the other hand, if any particu- lar apparatus, regardless of how wide- spread its use or hallowed its tradition, is recognized as a particular embodi- ment of an underlying theory, the de- velopment of the underlying theory is the professional basis for librarianship. It will be this underlying theory which will permit a determination of the most suitable apparatus for any individual purpose or type of library. Another way of setting forth the rela- tionship proposed here is by consider- ing the analogy presented by preclinical and clinical studies in a medical school. The preclinical subjects are the scien- tific basis of medicine, as they are the scientific basis of other types of activi- ties, nursing, public health, sanitation, etc. Information theory is to librarian- ship as the preclinical subjects of bio- chemistry, physiology, anatomy, etc., are to the practice of medicine. With- out such preclinical subjects medicine 'U.S. Congress, Senate, Documentation, Index- ing, and Retrieval of Scientific Information, A Study of Federal and Non-Federal Science In- formation Processing and Retrieval Programs (Senate Doc. 113 [86th Cong., 2d Sess.; Wash- ington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1960]).
98 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY reverts to the barbering it once was. Without information theory librarian- ship never can advance beyond the tech- nical operation which it now is. With so much as a background, we can turn at this time to the question which, more than any other, has domi- nated library literature in the past dec- ade and is the subject which draws the largest crowds of skeptics, neophytes, and enthusiasts at our library meetings -namely, the mechanization of librar- ies. In entering this discussion, the first thing which should be made clear is that the only meaningful and fruitful field for mechanization is the field of infor- mation-handling defined as the physical properties of messages. Anyone who pre- tends to mechanize thought processes or the meanings which we convey to one another by means of the physical prop- erties of messages is either a fool or a rogue. If mechanization is limited, as it should be, to the physical properties of messages, then it must be recognized that libraries have always been mech- anized. A typewriter, a date stamp, a 3 X 5 card, the book itself, not to men- tion microforms and phonograph rec- ords, are physical devices or, if you will, mechanical devices, for handling, stor- ing, transforming, and disseminating information. The only serious question which is hidden in the torrent of words on the mechanization of libraries is the question as to whether the state of the art with reference to more elaborate de- vices makes it feasible for institutions known as libraries to adopt forms of mechanization which show real promise of being of service, even though they have not hitherto been used in libraries nor discussed to any great extent in our library schools. Whether or not any particular de- vice or particular system of devices can contribute to the improvement of service of libraries of various kinds may de- pend in part on changes which can be made in the environment of the devices and the type of service given by the in- stitution. Any new device may have only limited usefulness until such time as the promise it offers leads to a change in the environment of the device to match that promise. Consider, for example, the early use of automobiles. In the begin- ning, without paved roads, gasoline stations, trained mechanics, spare-parts depots, etc., such devices were little better than toys and certainly less effi- cient than a horse and wagon for steady, regular transportation requirements. But with the improvement of automo- biles there came a concomitant improve- ment or matching of the environment to the needs of a motorized nation, so that our present physical environment is almost designed for the maximum util- ity of automotive transportation. In fact, there is considerable demand that our very cities be torn down and rede- signed to provide roadways and park- ing for an ever growing number of auto- mobiles. Certainly one does not undertake to change an environment to match a whim, and, if the devices now offered to libraries and information centers as a means of greatly improving the control of information did not have real prom- ise, it would be silly to consider environ- mental changes. Consider the following specific problem. In the standard prac- tice of preparing 3 X 5 cards for a cata- log, librarians have learned empirically what can be deduced from information theory, namely, that new cards should be filed into existing catalogs in batches rather than a single card at a time. The
DOCUMENTATION AND OTHER TECHNIQUES 99 cataloger who completes cataloging a book doesn't immediately run down- stairs or across the building to the pub- lic catalog and file in the cards she or he has completed. Rather, the new cards are cumulated into an in-process file, and, after this in-process file grows to a cer- tain size, sections of it, either letter by letter or several letters at a time, are filed into the main catalog. This pro- cedure of cumulating in-process material is known in the art of mechanized data- handling as "batching." Let me say at once that such a procedure, although it leads to efficiency of interfiling, also in- volves some degree of loss of service. For example, while material is being cumulated in an in-process file, it is not available to the public users of the cata- log. In spite of this loss, librarians who calculate the costs and pay-off of cer- tain activities feel it worthwhile to maintain in-process files and to carry out batch interfiling. Consider the same problem from the reference or output end. Our present catalogs are designed to answer individ- ual inquiries as they are received by the library or as patrons come to the library with such inquiries. It is conceivable that the type of apparatus required to handle such inquiries on an individual basis may get so cumbersome and so costly that it will turn out to be feasible and necessary to batch reference in- quiries. By this I mean that reference inquiries, like new cards for the catalog, may be cumulated for several hours or a day and then searched in a batch against a machine store of some kind. The user of the library would be told to leave his question and to return at some later time for his answer. Certainly this will make many library users unhappy, and this practice is not being recom- mended at this time. The only point be- ing made is that, in principle, batching at the output can be justified in the same terms in which batching at the input is now justified. Having recognized that a change of environment or type of service may be required to obtain maximum utilization of new types of equipment, it is neces- sary to enter a caveat at this time. Un- less the change in equipment and change in environment and service leads ulti- mately to better service at lower cost, it ought not to be undertaken. Many changes have been made in special li- braries which seem to have been moti- vated solely by the glamor of "mechani- zation," without any real concern for the economics of the change or the service potential involved in it. One of the things which can be derived from a theo- retical basis of librarianship of the kind we have outlined above is a reasonable prediction of the pay-off of new pro- cedures and new equipment. The discussion thus far has been quite general, and you may feel that I have not carried out my assignment unless I come to grips with the specific ques- tion of punched-card machines or com- puters in libraries. Library literature is full of accounts of particular experi- ments with punched cards and with prognostications of what will happen to the American library when finally com- puters replace both catalogs and librar- ians. In the first place, I think we can dismiss as sheer poppycock the replace- ment of human intelligence by any mechanical device, however complex. This means that the problem is not whether or not we substitute a com- puter for a librarian but how the librar- ian should use the computer, assuming that he ought to use it at all. Returning to the more simple prob- lem of punched cards, most of the litera-
100 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY ture on the use of punched-card equip- ment in libraries boils down to the evalu- ation of two propositions. Punched- card devices can eliminate the problem of filing, and they can eliminate the problem of multiple cards for a single item. When these arguments are ex- amined, it is discovered, first, that the savings in filing costs turn out to be triv- ial, especially when compared with the cost of the machine; and, second, that a busy library of any reasonable size cannot afford the luxury of sorting its total catalog for each inquiry it re- ceives. Not even the most impassioned devotee of punched cards has ever seri- ously suggested the replacement of a large 3 X 5-card catalog with an un- ordered deck of punched cards. With reference to the elimination of multiple cards, once the initial enthusiasm dis- appeared, it was dicovered that the coding potential of a single 80-column card is rather restricted and that with- out super-imposed coding, with many attendant problems which need not con- cern us at this time, a single card is no substitute for the "unit card" system used in most libraries. These negative statements do not mean that punched cards cannot be used in libraries. They mean only that we cannot use an un- organized file of punched cards as a substitute for the traditional card cata- log. It is possible, however, to organize a file of punched cards under subjects so that very large collections of informa- tion can be deeply indexed and searched at a reasonable cost. The type of organ- ization required has been variously re- ferred to in the literature as "inverted indexing"' or "aspect indexing." We will not attempt to describe this method in detail here; it has been completely de- scribed in many of our previous papers and bn other papers in the literature.6 The important point to note is that its value is a function of the depth of in- dexing. In a library which finds it ade- quate to utilize one or two subject head- ings per book, this type of indexing would be supererogatory. However, if a collection of material is to be deeply indexed, with five or more entries per item, then it will be discovered that the value of co-ordinate indexing goes up with the depth of indexing per item. We are not, by such a statement, advo- cating that all libraries immediately begin programs of deep indexing of their material. What we are saying is that the traditional barriers to deep index- ing represented by the 3 X 5-card cata- log need no longer be a barrier if such deep indexing is required either by the type of material or the type of service. There are many special libraries which find deep indexing necessary to the ful- filment of their purposes. It would be just as silly for such libraries to hold fast to 3 X 5-card catalogs as it would be for a standard public library to give up its 3 X 5-card catalog in favor of one of the various forms of co-ordinate index- ing. Before leaving this question of punched cards, something should be said about the use of such devices as means for storing texts for printing in various forms. Although punched cards can and have been used to compile lists and bibliographies, they suffer from many limitations, including a very re- stricted number of characters and seri- ous limitations in the ability to arrange blocks of text. These limitations have led recently to an attempt to combine the sorting and handling potentialities of punched cards with the more de- 'M. Taube and associates, Studies in Coordi- nate Indexing, Vols. I-V (Washington, D.C.: Documentation Inc., 1953-59).
DOCUMENTATION AND OTHER TECHNIQUES 101 sirable properties of photographic re- production for the preparation of texts. At the present time Nuclear Science A b- stracts and the Current List of Medi- cal Literature are being produced by mounting and photographing entries, which entries are handled, cumulated, sorted, interfiled, etc. by punched-card machines. The inherent slowness of punched- card equipment as a searching medium has led to the supposition that a com- puter using magnetic tape is the answer to searching large catalogs. It is, how- ever, unfortunately true that speed of reading magnetic tape will not com- pensate for the wrong logic, and no li- brary can afford to search its total col- lection in any medium in order to answer a particular inquiry. It is true, as we have noted above, that linear searching devices, whether card or tape, can be- come more efficient if we are willing to batch our inquiries. But I feel that such heroic measures are not necessary in order to gain benefits for librarianship from the new techniques of mechanized searching. There is another area of new devel- opment which bears a very close rela- tionship to a problem which occasioned a great deal of discussion among li- brarians a decade ago. Most of you will remember the impact of Rider's book, The Scholar and the Future of the Re- search Library.7 Besides recommending a new type of microform, Rider recom- mended that the contents of a library and its catalog be combined in the same physical medium. The original micro- cards were described as carrying cata- loging data on one side and the text cataloged on the other. The daring be- hind this concept occasioned a great deal of excitement, and I can recall Archibald MacLeish handing a copy of the book to each of the chiefs at the Li- brary of Congress, asking them to read it, and to present at a meeting in his office the reasons why the Library should not immediately proceed to microcard its collections. After the initial excitement there were many second thoughts. It was soon realized that there were many disad- vantages that followed from combining text and catalog data, the most obvious being that, when you removed a book to read it, the integrity of the catalog was destroyed; and any following searcher would not find a reference to the book in the catalog. There is also the problem of duplicating the text as many times as one might duplicate cataloging data. At the present time there isn't much enthusiasm among li- brarians for combining the text with cataloging data in the public catalog or similar instruments. Nevertheless, a variety of this idea has persisted or has developed anew in various proposals for mechanizing libraries. These proposals, most of which involve some type of microform, involve combining both text and code in the same store. Examples of such devices are Filmsort cards, which are IBM cards with microfilm inserts, the Minicard system, the Film- orex system, the system advanced by the National Bureau of Standards for storing texts at various positions on a matrix card, and similar systems. How does one decide concerning the merits of searching a code and going to an- other file for the text after the address is delivered by the first search, as op- posed to a single search of a combined code and text file? The answer to this question turns out to be derivable from 7Fremont Rider, The Scholar and the Future of the Research Library (New York: Hadham Press, 1944).
102 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY general theoretical considerations, and it is presented here to illustrate the man- ner in which an understanding of un- derlying theory can guide us in the choice of particular devices or systems of mechanization: In planning a system of information storage and retrieval, one of the conditions which is usually known is the size of the answer which will be an acceptable outcome of a search. This size will vary between general and specific questions; but in indexing items, the indexer is usually aware of what terms are too general and will yield answers too large to be useful. Similarly the time available to read and digest an answer may determine that an answer con- sisting of one item is not enough, that an an- swer consisting of one thousand items is too much, and that an answer containing between ten to twenty items is optimum. It may be concluded, then, that given the prior knowledge of the optimum size or an average size of an answer, it is possible to pre- dict the relative cost of a system which com- bines code and text as compared with a sys- tem which stores code and text separately. A full set of mathematical equations remains to be worked out for such a task, but the mathe- matical equations given below are sufficient to illustrate the method and the basis for decision. Consider System A and System B, two sys- tems of information storage and retrieval in which microfilm is used for the storage of both code and text. In System A, code and text are combined on a single store so that matching the code also delivers a microfilm copy of the text. In System B the store is divided into two parts, one part containing code and the other part containing text. A search of the code store of System B yields addresses which then must be used to search the microfilm containing the text in order to retrieve the ultimate items of search. Consider a system that is designed to deliver a single answer, that is, the address of an item in inventory or a particular text satisfying a very special set of index headings. The retrieval of a single item from the separate store of Sys- tem B would require the selection of a single numbered item from a file arranged in numeri- cal order. This, in principle, is the simplest of all retrieval tasks, since the position of the de- sired item is known with reference to all other addresses in the file. As the number of an- swers increases, the cost of retrieving the items from the text store of B will increase linearly. It will cost twice as much to retrieve two items as one item, three times as much for three items, etc. Hence, there will be an answer con- taining n items, where n is a subset of I, the items in the store, so that with reference to System B, the cost of retrieving n items from a separate store plus the cost of storing only codes for I items is higher than is the cost of storing I codes and texts in System A. Con- trariwise, there will be an average size of n such that the cost of System B will be less than the cost of System A. If it is assumed that the size of each text is equal to each code group and that both Sys- tem A and System B store codes sequentially, then the combined single store of System A will equal in size the two stores of System B. I in System A will be twice the size of C in System B. Since the cost of a search of a sequential file increases linearly with its size, the average cost of a search of I (System A) will be twice as much as a search in C (System B). There will be an additional cost in System B of retrieving items from T, thc text store. The problem then reduces to determination of whether I - C is greater or less than the cost of re- trieving an item from T. Since the absolute value of I - C is fixed by the size of the sys- tem and the number of retrievals from T varies with the size of the answer, there will be an average-sized answer which is less than I - C and, also, an average-sized answer which is greater than I - C. For example, since the absolute size of the system will affect the absolute value of I - C, even though I = C + T, the final mathemati- cal formulation should contain four size param- eters: 1. The size of the total system (number of items) 2. The size of the code group for an item 3. The size of the clear text of an item 4. The size of an average answer (number of items) System A System B I [text store + code store] = T [text store] + C [code store]
DOCUMENTATION AND OTHER TECHNIQUES 103 For a prefiled system like the Minicard sys- tem or Filmorex, System A will differ from System B not only in higher search costs but in size of the store and, hence, in the cost of the initial input investment. In prefiled sys- tems which combine code and text, both code and text are multiplied for each filing posi- tion; but prefiled systems in which the code is separate from the text need only multiply the code groups and still retain a one place sequential file of texts. If we assume n filing positions, since I = C + T, it will always be the case that nI > nC + T. It follows that the average number of an- swers in a question required to justify System A must be higher when System A is a prefiled system, since a prefiled combined system has botk/ a higher searching cost and a higher input cost than a prefiled system which stores code and text separately.8 This paper is already overly long, and there are other particular aspects of documentation which we have not discussed, namely, the reproduction of materials and their dissemination. But in these areas also it will be found that basic theoretical considerations can serve to eliminate ad hoc arguments which have plagued us for years. For example, one of the limitations which stands in the way of using computer out- put as finished reports is the limited font on computers, namely, their re- striction to upper case. This limitation is especially notable in documentation activities in the field of chemistry. In order to print chemical abstracts, ap- proximately one thousand different characters are used, including upper and lower case, italics, upper and lower case Greek, superscripts, etc. This prolifera- tion of characters is tied to the meth- od of composition. For example, in setting type by hand, it is simpler to reach for a Greek A than it is to reach for five separate letters, D E L T A. On the other hand, in a high-speed printer one of the crucial parameters is the number of characters on the printing wheel or similar device, and it becomes economical to substitute D E L T A for the single character. In principle, this procedure is identical with the use of binary digits, rather than decimal digits, in a computer. If computers be- come our printers, we are going to have to face a problem similar to that faced by the inventors of printing, who were first required to produce fonts whose product could not be distinguished from the work of scribes. If we place an equivalent requirement on computer printing, we are going to delay advances in the preparation of reports and various kinds of bibliographical apparatus. The problem in communication is theoretically identical with the prob- lem of printing. Communication chan- nels are expensive, and, if we are will- ing to accept communications which utilize a low level of redundancy and a minimum number of characters, we will make rapid advances in this field. But if we hold fast to a tradition, with- out understanding that our tradition is also the result of a mechanical develop- ment to which we have become accus- tomed, we will hold back the advances we could make, and preserve the library as a nineteenth-century institution. This is something I am sure that none of us wants. A tradition by its very nature is something we should not throw away lightly. But we also have the obligation to make new traditions and to avoid the transformation of existing traditions into dogma. 'Based on a working paper prepared for In- formation Storage and Retrieval Theory, Sys- tems, and Devices, by Mortimer Taube and Harold Wooster (New York: Columbia University Press, 1958), pp. 88-90.