Look around you. With a keen eye and a sense of context, your vision just might fall upon an enticing, opportune, timely, and full library research agenda. Look around you, and think big. With a keen eye, a sense of context, and thinking big, you stand to discover research opportunities and needs, the pursuit and study of which could contribute significantly to our understanding of the library enterprise. As curtains go, those in the office of the director of the State Archives Division of the Texas State Library were unremarkable. A faded yellow, they had been guarding their windows since the building had been erected and the office outfitted—fully sixteen years before I moved into the room with them on January 18, 1977, to become the fourteenth state archivist of Texas in a succession dating back a century. Closed, they gave the appearance to anyone outside the room that visitors were less than welcome in my office—the opposite of the atmosphere I wanted the state archives to radiate. For me, they were in the way, and I kept them pushed back as far as they would go. But this was not what made me think twice about them. Something else that became apparent over time as I visited the offices of my fellow division directors came to nag at me about these window coverings. It would have plagued Henry Homes too. The state librarian of New York, who died three-quarters of a century before the curtains were ever hung, Henry Augustus Homes entertained no small thoughts when it came to libraries. In sketching the scope of a state library for readers of the massive Public Libraries in the United States of America: Their History, Condition, And Management, published by the United States Department of Education in the American centennial year of 1876, Homes left nothing out. The ultimate state library in his view would collect and provide access to statutes, legislative journals, and documents of all the states; also works of state, national, and local history, science, and the arts relating to the state; also works written by citizens of the state; also newspapers of the state. It would be responsible for managing the archives of state government and also for collecting and serving for users the papers of eminent citizens. For librarians beyond its walls, the state library would create book lists to aid public and school librarians in building their collections. A grandiose vision? Oh my, yes! But Homes was not finished. “Not going beyond what we have a right to hope for,” he continued, the ultimate state library should also include museums—a history museum, a natural history museum, and a museum of archaeology [1, p. 306]. As Homes envisioned this amalgam of a circulating library, library service agency, administrative archives, collecting archives, and set of museums, the state library would serve “not merely in behalf of material ends and legislative necessities, but also for the cultivation and development of the most serious studies and the highest thought on themes of science and of social and political life” [1, p. 308]. What Homes styled a “library” in fact far exceeded the mold conceived by any audience for which he wrote—any audience: lawmakers, librarians, and the public. It exceeded what librarians in the American Library Association would adopt three years later as their motto: “The best reading for the largest number at the least cost.” It exceeded even farther the ideal of a library as summed up a half century later by ALA president Judson T. Jennings when he held that a library was a place filled with books, the primary mission of which was promoting reading, period [2, 3]. Homes’s library was more than a collection of works assembled for circulation (with or without a preservation mission) and more than a library service bureau. It was more than an archives managing as an administrative function the records generated in the conduct of state business, more than an archives obtaining, from figures outside of government, personal papers the study of which contributes meaningfully to the cultural and educational health of society. It was more than a museum of humanity, even in broad definition encompassing significant and curious objects from humankind’s prehistoric and historic pasts. It was an entity that was more than the sum of its parts. Homes envisioned an institution, its components in balance, each in parity with all of the others. None, did he suggest—not the library function, not the archival function, not the museum function—none of the components as he described them was either greater than or subordinate to any other. That was it! That was the problem of the curtains, indeed, of the entire office with its stately built-in wooden book shelves, carpeted floor, and massive executive wooden desk. The offices of the other division directors in the Texas State Library were plain, institutional. Sheetrock walls and generic tile flooring characterized the cocoons in which my peers guided implementation of their missions on gray metal desks. And the windows in those offices that had them were fitted with basic blinds. The state archivist’s work space with the yellow curtains was a room designed and appointed to impress occupant and visitor alike with the contribution the state archives makes to the well being of state government broadly and to the citizens of the state generally. It was an office to impress the fundamental value of the unique documentary record of more than two hundred years of government under Spain, France, Mexico, the Republic of Texas, the Confederate States, and the United States of America. These are records that document the obligations of the citizens to the state and the responsibility of the state to its citizens, files essential in undergirding the history of the state, and, I admit, for some, documents the contribution of which was not envisioned by the high-minded framers of the state’s archival function. For seventh-grade boys viewing the display of Republic of Texas currency during the obligatory spring field trips of their Texas history classes, suddenly catching sight of the shapely and voluptuous woman on the fifty-dollar note, sinuously posed with precious little left to the imagination, brings an anticipation to the study of history they had never before imagined. Mine was an office unlike the others, out of balance. Why? Had managing archives been esteemed a more important work of the Texas State Library sixteen years earlier than promoting reading? Why? Was it a particularly strong statement of a deep inner feeling about Texas’s appreciation of its unique prestatehood history of revolution and nationhood, or something as transparent as a requirement of a funding opportunity, or as troubling as the leadership of the agency being unable to educate state policy makers and/or gubernatorial appointees on the library’s governing board—the Texas Library and Historical Commission—to educate them to the breadth of services performed by a state library with a mandate as large as Texas, or was it something else? Stepping farther back in time, why did Henry Homes’s dream not flourish in Texas? Did it blossom in other states? What circumstances nurtured or inhibited it anywhere? Why? Equally, I had to ask, what had transpired in the decade and a half intervening between the design and outfitting of the state archivist’s office and my arrival to occupy it that caused our governing commission to pay negligible attention to archives while nurturing library development—promotion of public libraries around the state? Bring the question to the present. Is the recent uniting of the state library and state archival functions in Virginia in an agency styled the Library of Virginia a long-delayed answer to Homes’s call of a century and a quarter earlier? And, is the iSchool movement—joining the library, archival and records management, information science, and preservation fields and functions—a realization of Homes’s vision? If so, why did it take so long to occur? What similarities to and differences from the response through time to Homes’s call give us insight into ways to respond to contemporary changes so as the better to accomplish our professional mission? Ominous to contemplate, are we somehow reinventing the wheel for having neglected continuing study of the experience of librarians and library leaders in other times who had to and did answer the same question of what is a state library or, more fundamentally, just what is a library? Questions heralding research needs and opportunities cascaded from reflecting on those tired, yellow curtains. Aggregated, they coalesced into three agendas for those of us invested in research—invested in seeking new knowledge and in exploring the bounds of our field. These three are 1. Explore the historical dimension of topics. Add investigation of historical precedent where appropriate and, as much as possible, to studies of the library and its services. Utilizing investigative and analytical tools of the historian, incorporate historical analysis in studies of the library and its services to extend the breadth of library research. The context of time offers its own dimension of understanding. Moreover, historical investigation can provide an especially valuable approach to studying contemporary issues hot in the moment by affording their discussion in the less passionate and more fully informed context of the issue framed in the moment of another time and place. 2. Revive study of the institution of the library in its historical dimension. Research interests, as societal concerns, cycle with changing circumstances and generations. Serious study of the historical development of the institution of the library flourished a half century ago. As concerns of society shifted with circumstances of succeeding times, so naturally did the attention of library researchers. We have never returned to study of the history dimension of the institution of the library, a history by the passage of time now much enlarged. The need, however, to understand as fully as possible in the context of society the nature, roles, and thus contributions of the library, especially the institution as a whole but also its many functions—to understand the contributions of the library in and to society from multiple and changing perspectives through time can be as meaningful today as it was when the research dimension of library science was launched eight decades ago. 3. Orient research to lead adaptation to the times, particularly with regard to the relationships between libraries and other components of the information domain. In our period of transition into a new era in creating, managing, accessing, and preserving information, from hard data to casual reading material, boundaries that once were hard and fast between libraries and librarianship, on the one hand, and sister fields and professions of archival and records enterprise, information science, and preservation of the cultural record, on the other hand, are blurring as all confront similar issues in the electronic and digital environment. The nature of the relationships between and among the library and components of what I call “the information domain” has both a present dimension in which work is beginning to be done and a historical dimension little explored. In these three, keep your eyes open for big gaps in unexpected places. Yes, this is easier said than done, but it can happen only when the researcher is open to the possibility. This trajectory rests heavily on serendipity—on your insight. And because the discovery is yours, and yours alone, the discovery brings an exhilaration like no other. The agendas one sees of course depend upon the vantage points from which one looks. The first vantage point for me is my academic background in history and a consciousness of how little presence the study of the events of our history and of those historical events within the context of the culture and society around us—how little history occupies the consciousness of colleagues in our information domain. Considering that history accounts in no small measure for the shape of the present, research that seriously considers the history component cannot help but be timely both for contributing to a well-rounded knowledge of the field and for providing insight into ways of dealing with matters of the present. Knowledge of leaders who and institutions that have alternately struggled through, failed on confronting, and succeeded in overcoming the challenges of their times and circumstances positions us in the present to determine with some confidence the nature of our times—whether ours is the unique and watershed period it is easy to think it is. Are the challenges before us any greater than those facing Melvil Dewey’s generation, or Jesse Shera’s, or any other? And if the challenges appear to be greater, by what comparison? History provides perspective. My second vantage point is the conviction that whatever corner of the library field any one of us is in, we share some common interests with all others in the field, however distant the particular job they do is from the particular job we do. At base, the common interests as I see them are the following: (1) the drive to meet our obligation to and play our role in society as effectively as we can from the perspective of our professional capability and as interpreted by the society we serve, (2) the intent to improve on and adapt to our time the service and thinking that has preceded ours, and (3) the challenge to clarify for a multitude of audiences outside of our professional colleagues the contribution we make to society. From this standpoint, agendas worthy of a keynote are those so encompassing that all should be able to find a place and feel an obligation to join in their pursuit. The third and fourth vantage points through which I see the agendas are my adventures in each of the two career paths I have followed. One of these is researching, writing, and teaching on the present conduct and the history of libraries, archives, and preservation in the cultural record environment—joyous and stimulating work, the research and writing side of which began in the academic environment and, after more than two decades in administration, continues in the academic home coupled with the teaching component. The other is a career as an archival administrator within libraries—academic and government—serving users, meeting the demands of administrators, and striving to influence the thinking of publics from focused history and genealogical researchers (those two not always separate at all), to the curious public, and to authorities whose decisions significantly opened or closed doors through which I wanted to take my library unit. Vital research joining the views from these vantage points is to me that which opens doors in realms lightly explored, if explored at all. Especially is it that which generates original perspectives on administration of the library agency ubiquitous in this country, the effective administration of which affects us all as workers in and around the library and as users of the library service. The final vantage point for me is that secured from researching a history that appeared initially to be a rather routine undertaking to produce an account on its centennial of the development of the Texas State Library. As with any institution, the agency had its disappointments, as when the 1909 enabling statute, the anniversary of which was being marked, failed to appropriate funds to run the place. (The new state librarian for two months both came to work anyway and paid enough expenses out of his own pocket to keep the library running.) And it had its chest-beating moments, in being the first state agency in Texas to elevate a woman to its head when the governing commission elected Elizabeth Howard West to be state librarian in 1918. But what had appeared to be rather routine work turned out to be anything but, as you will see. Studying the institution of the library in its historical dimension, incorporating the historical dimension routinely in library research and opening study of the relationship, especially through time, of the library with other components of the information domain—these are research agendas of and for the times, for any time, and for our time especially in charting a way forward in the unusually fast-paced and rapidly changing period that is ours. Of course, as you well appreciate, any good agenda or even single research project will overlap with, contribute to, and be enriched by insight from other good agendas and projects. Heaven knows it was true for me in researching and writing the Texas State Library and Archives study. Consequently, I can address none of the three agendas in what follows without reference to the others. And central to them all is history. Looking into history is like looking into a valley from a scenic overlook. The view can spread before one the breadth of a scene in which more of the whole is visible to the viewer than to someone on the ground below who is nearer any action. Or, as though observing through a telescope, it can permit close observation of the details of animated actions without the observer being a part of them in any way other than by the meaning the observer makes of and from them. It offers the potential of seeing matters and events, and the relationships between and among matters and events, that contemporaries cannot see, or be confident how well they see, for being in the midst of them. What makes the historical view uniquely rich is the comparative fullness of the perspective that “good”—that is, well-researched—history yields. This fullness comes largely from being able to get inside the heads of participants equally on multiple sides of a matter with multiple perspectives on events. This comes from utilizing sources including the following: (1) the contemporary papers and records of individuals and organizations held in archives, (2) the contemporary public record such as that captured in newspapers and reports, and sometimes (3) the later recollections of participants representing the multiple facets of any matter or occurrence. It comes also from all of the voices from these sources being heard within the studied context of the forces weighing on the times and affecting the places in which the events occurred. Documenting the voices within their contexts is what yields substantial insight into the motivations, actions, and reactions that the student of events contemporary to the student is ill positioned to secure. Knowing what lies under the surface of events—knowing motivation—is vital to assessing the value and quality of actions, and thus is essential to making informed choices. Asking questions of motive spawns hypotheses that beckon investigation. What did Homes hope to accomplish with his vision—influence the national government, lead a library community moving toward coalescing in the American Library Association, both of these, or something else? What was the purpose of outfitting the Texas state archivist’s office so richly in comparison to the office of, for example, the director of the equally important state library function of library development? Expenditure always raises questions, in history and through history into the present. Picture the scene. You will recognize the sentiment in it at once, though the actual event occurred nearly 175 years ago. The men elected to fashion a government to shepherd Texas’s month-and-a-half-old revolution against Mexico were gathered in a room in the revolutionary capital of Washington-on-the-Brazos. A Mexican army commanded by the president of Mexico, who styled himself the Napoleon of the West and meant to prove it, had begun its advance on the rebellious community. On December 5, 1836, as the delegates approached the end of their morning labor over matters of the gravest consequence for those they represented, such as how to field an army to sustain their cause, one of their leaders proposed that they furnish the government with a library, that in this desperate time they buy some books on law and the art of governing. A month later, John McMullen, the chairman of the finance committee to which the proposal was referred, returned the committee’s recommendation: “We approve of the proposition [to purchase the volumes], and do most earnestly recommend to the General Council to accept of the proposition so far as to embrace the list of books … together with such works as the wisdom of your honorable body may add to said list.” In the most eloquent English prose enunciated in his Irish accent, McMullen then pronounced the real recommendation: Yet to purchase the … volumes … would be, in our humble opinion, in the present distracted and impoverished state of the country, unwise, and give just cause of offense to a large majority of our fellow-citizens; they would instantly say, you advance one thousand dollars for a library, containing two thousand volumes; when you have not one cent to give to him who has suffered every privation, and risked every danger in defence of his country. It would not only displease the people, but it would be bad policy, and would be an expenditure of money which is not absolutely required at this time. Then, not to end on a negative note but, rather, to conclude with a positive sentiment, agreement in which would unite the General Council in support of dismissing the library, McMullen finished: “If our finance were in a flourishing condition, and our state [one] of peace with the world, we would recommend you purchase double the number of volumes proposed” [4, pp. 727–28]. That sentiment—that libraries are essential, just not now and not at this cost—characterized with agonizing symmetry from that day forward the response of government leaders in Texas to furnishing a government library. Archives fared no better. Barely a generation later, on January 16, 1852, a special committee of the House of Representatives, “compelled to notice the want of sufficient means or conveniences to protect and preserve the papers and books” in the adjutant general’s office and pointing to their importance in the life of Texans present and future, goaded their fellow lawmakers, saying: “We deem it almost unnecessary to remind this honorable body of the absolute necessity and importance of preserving the muster rolls, not only on account of the pecuniary interests involved [in making payments for service], but also as a proud memorial of the patriotism and self-sacrificing spirit of those who were ever ready to rally around the Lone Star, and to yield, if necessary, their lives in defence of Texian independence, and Texian soil.” Then, to seal the case, the committee asked: “Shall we, governed by a selfish spirit of economy, permit the only record of that ‘Spartan Band’ to be lost?” [5, pp. 152–53]. The answer was “yes.” Appeal to neither financial considerations nor patriotic spirit motivated action, and three years later both the building and the records were lost in a fire [6]. Thus, even before the Texas State Library existed, the notion of it confronted an issue as contemporary as today. Was the present distracted and impoverished state the real rationale for the finance committee response? Surely it could not have been so for the representatives, since in the Compromise of 1850 concluded not two years earlier, Texas had received $10 million for relinquishing its claims to parts of the present states of New Mexico, Colorado, and Wyoming. What, then, is it about the cost of books, reading, libraries, and the safe maintenance of public records of government obligations to its citizens that impels authorities commonly to profess that books, reading, libraries, and records are of incalculable value but are affordable only in good times, which somehow, for one reason or another, are not now? Study in both its present and historical dimensions of this “yes, but not now and not at this cost” syndrome known to us all is a line of research both essential to help us to understand the mind-set out of which it flows and needed to fully position the administration of libraries on solid ground. Finding how early the “libraries are needed, just not now and not at this cost” syndrome surfaced in Texas was a surprise. Discovering that the shelves, where studies of state libraries should be, were, in fact, virtually bare of accounts of specific state libraries and of any study of the state library as an institution and kind of library was a shock. In historical research, one expects to find gaps, usually small and commonly in questions that the archival sources do not answer for the researcher. The instance of the history of the Texas State Library was different. I had begun work on what appeared to be a rather straightforward topic and found myself having entered a significant void, which presented a topic larger than I had expected. What luck! Finding a void of this magnitude, in which one can explore landmarks and invite others to join in mapping the terrain, is the dream of any researcher. We have been writing library history for decades. The American Library Association’s Library History Round Table is more than sixty years old. Our history journal, Libraries & the Cultural Record (which began as the Journal of Library History), is forty-six years old. In all that time, with the single exception of a fine article by the dean of library historians, Wayne A. Wiegand, the state library in history has been overlooked or neglected. We have investigated precious little of the initial goals and subsequent developments that have shaped the contemporary state library, ubiquitous in America for three hundred years or so in its various forms [3, 7, 8].2 Library historians have been laboring in other fields during the past half century, more or less. After early research on the library as an institution, sparked by Louis Round Wilson’s focus on the topic in giving leadership to the research program of the new Graduate Library School at the University of Chicago in the 1930s and early 1940s, studies of library institutions, particularly of public libraries, flowed (Jesse Shera’s Foundations of the Public Library: The Origins of the Public Library Movement in New England, 1629–1855, being seminal [11]). But after a generation, while practicing librarians continued to write and consume works on contemporary institutional management, library historians sank their plows into other fields [3, 12, 13]. Judged by their discussions in recent literature, library historians lack consensus on realms central to study under the aegis of library history. British scholar Alistair Black decried library history’s “institutional anchorage” and asserted that library history should be treated as a subset of information history. His goal in the proposal was to try to invigorate library history by gaining the attention of, if you will, mainstream historians who, he argued, turn up their noses at the study of the library as an institution. Others call for the focus to fall on book history, the history of print culture, and on reading. I wager that no library historian, and likely few even remotely interested in library history or even the contemporary library, have not heard and been motivated by researcher Wiegand’s call for study of the library in the life of the user, rather than the user in the life of the library. While all of these topics are vital in themselves and essential study in the history of libraries, the library as institution has lost its foothold on the agenda [3, 14, 15, 16]. That fact magnified my state library history project. When I began, I had four goals: (1) to discover and document the history; (2) to tell an engaging story, because the library is people, and people are always interesting, especially ones who push on in the shadow of the stereotype we do; (3) to give meaning to the events of the story by pointing out continuities, watershed moments, and lessons to be found in the missteps and accomplishments; and (4) without compromising the integrity of the history being recounted, to advocate for the agency through that history. In the absence of studies of other state libraries giving examples against which to compare the Texas manifestation, I had to fashion a model of a state library in broad mandate so that both the reader and I could form judgments regarding the progress—forward, backward, or none at all—of the Texas instance [6]. If you are here looking for a research opportunity, exploring the historical development of state libraries beckons. But on the broader plane of which the Texas instance is but an example, it is time that we explore again in historical perspective the nature of the institution of the library itself. Here is opportunity writ large. As good as all the studies of the contemporary institution of the library may be, they do not and cannot tell us all we need to know and can learn, despite the indifference of mainstream historians, from continuing to research the history of the institution of the library. Institutions change in the context of time and circumstance; insight changes as the concerns of the public at large move to the next focus. The more we can know of institutional change in contexts through time, the more fundamentally we can understand and guide the library institution in the present, and the richer that mainstream history will be. The opportunity that neglect of the study of the institution of the library presents, of course, is that multiple rich veins for research await the prospector. The case of the state library—the Texas State Library as example—magnifies the fact. Throughout its history, and documented during the 124-year period my study covered, concurrence on what the nature and purpose of the institution was, the enabling legislation notwithstanding, was absent. The clear question, fundamental to the institution during this extended period, and fundamental to us today, few asked. What is a library? Of what functions does it consist? What functions look like those of a library but are not? In a 1956 commissioned study of the Texas State Library, the author wrote: “The use of the term ‘library’ when referring to the State Library was much more appropriate at the time it was first founded because it then consisted of only a small specialized collection of books. While perhaps not entirely inappropriate, the use of the term in reference to the operation today can be misleading” [6, pp. 140–41]. Librarians concurred. They could not agree among themselves on what the institution was. Many called for it to be a service agency to promote public libraries. One in its professional leadership tried to shape it in part as simply another public library focusing especially on service to families and children. Both the legislative reference service and circulating books to the blind, many prominent librarians argued, were not library services at all. The result of this failure to be able to say what a library was—the Texas State Library specifically—almost cost the agency its very existence. Legislators during the Depression (a time not unlike our own), looking for ways to reduce the cost of government, could see so little difference between the state library and the academic library of the nearby University of Texas that they proposed merging the two in order to save money. (Of course, the fact was that, however uninformed the lawmakers truly were, this was smoke and mirrors that permitted the legislators to increase appropriation for the legislative reference service for them while trumpeting their achievement in reducing the cost of state government. The reduction in expense would be realized by eliminating state library staff except for a single position transferred to the university library to carry on the “state” service, thus requiring the university’s librarians to shoulder extra duty providing the services of both state and academic libraries.) As for what a state library fully developed is—of what basic functions it consists—my study revealed three. One is a library resource function that consists of acquiring information (by collecting it from sources outside of the government and/or by obtaining it through interagency transfer from state agencies), classifying and cataloging it, and maintaining a reference service to facilitate its use. In different states, this reference role has been designed to serve the general public, and/or to meet the needs of lawmakers crafting legislation, and/or to provide works in appropriate formats for use by blind readers. A second is an archival/records management/history function. This consists of managing state agency records created, received, and gathered in the conduct of state business for the purpose of facilitating the daily work of government; of preserving those records whose content will have continuing use by either or both government workers and citizens after the records have fulfilled the purpose for which they were created; and so, finally, of facilitating their use. The third is supporting the vibrancy of public library service throughout the state [6]. The beauty of editing a journal is that with our board of advisory editors I can work to speed the testing of theses. In this case, library scholar and historian Robert S. Martin, and Penn State University reference librarian Bernadette Lear, are assembling the components of a special issue of Libraries & the Cultural Record to focus on the state library as an institution, including one essay that will further explore the nature and functions of a state library [17]. What does this tell you? To enrich a study of the areas of research in which you are occupied, get a journal to edit or engage the editor of the journal in which work in your area of our field is published! Exploration of institutional history will provide insight into some of the most difficult problems of ours or any field—good intentions gone sour. Picture the scene. In 1918, a delegation from the Texas Library and Historical Commission arrived in the office of San Antonio Public Library director Elizabeth Howard West and asked her to come to Austin to be the state librarian of Texas. She was a natural choice. Of impeccable integrity, stamina, and presence, West knew the agency, having served with distinction as state archivist for three years from 1911 to 1914. With “an abiding loathing for political interference in library business,” when the Texas electorate sent James E. Ferguson to the governor’s office in 1914, West resigned. She saw the handwriting on the wall. A demagogue of the first water, Ferguson acted in the assurance that the wisdom of the electorate in elevating him to the chief executive office justified any decision he would make, however partisan, especially in regard to patronage appointments. For three years the state library suffered under the direction of an educator and singing master who knew nothing of libraries and could not get along with his staff. After Ferguson’s impeachment and removal from office, would West return to the state library as its head? Yes, but on condition that the governing commission would work to add library training—one year’s worth—to the pitifully minimal qualifications for serving as state librarian, the purpose being to thwart any subsequent governor from acting as Ferguson had. The commission would, and the reform-minded legislature did. Through the forty-two years it was in force, West’s library education qualification, proposed and adopted for the right reason, served to inflame matters more than salve them. Where West had credentials in both the library and archival functions, by providing no preparation for overseeing the archival operation, the reform resulted in creating the perception that the agency was a library saddled with some other functions. It turned the library and archival functions into competitors by causing the vocal library constituency to work to subordinate the contribution of the archives to the health of the agency in the hope of channeling more of any appropriation to the library side. The qualification matter was finally resolved in 1961 after West’s death by changing the law once again, this time replacing the single library education credential with options [6]. Focused on the state librarian alone, the West reform could protect the state library from political interference only by moral persuasion. It did not. West continued to direct the state library until, at the end of the 1925 legislative session, she learned through the newspaper that the legislature, behind her back, and using money she intended to spread among her poorly paid staff, had created a sinecure position in the library. She resigned summarily a second time, finally ending the productive West years [6]. Study of circumstances such as these in history can equip the reflective to consider all likely ramifications of actions, not just the desired ones. The effect of the West reform on the relationship between the archival and library components of the Texas State Library—turning them into competitors—highlights in the blossoming information age the need for studies of such relationships through time. The library, archival and records enterprise, information science, preservation, and museum fields and functions that compose the information domain all have histories—histories that up to now have been studied largely in terms of the development of the single component under study. Clearly the relationships between and among the components are of long duration, and to develop the information domain in as robust a form as we can manage, knowledge of the courses historically intertwining these fields and functions is essential. Once again, the single institution of the state library and archival agency of Texas provides a desperate example, this time in the titanic struggle between state librarian Francis H. Henshaw and commission member and archivist Virginia Gambrell over the use of microfilm in the agency. Henshaw arrived in Austin in 1946 to a welcome as warm as that with which Elizabeth West had been greeted twenty-eight years earlier. Where his immediate predecessor held the position for fourteen years despite lacking the reformed library training requirement (her qualification was willingness to take the position at the embarrassingly low salary no other librarian would accept), Henshaw brought a national reputation as an authority in the use of microfilm for enriching library collections and managing library space. Not long after he arrived and began rejuvenating the library side of the agency, Henshaw became aware simultaneously of the volume of state archives for which he as state librarian also was responsible and of the problem he had in the confined space allotted in the capitol building in which to accommodate the records. Microfilm, so effective in solving the volume problem in the library, he reasoned, must, surely must, be able to do the same for archives. Without consulting his governing board first, he developed and secured a buy-in from several state officials for a plan to, in brief, film and dispose. Tensions rose steadily over his efforts, which failed both to account for the value of records in the original and to incorporate the tenets of the rising field of records management for dealing with issues of volume, until commission chair Gambrell finally asked for and secured Henshaw’s resignation. The Henshaw case and others like it afford significant opportunity for researching topics such as the embracing, appropriate and inappropriate, of new technology and the ultimately fatal consequences of misunderstanding that good professional practice in one realm does not automatically translate into good professional practice in another [6]. Though the lesson sounds simple, too many decision makers continue failing to learn it. Exploration of reasons for the failure and ways it has been avoided should be as warmly welcomed by us as Henshaw was when he took office. As historical studies can provide grist for our learning, so too can they contribute to the edification of those beyond our ranks. I term “advocacy history” a research agenda crafted to engage readers outside of our professional community. Researching and writing the history of, say, an institution the fortunes of which the author wants to advance affords a platform on which to advocate for the institution. The author can explore not only salient points in the history but also the consequences, intended and unintended, of occurrences. Studying these in the context within which they occurred similarly affords an opportunity to discuss them outside of present contentions and in a dimension deeper than that of the present alone. A research agenda long of moment but little studied in the historical dimension is the public presence of libraries. Audiences beyond our professional community, by influencing, indeed controlling, the tightening or loosening of the purse strings, can and do affect what we can do, even what in particular instances we can aspire to do. Understanding more deeply the relationships of these audiences with the library better positions us simultaneously to shape the service we deliver and to affect their concept of the library function in society. With a marketing mind-set informed by historical insight, this is a research course different from one pursued when considering our audiences as users of our resources and services. Advocacy history and biographical studies of librarians of exceptional courage make natural allies. Another part of the story of Texas State Librarian Elizabeth West offers an example. Feeling, as she wrote, “very strongly the necessity of doing justice in performing human service where it is sorely needed,” she meant to give service to African Americans. Many in the power structure in the state capitol who were in positions to cripple her agency in retribution disapproved. Wedged between her progressive principles and her desire to avoid a political confrontation that she could not win, West employed the compromise of asking the black borrowers to call ahead with their requests so that they could obtain their desired reading in full, but expeditiously. Thus, she drew minimal attention to the state library service she was determined to offer in the face of bigotry because it was the right thing to do [6, pp. 40–41]. More authors have written searching biographies than searching institutional histories. No finer example exists than Louise Robbins’s very engaging The Dismissal of Miss Ruth Brown [18], which displays a librarian sacrificing her job and her standing with the powers in her community—sacrificing herself—to combat censorship and, in company with Elizabeth West, whose biography is only a master’s thesis from the days that our school required researching and writing a thesis to graduate, to foster better race relations by serving all persons equally. Rare from the pens of our researchers are works appropriate to a title such as Profiles in Courage, designed to portray for the general reader the courage and stamina of librarians through time and in multiple socially charged circumstances having to choose between the ideal and ethical, on the one hand, and the expedient, on the other. To serve, advocacy history, first, must be solid, well-researched, and thoughtfully interpreted history. An engaging, readable tale written consciously for audiences outside of our professional community and dealing with issues and matters central to the ethics of our field is essential. These were the considerations guiding me in writing of the Texas State Library and Archives experience. Whether I succeeded remains to be seen, but my book offers one example of an effort at writing advocacy history. How it succeeds or fails should yield insight useful in crafting other works in this genre. A research line that beckons equally is the study of advocacy initiatives of librarians and colleagues in the information domain through time. The Texas State Library offers yet another instructive case. For the library community whose energy contributed to creation of the dual-mission Texas Library and Historical Commission, the initial goal was, first, causing creation of libraries, the books in which could serve to ease the drudgery of rural women’s lives, and subsequently promoting reading. As the agency matured and filled the space allotted to it in the state capitol building, voices began calling for construction of a building designed in whole or in part to facilitate the business of the agency. For thirty years, the voices fell on deaf ears. Then in 1956 the Texas Highway Department, which had accommodated the state archives in its basement, without warning summarily evicted the records. The state library had one month to find new space. Desperate, the library accepted the offer of the Highway Department to house the records in a Quonset hut at a Highway Department repair facility—a Quonset hut heated by open-flame space heaters and in which Highway Department records had burned to ashes only two years earlier. As they learned of it, history and heritage groups mounted campaigns to save the archives. The night before the general election of 1956, one gubernatorial candidate wrote of his surprise and indignation in learning just then of the humiliating exile of the state’s precious records. Elected the next day, he set as a goal of his administration to build a structure not only to secure but also to manifest the importance of the state archives. The office designed for the state archivist in that building matched the state librarian’s in magnificence in all but size. Now you know the reason my office had those curtains. But the story does not end there. Among this governor’s early appointments to the Texas Library and Historical Commission was the wife of a former legislative colleague of the governor and a library trustee who only recently had become active in library affairs. Her obsession with the library side of the multidimensional agency made the work of realizing the actual building more difficult than it needed to have been. “Great as is the sentiment attached to the Archives,” she wrote the commission chair, “or huge as are the potential savings to the State in a fully developed Control of Records program, or as strong as is legislative support of some other Divisions, I believe the real basis for firm, continuing and growing support and development of the State Library rests completely on a Library approach” [6, p. 150]. She was dead wrong. Archives—in this case, the indignation at the danger in which the archives of Texas government had been placed—created the loud and incessant public outcry that, along with a stroke of fate in the election, realized the building. More than disrupting, this commission member’s advocacy showed a woeful disregard of what Henry Homes so long before knew and advocated, namely, that the state library agency, whatever its components, needed to be treated as an entity—a whole—not as individual functions uncomfortably associated and competing. The story begs a line of research into effective bases for advocacy and when to fight and when to ride momentum that stands to accomplish one’s real ends (in this case, providing space designed to increase markedly the efficiency of the library function) while also accomplishing those of others. This trail of events leading at last to construction of the state library and archives building in Texas brings the focus back to the original problem exposed by the curtains in the state archivists’ office—the failure to treat the agency as a whole, as more than individual functions. Librarians and policy makers through time and in the present still have to answer these questions for which Homes in 1876 and the designers of Texas’s state archives and library building nearly a century later provided their answers: For whom does the institution of the library exist? What contributions to society is the institution intended to and does it provide? Of what functions does it appropriately consist? And, what relationship of the functions genuinely fulfills the institution’s mission in and contribution to society? All the research we do contributes to answering these questions. But as the information domain grows and expands, as new generations come on the scene, and as concerns of society flow one into another, the need for research initiatives that tackle the larger questions as well as the smaller ones must increase. Study of the forest is as important as study of the trees. Committed library researchers—you are the ones to do it. You are the ones to explore the historical dimension of topics; to add to our investigative tool kit use, where appropriate, of the techniques of the historian; and to incorporate historical analysis into studies of the library and its services, so as to bring the dimension of the context of time fully into our studies and thus understandings. You are the ones to develop advocacy history to enrich appreciation of the value of the library by contributing discussion of issues in the fullness of their manifestation in other times. You are the ones to join with counterparts in other fields of the information domain to enrich, through study of the historical dimension, our understanding of relationships between and among the fields. I would be remiss if I failed to remind you that our journal Libraries & the Cultural Record actively solicits work that has as a principal component exploration of relationships through time between and among different components. We want to publish the historical research you are doing in this vein. In taking new and different tacks—that is, in resuming study of the institution of the library, in exploring relationships between and among components of the information domain, and in bringing the historical perspective into our work, you stand to pioneer for the contemporary generation. May you find a partner willing to think as big and as expansively with you regarding the relationships between the library and components of the information domain as Henry Homes; may you find a gap the exploration of which will endow you with an agenda propelling research initiatives productive in developing yet fuller understanding of the library as institution. Research opportunities abound. So, look around you. With a keen eye and a sense of context, your vision just might fall upon an enticing, opportune, timely, and full library research agenda. Colleagues: Open your curtains!