Materials and Sources for Teaching the History of Books and Printing PAUL A. WINCKLER PART II Audio-Visual Materials: Audio-visual materials have always been extremely useful sources for teaching the history of books and printing. Films, filmstrips, and slides can be used to provide insight, knowledge, and appreciation of the subject when this is the best manner of presenting. In books and printing the most effective manner of teaching is to have students see and examine original materials supplementing this with the use of printed book material and media. The items which have been listed here are not necessarily ' 'recom- mended1 ' for everyone because aims, objectives, and methods of teach- ing differ, but they are included to indicate that such materials and sources are available. Films: The title of the film, length of showing, and source are given, as well as an indication if the film is color (c.) or black and white (b/w.) . All are 16 mm sound films. For the latest data on producers and distributors for these and other films check: Winckler is a Professor of Library Science at Palmer Graduate Library School, Long Island University. The first part of this article appeared in the Summer, 1972, issue of ]ELt pp. 43-71. 123
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP Audio-Visual Market Place: A Multi-Media Guide. R. R. Bowker, 1970- [annual]. NICEM. (National Information Center for Educational Media.) Index to Producers and Distributors. Los Angeles: University of Southern Califor- nia, 1972. the following NICEM indexes are also useful for listing of additional audio-visual materials: NICEM. Index to 16mm Educational Films. 3rd ed. Index to 35mm Filmstrips. 3rd ed. The following is a selected listing of some films which might be useful: Prehistoric period: "Lascaux. Cradle of Man's Art." c. 17 min. (International Film Bureau) A study of the beginning of man's art as depicted in the wall paintings in the caves at Lascaux in southern France. Alphabet and Writing: "The Alphabet-Mark of Man." c. 20 min. (McGraw-Hill Films) Useful introduction to the alphabet as "the story of one of man's most important inventions." "History of Writing." 28 min. (Encyclopedia Britannica Films) Describes how writing grew and how written signs changed their shape and form. "Milestones in Writing Series." c. 10 min. each. (University of Southern California) A series of six films including: "The Alphabet," "Manuscripts," "Paper," "Papyrus," "Pictographs," and "Printing." Features Frank Baxter. Medieval period: "Images Medievales." c. 19 min. (Film Images) The life and times of the Middle Ages as depicted in various illuminated manuscripts showing the fears, hopes, superstitions, humor, ideas, and desires of the people of those times. Modern period: "Story of Printing." b/w. 44 min. (Encyclopedia Britannica Films) Traces the history of printing from carved wood blocks to the transition from printing of pictures to printing with letters. Examines the contribu- tions of Gutenberg, and the introduction of printing into England with 124
Teaching the History of Books and Printing (Part II) Caxton. Shows the impact of the Industrial Revolution in modernizing presses. Examines the modern book. A shorter American version is called "Printing Through the Ages." 'The Colonial Printer." c. 27 min. (McGraw-Hill Films) An account of 18th century printing in America * 'showing the methods used and the relationship of the printer to the community." "Love of Books." 11 min. (British Information Services) A documentary film which tells the story of English books "as objects of beauty in themselves, and their importance today." Examples of old and new books are shown in the works of Caxton, Morris, Gill, and the work of Morison. Examines fine engraving, typography, and the private presses. Films on individual typographers, printers, illustrators, graphic art- ists, etc., are also valuable and include the following selected titles: "Diirer: The Great Passion." b/w. 14 min. (Film Images) Useful for discussion of Dürer's contribution to book illustration in a moving study of his series of woodcuts called "The Great Passion" of Christ. "Diirer and the Renaissance." c. 15 min. (McGraw-Hill Films) Shows the life and contributions of Albrecht Dürer and the change from the medieval concept of life to that of the Renaissance as reflected in his painting and graphic art. "The Flower and the Straw." b/w. 9 min. (Film Images) A delightful film which takes a brief look at the contributions of George Cruikshank to graphic arts and especially his illustrations of Dickens' Sketches by Boz. Shows the activities of London in the 1830's. "Goya." b/w. 20 min. (McGraw-Hill Films) The somber and moody world of Francisco de Goya y Lucientes is re- vealed in this study of his life and work. His times and his work are de- picted with insight into his satire reflecting the brutal and chaotic times in which he lived, and which he revealed with such force and power, especially in his graphic art. "The London of William Hogarth." b/w. 27 min. (McGraw-Hill Films) A romp through the world of Hogarth revealing through his prints the follies and foibles of the people of his time. "The Vision of William Blake." c. 27 min. (McGraw-Hill Films) An imaginative study of Blake and his life and times. The visionary and mystic are revealed as well as the poet and artist. The strange, sometimes beautiful and often frightening private world of William Blake is revealed in his book illustrations. 125
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP The following are helpful films showing the methods and techniques of various graphic arts procedures and provide a good idea of how books are illustrated and prints are made: "Art in Woodcut." c. 20 min. (Bailey Films) Shows the work of Jakob Steinhardt in producing one of his woodblocks. "Basic Reproduction Process in the Graphic Arts." c. 25 min. (Graphic Arts Films) Presents the fundamentals of printing by the relief, intaglio, planographic, and serigraphic methods. "The Black Tampon." b/w. 26 min. (Film Images) The film was produced in Holland but has English narration. Presents a brief historical background by showing ancient processes and tools used in printing. "The Book." b/w. 18 min. (Encyclopedia Britannica Films) Shows the variety of talents and techniques which are needed in producing a book. This film was made in Sweden. "Graphismes." b/w. 10 min. (in French) (Soc. Ed. Ph.) A study of the production of deluxe editions and examines the making of type, typesetting, and illustration for these books. Shows the work of Chagall, Matisse, Rouault, Picasso, and de Segonzac for the design and illustration of the modern book in France. "Making Books." b/w. 10 min. (Encyclopedia Britannica Films) A study of the manufacture of the modern book from the author's manu- script to the complete book. "Printmaking - Four Artists, Four Media." c. 19 min. (Film Assn. of Cali- fornia) Through the visual presentation of the work of four graphic artists the film shows the basic principles and method of producing the woodcut, etching, lithography and silk screen. In some cases these films may not be available from the source and will have to be obtained from a film rental library. Many institutions have published catalogs of their film libraries which are most useful in locating particular items. Filmstrips: The following filmstrips might be useful although there is great need for improvement in some of the so-called professionally produced filmstrips: 126
Teaching the History of Books and Printing (Part II) "The Art and Craft of Printmaking." Five color filmstrips with five records, automatic and manual, with Teacher's Guide. (Educational Resources, Inc.,) C1970. This set is aimed primarily at teaching printmaking techniques and the basic skills needed. It is most useful in providing library school students with a basic understanding of these processes and their application to printmaking and book illustration. "Books - Their Story." Seven color filmstrips (The Jam Handy Organiza- tion.) A visualized survey of books including: "Writing and Pictures," "Our Alphabet," "The Story of Numerals," "The Story of Paper," "Handwritten Books," "The History of Printed Books," and "How Books Are Made." Hardly an in-depth study but a useful brief introduction. The units on paper, the printing process and the manufacture of the book might be of use in graduate courses but only if very basic and somewhat superficial treatment is wanted. "A History of Graphic Art." Six black and white filmstrips (Educational Productions, Ltd.) This set is a Yevonde filmstrip containing units on "The Roots of Book Illustration," "The Woodcuts of the Early Printers," "Copper-Plate En- graving and Etching," "Popular Prints, 1775-1825," "Victorian Book and Periodical Illustration," and "20th Century Illustration." The views tend to be a bit small. Most useful if used with Cleaver's A History of Graphic Art. Slides: The following are a sampling of some professionally prepared slide sets which can be most helpful in teaching: "Selections from the Book of Kells." (American Library Color Slide Co.) 20 - 2 X 2 color slides in the set. "Medieval Book Illumination." (American Library Color Slide Co.) 18 - 2 X 2 c°l°r slides in an "Integrated Survey Set." Most useful for a general overview of the manuscript. "Development of Book Illustration." (Prothmann Associates, Inc.) 24 - 2 X 2 black and white slides. "History of the Woodcut." (Prothmann Associates, Inc.) 24-2 X 2 black and white slides. 127
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP "Master ES and the Origin of Engraving." (Prothmann Associates, Inc.) 24 - 2 X 2 black and white slides. "American Graphic Arts." (Educational Audio- Visual Inc.) 15 - 2 X 2 color slides. Includes the work of prominent 20th century American artists and book illustrators including: Baskin, Marsh, Shahn, Calder, Feininger, and others. The following slides are available from the Society for French American Cultural Services and Educational Aid, 972 Fifth Avenue, New York City, New York, for a rental fee: "Le Psautier de Saint Louis." 84 color slides. "Le Livre de la Chasse de Gastón Phebus." 33 color slides. "Jean Fouquet-Le Livre d'Heures d'Etienne Chevalier." 12 color slides. "Jacques Callot." 32 black and white slides. "Daumier." 65 black and white slides. "French Bookbinding from the 16th Century to the Present." 32 color slides, with text. From the collection in the Bibliothèque Nationale. Films trip and Slides Sources: A useful pamphlet for a listing of sources for 2X2 slides is: Sources of Slides. The History of Art. New York: Metropolitan Museum of Art, 1970. The following sources are useful for commercial purchasing of 2X2 transparencies and/or filmstrips. The major emphasis of most of these sources is on the medieval manuscript and graphic arts. Most of these sources have printed or mimeographed catalogs. American Library Color Slide Co. 305 East 45th Street New York City, New York 10017 Budek Films and Slides Division Avid Corporation P.O. Box 4263 10 Tripps Lane East Providence, Rhode Island 02914 Colour Centre Slides Ltd. Farnham Royal Slough, Bucks, England 128
Teaching the History of Books and Printing (Part II) Educational Audio Visual Inc. Pleasantville, New York 10570 Educational Productions, Ltd. East Ardsley Wakefield, Yorkshire, England Educational Resources, Inc. Subsidiary of Educational Design, Inc. P.O. Box 103 South Orange, New Jersey European Art Color Slide Co. 120 West 70th Street New York City, New York 10023 Films and Slides P.O. Box 437 North Hollywood, California 91630 Micro Methods Ltd. East Ardsley Wakefield, Yorkshire, England Prothmann Associates 650 Thomas Avenue Baldwin, New York 11501 Sandak, Inc. 4 East 48th Street New York City, New York 10017 In addition to these sources many libraries and museums have avail- able, for sale, slides from their collections. It is impossible to list them all. The Metropolitan Museum of Art Sources of Slides pamphlet provides names and addresses. The following are particularly active in this area and here the emphasis is also on the medieval manuscript. Many publish lists of items for sale: The Bibliothèque Nationale Paris, France 129
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP The Bodleian Library Oxford, England The British Museum Photographic Services London WClB 3RA, England The Jewish Theological Seminary of America Broadway and 122nd Street New York City, New York The Pierpont Morgan Library 33 East 36th Street New York City, New York Trinity College The Library Shop Dublin 2, Ireland Victoria and Albert Museum South Kensington London SW 7, England Walters Art Gallery 600 N. Charles Street Baltimore, Maryland 21201 The following are helpful as sources for rental of 2 X 2 slides: The Metropolitan Museum of Art Slide Library Fifth Avenue and 82nd Street New York City, New York 10028 Philadelphia Museum of Art Slide Library Parkway at 26th Street Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19130 Production of Slides: The availability of color and black and white slides or transparencies from standard sources, such as producers, distributors, libraries, and museums, is quite good and an excellent collection of such visual ma- 130
Teaching the History of Books and Printing (Part II) terial can be developed from these sources. However, purchase and constant rental of slides can be expensive, and often the standard "in stock" items do not suffice. In such cases it is helpful to be able to produce your own slides. Of course, anyone with a knowledge of photography can do this, but for the amateur this can be resolved through the use of the Kodak Ektagraphic Visualmaker. This set contains two stands, and is used with a Kodak Instamatic Camera, and flashcubes. The production is almost foolproof and once the user becomes accustomed to it, it can be most useful. Use of Koda- chrome or Ektachrome film will produce color transparencies in photo- graphing reproductions, facsimiles, illustrations in books, and original material for classroom viewing on any standard slide projector. Use of a precut mat can be used to frame the work to be photographed. Photographic tape can also be purchased for framing after the film is developed. The end result can be a fairly professional job, which per- mits the building of one's own, unique, and personal collection, based on the various items which the instructor wants to present in class rather than having to fit teaching into what is available. By being the producer of his own slides the instructor is free to make and have available a working collection of slides to be used with the lecture. The combination of slides which have been purchased from dealers, distributors, libraries, or museums, or which are rented, together with individual production of slides permits great flexibility and the de- velopment of a worthwhile and relevant collection of visual materials for teaching books and printing. Reproductions and Realia Sources: In cases where it is not possible to purchase original material it is possible to use reproductions for display and lecture purpose. The materials available here are reproductions of cuneiform clay tablets, examples of hieroglyphics, relief carvings of ancient scripts, picto- graphic tablets, cylinder seals, and other realia of value in teaching about these items and having examples in hand. Two helpful sources which publish a sales catalog are: Alva Museum Replicas Inc. 30-30 Northern Blvd. Long Island City, New York 11101 The University Museum Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104 131
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP Exhibition Catalogs: A collection of exhibition catalogs can be a most useful source of information for teaching books and printing. A number of these are generally available for sale at the time of the exhibition and also by order. Both from the descriptive commentaries and illustrations, ex- hibition catalogs can be helpful as a source for the study of various periods or particular books. Their number is much too numerous to list here but there is one which has probably surpassed all others in its appeal and value in Printing and the Mind of Man: Catalogue of the Exhibitions at the British Museum and at EarVs Court, London, July 16-27, 1963 (London: The British Museum, 1963), which is also available in hardcover as: John Carter and Percy Muir's Printing and the Mind of Man (New York: Holt, Rhinehart and Winston, cl967) . This is an ' 'invaluable catalog" containing information on "printing mechanisms and printed materials arranged to illustrate the history of western civilization and the means of the multiplication of literary texts since the XVth century/' Dealers9 Catalogs: Teachers of the history of books and printing also find dealers' catalogs a most useful source for the descriptions and illustrations which they contain. This relates to the catalogs of sale items pub- lished from time to time by the antiquarian book trade. Although their major purpose is for the sale of the items listed they are also in- valuable source items. There are a large number of such dealers' catalogs constantly being mailed out to libraries and book collectors and it is advisable to request being placed on the mailing list for a select number which the instructor feels will be useful to students. Last year there was one dealers' catalog which will probably rank as one of the most outstanding examples of this type. This is the Monumenta Xylographica et Typographica, "The Cradle of Printing -Part II" (New York: H. P. Kraus, 1971). This catalog lists a dazzling array of the book world's treasures which have been assem- bled by Kraus. The introduction to the catalog states that: "Never before in the 20th century has so formidable an assemblage of great printed books been displayed and offered for sale in a catalogue; per- haps it never can be done again." The list includes: The Gutenberg Bible cl455 (The Shuckburgh copy) in the largest paper copy extant, 132
Teaching the History of Books and Printing (Part II) and other works including The 1457 Psalter of Fust and Schoeffer; the Bible in Latin of 1462 also printed by Fust and Schoeffer; a page from The Constance Missal; Balbus' The Catholicon attributed to Gutenberg in its 1460 edition; books printed by Sweynheym and Pan- nartz, Koberger, Caxton, Pynson, Mentelin, to name just a few. De- scriptive comments are fascinating and informative. This catalog is "the fulfillment of the most extravagant dream of an antiquarian bookseller." For anyone who might be interested the sale price for the Gutenberg Bible is $2,500,000.00. Sources for Original Materials, Leaves, and Rare Books: There is no question that the teacher of the history of books and printing is greatly aided by the availability of materials from a rare book department or special collections where examples of materials discussed in class can be seen and examined first-hand. It is still possible within the limits of a modest budget to obtain materials which can be used as examples in class. The instructor will have to determine what materials are needed and which are best seen and described by having the original examples, rather than reproduc- tions, slides, or facsimiles. Even with a small amount of money it is amazing what can be collected over the years by continuously being aware of what is available and obtaining it. It is impossible to teach books and printing without visual materials. A useful source for this original material are the antiquarian book dealers, and book auctions. The collecting should be planned to include examples of some me- dieval manuscript leaves, possibly a complete manuscript or two, if funds allow, examples both in complete books and leaves of printed books revealing the work of the famous printers and typographers, incunabula leaves, samples of hand-made paper, a palm-leaf book, clay tablets, papyrus fragments, cylinder seals, and other items which would be useful in teaching books and printing. Some of these items can be obtained at fairly reasonable cost. Through the use of these materials the study of books and printing comes alive. It is impossible to list all the possible sources for this material and it is not recommended that the instructor in the history of books and printing establish his or her own rare book library but in this area these items are essential as part of the educational materials which a teacher needs. 133
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP For those who are interested in obtaining such material the follow- ing source is suggested: The Antiquarian Booksellers' Center 630 Fifth Avenue Rockefeller Center New York City, New York 10020 for: AB A A. Membership List. New York: Antiquarian Booksellers' Association of America, Inc., 1970. [Supplement, 1971.] In this pamphlet you will find a listing of the antiquarian book dealers, a geographical index and a subject listing of their areas of specialization. This can be most helpful in locating complete books or individual leaves of medieval illuminated manuscripts, incunabula, early printed books, examples of fine printing, private presses, bind- ings, etc. For a more detailed listing check: American Book Trade Directory, 1971-1972. Twentieth edition. New York: R. R. Bowker, 1971. Periodicals: A helpful if now somewhat dated directory of periodicals is Carolyn F. Ulrich and Karp Kup's Books and Printing: A Selected List of Periodicals, 1800-1942 (New York: New York Public Library, 1943) which provides an extensive listing of various journals in the book arts. The following selected listing of periodicals has been included be- cause these are some of the more important ones which are extremely useful as a rich source of information for any study of books and printing. Some of these items are listed in Ulrich and Kup's "selected list" but others have appeared since that time. A number of the older journals have recently been reprinted. For complete information on the journals check Ulrich' s International Periodicals Directory (New York: R. R. Bowker) . Journals which contain material on books and printing, the book arts, and related areas are: Alphabet and Image, Ars Typographical Art et Metier Graphique; Arts et Techniques Graphiques; Biblio- graphical Bibliographical Society of America. Papers ; Bibliographical 134
Teaching the History of Books and Printing (Part II) Society Translations. The Library; Book Design and Production; Car act ere; Caxton Magazine; The Colophon; The Dolphin; Fleuron; La France Graphique; Graphic Arts Abstracts, Graphic News; Graphis; Gutenbuch Jahrbuch; Illustrator Magazine; Imprint; Journal of the William Morris Society; Library Quarterly, Libri, Livre et Ses Amis; Metier Graphique, Motif; Nouvelles de I9 Estampes; Nouvelles Graphiques /Graphiques Nueuws; Oxford Bibliographical Society. Pro- ceedings and Papers; Pagina; Paper and Print; P enrose Annual, Print; Printing Abstracts; Printing Historical Society Journal, Restaurator; Serapeum; Signature; Typographica, and Xerox /Source. Special Collections: There are a few special libraries which have rather extensive col- lections on the history of books and printing including: The Pierpont Morgan Library, New York City, N.Y. The Henry E. Huntington Library, San Marino, California Library of Congress, Washington, D.C. The New York Public Library, New York, N.Y. Free Library of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Lilly Library, Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana Newberry Library, Chicago, Illinois (Wing Foundation on the History of Printing) Grolier Club Library, New York, N.Y. General Theological Seminary, New York, N.Y. Jewish Theological Seminary of America, New York, N.Y. La Casa del Libro, San Juan, Puerto Rico Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies, Toronto, Canada The Gutenberg Museum, Mainz, Germany The Plantin-Moretus Museum, Antwerp, Belgium St. Bride Institute Printing Library, London, England Of course, the major public and university libraries would be extremely useful for rare book materials, field trips, and also their publications. Special Events and Programs: Events and programs are limited by one's proximity to the event and it is possible that after some inquiry you may locate a local printer, papermaker, illustrator, printing plant, book manufacturer, lithographer, who would be willing to make arrangements for field trips. 135
JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARIANSHIP In the New York City area the American Institute of Graphic Arts sponsors "Plant Tours" during the spring and fall. There is a fee for each tour which lasts about ll/o to 2 hours and visits various plants in graphic arts, printing, new technologies, etc. For Plant Tour informa- tion and to be placed on the mailing list write to: Suzanne Livornese, American Institute of Graphic Arts, 1059 Third Avenue, New York City, New York. One of the most valuable programs available in the New York area is the "Heritage of the Graphic Arts" which is a series of weekly lectures on the graphic arts held during the fall and spring. Robert Leslie is Director. The past lectures in this series were recently pub- lished in book form by R. R. Bowker as Heritage of the Graphic Arts (New York: Bowker, 1972) edited by Chandler B. Grannis. Summary: It is hoped that this article has fulfilled its major purpose in pro- viding instructors with an idea as to the range and variety of ma- terials and sources which could be used in teaching the history of books and printing. Maybe this article will stimulate greater exchange of ideas among instructors of this and related courses, as to methods, techniques, and procedures which have been developed and which they would like to share with their colleagues. Although it is not possible to list all the sources and materials which are available this article has tried to present a number of them and the ways in which they can be used to make the study of books and printing enjoyable and rewarding for teacher and student. This has been done through this two-part presentation of print and non-print materials which can provide the information, knowledge, understand- ing, and appreciation for the study of the historical development of graphic communication. The field of books and printing is certainly one where the more you know about the subject the more you realize how little you actually do know. This listing, with its limitations, has been presented in the same spirit as that offered by William Caxton to his own readers when he advised: "... theyn that shal fynde f aulte to correct it and in so doyng they shal deserve thenkynges and I shal praye God for them." 136