THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Volume 72 APRIL 2002 Number 2 THE SCATTERED MEMBERS OF AN INVISIBLE REPUBLIC: VIRTUAL COMMUNITIES AND PAUL RICOEUR'S HERMENEUTICS Gary Burnett' Communities, whether they are "real" or virtual, are mediated by interpre- tation. One's place within a community is also constituted by an ongoing metaphoric "reading" through which one attempts to understand what oth- ers within the community say and do. Virtual communities are unique in making such reading explicit through further acts of writing: participants form their communities through public performances of writing, reading, and interpreting of texts. Any analysis of virtual communities must take into account both the exchange of meaning through texts and the fact of a medi- ating distance between participants. The hermeneutic theories of Paul Ri- coeur can support an analysis of these activities, which accounts for temporal and spatial distance in the exchange of the community's texts. Ricoeur's her- meneutic theory can be used to describe the process that drives virtual com- munities, which makes them into forums that attempt to "connect the scat- tered members of an invisible republic" [1, p. 43] in an electronic world. Introduction While the Internet is inconceivable without the technological infra- structure and protocols that support it, it is equally inconceivable with- out human users, who work together in electronically mediated envi- ronments. Such a human orientation can help to provide the basis for a useful social definition of the Internet: it is an electronically mediated 1. Assistant professor, School of Information Studies, Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida 32306-2100; Telephone 850-644-9992; Fax 850-644-6253; E-mail gburnett@mailer. fsu.edu. [Library Quarterly, vol. 72, no. 2, pp. 155-178] ? 2002 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-2519/2002/7202-0001$10.00 155
156 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY community melding information distribution and human interaction. It is this sense of community-much more than the technological "backbone"-that gives the Internet its significance. As the technology has grown in its ability to support increasing num- bers of nonprofessional users (as opposed to the computer scientists who developed it), such a community-based conception of the In- ternet-as well as the specific incarnation of such a concept in a wide variety of "virtual communities"-has become increasingly common- place. This technology pervades both the popular and scholarly imagi- nations to such an extent that it now can be seen everywhere from nationally syndicated advice columns, to primers on advertising and marketing, to scholarly literature in disciplines as far afield as econom- ics, sociology, and composition. Further, it has been used in educa- tional settings to create electronically mediated courses in a wide range of fields, including, for example, full online degree programs in schools of library and information studies (LIS).2 Much of the scholarly literature on virtual communities, which draws upon a long tradition of definitional work in sociology, philosophy, and political science, attempts to come to terms with what such commu- nities might be. This research typically focuses on the characteristics of communities that might give them substance and make them "real" or, conversely, focuses on those characteristics that make them "vir- tual." Tharon Howard [2] provides a useful critical overview of various approaches to defining "community," using this critique to frame a discussion of specific virtual communities. Similarly, Derek Foster [3] draws on Benedict Anderson's [4] important concept of "imagined communities" as well as the concepts of gemeinschaft and gesell- schaft to explore virtual communities as potential sites for the "redefi- nition of both the public and the private self and other, and for further investigation of the ever-expanding possibilities of human interaction" [3, p. 35]. Work focusing on the word "virtual" typically attempts to describe how communities that cannot depend on physical presence are con- structed. Pierre Levy notes that although a "virtualized" community is "not there" in the same sense that a geographically based commu- nity is assumed to be, it is still "guided by passions and projects, con- flicts and friendships" [5, p. 29]. However, because it lacks the physical dimension of a geographically based community, a virtual community 2. For example, the School of Information Studies at Florida State University has operated a full online master's degree program since fall 1996; one of the key aspects of such a program is the creation of a virtual "learning community" of students who are widely dispersed geographically.
VIRTUAL COMMUNITIES AND HERMENEUTICS 157 cannot simply accept its existence as a given. It is, rather, a problematic entity, which must continually forge a provisional self-definition in terms of its own "virtuality." In other words, a virtual community is a cooperative, if inherently unstable, experiment in what it might mean to be a community in the absence of physical proximity. Seen in this light, the often-asked question of whether virtual communities are "real" loses much of its pertinence, just as it does for more traditional, nongeographically based communities (such as "invisible colleges") mediated by the written word and shared interests; community is, sim- ply, one activity that people undertake whenever and wherever they find a space (whether physical or virtual) within which interaction, communication, and work can take place.3 The technological supports may shift, but community remains, taking advantage of available re- sources to become whatever it might be. As Levy puts it, "each new system of communication and transportation modifies ... the pertinent space for human communities" [5, p. 31]. In this sense, then, virtual communities can be understood as real communities, which use a new system of communication or a particular mode of social interaction to sustain themselves. If this is the case, an attempt to understand the ways in which virtual communities function must focus particularly on that mode of interaction and on the condi- tions within which such interaction must take place. This article ex- plores such questions by examining both the mode of interaction (tex- tually based discourse) and the conditions of distance and electronic mediation within which that interaction occurs. To do so, it uses the hermeneutic theories of Paul Ricoeur to argue that a process much like the one described by Ricoeur as "the mode of 'as if' " [1, p. 35] is intuitively used by participants in virtual communities as a means of creating and sustaining those communities. This process unfolds in an ongoing public "performance" of writing texts, reading and interpret- ing those texts, and making those readings and interpretations explicit through the creation of further texts, all in an electronically mediated public setting accessible to all members of the community. While the 3. It should be noted that "community" in a physical setting is also a problematic entity. However, physical proximity may lend to geographically constituted communities an ap- pearance of interconnectedness that is, at least on the surface, quite different from the dispersion of a virtual community. At the same time, because virtual communities are linked by shared interests (and a set of shared, publicly visible discursive practices) they may, ironically, be more tightly interconnected than physically defined communities in which diverse groups of individuals are drawn together by a wide range of other factors, including a number of economic and geographic contingencies. Since a full consideration of the nature of "community" is beyond the scope of this article; it must suffice to simply note such complexities.
158 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY thrust of this article is theoretical rather than empirical, it does have implications for studying the ways in which interactions occur within virtual communities and for understanding the ways in which virtual communities function in practice. Thus, although the article does not undertake an empirical analysis of specific communities, it concludes with some brief suggestions for applying Ricoeur's theory in specific studies. Before turning to Ricoeur's theory of hermeneutics and applying that theory to an analysis of virtual communities, however, it is neces- sary to review some of the pertinent literature related to electronically and linguistically mediated interaction in geographically dispersed on- line environments, as well as some literature on linguistic and interpre- tive mediation in community, more broadly defined. Virtual Communities and Computer Mediated Communications Studies Research on invisible colleges and discourse communities has long ex- plored the significance of distance and mediation in the predigital world.4 Further, an important strand of research into computer medi- ated communication (CMC) focuses on the effects of such mediation specifically within electronically mediated environments. Much early CMC research suggested that human interaction via computers neces- sarily filters out the cues that support a sense of "social presence," such as facial expressions and body language, thus decreasing true in- teraction and generating increased antisocial behaviors among CMC users [8-10]. Further, such studies often concluded that this decrease in social and physical "presence" causes CMC users to experience a significant reduction of their awareness of themselves as socialized indi- viduals [11-12]. More recent research has called these conclusions into question and has even suggested that the level of antisocial online behavior has been greatly exaggerated [13]. Joseph Walther [14-15] has further sug- gested that the lack of traditional physical and social cues in CMC can lead participants to form more positive images of their online interloc- utors than they otherwise might. Walther argues further that this per- ception may most readily occur in online situations in which partici- pants know they will be interacting over a long period of time, where they feel the need to establish virtual friendships and to consider their role as a member of an online group; Walther's research suggests that 4. For good overviews, see [6] and [7].
VIRTUAL COMMUNITIES AND HERMENEUTICS 159 the lack of traditional social cues may thus be a significant factor in the formation and sustenance of virtual communities. Although much of the research into virtual communities tends to assume an unproblematic role for physical proximity and at least some degree of face-to-face interaction within geographically defined com- munities, Anderson [4] has argued that any community beyond the level of the smallest village is an imagined construct-a mediating fic- tion by means of which groups of people can define themselves as be- ing somehow connected. While Anderson focuses on the agency of political ideology in the construction of community, others have suggested that other elements play a more fundamental mediating role. Anthony Cohen [16], for example, has suggested that the essen- tial mediating concept in the construction of community is something much broader than ideology, something that, like language, gives peo- ple the fundamental ability to express themselves and is, itself, constitu- tive not only of ideology but of thought itself. Cohen calls this constitu- tive element the symbol, which provides "people with the means to make meaning ... [and also provides] them with the means to express the particular meanings which the community has for them" [16, p. 19]. In other words, communities find themselves through a system of signification and exchange allowing for the construction of shared meaning and the possibility of understanding. Because of the technolo- gies that mediate them-and because their primary medium of ex- change is text-virtual communities not only make this construction of shared meaning explicit but also make it into a public act or perfor- mance, a process that occurs through public production and reception of texts. Like Levy, Cohen suggests that a community mediated by such a pro- cess of exchange is a tenuous construct, dependent not upon secure understanding but upon the much more problematic activity of inter- pretation: "As members of society we are all continuously engaged in the struggle to understand other people's behavior. What passes as un- derstandingis often based on interpretation, and the interpretation is gen- erally accomplished by reconstructing other people's behavior as if it was our own: in other words, by attempting to put ourselves in their shoes, our minds in their bodies. Hence, when other people use words that we use, we interpret their intended meaning by assuming that it corresponds to ours. Sometimes it may; sometimes it may not.... We are all, then, engaged continuously in interpretation" [16, p. 73]. In Cohen's paradigm, all communities, whether they are real or vir- tual, are irreducibly mediated by the interpretative act, through which symbols, actions, and linguistic exchanges are filtered. The meaning of a community is the aggregate of all of the individual interpretations
160 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY that take place within that community, and one's place within a com- munity is constituted by an ongoing metaphoric reading through which one attempts to understand what others within the community say and do. What distinguishes virtual communities from others is the fact that they make such an ongoing reading explicit: participants inter- act with each other-and form their community-always and specifi- cally through the writing, reading, and interpreting of texts. In other words, virtual communities are built from textual performances that are made up of public acts of creating and publishing (or "posting") texts that respond to (and, thus, actively interpret) earlier texts. Virtual Communities and Language The linguistic aspect of virtual communities has received considerable attention from researchers in a variety of disciplines. Boyd Davis and Jeutonne Brewer describe online textual exchange as "electronic dis- course," comprised of those "two-directional texts in which one per- son using a keyboard writes language that appears on the sender's mon- itor and is transmitted to the monitor of a recipient" [17, p. 11]. It has been widely accepted in the popular press and elsewhere that such electronic discourse (which includes E-mail, Web-based writing, and other types of online textual interaction) is a unique mode of commu- nication, melding aspects of writing and speech into something similar to what Katherine Kveim, modifying Walter Ong [18], calls "secondary literacy" [19, n.p.]. Perhaps the most fruitful approaches to linguistic aspects of virtual communities have attempted to evaluate discursive behavior within communities in order to ascertain those formal characteristics shared across virtual communities and other interactive online contexts. Such studies most often trace the discursive strategies employed by commu- nity participants in order to determine the ways in which such activity is different from other types of language use. The conclusions of some of these studies suggest that there are, indeed, a distinct set of discur- sive structures, behaviors, and tendencies that are specific to virtual communities. Such characteristics include (1) particular verbal prac- tices and structures to allow for ongoing exchange of information as part of the daily activities of the community [20]; (2) verbal "gestures" that suggest an acceptance of the virtual community as a site for "recip- rocal intertextuality" [21]; (3) aesthetic verbal patterns used to estab- lish rules for accepted behavior and social status [22]; (4) specific pat- terns of linguistic variation and "framing" of discourse [17, 23-24]; (5) the verbal ebb and flow of "flame wars" [25-26]; (6) the linguistic
VIRTUAL COMMUNITIES AND HERMENEUTICS 161 structuring of "difference" and "heterotopic discourse" [27-28]; (7) patterns of linguistic "dissent" from dominant online narratives, in- cluding verbal mechanisms for encoding, obscuring, or interrogating gender and race [29-33]; (8) the use of nonverbal "cues" such as "em- oticons" to express emotion [34]; and (9) verbal evidence of concep- tual maps used to support collaboration [35]. Further, Susan Herring [32] has suggested that, because the charac- teristics of online language "loosen" the more formal structures of other types of linguistic behaviors, they work to enhance both interac- tivity between participants and the willingness of those participants to engage in productive (or performative) language play, making the on- line environment particularly suited to certain types of communities. On the one hand, most of these approaches emphasize the role of writers within communities, which situates the production of meaning specifically within the creation of texts. On the other hand, Gretchen Barbatsis and her colleagues [36] use reception theory to emphasize the role of the consumers (or readers) of texts and to suggest that cyberspace is best understood as a space for performance in which ideas about "meaning making itself" can become embodied through performative acts of reading and writing. Such a concept of "performa- tive discourse" suggests that online communities are more interac- tive-involving both readers and writers-than they are merely loci for acts of writing. Indeed, Richard Lanham [37] and Brenda Laurel [38] have argued that performance and interactive play are fundamental to all types of human-computer interaction. In studies and descriptions of synchronous online game- and role-playing environments including MUDs, MOOs, and MUSHes,5 Sherry Turkle [39-40] and Julian Dib- bell [41], among others, have suggested that virtual communities in particular provide participants a space for the invention of "new selves through social interaction" [39, p. 12]. Other studies of the performa- tive aspects of virtual communities include (1) investigations of com- munity development through gaming [42]; (2) the "performance of humor" as a mechanism for creating and playing with community-wide shared meanings and social norms [43]; (3) the use of nicknames and pseudonyms in synchronous chat-based communities [44]; (4) the role of language-play as an inherent element of interactive digital writing [45]; and (5) experiments using synchronous Internet relay chat (IRC) -based communities to mount full-scale dramatic performances [45-46]. 5. MUDs (multiuser domains or multiuser dungeons), MOOs (multiuser object-oriented), and MUSHes (multiuser shared hallucinations) are all synchronous (or real-time) role- playing chat environments.
162 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Such an emphasis on performance and the interactive elements of virtual communities can be particularly fruitful for understanding the linguistic complexities to be found within them, as can emphasis on the production of meaning through the creation and reception of texts. However, as noted above, it is important in such analysis to consider the impact of the medium itself-that is, to acknowledge that whatever interaction takes place within virtual communities is always both struc- tured by physical (and, in some cases) temporal distance between par- ticipants and sustained by the mediation of the technologies that make them possible. Any analysis of virtual communities must take into ac- count both the exchange of meaning through texts and the fact of a mediating distance between participants. The Mode of "As If": Hermeneutic Theory While there are many potential avenues for exploring such activities, including, as noted above, the reception theory used by Barbatsis and her coauthors [36], hermeneutic theory seems particularly suited since it is historically concerned with the possibility of meaning being trans- ferred across the distances of time and space through the mediation of texts. Thus, hermeneutics can provide both a way of analyzing the creation of meaning through the interpretation of texts and a way to account for distance and mediation in the exchange of such meaning. Further, while hermeneutics is not specifically concerned with the per- formative aspects of language as such, it can provide a mechanism for understanding the ways in which participants in virtual communities build their communities through interpretive acts or, more accurately, through interpretation made manifest in acts of writing in response to other writing. As an approach, hermeneutics has had wide influence in philosophy, religious studies, and literary theory. In library and in- formation studies, however, it has received limited attention. Daniel Benediktsson [47], however, argues that a hermeneutic approach al- lowed for an important corrective to what he saw as an overemphasis on empirical methodologies in LIS studies. While Benediktsson's article is not directly applicable to the concern with virtual communities here, his analysis of "ideas and interactions between individual-social fac- tors" and "objectivated ideas" [47, p. 226] suggests both hermeneu- tics' potential importance for LIS and its pertinence for the manifesta- tion (or "objectification") of interpretation in virtual communities. Much of the emphasis of traditional hermeneutics, because of its concern with biblical texts, was, as John Thompson puts it, on "the elucidation of rules for the interpretation of texts" [48, p. 36]. Such
VIRTUAL COMMUNITIES AND HERMENEUTICS 163 an approach, emphasizing the validation of "correct" interpretations, continues in the work of E. Donald Hirsch [49] and others. However, much of the thrust of recent work in hermeneutics, because it has grown out of the phenomenology of Edmund Husserl, has been more theoretical in nature and attempts, as Hans-Georg Gadamer puts it, to come to terms with language as "the fundamental mode of operation of our being-in-the-world and the all-embracing form of the constitu- tion of the world" [50, p. 3]. The most important strands of this work have been undertaken by Gadamer and, more recently, by Paul Ricoeur. While the two share a conception of language as a constitutive part of the world in which we live, Ricoeur's work has had the clearest emphasis on textuality and has been the most clearly focused on the challenges of making "distan- ciation" meaningful and productive. Such a challenge-of overcom- ing distance through the production and exchange of texts-is at the core of virtual communities, which by definition utilize texts to over- come the temporal and spatial distances between participants. Thus, while I make some passing reference to Gadamer in my discussion of hermeneutics, I draw the most strongly on Ricoeur's work, in particu- lar, and most extensively, upon his book, Interpretation Theory: Discourse and the Surplus of Meaning [1 ], which is a series of lectures Ricoeur gave at Texas Christian University in 1973. This set of lectures contains the most clearly applicable exposition of his hermeneutic theories. Much of Ricoeur's other writing, including his earlier book, The Conflict of Interpretations, focuses on language (such as that found in the Bible) that expressly utilizes the double meaning of symbols and, thus, re- quires a hermeneutic process leading to a transcendent (and funda- mentally Christian) "uncovering of possibilities" [51, p. xxii]. Ri- coeur's later book, Interpretation Theory, emphasizes everyday language use, with a particular emphasis on discourse and the relationship be- tween conversation and textuality. Such an approach is particularly suited to an examination of virtual communities, which can only exist through ongoing textual conversations. For Ricoeur, language is best understood through its instantiation in discourse rather than through the abstract and disembodied systems of semiotics studied by Saussurean linguists [52] and structuralists [51] .6 Discourse, as Ricoeur conceives of it, is an inherently "interlocu- 6. Saussurean linguistics, rather than studying language as embodied in use and discourse, examines the structure of the sign itself as an arbitrary structuring principle, dividing it into the signifier (the sound-image of the sign) and the signified (the concept arbitrarily referred to by the signifier). The classic text of Saussurean linguistics is [52]. While he acknowledges the importance of Saussure, Ricoeur consistently positions his theories of language in opposition to Saussurean linguistics. Ricoeur's critique of the structuralist ap-
164 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY tory" activity, a dialogue between speaker and listener. Spoken lan- guage, because both participants are physically present in "the situa- tion of interlocution" [1, p. 29] and because it is supplemented by available contextual cues as well as the conventions of grammar and gesture-or "ostensive reference"-has the ability to transfer some limited understanding of the speaker's experience and intended mean- ing to the listener. As Ricoeur puts it: "Something passes from me to you. Something is transferred from one sphere of life to another. This something is not the experience as experienced, but its meaning. Here is the miracle. The experience as experienced, as lived, remains private, but its sense, its meaning, becomes public. Communication in this way is the overcoming of the radical non-communicability of the lived expe- rience as lived" [1, p. 16]. Ricoeur, however, does not conceive of discourse as an unmediated and unproblematic exchange of meaning or understanding between interlocutors. As he notes, "My experience cannot directly become your experience" [1, p. 16]. Indeed, such an assumption would obviate the necessity for a theory of hermeneutics at all. Rather, the meaning of an interlocutory event (its "semantic content") is a function of a complex interaction between what the speaker intends to say, what the sentences as they are spoken actually say, and what the listener under- stands. The full meaning of a discourse can be thought of as a "sur- plus," something exceeding the intentions of the speaker and per- sisting beyond the fleeting moment of the event. As Ricoeur states, "to mean is what the speaker does. But it is also what the sentence does" [1, p. 19]; language, as it is sent out into the world toward a listener, escapes the speaker's control and takes on a life of its own. Thus, the act of speaking-the discursive act-inherently introduces a "virtual" distance between the speaker and what has been spoken as well as be- tween the speaker and the listener. The physical presence of speaker and listener in the situation of in- terlocution masks this inherent distance, allowing both participants to assume an unproblematic exchange of meaning through the act of speaking. Written language, however, because it exists only through the physical mediation of text, literalizes this distance between partici- pants: speaker and listener become reader and writer, irreducibly sepa- rated by both space and time. As Ricoeur submits, "the human fact disappears" when language takes the form of inscription through writ- ing [1, p. 26]. proach to language pervades his work; for some of his most direct analyses of the abstrac- tions of this approach, see the essays "Structure and Hermeneutics," "The Problem of Double Meaning as Herneneutic Problem and as Semantic Problem," and "Structure, Word, Event," all of which are included in [51].
VIRTUAL COMMUNITIES AND HERMENEUTICS 165 The disappearance of the "human fact," however, does not mean that the possibility of the exchange of meaning vanishes in writing. Rather, the inscription of language (language physically embodied in an artifact that can both move through space and persist through time) fulfills a potentiality that remains merely virtual in speech. The act of speaking, since it is a fleeting thing that leaves no physical trace, re- mains merely contingent, and thus problematic. It is what is said (the transferred meaning) rather than the speech act itself that makes spo- ken language something more than a mere contingency, even though the words as they are spoken fade into memory; speech is transformed from a mere event into a vehicle for "the 'said' of speaking" [1, p. 27]. Ricoeur calls this an act of "intentional exteriorization" or "distancia- tion" [1, p. 27]. This distanciation, which remains only virtual and con- tingent (and, thus, masked) in speech, becomes explicit in writing. Be- cause it inscribes (or "fixes") the "'said' of speaking," writing becomes "the full manifestation of discourse" [1, pp. 25-26] or, in a pun (which has a meaning not originally intended by Ricoeur but is apropos to virtual communications), "e-nunciation" [1, p. 27]. The distanciation inherent in writing does not mean that the text is disengaged from discursive activity or that it becomes authorless or irrevocably detached from the intentions of the writer. Rather, it re- mains "a discourse told by somebody, said by someone to someone else about something" [1, p. 30]. The fact that text, however distanciated, continues to function as discourse makes interpretation necessary: "The authorial meaning becomes properly a dimension of the text to the extent that the author is not available for questioning. When the text no longer answers, then it has an author and no longer a speaker. The authorial meaning is the dialectical counterpart of the verbal meaning, and they have to be construed in terms of each other. These concepts of author and authorial meaning raise a hermeneutical proW lem contemporaneous with that of semantic autonomy" [1, p. 30]. Ricoeur proposes a variety of methods for dealing with this "herme- neutical problem," which range from "the genius of guessing" through "the logic of uncertainty and qualitative probability" and "the scientific character of validation" [ 1, p. 78-79], each of which is a valid, even necessary, interpretive response to the challenge of the distanci- ated text. The specific interpretive act appropriate to a given text, how- ever, is to a great extent a function of the actual makeup of the audi- ence reading that text. Determining the exact nature of such an audience, however, is also part of the challenge presented by the text itself: just as the text slips away from the control of the writer, so it also lacks a specific reader; rather, it is, by virtue of being a text, available to an open-ended audience, addressed "potentially to whoever knows how to read" [1, p. 31].
166 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY However, specific texts exist within specific social contexts, which are governed by specific economic and social constraints. A potential audience may be defined loosely within those constraints. In addition, a text is a function of the specific genre of which it is an example; genres are "generative devices" [1, p. 32] that structure texts ac- cording to certain rules and expectations of expression. In other words, contextual factors and generic norms place a frame around what it is possible to write (or to "mean") in a given situation; this has an impact on the reader, as well: "a book is addressed to only a section of the public and reaches its appropriate readers through media that are themselves submitted to social rules of exclusion and admission. In other words, reading is a social phenomenon, which obeys certain pat- terns and therefore suffers from certain limitations" [1, p. 31]. Texts written according to the norms of certain specific genres such as "letters, travel reports, geographical descriptions, diaries, historical monographs" [1, p. 35], and so on, mimic (or "restructure") the con- textual cues that form such a fundamental part of spoken discourse. Operating according to what Ricoeur calls the "mode of 'as if' ('as if you were there')" [1, p. 35], texts written within the norms of these genres partially mitigate not only the distanciation inherent in textual discourse but the situational contingencies of spoken discourse as well. Critiquing Plato's myth of the cave, Ricoeur suggests that writing, far from being a mere shadow of the real world, is, in fact, constitutive of the world as we understand it: "For me, the world is the ensemble of references opened up by every kind of text, descriptive or poetic, that I have read, understood, and loved" [1, p. 37]. The function of discourse, then, which is most fully realized through the mediation of writing, is to project a world that is available for others to take up and, through the interpretive act, make their own. The active engagement of a reader with the text through the hermeneutic process turns distance into contiguity. While the distance between writer and reader can never disappear, the mediation of text can, according to Ricoeur's hermeneutic theory, make such distance "productive" [1, p. 89]. Through such a process, the problem of textuality becomes its greatest potential. Hermeneutics and Virtual Communities Ricoeur discusses the "mode of 'as if'" explicitly in terms of printed texts and literary genres. However, the concept may be more broadly applied and, like much of Ricoeur's work, seems tailor-made for the electronically mediated text-based interactions of virtual communities.
VIRTUAL COMMUNITIES AND HERMENEUTICS 167 Indeed, in his critique of Plato's myth of the cave (although in 1975 he could have had little if any knowledge of what were, at that point, only the merest glimmers of online communities) Ricoeur establishes a framework that almost seems a direct description of them: "This gen- eral spatialization of language is complete with the appearance of print- ing. The visualization of culture begins with the dispossession of the power of the voice in the proximity of mutual presence. Printed texts reach man in solitude, far from the ceremonies that gather the commu- nity. Abstract relations, telecommunications in the proper sense of the word, connect the scattered members of an invisible republic" [1, pp. 42-43; empha- sis added]. Such "abstract relations" are the primary contextual feature of vir- tual communities: individuals, wherever they may be, sit at computers to read what other members of their communities have written and to write further texts in response. Distanced from each other in space and time, community members are linked by an elaborate network of input and output devices, network cards, modems, telephone lines, and other electronic equipment. Virtual communities-whether linked by E- mail, the World Wide Web, Usenet newsgroups, or some other techni- cal mechanism-exist as textual "conversations" carried on through the telecommunications network. In their structure, then, these com- munities depend on a genre of writing that directly mimics what Ri- coeur calls the "situation of interlocution."7 Virtual communities, in other words, depend directly upon the "mode of 'as if' " and are in- habited by participants who textually converse with each other "as if" they were actually present within a situation of interlocution. However, the online environment housing virtual communities not only supports communication but is also a mechanism for the storage and retrieval of information. Thus, while traditional communities exist in a context defined by physical structures and movement through physical space (and by an assumption of "presence"), the context of virtual communities is defined by structures of information and move- ment through virtual space (and by an explicit distance). In part because these communities exist within an amorphous "in- formation space," rather than physical space, their populations can be highly flexible; people may freely move between many virtual commu- nities at will once they have established access to the online world. In addition, they may not only move between communities but may also leave those communities altogether and gain access to other types of online information, most of which is also textual and, in many cases, similar in content to what is found within the communities. Thus, par- 7. See also [53] for an analysis of the "digital genres" within virtual communities.
168 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY ticularly on the Web, where movement from the texts created by com- munity members to other texts is often as simple as a single click of the mouse, communities can be highly permeable and may even be seemingly indistinguishable from other types of online "information." The existence of a community is, in this context, more a matter of the presence of texts exhibiting certain generic characteristics than any kind of physical or intellectual presence of a group of people within a specific space at a specific time. In such an environment, users may "forage," moving nomadically from community to community and from one information space to another.8 Thus, although many virtual communities maintain a core group of users, they are still distinguished by this sense of highly permeable boundaries and flexible populations (the WELL, for instance, has a significant number of users who have been active since it began in 1985 and many others who have been active for much of that time). What remains constant within such an environment is neither a user popula- tion nor a physical locale. Rather, a virtual community is defined by its own particular history of writing and reading-a history docu- mented by an ever-growing body of textual messages created by shifting populations of writers and interpreted by shifting populations of readers. The place of a text within a virtual community is, therefore, clearly not dependent on the presence of the writer of that text at any point in time following the act of writing itself, and even that act takes place somewhere other than within the bounds of the community. Quite lit- erally, once a writer "posts" a text to a community, that text travels out into a digital world from which it cannot be recalled and within which it takes on a life of its own. Even though virtual community discourse becomes part of an online textual world apart from its creators, it typically carries with it certain generic traces of the writer's virtual presence, often through formalized textual marks such as "user IDs" or signature (.sig) files that identify the writer as the originator of the text.9 Thus, texts created by partici- pants in virtual communities are never fully autonomous or disengaged from the writer but function as the intentionally distanciated "e-nunci- ations" of individual writers within the social context of a specific com- munity. Indeed, even more than most other types of texts, which do 8. For an analysis of virtual communities as foraging societies, see [541. 9. Such identifying marks as "handles" or "userids" may accurately point to the writer or, in communities that allow pseudonymous or anonymous posting, to a fictional construct that plays the role of the writer, either semiaccurately or misleadingly; the dynamics of such role-playing have been extensively analyzed (see, for example, [39] and [40]) and are beyond the scope of this article.
VIRTUAL COMMUNITIES AND HERMENEUTICS 169 not adopt the formal characteristics of the situation of interlocution, these texts retain traces not only of their creators but make active (if virtual) use of what Ricoeur calls "ostensive reference"-virtual ges- tures and figures of speech referring out to the listener and back to the speaker. Through such a process, the situation of interlocution is lent both the materiality of the written word and a virtualized "sense of presence" [55] that mimics discursive speech acts. I do not mean to suggest that the act of writing a text for a virtual community is an "event" in Ricoeur's sense. Indeed, such an event is merely contingent in an interlocutory situation, constituted by the "transitory and vanishing" [1, p. 9] sound of the speaker's voice, the physical presence of both speaker and listener, and so on. By inscribing the contingencies of speech into the material performances of writing and reading, the texts of a virtual community transform discourse as event; the act of writing itself may be a transitory event, but because it inscribes text on paper or encodes it in the persisting digital traces transmitted through the network, such an act creates something that persists through time and space and fixes "the 'said' of speaking" in a specific set of letters and words. A common criticism of the Internet as both a communications medium and a medium for the storage and retrieval of information is that, compared to the print media, it is inher- ently unstable-that is, while words, once printed in a book, remain the same as long as the book is in existence, words in the electronic domain are always subject to revision and change. However, from the point of view of an analysis rooted in hermeneutic theory, the ability of writing to fix "the 'said' of speaking" in contrast to the purely ephemeral nature of the act of speaking, remains in effect, at least in asynchronous communities. In addition, although the texts of a virtual community can theoretically be altered or revised after the fact, the writers of those texts rarely have sufficient access to the machinery on which those texts are stored to be able to edit or remove them. Some systems, such as the WELL, do support a writer's ability to delete old texts; such capability, however, is rare. In addition, as recent highly publicized legal cases have made clear, in which ostensibly deleted E- mail files have been subpoenaed, digital files may well be more perma- nent than print-on-paper texts.'0 In this sense, because the texts of the virtual community are explicitly dialogic-and because they fix the "said" of such dialogue in the digitally transmitted marks of written language-they can be seen as "the full manifestation of discourse," as Ricoeur called writing itself. Virtual communities, while bypassing 10. See, for example, [56, p. 165], a comparison of the stability of printed texts compared to the "destabilizing" effects of electronic texts.
170 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY the contingencies of the situation of interlocution as a transitory "event," resituate the function of interlocution itself into the world of writing. Interlocution, of course, requires not only a speaker but also a lis- tener. If the writer of texts in a virtual community is similar to the speaker in a situation of interlocution, the role of the reader is some- what more ambiguous. In one sense, the reader of a text in a virtual community may be seen as analogous to the listener: they both, after all, receive and interpret the message created by the speaker-writer. However, as Ricoeur states, within the situation of interlocution, dis- course is something "said by someone to someone else" [1, p. 30]. In other words, the listener in the situation of interlocution is the specific object of discourse-the particular person to whom discourse is di- rected by the speaker. A virtual community, however, is a public forum, and the texts ex- changed within it are available to anybody who can fulfill the minimum requirement of access. Thus, each text (as in print publishing) has many possible readers. However, as noted above, the potential audi- ence of a given text may be defined loosely within the constraints and parameters of the situation within which it is produced. To the extent that a virtual community is a community, thus, its texts are directed to other members of the community as a whole rather than to anybody and everybody." However, in many virtual communities, even the potential number of readers available for any given message may be radically unknowable, since access can be gained to the community by anybody with the proper equipment, and since presence in many communities can only be ascertained by the participant's willingness to create texts for other participants to read.'2 Thus, in virtual commu- nities, texts may be, as Ricoeur suggests, "addressed to an unknown reader and potentially to whoever knows how to read" [ 1, p. 31 ]. Thus, while the roles of the writer and the text in virtual communities can be said to virtually recreate the situation of interlocution as textual discourse, the role of the reader-unknown and often unknowable- is potentially more problematic. As Howard Rheingold [57] and many others have noted, however, 11. Just as private conversations in traditional communities do not take place as part of the discursive activities of the community as a whole, so private E-mail messages (or messages using any other private one-on-one channels that may be available to members) take place outside of the boundaries of the community; they are, that is, invisible to members of the community who do not participate directly in them. 12. Some virtual communities, it should be noted, do provide ways of tracking who has visited but has not participated-in other words, who has "lurked"-but such mechanisms rarely allow a writer to track the readership of a specific text.
VIRTUAL COMMUNITIES AND HERMENEUTICS 171 virtual communities do develop a strong sense of themselves as commu- nities-something that would not be possible if they were simply aggre- gations of writers sending texts out to radically unknowable readers. While the full potential readership for any given text remains unknow- able, portions of that readership are, in fact, well known to the writer, primarily because many potential readers are also writers and are active participants (or active performers) in the community. And, while the population of a specific community may change radically over time, there are, at any given moment in an active community, a number of people who do take part as both readers and writers and are ongoing participants; while a large portion of the community may be transient, this group forms (even if temporarily) the core and are, thus, highly visible to the community as a whole through the exchange of texts that is the primary activity of the community. This presence of an active core of participants has important implica- tions for the success or failure of the community: while in the print world success can be measured in terms of the numbers of printed texts consumed (bought, checked out from libraries, or otherwise ob- tained) by readers, who may never make themselves known to the writ- ers of the texts, virtual communities survive only to the extent that read- ers are also writers and are willing to undertake the public activity of posting texts to the community. As Ricoeur notes, the potential "uni- versality" of the reading audience can only be partially realized. In a virtual community, texts tend to be addressed not to the full-and unknowable-audience, but to the visible and known members of the current core community (those who are also writers, and from whom there is a reasonable expectation of receiving a response, and with whom there is a reasonable chance of developing an ongoing interac- tion). This interaction, through the influence of generic norms govern- ing such matters as quoting others' texts, is highly self-reflexive: writers create texts that refer directly to other texts and, thus, integrate the act of reading directly into the act of writing. Reading becomes writing that, in turn, generates a new act of reading. Through such a recursive activity, communities develop a robust sense of themselves and are able to forge an approximate but functional sense of their own populations. This process of coming to know one's virtual community is entirely mediated by texts and specifically by the public writing and reading of texts.'3 The presence of these texts within a context surrounded by still 13. Many virtual communities do schedule face-to-face meetings of various sorts, ranging from small, informal gatherings of a handful of individuals to full-scale conventions. How- ever, such meetings remain, in Ricoeur's terms, contingent. In any event, the fullest "meaning" of a virtual community may be found in its texts, and face-to-face interactions can be seen as supplemental to the textual experience.
172 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY other texts is what creates virtual communities, which are made robust by the degree to which their texts provide evidence that the members of the community remain responsive to one another through the cre- ation, consumption, and further creation of texts-and that they con- tinue to be good readers and that they publicly demonstrate their read- ing by also performing as active writers. For virtual communities to function effectively, they must develop a shared expectation of such responsiveness and interactivity. The mediating function of texts within a virtual community, therefore, depends on the full development of those generic norms and expectations that serve as what Ricoeur calls "generative devices" [1, p. 32] to produce and sustain discursive per- formance and interaction within the community. That is, as noted above, a virtual community as a whole engages in a particular genre of literary production. This genre, practiced by sufficiently large num- bers of people and taking place in a virtual public setting created and mediated by electronics and by textual discourse, allows participants in a virtual community to function as if they were a true community and were actively engaged in something much like interlocution. But can such literary production be said to generate something that can be called "community"? Many critics have suggested that their use of electronic mediation in the place of face-to-face interaction means that virtual communities cannot support the human characteristics necessary for the development of either communication or human community.'4 Ricoeur himself asks much the same question of texts in general: "Is not this intentional exteriorization delivered over to mate- rial marks a kind of alienation?" [1, p. 38]. The texts of a virtual com- munity are distinct from other types of texts insofar as they rely almost completely upon the success with which the participants can invoke the "mode of 'as if' " and use writing to mimic the interlocutory event. In addition, because of their place within the larger information envi- ronment of the Internet as a whole, these texts can be seen simply as texts in the midst of other texts, undifferentiated from the overwhelm- ing flow of information and "data smog" [61]. Thus, the place of vir- tual communities in a context mediated not only by complex electronic machinery but also by a flood of other textual information can, argua- bly, add to the sense of alienation noted by critics. How do virtual communities find such a strong sense of their own connectedness, and of themselves as communities, within such a poten- tially alienating context? For one thing, the disappearance of "the human fact" [1, p. 26] so decried by critics is not simply a matter of electronic mediation but is, as Ricoeur notes, inherent in text itself, 14. See, for example, [58-60].
VIRTUAL COMMUNITIES AND HERMENEUTICS 173 resulting from the "distanciation" or "intentional exteriorization" through which written discourse must be carried out. By accepting (or, perhaps more accurately, by inhabiting) a textually mediated distance and taking it as their own, virtual communities, in effect, attempt to use the discursive properties of text to transform such alienation. In Ricoeur's terms, they attempt to make distanciation productive on an ongoing basis and work to transform the alienation of distance and irreducible mediation into a mechanism for community. In addition, the generic rules of discourse through which virtual communities inter- act (their reliance on textual transformation of the "ostensive refer- ences" of spoken discourse as well as other characteristic verbal norms) play a major role in this process; the use of such generic practices allow virtual communities to provisionally define their own boundaries and to distinguish themselves from the flood of other texts surrounding them. Their collective acceptance of the nature of textual discourse (what Ricoeur calls the "mode of 'as if' ") is the defining characteristic of their interactions and defines them as communities. However, Ricoeur's hermeneutics suggests a further reason that vir- tual communities not only exist but are able to exist "'as if" they were true communities: the transformation of distance into proximity (the struggle to overcome potential alienation) is inherently part of the act of reading and is an inescapable element of all acts of interpretation. And virtual communities are, above all, communities of readers who are also writers, who make the ongoing performances of reading and interpreting the writing of others their daily business as they write new texts for others to read and interpret. Empirical Hermeneutics: The Practice of "As If" This article remains, of necessity, within the realm of the theoretical. In one sense, such a limitation is itself in keeping with Ricoeur's herme- neutics, which explicitly rejects the challenge of deriving a specific methodology for testing interpretive practices [48]. However, if the claims made here-that Ricoeur's hermeneutic theory can be used to describe the process that drives virtual communities and that the "mode of 'as if' " is central to such communities-are accurate, they should be accessible to empirical testing using specific virtual commu- nities as examples. What would such empirical testing look like? In one sense, the sheer presence of interpretive activity should be easy to demonstrate. All that is required would be examples of posts to a virtual community that display clear evidence of interpretation by providing explicit "read-
174 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY ings" of earlier posts. Similarly, the existence of specific generic writing practices within specific communities would be easy to verify through an analysis of overt textual practices (such as norms for quoting earlier posts, typical abbreviations, turns of phrase, and so on) as well as more subtle practices governing things such as syntax, vocabulary, and ac- ceptable content. However, such a simple demonstration would do little to show either the centrality of the "mode of 'as if' " within virtual communities or the ways in which such ongoing interpretive textual activities help to generate or sustain communities over time, even while specific partici- pants may come and go. Thus, simply analyzing a sample dialogue or looking at a community at a specific moment of time would not suffice. And, indeed, any given specific moment in the history of a virtual com- munity may or may not provide clear evidence of the kinds of activities and practices discussed in this article, which, I would argue, reveal themselves over time as the texts of a community aggregate. What would be required for a direct application of Ricoeur's herme- neutics to a study of virtual communities, however, is a longitudinal analysis of the textual archives of one or more specific communities. This analysis would combine the approaches already outlined with a series of close readings or content analyses designed to uncover those points at which interpretive acts of reading are manifested in the cre- ation of new texts that are in turn, as part of an ongoing iterative and reflexive textual performance, fed back into the community for further reading and, again, further acts of writing. A careful analysis of such practices, as they persist over time, could show not only the applicability of Ricoeur's theories to a study of virtual communities, in general, but could also reveal a great deal about the particularities of specific com- munities. Because interpretive activities draw on existing texts through reading and, as suggested in this article, manifest that reading or inter- pretation in new texts that serve as new reading materials for the com- munity, an analysis of such interpretive activities longitudinally would uncover the specific "threads" of content and discursive practice that tie a community together. Conclusion Traditional hermeneutics attempted to account for the ways in which biblical texts could remain meaningful even though they were distant in time from their readers. Ricoeur's work extends this analysis to in- clude the distance he sees as inherent in all texts. The human members of virtual communities, because they must grapple daily with both tem-
VIRTUAL COMMUNITIES AND HERMENEUTICS 175 poral and spatial distance through the mediation of both electronics and textual discourse, accept both types of distance as their own and take the act of struggling with such distance as the primary activity of their world. In other words, virtual communities take the distance in- herent in texts-and in discourse itself-and attempt to make it "pro- ductive" [1, p. 89]. By thus accepting distance, and by undertaking an ongoing activity of textual interlocution, virtual communities enact the final goal of hermeneutics: they attempt to overcome distance through the reading and interpretation of texts via the creation of further texts. As such, they attempt to build communities through the means that are avail- able to them and, by so doing, to mediate the distance between us that is inherent in our use of language to communicate. As Ricoeur puts it: "Distanciation is ... the dynamic counterpart of our need, our inter- est, and our effort to overcome cultural estrangement. Writing and reading take place in this cultural struggle. Reading is the pharmakon, the "remedy," by which the meaning of text is "rescued" from the estrangement of distanciation and put in a new proximity, a proximity which suppresses and preserves the cultural distance and includes the otherness within the ownness" [ 1, p. 43]. The ongoing acts of reading, interpreting, and internalizing the writings of others that form the pri- mary activity of virtual communities make up the engine that drives them and makes them into forums that, whether they succeed or not, attempt to "connect the scattered members of an invisible republic" in an electronic world [1, p. 43]. REFERENCES 1. Ricoeur, Paul. Interpmtation Theory: Discourse and the Surplus of Meaning. Fort Worth: Texas Christian University Press, 1976. 2. Howard, Tharon W. A Rhetoric of Electronic Communities. Greenwich, Conn.: Ablex Publish- ing Corporation, 1997. 3. Foster, Derek. "Community and Identity in the Electronic Village." In Internet Culture, edited by David Porter, pp. 23-37. New York: Routledge, 1997. 4. Anderson, Benedict. Imagined Communities. London: Verso, 1983. 5. Levy, Pierre. Becoming Virtual: Reality in the Digital Age. New York: Plenum Trade, 1998. 6. Crane, Diana. Invisible Coleges: Diffusion of Knowledge in Scientific Communities. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1972. 7. Swales, John M. Genre Analysis: English in Academic and Research Settings. Cambridge: Cam- bridge University Press, 1990. 8. Short,John; Williams, Ederyn; and Christie, Bruce. The Social Psychology of Telecommunica- tions. London: Wiley, 1976. 9. Sproull, Lee, and Kiesler, Sara. "Reducing Social Context Cues: Electronic Mail in Orga- nizational Communication." Management Science 32 (November 1986): 1492-512.
176 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 10. Kiesler, Sara. "The Hidden Messages in Computer Networks." Harvard Business Review 64 (January/February 1986): 46-54, 58-60. 11. Hiltz, Starr Roxanne; Turoff, Murray; and Johnson, Kenneth. "Experiments in Group Decision Making." Part 3: "Disinhibition, Deindividuation, and Group Processes in Pen Name and Real Name Computer Conferences." Decision Support Systems 5 (June 1989): 217-32. 12. Kiesler, Sara; Siegel, Jane; and McGuire, Timothy W. "Social Psychological Aspects of Computer-Mediated Communication." Amenican Psychologist 39 (October 1984): 1123- 34. 13. Walther, Joseph B.; Anderson, Jeffrey F.; and Park, David W. "Interpersonal Effects in Computer-Mediated Interaction: A Meta-Analysis of Social and Anti-social Communica- tion." Communication Research 21 (August 1994): 460-87. 14. Walther, Joseph B. "Computer-Mediated Communication: Impersonal, Interpersonal, and Hyperpersonal Interaction." Communication Research 23 (February 1996): 3-43. 15. Walther, Joseph B. "Group and Interpersonal Effects in International Computer- Mediated Collaboration." Human Communication Research 23 (March 1997): 342-69. 16. Cohen, Anthony P. The Symbolic Construction of Community. Chichester: Ellis Horwood Ltd., 1985. 17. Davis, Boyd H., and Brewer,Jeutonne P. EkctronicDiscourse: LinguisticIndividuals in Virtual S,pace. Albany: State University of New York Press, 1997. 18. Ong, Walter J. Orality and Literacy: The Technologizing of the Word. London: Routledge, 1982. 19. Kveim, Katherine. "The World Wide Web-an Instance of Walter Ong's Secondary Oral- ity?" Ph.D. diss., Goldsmiths College, University of London. Available online at http:/ / www.angelfire.com/oh/kathrine/dissertation.html (last accessed January 20, 2002). 20. Burnett, Gary. "Information Exchange in Virtual Communities: A Typology." Infonnation Research: An International Electronic Journal 5 (July 2000). Available online at http:// InformationR.net/ir/5-4/paper82.html (last accessed January 6, 2002). 21. Mitra, Ananda. "Characteristics of the WWW Text: Tracing Discursive Strategies." Jour- nal of Computer-Mediated Communication 5 (September 1999). Available online at http:// www.ascusc.org/jcmc/vol5/issuel/mitra.html (last accessed January 6, 2002). 22. Marvin, Lee-Ellen. "Spoof, Spam, Lurk and Lag: The Aesthetics of Text-Based Vir- tual Realities." Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 1 (1995). Available online at http:/ /ascusc.org/jcmc/vol1 /issue2/marvin.html (last accessed January 6, 2002). 23. Paolillo,John. "The Virtual Speech Community: Social Network and Language Variation on IRC." Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 4 (June 1999). Available online at http://www.ascusc.org/jcmc/vol4/issue4/paolillo.html (last accessedJanuary 6,2002). 24. Paccagnella, Luciano. "Getting the Seats of Your Pants Dirty: Strategies for Ethnographic Research on Virtual Communities." Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 3 (June 1997). Available online at http://www.ascusc.org/jcmc/vol3/issuel/paccagnella.html (last accessed January 6, 2002). 25. Millard, William B. "I Flamed Freud: A Case Study in Teletextual Incendiarism." In In- tenet Culture, edited by David Porter, pp. 145-59. New York: Routledge, 1997. 26. Mabry, Edward A. "Frames and Flames: The Structure of Argumentative Messages on the Net." In Network & Netplay: ViTtual Groups on the Internet, edited by Fay Sudweeks, Margaret McLaughlin, and Sheizaf Rafaeli, pp. 13-26. Menlo Park, Calif.: American Asso- ciation of Artificial Intelligence Press and MIT Press, 1998. 27. Hogsette, David. "Unstable Conditions: Dynamics of Dissent in Electronic Discursive Communities." Works and Days 25/26 13 (1995). Available online at http://maple. grove.iup.edu/en/workdays/Hogsette.html#anchorl591021 (last accessed January 6, 2002).
VIRTUAL COMMUNITIES AND HERMENEUTICS 177 28. Lievrouw, Leah A. "Our Own Devices: Heterotopic Communication, Discourse, and Cul- ture in the Information Society." Information Society 14 (May 1998): 83-96. 29. Jones, Steven G. "The Internet and Its Social Landscape." In Virtual Culture: Identity and Communication in Cybmociety, edited by Steven G. Jones, pp. 7-35. London: Sage, 1997. 30. Burkhalter, Byron. "Reading Race Online: Discovering Racial Identity in Usenet Discus- sions." In Communities in Cyberspace, edited by Marc A. Smith and Peter Kollock, pp. 60- 75. London: Routledge, 1999. 31. O'Brien,Jodi. "Writing in the Body: Gender (Re)Production in Online Interaction." In Communities in Cyberspace, edited by Marc A. Smith and Peter Kollock, pp. 76-104. Lon- don: Routledge, 1999. 32. Herring, Susan. "Interactional Coherence in CMC."Jounal of Computer-Mediated Commu- nication 4 (June 1999). Available online at http://www.ascusc.org/jcmc/vol4/issue4/ herring.html (last accessed January 6, 2002). 33. Witmer, Diane, and Katzman, Sandra. "Smile When You Say That: Graphic Accents as Gender Markers in Computer-Mediated Communication." In Netwr* & Netplay: Visrtual Groups on the Intknet, edited by Fay Sudweeks, Margaret McLaughlin, and Sheizaf Rafaeli, pp. 3-12. Menlo Park, Calif.: American Association of Artificial Intelligence Press and MIT Press, 1998. 34. Nowak, Kristine L., and Anderson, Trina. "Communicating Emotions in CMC: In Search of a Sufficiency Threshold." Paper presented at International Communication Associa- tion, Information Systems Division, San Francisco, May 1997. 35. Turoff, Murray; Starr, Roxanne Hiltz; Bieber, Michael; Fjermestad,Jerry; and Rana, Ajaz. "Collaborative Discourse Structures in Computer-Mediated Group Communications." Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 4 (June 1999). Available online at http:// www.ascusc.org/jcmc/vol4/issue4/turoff.html (last accessed January 6, 2002). 36. Barbatsis, Gretchen; Fegan, Michael; and Hansen, Kenneth. "The Performance of Cyber- space: An Exploration into Computer-Mediated Reality." Joumnal of Computer-Mediated Communication 5 (September 1999). Available online at http://www.ascusc.org/jcmc/ vol5/issuel/barbatsis.html (last accessed January 6, 2002). 37. Lanham, Richard A. The Electronic Word: Democracy, Technology, and the Arts. Chicago: Uni- versity of Chicago Press, 1993. 38. Laurel, Brenda. Computers as Theatre. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1991. 39. Turkle, Sherry. Life on the Screen: Identity in the Age of the Intenet. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1995. 40. Turkle, Sherry. "Constructions and Reconstructions of Self in Virtual Reality: Playing in the MUDs." In Culture of the Internet, edited by Sara Kiesler, pp. 143-56. Mahwah, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1997. 41. Dibbell, Julian. My Tiny Life: Crime and Passion in a Virtual World. New York: Holt, 1998. 42. Breeze, Mary-Anne. "QUAKE-ing in My Boots: <Examining> >Clan:Community< Con- struction in an Online Gamer Population." Cybersociology Magazine, no. 2 (November 20, 1997): Available online at http://members.aol.com/Cybersoc/is2breeze.html (last ac- cessed January 6, 2002). 43. Baym, Nancy K. "The Performance of Humor in Computer-Mediated Communication." Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 1 (September 1995). Available online at http:/ /www.ascusc.org/jcmc/voll /issue2/baym.html (last accessed January 6, 2002). 44. Bechar-Israeli, Haya. "From <Bonehead> to <CLoNehEAd>: Nicknames, Play, and Identity on Internet Relay Chat." Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 1 (Septem- ber 1995). Available online at http://www.ascusc.org/jcmc/voll/issue2/bechar.html (last accessed January 6, 2002). 45. Danet, Brenda; Ruedenberg, Lucia; and Rosenbaum-Tamari, Yehudit. "Hmmm . . . Where's That Smoke Coming From?" Writing, Play and Performance on Internet Relay
178 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Chat." In Netwos* & Netplay: Vinrual Groups on the Internet, edited by Fay Sudweeks, Marga- ret McLaughlin, and Sheizaf Rafaeli, pp. 41-76. Menlo Park, Calif.: American Association of Artificial Intelligence Press and MIT Press, 1998. 46. Danet, Brenda; Wachenhauser, Tsameret; Bechar-Israeli, Haya; Cividalli, Amos; and Rosenbaum-Tamari, Yehudit. "Curtain Time 20:00 GMT: Experiments with Virtual The- ater on Internet Relay Chat." Joumal of Computer-Mediated Communication 1 (September 1995). Available online at http:/ /www.ascusc.org/jcmc/voll /issue2/contents.html (last accessed January 6, 2002). 47. Benediktsson, Daniel. "Hermeneutics: Dimensions toward LIS Thinking." Library and Information Science Research 11 (March 1989): 201-34. 48. Thompson, John B. Critical Hermeneutics: A Study in the Thought of Paul Ricoeur and Jurgen Habermas. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981. 49. Hirsch, E. Donald. Validity in Interpretation. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1967. 50. Gadamer, Hans-Georg. Philosophical Hemeneutics. Translated by David E. Linge. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1976. 51. Ricoeur, Paul. The Conflict of Interpretations: Essays in Heneneutics. Edited by Don Ihde. Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press, 1974. 52. Saussure, Ferdinand de. Course in General Linguistics. Edited by Charles Bally and Albert Sechehaye. Translated by Wade Baskin. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1966. 53. Yates, Simeon, and Sumner, Tamara. "Digital Genres and the New Burden of Fixity." Paper presented at the Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, Special Track on Genres in Digital Documents, Maui, Hawaii, September 1996. 54. Komito, Lee. "The Net as a Foraging Society: Flexible Communities." Information Society 57 (January 2001): 115-29. 55. Lombard, Matthew, and Ditton, Theresa. "At the Heart of It All: The Concept of Pres- ence." Joumnal of Computer-Mediated Communication 3 (September 1997). Available online at http://www.ascusc.org/jcmc/vol3/issue2/lombard.html (last accessed January 6, 2002). 56. Birkerts, Sven. The Gutenberg Eklge: The Fate of Reading in an Electronic Age. New York: Fawcett Columbine, 1994. 57. Rheingold, Howard. The Virtual Community: Homesteading on the Ekctronic Frontier. New York: Harper Perennial, 1993. 58. Barlow, John Perry. "Is There a There in Cyberspace?" In Composing Cyberspace: Identity, Community, and Knowledge in the Ekctronic Age, edited by Richard Holeton, pp. 164-96. Boston: McGraw-Hill, 1998. 59. Postman, Neil. Technopoly: The Surrender of Culture to Technology. New York: Knopf, 1992. 60. Stoll, Clifford. Silicon Snake Oil: Second Thoughts on the Information Highway. New York: Anchor Books, 1996. 61. Shenk, David. Data Smog: Surtviing the Information Glut. San Francisco: Harper Edge, 1997.