THIE OBLIGATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE LIBRARIAN CONCERNING CENSORSHIP' LEON CARNOVSKY I HAVE never met a public librarian who approved of censorship or one who failed to practice it in some measure. In some cases the practice was resented and adopted only in response to assumed or actual pressure; in others, it was accepted as proper and was justified on the score that no library can provide all books and that, just as most books which have been published cannot be found in any single library, so a library is forced to practice censorship in effect, if not in name, by failing to acquire the thousands and millions of books which it passes up for reasons of money, space, community interest, or whatever cause. First of all, I should like to clear up the confusion behind this conception; it is a confusion between book selection and censorship. Though the result may be the same in both-nonprovision of a book- the reasons are different and should be clearly recognized. Assume a typical pub- lic library in a middle western town of ten thousand, run by a librarian doing the best he can to provide a wide assort- ment of literature. The librarian sees a review of a history of Persian art, priced at $25.oo, but he quickly concludes that this book is not for him, a decision obviously based on sound reasoning. The elements in his reasoning are lack of po- tential interest, cost, possession of other books on the same general subject, and the relative importance to the accom- plishment of his objectives of this book as compared with half-a-dozen others that he can buy for $25.00. Then he sees an announcement in Publishlers' Weekly of a new book by Faith Baldwin, but he has always felt that the literary standards of his collection required a better quality of fiction; therefore he does not even se- riously consider the book, much less order it. Next he reads about a book entitled Studs Lonigan. It is well reviewed, widely publicized, inexpensive, and a lot of peo- ple ask for it. Yet the librarian decides not to buy it. Though all three books are thus denied the potential borrower, one would have to employ a highly specious logic to conclude that a censorship was operative in all three cases. We must clearly distinguish between identical effects that result from altogether differ- ent causes, and we shall never face the censorship problem squarely and honest- ly until we see that book selection (which implies book rejection) and censorship are not identical. Censorship is defined in the Encyclo- paedia of the Social Sciences as "the pol- icy of restricting the public expression of ideas, opinions, conceptions and im- pulses which have or are believed to have the capacity to undermine the governing authority or the social and moral order which that authority considers itself bound to protect."2 It is a conscious pol- icy and may be enforced without the as- sent of the majority; indeed, it may be 1 This paper was presented at the Fourth Annual Library Symposium, Kent State University, Kent, Ohio, on May I3, I949. 2 Encyclopaedia of the Social Sciences, III (New York: Macmillan Co., 1930), 290. 2I
22 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY instituted by a small group or even by an individual who feels strongly concerning a certain issue. Though such issues may fall in any sphere of human interest, the practice of censorship has been most fre- quently invoked in three areas, namely, politics, religion, and morals, and there- fore it is in these areas that the problems of censorship as they impinge on library administration are most often encoun- tered. The theory of free speech in the politi- cal realm has been so thoroughly discussed that it seems a little strange that it should need a defense in I949. Clearly and forthrightly expressed in the First Amendment to the Constitution, copied and incorporated in some form in our state constitutions, strongly supported by court decisions of the most respected and honored members of our judiciary, it still remains an ever present issue to plague and puzzle us. The reason is that freedom is not and can never be an abso- lute. My freedomto make noise is direct- ly contrary to your freedom to enjoy quiet. Nor can there be absolute freedom of speech; society itself imposes limits upon it, and it becomes the business of the courts to determine whether the lim- its have been transgressed in individual cases. Perhaps the clearest expression con- cerning free speech appears in our Bill of Rights: "Congress shall make no law . . . abridging the freedom of speech or of the press"; and the finest explication of the free-speech doctrine is to be found in John Stuart Mill's essay On Liberty. Little that has been written since adds much to his cogent argument. His pri- mary object in writing his essay was to establish the principle that "the sole end for which mankind are warranted ... in interfering with the liberty of action of any of their number, is self-protection. That the only purpose for which power can be rightfully exercised over any mem- ber of a civilised community, against his will, is to prevent harm to others."3 In- cluded in the sphere of liberty of action is "the liberty of expressing and publish- ing opinions," even though such expres- sion goes beyond strictly individual con- cern and extends to other persons. How- ever, says Mill, since expression of thought is so closely allied to freedom of thought itself, it is practically insepa- rable from it.4 The champions of free speech, from Milton through Mill to Justice Holmes in our own day, have all been much more concerned with the preservation of the right of free speech for the individual- even though he be the only person in the nation who believes what he believes. In- deed, this is no more than the recognition of the fact that all progress in human affairs is possible only in an atmosphere which permits the unusual person., who is frequently the unpopular person, to get himself heard. The harm in silencing sulch a person is only incidentally the harm to him; the greater harm is to society, which may be thus deprived of the opportunity to learn a possible truth of which only he may be the master. The truth or wisdom of any issue, like the nature of the good and the beautiful, is never discerned by taking a vote; majorities as such have force on their side but little else. To si- lence a dissident is to solidify a position and thus to make less likely the possibil- ity of change. Listen to Mill on this point: The peculiar evil of silencing the expression of an opinion is, that it is robbing the human race: postcrity as well as the existing generation; those who dissent from the opinion still more 3 John Stuart Mill, On Liberty (Boston: Atlantic Monthly Press, 1921), pp. I 2-13. 41bid,i p. i 6
THE LIBRARIAN AND CENSORSHIP 23 than those who hold it. If the opinion is right, they are deprived of the opportunity of ex- changing error for truth; if wrong, they lose, what is almost as great a benefit, the clearer perception and livelier impression of truth, pro- duced by its collision with error.5 And again, with even greater force: I insist thus emphatically on the importance of genius, and the necessity of allowing it to un- fold itself freely both in thought and in prac- tice, being well aware that no one will deny the position in theory, but knowing also that almost everyone, in reality, is totally indifferent to it. People think genius a fine thing if it enables a man to write an exciting poem, or paint a pic- ture. But in its true sense, that of originality in thought and action, though no one says that it is not a thing to be admired, nearly all, at heart, think that they can do very well without it.... Originality is the one thing which un- original minds cannot feel the use of.6 This, however, is only one argument for free speech; others are equally cogent. Mill mentions three: first, a suppressed opinion, though false on the whole, may yet contain certain elements of truth. Ac- cepted or "prevailing opinion on any sub- ject is rarely or never the whole truth; it is only by collision of adverse opinions that the remainder of the truth has any chance of being supplied." Again, even in the unlikely event that on any given issue the opinion we hold is the complete truth, our confidence in it becomes more strongly intrenched as we see it in the light of lesser truths or even of false doc- trines. And finally, says Mill, the mean- ing of the doctrine itself, if it is never challenged, may be lost and become a mere formal profession accepted from habit and not from conviction.7 Since the case for free speech is so solid in our historic tradition, in our constitu- tional guaranties, and in its logical per- suasiveness, it seems odd that the prin- ciple is continually being challenged and has been fought several times all the way up to the Supreme Court. And yet it is not so odd, for, as we have said, the con- cept of free speech is not an absolute, and it is continually necessary for the courts to determine where free speech may be- come a menace to society or even to the achievement of short-term goals which society, through its legislatures, may en- visage. The single most important case involving free speech is the famous Schenck case, heard before the Supreme Court. Here the decision of the Supreme Court was written by Justice Holmes- not a dissent but presenting the unani- mous opinion of the Court. In June, 19I7, and May, I9I8, Con- gress enacted legislation aimed at con- trolling speech which might be construed as disloyal or seditious. The defendants, Schenck and his associates, had been found guilty in the lower courts of mail- ing circulars calculated to cause insubor- dination in the military forces; the circu- lars declared conscription to be despot- ism and urged the conscriptees to ob- struct its operation. The defense invoked the free-speech clause of the Constitu- tion, and it is this aspect that makes the case important for us. The statement of Justice Holmes in ruling on this point has been often quoted, because it laid down a rule that comes close to furnish- ing a yardstick, to drawing the line where the constitutional protection of free speech no longer applies. Said Holmes: We admit that in many places and in ordi- nary times the defendants in saying all that was said in the circular would have been within their constitutional rights. But the character of every act depends upon the circumstances in which it is done.... The most stringent protection of free speech would not protect a man in falsely shouting fire in a theater and causing a panic.... The question in every case is whether the words used are used in such circumstances and are of such a nature as to create a clear and present danger that they will bring about the substantive evils that Congress Ibid., p. 23. 6lbid., p. go. 7 Ibid., p. 72.
24 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY has a right to prevent. It is a question of prox- imity and degree. When a nation is at war many things that might be said in time of peace are such a hindrance to its effort that their utter- ance will not be endured so long as men fight and that no court could regard them as pro- tected by any constitutional right.8 The key phrase in this decision is "clear and present danger." The problem still remains to determine when a publi- cation or an act constitutes a danger to the state or to society, but at least we have the right question, even if we can- not always provide the right answer. In- deed, even the Supreme Court was un- able, in applying the test, to come out with a consistent answer. This is most clearly shown in the Abrams case, also decided in I919, the year of the Schenck decision. Abrams and his associates had strewed some leaflets from the roof of a building in New York. These leaflets were not aimed at interfering with the war against Germany but protested against American intervention in the Russian Revolution. Included in the pro- test was a call for a general strike; this could be construed as interfering with the war against Germany, therefore the group was indicted. No strike was actu- ally called, and there was no evidence that a single person had been moved to stop any kind of war work as a result of the leaflets. Nevertheless, the defendants were found guilty in the District Court, and the sentence imposed was upheld by a 7-2 vote of the Supreme Court. The great importance of this case for us lies in the dissenting opinion of Justice Holmes,9 concurred in by Justice Brandeis; in this opinion Holmes further develops the "clear and present danger" principle. He strikingly shows how strongly he has been influenced by both Milton and Mill; his statement has been said to be the greatest utterance on intellectual free- dom by an American and ranking with The Areopagitica and the essay On Liber- ty.IO Persecution for the expression of opinions seems to me perfectly logical. If you have no doubt of your premises or your power and want a certain result with all your heart you naturally express your wishes in law and sweep away all opposition. To allow opposition by speech seems to indicate that you think the speech impotent, as when a man says that he has squared the circle, or that you do not care wholeheartedly for the result, or that you doubt either your power or your premises. But when men have realized that time has upset many fighting faiths, they may come to believe even more than they believe the very foundations of their own conduct that the ulti- mate good desired is better reached by free trade in ideas-that the best test of truth is the power of the thought to get itself accepted in the competition of the market, and that truth is the only ground upon which their wishes safely can be carried out. That, at any rate, is the theory of our Constitution. It is an experiment, as all life is an experiment. Every year if not every day we have to wager our salvation upon some prophecy based upon im- perfect knowledge. While that experiment is part of our system I think that we should be eter- nally vigilant against attempts to check the ex- pression of opinions that we loathe and believe to be fraught with death, unless they so immi- nently threaten immediate interference with the lawful and pressing purposes of the law that an immediate check is required to save the coun- try.... Only the emergency that makes it immediately dangerous to leave the correction of evil counsels to time warrants making any exception to the sweeping command, "Con- gress shall make no law . . . abridging the freedom of speech." I hope the implications for libraries of what I have said have not been lost. If there is one agency above all which has 8 Schenck v. United States, 249 United States Reports 47 (I9I9). 9 Abrams v. United States, 250 United States Re- ports 6i6, 624 (19I9). lo Max Lerner (ed.), The Mind and Faith of Justice Holmes: His Speeches, Essays, Letters and Judicial Opinions (Boston: Little, Brown & Co., I943), p. 306.
THE LIBRARIAN AND CENSORSHIP 25 the power to put teeth into the principle of free speech, it is the public library. I know of no nobler function which it has to perform than this: the presenting of all points of view, however unpopular, even loathsome, some of them may seem; by the same token, I know of no greater evil, no surer betrayal of that function, than the denial of the expression of certain viewpoints through a deliberate or con- trived censorship. This, you may say, is all very well in theory; does it really have any application today? Today the great competing political doctrines are, of course, democracy and communism. Within the framework of democracy it- self there is room for dissension: the so- cial welfare state versus an uncontrolled laissez faire, to name but one conflict. No library is likely to quibble over the pres- entation of these two points of view, or variations of them. The serious problem does arise over the presentation of the literature of communism. Here is materi- al the publication of which is clearly sanctioned by the First Amendment; it is altogether legal by any test we may apply. The understanding of communism is as important as the understanding of democracy, capitalism, or the divine right of kings. No court, as far as I know, has ruled that the distribution of the lit- erature of communism represents a "clear and present danger" to the securi- ty of our civilization." It is clearly up to us to give the widest possible latitude to free speech within the political realm. It is sometimes convenient to forget this principle in the face of certain pres- sures against a given position. An over- zealous American Legion post, a D.A.R. chapter, a religious or national group, or even an individual may feel so antagonis- tic toward another country or toward an- other faith or philosophy that it would deprive everyone else of the opportunity to read about them. They do not apply the "clear and present danger" principle; in fact, they apply no rational principle at all but act from a deeply felt emotion. Disagree with them, and you are labeled "un-American" -a strange transvalua- tion of values when a position espoused by the greatest American of our genera- tion is called "un-American." Numerous presentations in support of free speech might readily be cited; they are brilliantly summarized in a great dis- senting opinion by Justice Brandeis, con- curred in by Holmes. The case was that of Pierce v. United States and consisted of the prosecution of three Socialists for dis- tributing a pamphlet denouncing war. Said Brandeis: The fundamental right of free men to strive for better conditions through new legislation and new institutions will not be preserved if efforts to secure it by argument to fellow citizens may be construed as criminal incitement to dis- obey the existing law-merely, because the argument presented seems to those exercising judicial power to be unfair in its portrayal of existing evils, mistaken in its assumptions, unsound in reasoning or intemperate in lan- guage.I2 We do well to remember with Chafee, the author of Free Speech in the United States, that the First Amendment was de- signed to protect two kinds of interest in free speech: the freedom of the individual to express himself and the freedom of so- ciety to listen, to weigh arguments, to balance claims. The boundary to free speech "is fixed close to the point where words will give rise to unlawful acts," -- It is worth noting that in the recent trial of the eleven Communists in the U.S. District Court in New York, Judge Harold R. Medina included the following statement in his charge to the jury: "Books are not on trial here, nor are you concerned with the philosophical validity of any mere theories" (New York Times, October I4, I949). 22 Pierce v. United States, 252 United States Reports 239 (I920).
26 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY and "the great interest in free speech should be sacrificed only when the inter- est in public safety is really imperiled, and not ... when it is barely conceivable that it may be slightly affected."'3 This is especially true in peacetime. We next turn to free speech as it ap- plies to religion, a subject on which we tend to be more sensitive than on any other. Criticism of one's most personal spinrtual beliefs is bad manners at the least. It may become a serious nuisance, as it was when Jehovah's Witnesses hired loudspeakers to condemn publicly the members or tenets of other faiths. As a result many communities passed ordi- nances requiring licenses for the use of sound trucks. Jehovah's Witnesses, how- ever, ignored this legislation and contin- ued berating other creeds; they were ar- rested, prosecuted, and eventually ap- pealed their case to the Supreme Court on the grounds that such licensing re- quirement constituted an abridgment of free speech. The Court, by a 5-4 vote, sustained the Witnesses, and the ordi- nance designed to curb the overexuber- ant preachings of this sect was declared unconstitutional.'4 An even clearer case is that of Lovell (a Jehovah's Witness) v. Griffin (Ga.), where it was held by Justice Hughes, speaking for a unanimous Court, that an ordinance requiring writ- ten permission from the city manager for the distribution of literature of any kind was unconstitutional. "Whatever the motive which induced its adoption," said Hughes, "its character is such that it strikes at the very foundation of the freedom of the press by subjecting it to license and censorship."'s It should be noted that free speech was the issue in both these cases, not criticism of religion. This issue was not even raised. Just as it is legally proper to criticize agnosticism, paganism, atheism, or any other nega- tive form of religion, so it is proper to criticize its positive forms-Judaism, Catholicism, or any of the branches of Protestantism. Interference with the right to criticize religions has been a serious library prob- lem only sporadically in a few localities. Christian Scientists objected to Edward Dakin's biography of Mary Baker Eddy, published by Scribner's in the I920'S; and you are undoubtedly familiar with the strenuous objection raised in New York and a few other places to the Nation's se- ries of articles by Paul Blanshard in which he criticized certain aspects of the Catholic church. In neither case did the issue reach the courts, for the right of publication guaranteed in the Constitu- tion was too patent. Yet in both cases pressures were brought against libraies, and some censorship resulted. Censor- ship of the Blanshard articles in the Na- tion took a particularly serious form in New York, for not only were the issues containing the offensive articles removed from school-library shelves but subscnrp- tions to the periodical were canceled at the direction of the superintendent of schools. We find here an implied threat against any periodical that may con- template the publication of any article to which some powerful and numerous group might take exception. It seems unnecessary to stress the li- brary's responsibilities in this delicate area. The right to criticize religion must not be abrogated any more than the par- allel right to criticize social or political beliefs. We plainly have the right to look critically at any religion, and members of a religious group lay themselves open to suspicion if they attempt to deny to any- 13 Zechariah Chafee, Jr., Free Speech in the United Staes (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, I948), P. 35. "4Saia v. People of the State of New York, 334 United States Reports SS8 (1948). XS LOveI? v. Griffin, 303 United States Reports 444 (g938).
THE LIBRARIAN AND CENSORSHIP 27 one this right. The answer to free speech is more free speech, not its obliteration. Serious discussion of the beliefs or opera- tions of any established church is surely proper material for a public library. In spite of the dangers of censorship of political and social ideas, it is in the area of morals that librarians have experi- enced the greatest difficulty, both from external interference and from the na- ture of the decision concerning the line between morality and immorality. Strict- ly speaking, it is not morality that intro- duces the problem but such concepts as obscenity, pornography, filth, or what- ever other synonyms one prefers. Here too, as in political censorship, the First Amendment is invariably invoked by the publisher or author whose book is ob- jected to. He may claim that the book is not obscene, or, less frequently, he may argue that the free-speech principle con- fers an unlimited right and that consider- ations of obscenity are irrelevant. How- ever, we clearly have the right to legislate against the distribution of filth, and in one notable case, United States v. Lime- house, the Supreme Court upheld such a right. One Limehouse had written letters which the Court characterized as coarse, vulgar, disgusting, indecent, and unques- tionably filthy within the popular mean- ing of that term.'6 Does this type of thing create "a clear and present dan- ger"? It would be difficult to prove this, yet Justice Brandeis took the position that Congress had the right to punish the distribution of filth. It will be recognized that this was not the sort of "free speech" the Founding Fathers had in mind when drawing up the First Amendment. It has nothing to do with arriving at truth or rational de- cisions on the basis of conflicting ideas, of presenting evidence for a point of view, or even of propagandizing for or against action construed in the public in- terest. The suppression of such speech harms no one but the individual sup- pressed. His right to be obscene is curbed in the interest of a larger right-that of the rest of us to be saved from his ob- scenities. Chafee has likened this to the curb we place on an individual to pre- vent his smoking in streetcars. The in- jury in both cases is immediate, in the discomfort caused the nonsmokers and in the shock to the sensitive listener and reader. Free speech does not include li- cense or licentiousness; the "clear and present danger" test cannot here be in- voked to draw the line between the per- missible and the proscribed.I7 This, however, is only the beginning and the simplest part of the problem. The major question remains that of an operational rather than of a dictionary definition of obscenity. This has turned out to be a matter of extraordinary diffi- culty, and it has been treated with little consistency from one court to another; frequently the decision seems to have been based on hunch or intuition-at any rate, without the spelling-out of a definition acceptable to other judges, to publishers, or to librarians. We speak glibly about ours being a nation governed by laws; but laws are not only made by men, they are also interpreted by men, and one man's interpretation is different from another's. Hence the vast number of dissenting opinions, in obscenity cases as well as in others. Historically, American and British law has tended to rely on the definition pro- vided by Lord Chief Justice Cockburn, in i868, in ruling against a pamphlet en- titled The Confessional Unmasked: "I think the test of obscenity is this, wheth- A6 United States v. Limehouse, 285 United States Reports 424 (I932). 17 Zechariah Chafee, Jr., Government and Mass Communications (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, I947), 1, 55-56.
28 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY er the tendency of the matter charged as obscenity is to deprave and corrupt those whose minds are open to such immoral influences, and into whose hands a publi- cation of this sort may fall."'8 By this definition we must determine for any one publication whether its effect is likely to be that envisaged by Judge Cockburn, and such decision is reserved to the courts. Usually, objection to certain books is raised by local police, perhaps at the instigation of private individuals or groups, and is disposed of by local courts. Federal courts have been involved far less frequently. Lord Cockburn's formulation, contin- ually cited as a guide, has recently been considered quite unsatisfactory because it goes much too far. It tacitly accepts as the boundary line the lowest common de- nominator of human 'intelligence. Any book might conceivably fall into the hands of a child or of a pathological adult who might thereby be corrupted. As Jus- tice Qua, in the Massachusetts Strange Fruit case, observed: "A book placed in general circulation is not to be con- demned merely because it might have an unfortunate effect upon some few mem- bers of the commulnity who might be pe- culiarly susceptible.""9 (Even so, Justice Qua joined the majority of the Massa- chusetts Supreme Court in upholding the right of the lower court to find the book obscene.) In general, the recent tendency has been-outside Boston-to permit con- siderable latitude to the author, though most commentators agree that a line must be drawn somewhere. Liberal and intelligent commentators-like Chafee and Huntington Cairns, who as former assistant general counsel to the Treasury Department was charged with ruling on literary importations-believe the line should be drawn at pornography, and on this point Cairns has written as follows: Art . . . has its own morality, its own in- tegrity, which those who would limit its treat- ment of sexual detail would do well to recog- nize.... We have to recognize, however, that this principle of justification covers only half, or less than half, the case. Not all writing is litera- ture, not all information is science. There is ... that class of material which is put forward with no other purpose in view than the stimula- tion of the sexual impulse.. . . In their bulk, these photographs and drawings, these miser- ably printed pamphlets and books, are as far removed from art as they could well be.... The principle which accords complete freedom to the artist and scientist in the treatment of sexual detail plainly does not justify pornography.20 He then goes on to say: "There is no difficulty in distinguishing between those books the impulse behind which is liter- ary and those whose impulse is porno- graphic. Any man with a modicum of lit- erary knowledge can do so without hesi- tation." I wonder if Mr. Cairns would be quite so confident today. Consider the in- teresting case of Edmund Wilson's Mem- oirs of Hecate County. The book raised a storm of protest throughout the country, and the publisher, Doubleday, was brought before the New York Court of Special Sessions on the grounds of the book's alleged obscenity. Here it was judged obscene, with one justice dissent- ing. He held that the prosecution's inter- pretation of the law was "grossly inade- quate," and he stated: The writer of the story is evidently and honestly concerned with the complex influences of sex and of class consciousness and man's re- lentless search for happiness. That is a problem which also is of deep concern to the matured isRegina v. Hicklin, Law Reports, 3 Queen's Bench 360 at 371 (x868). 19 Commonwealth v. Isenstadt, 3 I8 Massachusetts Reports at 551-54 (I945). 20 Huntington Cairns, "Freedom of Expression in Literature," Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, CC (Philadelphia, I938), 85.
THE LIBRARIAN AND CENSORSHIP 29 reading public. That public is entitled to the benefit of the writer's insight and that right may not lightly be disregarded by excluding from consideration all interests but those of the young and immature.2I Nevertheless the book was held obscene, the judgment appealed successively to the Appellate Court, the Appeals Court, and the United States Supreme Court, and all upheld the ruling of the lower court. In the Supreme Court the vote was a 4-4 tie. Clearly the line between honest writing and obscenity is not easy to draw, even by persons with considerably more than Mr. Cairns's suggested "modicum of literary knowledge." Perhaps the most widely publicized censorship case in recent years is that of James Joyce's Ulysses. This book, pub- lished abroad, was held up in customs on the charge of obscenity, and the case was heard before Judge Woolsey in the Unit- ed States District Court. Judge Woolsey first raised the question of author's in- tent and concluded that the book was not written "for the purpose of exploiting obscenity." "I do not detect anywhere," he wrote, "the leer of the sensualist." But a second question arises: in spite of the author's sincerity, in spite of the book's quality, is it likely to harm the reader? Or, in line with the somewhat lurid lan- gluage of the statute, did the book tend "to stir the sex impulses or to lead to sexu- ally impure and lustful thoughts?" In short, what would be its effect upon the average man-l'hornme mxoyen sensuel? To answer this question, Judge Wool- sey depended not only upon his own reading but also upon the opinions of two friends. Their conclusion was that the book did not tend to excite sexual im- pulses but instead served as "a somewhat tragic and very powerful commentary on the inner lives of men and women." Judge Woolsey said in his decision: "I am quite aware that owing to some of its scenes Ulysses is a rather strong draught to ask some sensitive, though normal, persons to take. But my considered opin- ion, after long reflection, is that, whilst in many places the effect of Ulysses on the reader undoubtedly is somewhat emetic, nowhere does it tend to be an aphrodisiac. "22 Three elements in this case are worth noting. The first is the consideration of the author's intent; the second, the pos- sible effect on the reader; and the third, the method used to arrive at a decision- that of inviting others to join in judging the book. In a sense this method is the same as dependence on a jury but with this difference: that here the friends of the judge were selected deliberately for their ability to make a mature judgment on a difficult work of literary craftsman- ship. Thus far we have seen how the objec- tion to obscene literature revolves around a question of definition, a definition not contained in the statutes enacted against obscenity but, rather, left to the courts. First, we have seen that in some in- stances pornography is readily identified and is beyond the protection of the First Amendment. Second, we have seen that the "clear and present danger" test is difficult to apply when the issue is ob- scenity. Who can say where the danger lies in being exposed to dirty language or unconventional situations? If we were to apply this test to literature, we might as well give up any attempt to bar filth. If a book is not obviously pornographic and if the "clear and present danger" test cannot be invoked, how shall the line be drawn? Here the answer has been the standards of the community, or, as 2I Justice Perlman's dissent. 22 United States v. One Book Called "Ulysses," 5 Federal Supplement I82 (N.Y., I933).
30 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Chafee suggests, how much frankness the community will stand.23 This I frankly do not like; it seems to substitute one difficulty for another, without solving the basic problem. The "community" itself is difficult to define; is it a region, a city, or a neighborhood? Is it the majority of adults, and, if so, how do we know what they will accept? If we cannot depend on majorities, whose level shall be accepted as representing the community-that of a well-read minority or of a poorly read, superficial majority, or something in be- tween? Under the circumstances, our best solution is probably the one Judge Woolsey hit upon: to rely upon the judg- ment of intelligent readers and to expect them to be as liberal as possible in mak- ing their decision. There is far less dan- ger to the community, however defined, in permitting questionable literature to be published and read than there is in a strict definition of "obscenity" that would deny access to such literature. After all, what is the real objection? Are the censors afraid that we will be offend- ed by books like Studs Lonigan? If there be any among us who would be offended, the solution is simple and readily at hand: we can close the book. Happily the freedom to read implies the freedom to desist from reading. But many of us will not desist, and that is what the censor truly fears: not that we will be offended but that we will be pleased.24 Where does this leave the library? Shall the library provide books which some courts-notably in Massachusetts -have ruled obscene? Shall it consider as unacceptable books that have actually been cleared by the courts? And what about the large mass of books that never come to the courts at all? In fact, it is this group that may cause the library the most heart-searching and even embar- rassment. The library cannot wait for a test case to be brought to trial, yet it must make its decision shortly after pub- lication. My answer would be that in the first case, where the courts have ruled a book obscene, it all depends on which court. If it is a state or municipal court, we need take its ruling seriously only when our library is within the jurisdic- tion of the ordinance on which the court acts. There is no reason for a library in Ohio to remove Strange Fruit from its col- lection merely because a Massachusetts court considered it obscene. In the second case, where a book has been cleared by the courts, that is a point in its favor, al- though there may be other good and suf- ficient reasons why it may be rejected by the library. A book should have more to commend it than the mere absence of dirt before it is judged legitimate library bookstock. As for the third case, where we cannot look to the courts for guidance, I believe we must depend on some such test as that which Judge Woolsey applied. Here the librarian himself must be the judge, and he should apply his best efforts to- ward determining whether the book in question, taken as a whole, is to be con- sidered obscene. In making his decision he should give the benefit of the doubt to the book. Presumably, it is not "dirt for dirt's sake"; like most books, it is not likely to lead the reader to sexual ex- cesses or immorality; it is not likely to give offense to the normal reader because of its language or frank descriptions. If the librarian, like Judge Woolsey, wishes 23 Chafee, Governmentt and Mass Communica- tions, I, 2I5. 24 "The objection which the Watch and Ward Society makes to many of the books it wishes to suppress is not that these books offend readers but that they delight them .... The true fear of the censor is that the ideas set forth will in the long run undermine our present system of marriage and morality" (ibid., p. 57).
THE LIBRARIAN AND CENSORSHIP 3I to check his judgment against that of others, he may call on literate citizens at large, whose judgment he trusts, for an opinion. They too should be very slow to rule against a book, and in judging its possible effect on the library's readers they should certainly not take as the norm the adolescent or immature adult, nor should they give undue weight to the probability that the book will offend some people. Most important of all, they should never lose sight of the fact of which Chafee reminds us, "that stamp- ing on a fire often spreads the sparks, that many past suppressions are now considered ridiculous, that the communi- cation of ideas is just as important in this field as in any other, and that healthy human minds have a strong natural re- sistance to emotional poisons. "2S Remem- ber that Whitman's Leaves of Grass was at one time considered unfit to be read; remember, too, that books like The Na- ked and the Dead and The Young Lions would probably not have found a pub- lisher twenty years ago but are today listed among the notable books of I948. Yet even with all these precautions some people will protest. They may be a church group, a superpatriotic society, or even one or two individuals. The protest may be lodged against books in the polit- ical or social realm or against a novel. It may take the form of mere objection, or it may become an ugly threat against the library or its librarian. Even more impor- -tant, perhaps, is the fear of such objec- tion, a fear that, oftener than we think, may lead a librarian or library board to rule out certain books to avoid an embar- rassing situation which may develop-in short, to deprive the potential and inter- ested reader rather than take a chance on someone's objection. Such objection is thought to create bad public relations, though we should remember that equally bad public relations may develop by fail- ing to provide certain books. Let us analyze this situation for a moment, taking the matter of a potential objection first. We might as well recog- nize that this is an ever present possibil- ity; we can never escape the chance that someone may feel unhappy about a par- ticular book. Yet I think that in an over- whelming number of cases, where a li- brary has actually obtained the book, no protest developed at all. Fear of protest usually turns out to be a straw man. But suppose that a protest is lodged: should it be taken seriously enough to withdraw the book? We must consider the nature of the book and the nature of the protes- tant. If the book was seriously weighed in the light of its quality and of library poli- cy and was acquired because it met the standards imposed by the library, I see no reason for its withdrawal. As for the protestant, does he represent a sufficient- ly numerous citizenry, or is he speaking solely for himself or for a special group? Even if the librarian were to decide on the basis of numbers, why should he as- sume that more people would object to the book than would welcome it or would at least be indifferent to its provi- sion? We hear a great deal these days about the need to protect minorities, particu- larly their right to free speech and as- sembly. But in protecting minority rights we must be careful to distinguish be- tween the right to express and the right to dominate. Majorities also have their rights: no minority should abuse its priv- ilege so as to shackle the majority. What "right" permits any minority-racial, national, or religious-tacitly to say to the rest of the community: "You shall not read this book"? In assuring minori- 25 Ibd., p. 2IS.
32 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY ties their right to self-expression, their right to object, let us not extend to them the pnrvilege of dictating to the rest of us what we may or may not read. As the philosopher F. H. Bradley has written: "What is not tolerable is that stunted na- tures should set up their defects as a standard. It is an outrage, it is sheer blasphemy, when they bring the divine creations of literature and art to the touchstone of their own impotence, their own animalism, and their own immo- rality."-6 Censorship is an evil thing. In accept- ing it, in compromising, in "playing it safe," the librarian is false to the highest obligations of his profession. In resisting it, he retains his self-respect, he takes his stand with the great champions of free speech, and he reaffirms his fundamental faith in the dignity of man. 26 Quoted in Caims, op. cit.