Volume XXXV APRIL 1965 Number 2 URBAN PUBLIC LIBRARY SERVICES FOR ADULTS OF LOW EDUCATION' PETER HIATT T HE responsibility for the continu- ing education of adults has been a persistent article of public li- brary faith. Today, public libraries in urban areas are faced by increasingly difficult problems. Many of these prob- lems result from the departure of com- paratively well educated individuals and their replacement by less educated residents. Librarians have been seri- ously handicapped by a lack of knowl- edge of how these people of low educa- tion, who normally make little use of books and libraries, can be reached. A few public libraries have attempted to reach such people by specially adapting services. The present study investigates the response that readers of limited education have made to specially adapted library services. THE BACKGROUND Public libraries profess among their long-standing goals the encouragement of continuous self-education for all age groups. They are especially concerned to improve people's ability to partici- pate usefully in community activities and to equip persons for efficient activ- ities in useful occupations and practi- cal affairs. The newest immigrants to our cities need to be assimilated into the main stream of American culture. If urban public libraries are to realize this philosophy it is necessary to en- courage these people to use libraries. This, of course, should not sound new to librarians. Philip Hauser, a sociolo- gist long concerned with public librar- ies, points to the public library as "a highly significant agency among the various institutions which will assist the Negro in making this basic transi- tion in his way of life."2 (He was speak- ing of the rural Negro suddenly trans- planted to an urban setting.) Since the early eighteenth century the phenomenon of new cultural groups coming into a city and replacing groups who have moved out has become the 1 This article was drawn from the author's "Public Library Branch Services for Adults of Low Education" (PhD. thesis, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, New Jersey, 1963). Low educa- tion is defined as schooling not beyond the eighth grade. 'Philip M. Hauser, "Community Developments and Their Effect on Library Planning," Library Quarterly, XXVII (1957), 265. 81
82 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY typical pattern, and public libraries serving urban areas in the 1960's have been faced with the departure of a large proportion of the library's normal public and the influx of groups with a less literate background. Given workable methods the library can be one of the institutions which contributes directly to the education, growth, and adjustment of these groups. The first step in such a process should be the development of interest in using libraries. In its 1958 Annual Report, the Enoch Pratt Free Library describes the "New Baltimoreans" who have not long been residents of the city and make special use of the library. The report notes the flow of southern migrants with limited education as well as in- digenous cultural patterns which cre- ate special problems in the use and abuse of books. Not only must the ever growing student body in schools and colleges be served but also the increas- ing numbers of citizens of lower income and little schooling. Unfamiliar with the services of Enoch Pratt, they may not take proper advantage of them, or, when they do, all too often may abuse them. The Library must provide materials to help the educational level of the city rise. This does not mean lowering the standards of book selec- tion; but it does mean more vocational mate- rial, more scientific and mechanical books on all levels to be used by adults who wish to study for high school equivalence tests, and easy read- ing books for many adults who need to learn the mechanics of reading and to understand what is being read.3 Fulfilling this role with underprivi- leged newcomers is made difficult not only by their educational level and oc- cupational patterns. A large body of research shows that people with limited education are not the most hopeful candidates for heavy library use. Stud- ies of reading as well as of library use have indicated a direct correlation be- tween a low level of education and low use of books and libraries. In addition, many of the urban newcomers are in- volved in occupations which seldom require the use of a library.4 The picture is not entirely dark. In a study made in 1946, Henry C. Link found that 23 per cent of adults with eighth-grade education or less and in the lower-income category are, con- trary to popular opinion, active read- ers.5 Furthermore, 25 per cent of adults with eighth-grade education or less of all income levels read one book or more a month. Although many question that these figures would be valid today, per- haps better than 20 per cent of those of both low education and low income are book users. The library ought to adapt its services in order to stimulate increased patronage in low-education urban areas. Indeed, in order to fulfil its article of faith, the library must so adapt its services. COMMUNITY PROFILES Two branch libraries located in de- pressed areas of different cities illus- trate such programs of special services: the Carnegie West Branch of the Cleve- land Public Library (CW), and the Pennsylvania Avenue Branch of the Enoch Pratt Free Library of Baltimore (PA). Each of these two branches 3 Enoch Pratt Free Library, Annual Report, 1958 (Baltimore, 1959), p. 5. ' Bernard Berelson, "Who Uses the Library?" in his The Library's Public (New York: Columbia University Press, 1949), pp. 19-50. 'Henry C. Link, People and Books: A Study of Reading and Book-Buying Habits (New York: Book Industry Committee, Book Manufacturers' Institute, 1946), p. 61.
ADULTS OF LOW EDUCATION 83 serves a low-education area with a specially adapted program of services. Significantlv both branches have adult registration percentages higher than a sample of metropolitan branch libraries which serve similar areas but which have made no special attempt to adapt services. The characteristics of the communi- ties they serve are similar in many ways and are representative of such com- munities in urban areas around the nation. Both libraries serve a primarily residential community with a median educational level of 8.8 grades,6 well below the national median of 10.6 grades. Both communities are charac- terized by rapid change and mobility; in Baltimore 47.8 per cent of the branch area population had lived in a different house in 1955 and in Cleveland, 53.7 per cent. More than one-third of the housing in both communities is deterio- rating or dilapidated and the typical family in these communities earned about $5,000 in 1959. More than half of those in the labor force are opera- tives, laborers, or service workers. In- versely, the number holding profes- sional and related jobs is very low. The unemployment rate for the two com- munities in 1960 was 8.7 in Baltimore and 7.7 in Cleveland-dramatically higher than the median for the nation. Churches of various denominations are well represented in both communities, and store-front churches are unusually common. Recreational facilities are be- low minimum standards. Librarians noted the reticence with which adults venture out in the evenings in Balti- more, and the staff in Cleveland spoke of vandalism (in 1959, for example, the library was broken into seven times). PA serves a part of Baltimore some- times called the "gray area," an area typified by high crime and unemploy- ment rates, social alienation, low level of communication and language skills, poor nutritional and health standards, and limited access of facilities for self- help. It is predominately Negro (86 per cent). The only local groups and clubs are neighborhood clubs, and these have been formed for protection rather than for neighborhood improvement. Thus, the branch serves an underorganized, low-education, changing, Negro com- munity characterized further by a sub- culture holding values and customs which differ from those of the urban middle class. Many suffer from the problems of transiency, of educational and cultural handicaps, divorce, chronic illness, mental illness, and delinquency. Many also lack motivation and capacity to cope with their problems or to be- come responsible citizens.1 The CW community is a depressed area, too, but it is a better arranged community, as will appear in subsequent accounts. SERVICES Both branches have adapted services to fit the special needs, problems, and interests of their communities. In gen- eral both put a great deal of emphasis on work with community organizations and agencies, especially those con- cerned with or composed of adults who have completed only an elementary- * Statistics drawn from several tables in 2 vol- umes of the U.S. Bureau of the Census: U.S. Cen- suses of Population and Howsing: 1960. Census Tracts. Final Report PHC(l)-13, Baltimore, Md., and Final Report PHC(1)-28, Cleveland, Ohio. I Health and Welfare Coundl of the Baltimore Area, Inc., A Letter to Ourselves: A Master Plan for Human Redevelopment (Baltimore, 1962).
84 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY school education. Both branches are well located and have an above-average collection. Each has an exceptional pro- fessional staff with a highly imagina- tive, flexible library philosophy and an objective, inquiring attitude toward its professional work. At PA there are six professional li- brarians available for specialized serv- ice to children, teen-agers, and adults. The division between clerical and pro- fessional duties is well drawn, as is the separation of professional responsibili- ties toward various age groups; yet there is also strong co-ordination. The caliber of the staff is unusually high. The administration has placed some of the Enoch Pratt's top quality personnel in this particular branch. The staff is challenged by its respon- sibilities and continues to learn how to meet them. The approach to service is one of broad coverage, wide range, flexibility, and continuous experimen- tation. Individual patrons are served in their many capacities. The librarians are on constant alert to approach and offer assistance to each patron, and a variety of group services is offered. Existing groups, both library-sponsored groups and other area-wide organiza- tions and agencies, serve as one of the branch's major, continued community contacts. The quality of service at CW also is high. Librarians are available for chil- dren, teen-agers, and adults, but the system's administrative organization does not facilitate co-ordination of branch services to all age groups. The branch children's librarian is not im- mediately responsible to the branch librarian but rather to the Cleveland system's Children's Librarian. Branch co-ordination of work with teen-agers and adults is strong. Unlike the Balti- more branch, clerical duties are occa- sionally shared by the professional staff. As in PA, co-operation with other com- munity agencies is fundamental to the CW concept of library services. Both branches can show attitudes, resources, and services that distinguish them as special agencies for serving adults with low education. These in- clude special emphasis on philosophy of service, a series of self-studies, adapta- tion of the collections and continued construction, maintenance and renova- tion of the buildings. The staffs of both libraries participate in local community and professional organizations. The background attitudes and the availa- bility of special resources permeate such individual services as floor work and (at CW) the making of book an- notations and handling registration. They enter also such group services as book displays both in and out of the library, staff talks outside of the library (CW), the compilation of such lists as "Readable Books for Adult Students" (PA), "Magic of Music Series" (PA), and "Evening Film Series" (CW)-to name some typical services. Both branches have provided children's and young adults' services for adults, al- though PA's programs in this area are both more extensive and enduring. METHOD To study the impact of these special services, a sample of library users was selected for interview in depth. Subjects for interview consisted of people using the library during a specific two-week period. A desk was located at a point where all adults passed but removed enough from the activity of the library to permit the interviewee to feel he
ADULTS OF LOW EDUCATION 85 could not be overheard. Each person was told that a study of the library was being made and that if he would answer a few questions it would be helpful. A few opening questions were designed to gather generally useful information and to weed out those of more than eighth- grade education. Of 576 adults interviewed in both branches, 79 adults of low education were given depth interviews. Since the purpose of this study was to determine which service could be seen to have encouraged library use among adults of low education, it was not deemed neces- sary to create a control group. The significant finds from the method are the individual responses to adapted services. Such a method does not, of course, permit definitive generalization, nor does it allow for an extensive sur- vey of low-education adult library users. Rather, it is an important first step that identifies those services which were found to have had impact on particular readers. The interviewer sought to find ex- amples of adults with low education who had been affected by library serv- ices. The interview hours were planned to allow a maximum range of interview opportunities. During September, 1962, 301 interviews were conducted for 82%4 hours during two weeks at PA; in Oc- tober 275 for 7954 hours at CW. Time schedules were arranged to avoid the teen-age influx in the late afternoons. All those of eighth-grade education or less were given intensive interviews in order to determine important char- acteristics of likely pertinence to library use,8 to determine how the library had first been brought to their attention, and to reveal the factors that had encour- aged initial use of the library. The in- terviews served to identify elements which had encouraged interest and use of the library by these semi-educated adults. For each adult of eighth-grade educa- tion or less an understanding of his motives and need for library use was developed through an interview sched- ule designed to clarify the catalyst, circumstances, and sequence of events which brought him to the library. Special focus was placed on his first use of the particular branch library, as well as his previous use of other libraries. He was asked when he had first visited this branch and which of the services he had used in order to determine the relation of the library's program of services to his interest in the library. As a major key to findings, the inter- view schedule was subject to many revisions, and was tested in a low- education neighborhood in Newark, New Jersey. The final schedule allowed for needed flexibility. It was in two parts. The first, a brief identification giving some useful information, allowed for courteous but quick dismissal of people not pertinent to the study. The final form of the interview schedule, a detailed explanation of each question and the reasoning behind it, runs to many pages and may be con- sulted in the dissertation from which this report has been abstracted. RESPONSE OF READERS OF LIMITED EDUCATION TO SPECIAL LIBRARY SERVICES An analysis of the seventy-nine inter- views with adults of eighth-grade edu- I Such characteristics were sought for as occu- pation, organizational membership, educational level, place and length of residence, age, sex, race, and community involvement.
86 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY cation or less revealed that several adapted services were a primary factor in encouraging library use by these adults: 37 per cent of the total seventy- nine interviews showed a direct rela- tionship between library interest and adapted services, and 51 per cent showed an indirect relationship. In other words, services to the special needs and inter- ests of adults of limited education are clearly evident. The number of interviews with an- swers which relate to specific library policies is summarized in Tables 1 and 2. A discussion of each service follows. It was found that several individu- ally adapted services encouraged use. It was also found that various elements of these specific services were often linked together to form patterns which had encouraged library use. This paper, then, will discuss examples of interview responses to illustrate both findings. First let us consider individual services. BRANCH LOCATION IN DEPRESSED AREA The very location of a branch in a depressed, problem neighborhood great- ly encourages visits to the library. Such a location was deliberately selected for the branch sites in Baltimore (PA) and in Cleveland (CW); the PA branch newly built and the CW branch, more than fifty years old, extensively re- furbished and given additional support. Eighteen per cent of those interviewed said this location directly affected their library use. For example, one woman had started to use the library as soon as she moved back into the neighbor- hood two years previously. Libraries TABLE 1* RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN LIBRARY USE BY ADULTS OF Low EDUCATION AND ADAPTED SERVICES No. oF INTERVIEWEES AFFECTED BY SERVICE SERVICE Baltimore Cleveland Branch Branch Total (PA) (CW) Decision to locate a high quality branch library in a low-education neighborhood .............................................. 14 N.a. 14 Individual services: Accessibility of librarians (as revealed in the user asking for help as a part of his library use) ...................................... 10 0 10 Building rapport and approaching each adult in an effort to make adults of low education comfortable and at ease in library use 3 6 9 Mailing list and newspaper notices .......................0...... 3 3 Selection of easy reading material with adult interest ............. 2 N.a. 2 Group services: Film programs ..................O.... ? t 5 5 Other programs .............................................. N.a. 4 4 Program planning conference ................................. I N.a. 1 * A chronology of service for a ten-year period was created for both branches by examining all records and reports available, by talking with the library system's administrators, and by interviewing the branch librarian and her staff. The information gained was added to and refined by observation of services, and by examination of the collection. A preliminary checklist of elements of services which could be adapted to adults of low education was used as a final check for completeness. A summary of services and a chronology of the development of these services were then made for use during interviews. t None offered in Baltimore for past 5 years.
ADULTS OF LOW EDUCATION 87 were "too far when I didn't live here; so I didn't use any. Now that I've moved across the street, I've started to use the library to help my girl with reading." This secondary motivation is impor- tant, too, as we will see later. A sixty- year-old pin setter who is a steady reader uses the CW branch because it is a block from the bowling alley. Others also cited location as a major factor in their library use; the library was conveniently located near work, home, or transportation. PHILOSOPHY OF SERVICE Staffing, hours, and philosophy of service play an important role in en- couragement of library use. Both branches investigated are staffed with top quality personnel, have full hours and full staff. These factors allow for the development of a program of serv- ices crucial in the development of li- brary use among those interviewed. Furthermore, the philosophy of the pro- fessional staff gave direction to the available talent and opportunity. Each staff displayed initiative in experimen- tation, questioning, co-operation, and conscious wish to make the library an integral part of its community. Both staffs welcome and initiate re-evaluation of the changing reading needs of their communities.9 Both branches accept involvement in their communities' problems and devel- opment as a basic concern. From this philosophy considerable emphasis has been put on work with neighborhood organizations and agencies. Some of these activities need to be described before their impact can be understood. PA serves an area that is not only underorganized but in which no truly community-wide groups exist. Several outside agencies are concerned with the TABLE 2 ELEMENTS OF LIBRARY SERVICE ENCOURAGING LIBRARY USE AMONG ADULTS OF Low EDUCATION No. oP INTERVIEWEES AFFECTED ELEMENTS OF LIBRARY SEnQCES Balti- Cleve- more land Toa Branch Branch Total (PA) (CW) Accessibility of librari- ans. 15 21 36 Location of branch. . 0 8 8 Physical layout of branch .0 8 8 Group programs 0 5 5 Hunganan collection N.a. 2 2 Hospitals and Institu- tions service0 2 2 General collection. 0 1 1 community as a whole. The Urban Re- newal Agency is one. The branch li- brarian and her staff work closely with leaders of urban renewal in an effort to understand better their community and to help in its improvement, as well as to interpret and relate the library's program of services. The library is used for meetings of the agency. The staff has participated in distribution of materials in and outside of the library, and it has continually stressed the li- brary's role in community improve- ment. Traditional services such as win- dow displays and booklists are, of course, important, but this interrelation of the Urban Renewal staff and the librarians is probably more significant. Recently the Urban Renewal and Hous- 9 -Both the Pennsylvania Avenue Branch and the Carnegie West Branch have been continously involved in formal and informal self-studies con- cerned with hours, collection, use, and, perhaps most significant, the changing background, inter- ests, needs and problems of the areas they serve.
88 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY ing Agency made house-to-house in- spections and noted improvements that would be required. In order to foster these improvements, an Area Recogni- tion Program was started. Neighbor- hoods that had done an outstanding job of improvement were selected for recog- nition. The branch co-operated with the agency in creating a display that showed what can be done and how it can be done. Credit was then given to those who did an outstanding job. The agency held meetings on home improve- ment at the library, and the branch supplied lists and displays of appro- priate materials to supplement the agency's explanation of how to make and finance such improvements eco- nomically. PROGRAM PLANNING INSTITUTE In an area where only highly local neighborhood organizations exist, the need for wider involvement is pressing. Recognizing that in its community church groups are often well organized and supply much community leader- ship, PA co-sponsored a Program Plan- ning Institute for Church Leaders. Long a staple in Enoch Pratt's concep- tion of positive library leadership, the machinery for setting up such a pro- gram is readily available. In order to determine what would be most desired by the church leaders who wanted to learn how to plan and conduct programs in the area, questionnaires were sent out noting what the library could do and asking which of these activities the leaders would like to select. (Some of the items listed were book re- views, book lists, film presentations, displays.) Sixty representatives from thirty churches then participated in a three-hour program. A presentation on "How To Conduct a Discussion Group" and "How To Use Films in a Program" was followed by an explanation and demonstration of book reviewing and a general presentation on "How To Plan Various Kinds of Programs." Although planned and executed as a program for other community agen- cies and not individuals per se, this program introduced people to library use. A Negro steam-generator operator in his early sixty's, a church leader despite his eighth-grade education level, was an example. He had been ''using" another branch for four years; that is, be has two children who in progressing from elementary school to high school were told by their teacher to use the public library. He started taking them to his neighborhood branch. "I used to bring them to the library and wait." He brought his children to that branch for three years; he went into it; and he waited inside for them. It never oc- curred to him to use the library himself. This might have remained his level of library use indefinitely. Interestingly enough he was unable at first to recall the reason for which he started to use the library for himself: "I got so as I looked around and then came to the conclusion that I could get books." However, as we talked further about various library services, it slowly be- came apparent to him that the program planning conference had been the turn- ing point. (He was unable to identify the program beyond the recollection that it was "a meeting on how to get people to talk.") And it was after at- tending the program that he began to borrow books for his church teaching. The church in which he holds his classes is one block from the library and not in the neighborhood of his home. It is
ADULTS OF LOW EDUCATION 89 significant that he turned to this branch instead of the one his children use. Asked if he used the library for any other purposes, he said that the thought had not occurred to him before. Al- though he was not clear about it, ap- parently he uses his neighborhood branch in his role as mentor-taking his children to the library-and this branch in his avocational role as church leader. Whereas this interview points up in a tangible manner the success of Enoch Pratt's philosophy and techniques, I could discover no such startling evi- dence for Cleveland's. Nonetheless, the vital role of the Cleveland branch as a participating agency in community leadership should not be underesti- mated. It serves through both staff membership and professional leader- ship in the West Side Community Council and the West Side Civic Coun- cil, and offers a series of programs to preschool children as well as to older people with local agencies. Co-operation with the Puerto Rican Affairs Com- mittee and, as a result, with a local Spanish-speaking teacher in the public schools in order to promote the use of the public library by Puerto Ricans was initiated in 1962. Although no im- mediate, direct results of these pro- grams were found among the individuals interviewed, the programs are not aimed at this individual level. RAPPORT It should be noted, again, that both branches put unusual emphasis on in- dividual contact with adults. The li- brarians make constant efforts to estab- lish rapport and to make adults in their difficult neighborhoods feel comfortable in using the library. The success of this effort was evident in many of the inter- views: 70 per cent revealed that their individual contact with the librarian offered vital encouragement to their library use. The importance of building such rap- port in a low-education neighborhood is well illustrated by an unemployed Negro in his mid-twenties who has but an eighth-grade education. He first came into the library because he had seen it under construction and was curious about the building: "I like the librarians here; the people. They're very nice; that's why I keep coming back." The day he was interviewed he had come to the library only to show the librarian his new child. According to the assistant branch librarian, he had been coming to the branch for some time, and had been a real problem- maker when a teen-ager. Some of the female staff members were afraid of him. The assistant librarian added that his reading ability was low, that he is in and out of jobs, and comes to the library mostly to kill time. The staff had made particular efforts, first to control him, and later to win his con- fidence. The assistant librarian con- firmed the interviewee's statement that he took books from the display designed for literacy classes-"Readable Books for Adult Students." This interviewee has been encouraged to use the library and has had his interest in library use sustained because of two services adapted for people with little schooling: the emphasis on building rapport and the adult easy-reading collection. This can be seen again in the case of a Negro housewife in her mid-fifties who had a fifth-grade education. She had attempted in 1935 to use another branch library, but had been imme-
90 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY diately discouraged by the identification procedure then in effect. She could not prove her identity to the library's satis- faction: "They asked me if I belonged to any organizations, and I didn't then. So I didn't use the library, and I didn't get a card." Recently Enoch Pratt Free Library has reviewed its registration process and simplified identification. This fact together with the effort made by the staff of PA to make neighborhood adults feel at ease in the library seems to have encouraged her to use the li- brary: "I guess you don't need to be- long to an organization to use this branch. They just asked where my hus- band worked and where I lived." Whatever finally motivated her to enter a library again ("I just de- cided"), the staff has been able to retain her interest: she has been using the library for six years. And in Cleveland, an eighth-grade graduate in her mid- seventies noted that the librarians are "so nice to me that I keep coming back." She lives fifteen miles from the branch and told of going to libraries closer to home. She went into one and "felt lost. And no one helped me. I never went back. But I'd go a long way to come here . . . all the librarians here have been helpful." A retired man in his sixties (eighth- grade education) has used other branches as well as the Cleveland Cen- tral Library. Even though he enjoys the Newspaper Room at the Central Li- brary, he uses CW a good deal. The rapport the staff has built with this man is evident. The librarian "is very nice and helps me." A window cleaner, also an eighth-grade graduate in his sixties, began using the branch when he retired a year previously. He said he is "getting old and can't run around any more. So I have TV and when it's not interesting I get a good book that will last me all night." It was important to him that he "knows the girls here." Similarly, an unemployed male with eighth-grade education had used the Central Library in the past, but he has come to this branch for eight or nine years. His first use of the branch occurred when he was stuck on a prob- lem and stopped in on the way home. He got immediate assistance and solved the problem. He has been a regular and loyal patron since. "I got my basic knowledge on how to build my house here. You can't beat the librarians here; they really help you." Even though he was building his house on the opposite side of town, he continued to come to this branch for information needed in its construction. Currently he is using the library resources to relearn his old job: "The field has changed in thirteen years while I had another job. I read up and can tell the interviewer that I haven't had experience on the new machines, but understand how they work. And I can talk about them." Here is another steady library user who feels that the branch has been par- ticularly helpful to him, and who demonstrates that rapport with less literate adults is vitally linked with their interest in library use. CO-SPONSORED PROGRAMS Capitalizing on opportunities pre- sented by a well-organized area, CW offers a wide variety of programs co- sponsored with other organizations: discussions concerning different age groups, a health fair, a home-improve- ments demonstration, talks by staff outside the library, a southern migrant
ADULTS OF LOW EDUCATION 91 institute, visits by citizenship and English classes, circulation of materials outside the library, and a "Future of Your Neighborhood" institute. The library has sponsored many group services. Among these are displays in- side and outside the library, an open house at the branch following its re- furbishing, a community Christmas program, classical recordings played in the library at special seasons, leisure- time book and film programs, an evening film series, and a reader- interest arrangement, "Books for Daily Living." FILM PROGRAMS The film and book programs in Balti- more had been discontinued for nearly five years, and no one of those inter- viewed could recall participating in them. However, in Cleveland the pro- gram has run continually for more than five years and has been carefully adapted to meet the interests of the audience. Film programs built around travel themes were most popular, and occasionally a patron would conduct one of the programs. CW found that the effort to tie in books discouraged rather than encouraged attendance. They soon dropped this aspect and concentrated on films alone. Interviews revealed that CW was thereby serving an audience that would not otherwise be reached. Quite a few were found to be in regular attendance and cited the programs as an important factor in their use of the library. A precision grinder in his late fifties, of eighth-grade education, first came to CW over forty-five years ago, but after he finished school stopped using the library. Five or six years ago, drawn by the film programs, he began to use the branch and the Central Li- brary regularly. The film program is the only library service he uses. He noted that he did browse in the library, al- though he "has magazines and paper- back books at home." His reawakened interest in the library is attributable to the film programs. A seventy-two-year-old male who had completed the sixth grade had first stopped in the library "to look around" after being retired for two years. He had time on his hands and claimed that he had not read before he started using the library. His main use of the library centers on film programs, although he has used the Central Library and an- other branch "which was too crowded and didn't have so many books." He has been coming to the film programs at this branch for two or three years: "Whenever they send me a notice I come." He also comes to the Christmas programs and to the Golden Age pro- grams when he receives notices. The importance of the film programs and especially of the library's mailing list is clearly evident.10 10 Publicity at both branches is an integral part of the program of services. For programs which are to run for several weeks and involve more than one or two group meetings, the Baltimore branch has as usual points of distribution of flyers or posters a large shopping center, a drug store, a "Negro" movie house, a large restaurant, and the area's twenty-six major churches, each of which includes notices in its bulletin. In addition to these local outlets, several city-wide organizations with local membership have been used for the distribu- tion of program announcements of pertinence to their membership. The picture at the Cleveland branch is similar but its organized community offers more ready- made publicity outlets. For most programs the branch follows a regular pattern of distribution: dodgers are distributed through PTA's, churches, the local paper, and the local low-income housing project. In addition teachers frequently announce programs at schools, and there is a mailing list to about sixty organizations and agencies as well as to about 125 individuals and leaders. For major pro-
92 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY A messenger in his late forties with a seventh-grade education was inter- viewed on a night he had come to at- tend a film program. He does not use the branch in his neighborhood which has no film program, but he visits CW and one other branch for film programs only. He first started using CW four years previously when the film pro- grams were changed to evening hours. The only other time he used a library before this was to attend a concert. To this man advertisement is important. He first learned about the film programs which started his library use through the local newspaper. He has not used a library for additional services. OTHER GROUP PROGRAMS A retired Hungarian male in his seventies (sixth-grade education) il- lustrates the success of several of the other library group programs. He first used the library in 1909 ("just read here-didn't take any books home"), but stopped using the library almost completely until 1932, when "during the Depression a social worker came and gave a course on 'Mothers."1 It was very educational." At this time he started taking books out of the library for the first time and has been using the library "off and on" ever since. HOSPITAL AND INSTITUTIONS SERVICE Among the Cleveland Public Li- brary's strongest and most highly de- veloped services are those offered by the Hospital and Institutions Depart- ment. Not a branch-originated program, this does, nevertheless, serve as an ex- ample of an adapted individual service initiating and developing library use among adults of low education. Two of those who were interviewed cited this service as influential in their use of the branch library. A woman, seventy-five, with eighth- grade education, was described previ- ously as coming fifteen miles to this branch because of the assistance and attitude of the staff. Why did she start using the library? About six years ago she was in the hospital. After a heart attack she found that the Public Li- brary would supply books to her in the hospital. "I'd ask on Tuesday and they'd come on Thursday." When she found out about this service she told her doctor she didn't care how long she had to stay in the hospital. Next, she encountered the Department's highly developed shut-in services. Limited by crutches for several years, she had books sent to her home. These services clearly reinforced her loyalty to the library, and were of real assistance to her in times of need. She had always been a reader and read books before her library use was initiated through these services. A seventh-grade graduate in her mid- fifties, now a ward secretary at a hos- pital, had not used a library since she left school in Minnesota. In fact she said that she had not used books since grams the whole staff gets out and distributes ma- terials. One Cleveland interviewee noted: "They used to send me notices about meetings and I'd go." The branch librarian has found it effective to follow up written publicity with personal phone calls and commented that phone calls seemed more effective after written publicity than before. 'There is no record of a program with this title, but undoubtedly this was one of a series of self-help lectures held during the Depression years.
ADULTS OF LOW EDUCATION 93 that time. The effect of a strong, well- developed library service is dramat- ically evident, for only when she went to the hospital one and a half years ago did she re-encounter books and li- brary service. "I used books there and then again when I was back in the hos- pital." When ordered by the doctor to take daily exercise, she chose the li- brary for her first walk. She now loses no opportunity to tell others in the hospital of the Public Library's hos- pital services. ADAPTED AND FOREIGN-LANGUAGE COLLECTIONS The collection makes library service possible. The continued adaptation of the materials at these two branches has made the collection an integral part of services. Both PA and CW have been especially alert in keeping the collection up to date and constantly matched to the needs of their changing neighbor- hoods. The PA librarian writes, "We are ever watchful for new trends that may appear in the request of readers so that the bookstock can reflect these new interests."12 Both librarians pointed out the value of anticipating needs be- fore they became evident in actual re- quests. PA has a permanent display of "Readable Books for Adult Students." About 175 books, with many duplicates, have been selected for the adult eve- ning classes, Grades 1 through 6. The case of a man who regularly selects from this display has been noted. Another approach toward making easy-reading books available is illus- trated by a male Negro reader in his late sixties who finished only the eighth grade. Recently retired from a thirty- six-year job as a porter in a large de- partment store, his reading now centers on one topic-foreign countries. But, as he commented, his reading level is not high: "I like to read all about France and those places, even if I don't under- stand all of it." The children's librarian noted that "he always takes two or three books, usually from the Children's Room. He likes geography, but he's read so much it's difficult to find any- thing for him. I keep aside all new children's books on geography that might interest him." This individually adapted service of setting aside books meeting his reading level and interest is directly related to his interest in the library. As the home center for the Cleveland Public Library's 10,000-volume Hun- garian collection, CW handles all rotat- ing loans and special requests. Although there are no Hungarian-speaking per- sonnel on the staff, the branch librarian has been ingenious in seeking help from community Hungarian leaders for se- lection and weeding. She herself at- tempted Hungarian courses hoping to learn at least enough to handle book titles. Two adults cited the Hungarian collection as a specific reason for their use of the branch; a woman of sixty with a sixth-grade education mentioned the reading of Hungarian newspapers as one of her reasons for library use and another Hungarian woman with a fifth- grade education, though she does not live in the branch neighborhood, comes here with her husband specifically to use the Hungarian collection. A friend "told us there were more Hungarian ' Janet Stevens, librarian, Pennsylvania Avenue Branch Library, Enoch Pratt Free Library, Balti- more (personal communication, October 26, 1962).
94 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY books here than at the branch we were using." Since many readers prefer to do their reading in the library (e.g., the Hungarian woman who reads Hungar- ian newspapers at CW), the physical plant can serve to encourage library use. The Carnegie West building, for example, was constructed fifty years ago, yet its size and design allow sepa- rate rooms for reference and reading, and this layout makes the building particularly appropriate for today's needs. While the children crowd into the Children's Room and teen-agers in- to the main circulation area and parts of the Reference Room, there is still space for adult readers to feel compara- tively isolated and undisturbed. "This branch is not so crowded." "Quiet, peaceful atmosphere." "My branch is mostly kids." PATTERNS FORMED BY VARIOUS ELEMENTS OF SERVICE Some of the adapted services which had an effect on library use by low-edu- cation adults have been described. Dur- ing the interview process it became in- creasingly evident that there were, in addition, important combinations of elements of library service which en- couraged library use. These occasion- ally included non-library factors.13 These patterns underline the need for librarians' awareness of elements of service and of incidents that may fit together in a sequence leading to li- brary use. Where we, as librarians, can be alert to such patterns, extra effort can be put forth at a possible catalytic point to help encourage li- brary use among low-education adults. The elements of service that at- tracted this special clientele were identi- fied as follows: (1) use of the library in connection with a child, (2) accessibility of librarians, (3) group programs, (4) the location of the branch. These ele- ments combined into what may be called patterns. Following are accounts of thirteen cases which fit into three different patterns. PATTERN I: USE OF LIBRARY IN CONNECTION WITH CHILD AND ACCESSIBILITY OF LBRARIAN A Negro housewife in her mid-forties and with a seventh-grade education had used the library in her role as mentor. "He looks up to me," she said explain- ing that she brought her son to the library regularly in order to encourage his interest in books. Having brought him to the library over a period of ten years, only recently did she start to use the library for herself, and turned to the librarian for help. A mechanic in his mid-forties with an eighth-grade education had used a library when in school but stopped after that. Two years ago he began bringing his son "to encourage him." And now, "I've just been made a Boy Scout leader and I'll use the library for that until I can afford my own books." He has asked the librarian for help in the " Seven cited an outside contact (friend, neigh- bor, church group, relative) as influential in de- veloping interest in library use. In each case, in- terestingly, it is apparent that the non-library con- tact had been made conscous of the library. Her l"son in school found out about the library and told me I had to go to the library to find out about it." A women attending night-school class nearby brings her sister to the branch. One man's wife "kept telling me to come here. I finally came, seven years ago." Another was introduced to library use by "a friend who reads Christian books from the library." And so forth.
ADULTS OF LOW EDUCATION 95 past, and is depending on her help in this new avocational role. PATTERN II: USE OF LIBRARY IN CONNECTION WITH CHILD, ACCESSIBILITY OF LIBRARIAN, AND PROGRAM PLANNING CONFERENCE FOR CHURCH LEADERS It will be recalled that this man, who first used the library for himself in connection with his avocation as a church teacher, was motivated to his initial use by PA's program planning conference. He had used another branch for several years, but only for his chil- dren. The mentor role, the program con- ference, and finally the accessibility of a librarian from whom he could ask assistance worked together in establish- ing and developing his interest in li- brary use. PATTERN III: ACCESSIBILITY OF LIBRARIAN AND LOCATION OF BRANCH Several interviewees wandered in be- cause they were curious about the new building and several others because they found the location convenient. Both groups-once in the library- were made to feel comfortable and given professional assistance. These two factors together had an effect on their use of the library. It is important to notice the large role played by library services to chil- dren. It is found in three of these pat- terns. Six interviewees cited the use of the library in connection with a child as leading to their use of the library; eleven more noted library service to children as one of the reasons for li- brary use. Using the library in connec- tion with service to children is inter- twined with personal library use for each of these adults. For example, one woman had long used the library in her role as mentor only. When she needed information on childbirth, it seemed natural for her to turn to the library. The link between these two needs was created by the librarian seeking out and assisting this woman when she looked lost. On the other hand, another woman accompanies her children to the library never using it herself. She has not taken books out, and though she goes to an- other branch and the Central Library she "just sits" and waits for her chil- dren. This woman might be considered a steady library user, yet she has not found motivation to use the library for herself. There were nine others like her among the seventy-nine low-education adults interviewed. AREAS FOR FURTHER INVESTIGATION The problem of low library use among adults of little education is per- sistent. The analysis of the interviews and an examination of the programs of service at CW and PA point to the need for further research. Several areas sug- gest themselves. Both CW and PA work extensively with community agencies and organiza- tions. The experience of church leaders, urban renewal experts, and many others concerned with community develop- ment emphasizes the importance of community agencies working together to effect community change. Investiga- tion is needed to determine to what extent and in what ways public librar- ies have been effective in this important relationship. It would be of further assistance to practicing librarians to know if other services can be success- fully adapted to adults of low educa- tion. "Mavericks" were found in this
96 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY study: adults of low education who had long been book users.14 More investi- gation about the reading habits of low- education adults would give valuable knowledge to librarians working in such neighborhoods. Many large communities are facing problems of shifting population with the resulting influx of adults who tradi- tionally have been labeled non-users. The present study has pointed to the feasibility of adapting adult services. It would be worthwhile next to set up an adapted, well-supported pilot program of adult services in a library serving a culturally deprived community in order to determine just how effective a fully developed program could be in encour- aging library use. Among the adults interviewed, unemployment and re- tirement combined to be the largest "occupational" category. What is the relation of leisure time to library use? Is there a direct correlation between library use and leisure, or are there other more basic factors that underlie this apparent relationship? The findings point to an extremely important generalization: the central role of a professional librarian at a branch outlet who is sympathetic to the special needs, problems, personalities, and desires of these people can do much to encourage potential readers to be- come active library users. Again and again the central role of personal, pro- fessional contact at a particular point in the development of library use was demonstrated. Whether a film program, a program planning conference, a spe- cial collection, skilful publicity, branch location, or a friend initiated interest in the library, it was usually the profes- sional librarian who had the catalytic role. The usual pattern of library serv- ice in low-education problem areas has not brought results. Most libraries meet reduced use and lowering circulation by cutting back professional staff; this probably causes only further reduction in the use and effectiveness of the li- brary. In the two branch libraries stud- ied, the strengthening of resources, staffing with top quality professionals, and an imaginative, adapted program of adult services resulted in increased use and important participation by the library in its community affairs. Specially adapted services can lead to increased library use by adults of low education. Whether a library adminis- trator chooses to attempt to reverse a decline in use and whether he believes adults of low education to be a basic concern of the public library must de- pend on his philosophy of library serv- ice. There is enough indication of the effectiveness of adapting services and of the vital role of the professional librar- ian to promise potential success. If the library profession is to continue to meet its long-expressed obligation to reach and serve its public, it must demonstrate flexibility, energy, and im- agination. Adults of low education who want to read deserve to be reached. Baltimore's Pennsylvania Ave- nue Branch and Cleveland's Carnegie West Branch illustrate some techniques that librarians faced with similar prob- lems can utilize. Increasing registration at these two branches should encourage similar branches to try these tech- niques. I Cyril Houle, in The Inquiring Mind (Madi- son: University of Wisconsin Press, 1961), pp. 44- 46, has suggested that they are "mavericks." W. S. Gray and B. Rogers, in Maturity in Reading (Chi- cago: University of Chicago Press, 1956), p. 46, have proposed that there is a relation between community involvement and reading.