Physiological Access as a Social Justice Type in LIS Curricula Laurie J. Bonnici College of Communication and Information Sciences, University of Alabama, Box 870252, Tuscaloo sa, AL 35487-0252. Email: lbonnici@slis.ua.edu Stephanie L. Maatta School of Library and Information Science, Wayne State University, 106 Kresge Library, Detroit, Ml 48202. Email: es7746@wayne.edu Muriel K. Wells, Jackie Brodsky and Charles W. Meadows, III College of Communication and Information Sciences University of Alabama, Box 870252, Tuscaloosa, AL 35487-0252. Email: {mkwells, brodsOOl, cwmeadowsiii}@crimson.ua.edu This study reports the results of a survey of library and information science (LIS) deans and directors and a content analysis of LIS schools' curricula as it relates to issues of physiological access. A conceptual framework of social justice is applied to analyze curricular approaches to diversity. Results indicate that LIS curricula include both topics of physical impairment and socially classified populations as diversity issues. Analysis of course titles and brief course descriptions indicate that the type of diversity is not explicitly defined at this macro-analytical level. The researchers propose further devel opment of the social justice framework to provide a lens for continued examination of diversity in LIS education on a micro-analytical level. Keywords: diversity, disabilities, LIS Education, curricula, social justice, content analy Introduction People with physical disabilities have the same needs and desires for infor mation to conduct their daily lives as those who are without disability. Information services to persons with physiological challenges, specifically those with visual impairments and physical disabilities, have been guided by the National Library Service (NLS) (Bonnici, Maatta & Wells, 2009). The Network of the National Li brary Service (NLS) for the Blind and Physically Handicapped (BPH), a divi sion of the Library of Congress (LOC), administers services through 56 regional libraries. The BPH program was originally developed to serve blinded veterans, and they continue to be the first priority for J. of Education for Library and Information ISSN: 0748-5786 © 2012 Association for distribution and circulation of new equip ment and materials (National Library Ser vice, 2011). The majority of clientele are U.S. veterans between the ages of 70 and 79 (Bonnici, Maatta & Wells, 2009). Al though a very important sector of the spe cial needs population, they are one slice of a larger pie with the same access needs. Librarians for the NLS/BPH network indicate a growing need for the service as the U.S. population ages (Bonnici, Maatta & Wells, 2009). Seventy-six mil lion American children were born between 1945 and 1964, forming the Baby Boomer generation (Howe & Strauss, 1991; Jones, 1980). Constituting the largest segment of the U.S. population, Baby Boomers are entering a life phase when sensory organ functions begin to diminish. Com snce, Vol. 53, No. 2—(Spring) April 2012 rary and Information Science Education 115
116 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE mon effects of the aging process include a gradual decline in vision, auditory, and dexterity acuities often commencing at 45 50 years of age (NIH, 2004; Huang, 2008). These impairments remain slight for many years, falling outside of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) definition of disability, yet still pose barriers to infor mation access, particularly as information and communication technologies (ICT) become smaller and rely on visual/tactile functions to operate them. As the Baby Boomer population ages the demand for services for the elderly will increase over the next several decades (U.S. Census Bu reau, 2006). Based on these demographic statistics, there will be an increased need for delivery of services to people with vi sion and hearing impairments, placing further demand on assured equal access to information. LIS professionals serving persons with physiological impairments have expressed concern that LIS education programs do not include information on services to per sons with physiological disabilities (Bonnici, Maatta & Wells, 2009). LIS profes sionals can play a central role in assuring equality of access. However, the data reveal that over half of the profession als currently serving special access needs through the NLS/BPH system will retire within the next ten years. Clearly there is a growing need to plan for replacement of these professionals. Data analysis in dicates that library education in the USA may not be preparing for the expected mass exit of professionals versed in serv ing persons with physiological challenges. The purpose of this study is to examine the state of LIS education as it relates to inclusion of courses in the curriculum that address service to clientele with informa tion access barriers based on physiological challenges. Review of the Literature In the early 1990s, diversity issues en tered the conversation about LIS curricula. However, these discussions generally did not address services to people with physi ological challenges, but rather issues of other groups identified as being cultur ally and ethnically diverse (Chu, 1995; Freiband, 1992; Pawley, 2006; Peterson, 1994; Welburn, 1994). However, Gollop (1999) did examine physiological chal lenges as an aspect of the array of diversity issues in LIS curricula. Alessios (1949) called attention to the absence of library education programs that prepared professionals to work with spe cial populations, specifically referred to as the blind and physically handicapped. She stated, "So far as I know, no library school includes lectures on this work in its cours es" (p. 375). By 1976, a survey by the Li brary of Congress Division for the Blind and Physically Handicapped (1976) found that 75% of the American Library Asso ciation (ALA) accredited library school programs were not offering preparation to serve users with physical disabilities, and 43 (73%) of the programs had no plans to offer any future courses. Fifteen schools indicated that although no separate courses were offered, discussion of services to dis abled readers was included in more gener al courses. Regarding this survey, Gibson (1977) noted, "There appears to be either no consideration of this aspect of library services or the subject is taught briefly in one or more general courses which appear to lack continuity and depth" (p. 123). Awareness of the needs of people with physiological challenges was the focus of several studies, including a micro-analyti cal examination by Lucas (1983) of three one-hour courses running in consecu tive five-week periods at the University of South Carolina, designed to promote positive attitudes toward persons with dif fering physical abilities. Through obser vation and student feedback, Lucas concluded that education about information needs of people with physiological chal lenges and available resources should be accompanied by "sensitizing and attitude adjusting" experiences to promote positive
Physiological Access as a Social Justice Type in LIS Curricula 117 attitudes and counter the negative effects of "pity, sympathy, and patronizing" (p. 221). Experiential exercises to promote awareness were also noted by Klauber (1990) in courses offered at the Palmer School of Library and Information Sci ence at Long Island University. Macro-analytical studies of LIS educa tion in ALA-accredited programs include Walling's (2004) examination of how LIS education addressed three specific areas: topics related to the Americans with Dis abilities Act (ADA), services to people with disabilities, and adaptive technolo gies. Sixty-six percent of the responding schools confirmed that their graduates were aware of ADA, while only 58% of the programs confirmed that their gradu ates were exposed to information about services to people with disabilities. Ad ditionally, only half of the responding schools confirmed that all of their students were exposed to information about adap tive technologies. Carlos (2005) examined curricula of nine ALA-accredited programs and found that instruction in disability-related issues was not yet standard in library schools. Likewise, Epp (2006) determined that library education has not kept up with evolving technologies in formats for the print disabled, stating that many librarians lack training in the use of the technology, tools, and sources of alternate formats and assistive technology. The international literature includes two studies of LIS curricula addressing servic es to people with physiological challenges. Koulikourdi (2005) examined LIS schools in Greece and noted that none had a course focusing on serving people with physical disabilities. Also, none of the schools had faculty members with a research interest or background in this area. In a study of 88 LIS schools internationally, Galler (1997) found that most (79.5%) had no courses addressing "the disadvantaged." Seeking to investigate the perspec tive of graduates of LIS educational pro grams, a 2008 survey of librarians serving the NLS/BPH network inquired about the preparation of graduates to serve popula tions with physiological challenges (Bon nici, Maatta & Wells, 2009). More than half the respondents believed that there was insufficient content in the LIS curri cula addressing service to users with phys iological challenges. Thus, the literature shows that although improvement has been seen in the number of LIS programs covering issues of serv ing people with physiological challenges, there is still a need to address this within the context of the diversity of information seekers. The ALA Office for Literacy and Outreach Services (OLOS) focuses on ser vices to underserved or underrepresented communities, including but not limited to people with disabilities; poor and home less populations; people of color; gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender people; new Americans, and older adults (Ameri can Library Association, 2010). Mehra, Albright & Rioux (2006) propose, through a practical framework for social justice research, information empowerment as a means for people to better their lives. Their proposed framework for social justice re search in the information professions in cludes five elements, one of which is the identification of underserved populations (Mehra, Albright & Rioux, 2006, p. 3). Through the framework of social justice, the researchers examine LIS education to prepare graduates to serve persons with physiological challenges within and be yond the parameters of ADA legislation. Conceptual Framework If LIS education is to meet the needs of both the academy and LIS practice, the curriculum should be in constant flux to mirror changes in those two audiences. Following Rioux's (2010) call for appli cation of social justice as a framework to examine LIS education, the researchers apply Mehra et al.'s (2010) typology of social justice to examine the topic of di versity in LIS curricula. Specifically, this
118 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE research seeks to determine if persons with physical disabilities are included among the populations identified within LIS courses as being diverse. Rioux declares that social justice is not referred to explicitly in the LIS literature. However, he clarifies that many LIS stud ies are based in the ideas of social justice. Rioux offers five assumptions, outlined in Table 1, as a basis for constructing a social justice meta-theory that he extracts from six typologies of social justice as identi fied by Mehra et al. (2010). Building on this premise, we propose further delinea tion of the six types. Through application of diversity qualifiers (laws, services, and philosophies relevant to diverse popula tions) the social justice typology is applied to LIS. LIS studies pre-dating 1990 indicate that the needs of special populations pri marily addressed service to persons with physical impairments based in medical diagnosis (Lucas, 1983; Lucas 1986) with rare attention to socially classified popula tions such as race, ethnicity, gender, and sexual orientation (Bowen, Hiley & Wal ley, 1986; Lockett, 1988). Reflected in the LIS curriculum, this approach is indicative of a distributive social justice type defined as the distribution of resources through out society (Fleischacker, 2004). Further explained, an unequal distribution may be deemed acceptable once basic needs and rights are met. The NLS/BPH program provides some materials formatted for users with visual impairments reflective of resources found in the general library collection. However the program does not provide all materials in an accessible for mat, resulting in an unequal distribution of access to information. A cursory glance at LIS curricula, LIS literature, and LIS-related social media in dicate that socially classified populations such as race, ethnicity, gender, and sexual orientation are now topics addressed as diversity in LIS education. A focus on socially classified populations indicates a curriculum grounded in utilitarian social justice type in which the good of society is favored over the good of the individual (Mehra et al., 2010). Under this perspec tive, societal policies would maximize the welfare of many, even if this comes at the expense of an innocent few (Stein, 2006). Based on ADA legislation passed in the early 1990s combined with national level specialized services such as NLS/BPH, LIS educators could reasonably assume that the needs of users with physical ac cess barriers were being addressed. With Table 1: Diversity Qualifier for Social Justice Type. Social Justice Type Brief Description Diversity Qualifier Justice-as Desert Egalitarianism/Equity Utilitarianism Distributive Justice justice as Fairness Goods provided as deserved, merited or sanctioned by society. Equal distribution of societal resources tak ing account of political, economic, social, and cultural aspects of society (Stein, 2006; O'Neill, 2003). Good of society favored over good of the individual (Stein, 2006). Distribution of goods to assure everyone is supplied with a base level of material means (Fleishacker, 2004). Extensive and equal liberty is ensured. Ben efits and burdens are established so that the least advantaged obtain the greatest benefits (Rawls, 1971; Rioux, 2010). ADA law Civil Rights Act—inclusive of both socially and medically clas sified diverse populations Diversity—socially defined NLS/BPH Diversity is broadly and in clusively considered with the burden borne by the mainstream population.
Physiological Access as a Social Justice Type in LIS Curricula 119 service to users with physical challenges presumably addressed, efforts in the LIS curriculum could align to embrace issues of diversity that began surfacing in the LIS literature in the 1990s. Such issues includ ed but were not limited to socially and cul turally defined populations such as race, ethnicity, gender and sexual orientation. The researchers speculate that diversity, as addressed in LIS curricula, is referred to broadly through topics such as race, eth nicity, and sexual preference, perhaps at the expense of a smaller, more narrowly defined, legally protected population such as the physically challenged. If a formal examination of LIS education through the lens of social justice theory supports the researchers' notion that socially defined populations as a topic dominate LIS cur ricula, then the researchers propose that a shift to egalitarianism/equity social jus tice type would better represent all user types qualifying under the term diverse broadly inclusive of socially, culturally, and physiologically defined populations. Under egalitarianism/equity type there is an equal distribution of societal resources (Stein, 2006). This definition takes into account political, economic, social, and cultural aspects of society. Under egalitarianism/equity social justice, LIS educa tion would shift from a micro-defined to a macro-defined curricular approach where classes addressing diversity cover concep tual and theoretical approaches to serving 'diverse' populations defined in the broad est sense of the word. Students would learn about specific populations through sharing of assignments and projects, thus avoiding limitation of a course to a spe cific user population or narrowly defined group type such as ethnically or culturally defined groups. Research Questions Previous literature has identified the need for reform in LIS (Gibson, 1977; Lu cas, 1983; Walling, 2004), but few studies have examined the current state of ALA accredited programs to prepare students to serve persons with physiological chal lenges more broadly defined beyond ADA legislation (Gollop, 1999; East & Lam, 1995; Walling, 2004). Mindful of the con cern for a burgeoning population of aging citizens that face declining physical abili ties combined with the application of the term diversity as a catch-all phrase to refer to a variety of users with information ac cess challenges, the researchers posed the following questions to guide the study: RQ 1: To what extent do courses on diver sity address service to patrons with physi ological challenges? RQ 2: How can social justice theory serve as a framework for unifying underserved populations in LIS curricula? To address the research questions, the researchers engaged three methods to col lect data: surveys of LIS school adminis trators, content analysis of LIS program websites, and surveys of select LIS in structors responsible for course titles ad dressing diversity. Method The study design consisted of three phases involving content analysis and sur vey research methods. Content analysis of course titles and brief course descriptions was conducted to determine which cours es address universal access issues. For the purpose of this study universal access re fers to services to persons with physiologi cal challenges including age-related infor mation access issues. Surveys of program administrators and faculty allow for clari fication of LIS curricula and course con tent beyond course titles and brief course descriptions. • Phase I: a survey of LIS deans and directors was conducted to identify how assistive technologies and acces sibility issues were being represented in the curriculum of ALA-accredited programs;
120 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE • Phase 2: a content analysis was con ducted on course titles and brief course descriptions of the same programs; • Phase 3: a survey of LIS instructors was conducted to clarify results from phase 2 of the study. Phase 1 In January 2009, a web-based survey consisting of 16 questions was distributed to the 49 deans and directors of schools in the U.S. with ALA-accredited programs. Thirty respondents completed the survey for a response rate of 61%. The survey solicited information regarding current courses, plans for future courses, and fac ulty knowledge (see appendix). Phase 2 In October 2009, content analysis was conducted on course descriptions from the 49 schools with ALA-accredited pro grams. The course descriptions were com piled from the institutions' websites. A Table 2: Content Analysis Identifying Keywords. Access Accessibility Disabilities ADA Assistive technologies Adaptive technologies Diverse Diversity Universal access Special populations Under-served populations Specific instances of each of the words were sought using key word search of course titles and brief course descriptions to initially identify courses potentially addressing populations with physical disabilities. In instances where course descriptions did not specifically list physical disability, the researchers employed survey method with instructors to determine if physical disability is addressed as a topic of the course. total of 386 courses were identified via school websites. To identify courses that were relevant to the study, a keyword search was performed on course titles and brief course descriptions. The eleven keywords used were identified from a fre quency analysis conducted of the library literature. Course listings of the websites for the 49 LIS schools were examined. School media courses were excluded due to governmental oversight at the state and federal levels. Further, the subject area deals with a user population that is specifically protected under the 2004 In dividuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) (Appling and Jones, 2002). IDEA is a United States federal law that governs how states and public agencies provide early intervention, special education, and related services to children with disabili ties. It addresses the educational needs of children with disabilities from birth to age 21. For a more comprehensive examination of the curricula, a message was posted to the jESSE electronic mailing list, which promotes discussion of LIS education is sues in a worldwide context, inquiring about non-regularized courses offered un der a general special topics label that ad dress diversity. Nineteen responses were collected and analyzed using the keywords identified by the researchers above. A cod ing scheme was developed to determine inclusion criteria for approaching the topic of universal access for persons with physi ological challenges. The following coding schema was developed. • "1": containing keyword(s) identified from the LIS literature pertaining to universal access and explicitly ad dressed diversity issues which included the words disability, physical challeng es, aging, seniors, baby boomers, visual access issues, and mobility challenges. • '1?': containing keyword(s) identi fied from the LIS literature pertaining to universal access as listed above; however the brief course description re
Physiological Access as a Social Justice Type in LIS Curricula 121 quired further clarification to determine if it addressed diversity issues related to aging, seniors, baby boomers, visual access issues, and mobility challenges. • '2*': containing keyword(s) identified in the LIS literature as pertaining to di versity, but the brief course description specifically addressed racial and ethnic diversity to the exclusion of the terms disability, physical challenges, aging, seniors, baby boomers, visual access issues, and mobility challenges. • '2': not containing keyword(s) identi fied from the LIS literature pertaining to universal access. Content analysis was conducted on the 397 courses using the keyword search fea ture in MS Word to code courses as '1', '1?', '2*', or '2'. Table 3 shows the results of the content analysis. Due to the varianc es and inconsistencies in course descrip tions, a post-hoc analysis was necessary to determine whether the courses coded '1?' implicitly addressed physiological chal lenges. Phase 3 The 64 courses that were coded as '1?' in phase two underwent further examina tion to determine their relevance to univer sal access for persons with physiological challenges. Emails were distributed to the deans and directors to acquire further in formation concerning these courses and to procure contacts for a survey. Nineteen courses were removed from the list for the reasons listed below, leaving 45 courses to be examined for this portion of the study. • 8 = No contact information for faculty • 7 = Not offered within past 2 years • 1 = Consortium listing • 2 = Cross-listed with another depart ment (course not owned by LIS) • 1 = No faculty of record listed Relevance was determined by admin istrating a web-based survey to the 45 in structors of the courses coded as ' 1?'. The survey consisted of 15 questions that were designed to elicit clarification of the brief course descriptions. Fifteen completed surveys were collected for a response rate of 33% (see appendix). Analysis Phase One To determine the general state of LIS curricula as it relates to topics of acces sibility for special needs patrons, a web based survey consisting of 16 questions was distributed to the 49 deans and direc tors of schools in the U.S. with programs accredited by ALA. Four questions were posed to ascertain the number of programs currently offering courses either devoted to universal access or containing a significant amount of material devoted to universal access, and the level of importance placed on educating students in areas of univer sal access and service to special popula tions. Eighty percent reported not having Table 3: Courses Coded for Diversity (Phase 2). Number of Code Definition Courses 1 Courses identified as meeting the definition of diversity 46 1? Courses containing vague descriptions requiring additional examination 64 2 Courses not meeting the definition of diversity as defined by this study 250 2* Courses which included diversity outside of and to the exclusion of physiological 38 challenge as defined by this study (such as racially, ethnically, and linguistically diverse communities)
122 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE a course specifically devoted to universal access and that diversity is taught through courses identifying specific populations. Fifty nine percent of respondents reported offering a course with a significant amount of material devoted to universal access as supporting materials. Respondents were asked to rate the level of criticality for LIS education in five key areas of service to special populations: universal access, ac cessibility for special needs patrons, adap tive technologies, services to people with physical challenges, and W3C and Section 508 Compliance. The majority (55%) of respondents per ceived the five key areas to be critical while 40% perceived these areas to be highly critical (see Figure 1). A majority (71%) responded that their LIS program offers courses covering these key areas. Cumu latively the area identified as most critical was adaptive technologies followed close ly in importance by universal access. One question was posed to determine whether the LIS programs have plans to offer such courses within the subsequent two years. Fifty percent of the respondents report that plans are in place to offer courses within the next two years while 30% were unsure. Phase Two Phase two sought to determine if LIS course content explicitly addressed infor mation access for persons with physiologi cal disabilities. From the analysis of LIS curricula, the researchers were able to de termine that of the 379 courses examined after removing eight with dual listing, 46 were found to explicitly address serving users with physiological challenges or to address it as one of several user popula tions. The course descriptions were ex plicit in that they contained one or more keywords in their descriptions that were identified by the researchers in their defi 20 I highly critical I critical I moderately critical I not critical I Not Sure Aee«si4>% lot S«<v«»s to Mopte with wtnl n*«dj s»Bsn» ehyKMl UflwetMl Acc*$s Adaptive »ehrtoto$*s W3C Section SOS Cs^sclance Figure 1. Degree of criticality to LIS programs as viewed by directors.
Physiological Access as a Social Justice Type in LIS Curricula 123 nition of persons with physiological chal lenges. Below is an example of a course description addressing issues of diversity as related to users with physiological dis abilities. Covers characteristics and needs of adult users of public libraries; discusses plan ning, implementation, and evaluation of adult library services including adult liter acy, readers' advisory, genealogy, services to seniors, services to immigrants, services to people with disabilities, multicultural services, and lifelong learning. The researchers determined that al though some courses explicitly stated within their titles or descriptions that they addressed issues of diversity, closer, de tailed examination of the descriptions re vealed that these courses addressed cultur al, ethnic and racial issues to the exclusion of physiological disabilities. Below is an example of a course description limited to cultural diversity. Examines library information policy is sues from cultural perspectives, a topic of increasing interest as the nation becomes more diverse with immigrants from around the world and as indigenous groups gain influence. Content analysis extracted 61 course descriptions from the sample that were deemed inconclusive, and could not be categorized. These courses were labeled '1?'. Below is an example of a course de scription that contained at least one of the inclusionary criteria, but whose content was vague as to whether it addressed is sues related to access for populations with physiological challenges. This course offers an introduction to mul ticultural/diverse/special groups and the application of interdisciplinary concepts of diversity. The focus is directed toward the planning, development and delivery of library and information provision services in a multicultural society. Other topics include the delivery of cultural and com munication traits and their role in library service planning; the role and importance of developing a mission statement, vision and long range service plan to meet the needs of specialized populations, and the development of a conceptual framework for the evaluation of library services for multicultural/diverse/special groups. As a result of the j ESSE listserv inqui ry, three additional courses were identi fied as a '1?'. A total of 64 courses were identified as containing identifying key words from the coding scheme, but whose descriptions did not indicate that issues of physiological challenges were addressed. Phase Three Contact with the administrators of the 64 courses labeled '1?' revealed that some courses had been phased out or were cross-listed from other non-LIS depart ments. Eight courses did not have identifi able faculty of record. Based on this infor mation a final list of 45 courses underwent further examination. A web-based survey was distributed to the instructors to de termine how their course defined diver sity. One question was posed to determine course title, course number and whether the course was undergraduate, masters or doctoral level. To obtain an understand ing of what was included in these courses the participants were asked to list course objectives. A third content analysis was then conducted on the listed objectives by identifying the keywords (see Table 2). In addition, the survey asked the participants to identify the relevance of seven scenari os to course content. Scenarios were con structed to determine whether courses on diversity address service to patrons with physiological challenges. Below is an ex ample of a scenario provided which con siders services to users with physiological challenges. Dear Professor, I am interested in exam ining resources and services provided by the local public library system for
124 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE Table 4: Courses Coded for Diversity (Phase Three). Code Definition Number of Courses 1 Courses identified as meeting the definition of diversity (populations with physi- 60 ological impairments) 2* Courses which included diversity outside of and to the exclusion of physiological 39 challenge as defined by this study (such as racially, ethnically and linguistically diverse communities) NR1 ? Courses containing vague descriptions requiring additional examination (no re- 30 sponse to survey in phase 3) users with visual impairment. Would this be appropriate for class discussion and a basis for class assignments? In contrast, the following is an example of a scenario addressing issues not related to users with physiological challenges. Dear Professor, I plan to look for a job in a library (either public or academic) working with Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual, Transgendered, and Queer (GBLTQ) clientele for access to resources within the community. Will this topic be cov ered in your course? Fourteen of the courses were deter mined to address issues of physiological challenges for access to information. Only one course addressed diversity outside of physiological challenges. To gain a more complete picture of the LIS curricula pertaining to informa tion access for people with physiologi cal challenges, courses were examined to determine whether they were core or required courses. Seven of the courses that were identified as addressing diver sity and physiological challenges could not be identified as core or required. Of the remaining 53 courses, ten were core courses and 13 were required courses. Re sults from the content analyses shown in Table 4 of LIS curriculum revealed that 60 courses addressed issues of services to in formation seekers with physiological chal lenges, while 39 courses addressed issues of diversity, but did not include physiolog ical challenges. In sum, 99 courses across 49 schools studied were identified as addressing di versity. The majority of those courses were centered on physiological chal lenges to access. Twenty-five of the programs included at least one course on physiological challenges to access. Nineteen programs minimally offered one course addressing socially classified diverse populations. Twelve programs offer courses that address physical and socially classified aspects. Nineteen pro grams do not have any explicit indication of courses in their curriculum that ad dress diversity. However, eight of the 19 programs had a course identified by the researchers as a '1?' (vague descriptions requiring additional examination) but did not respond to the Phase Three survey of LIS instructors. Table 5 provides a sum mary of findings. The micro-analysis summarized above appears to correlate with the responses from leaders of LIS education. The LIS deans and directors indicate that universal Table 5: Summary of Findings. Number Results of Courses Courses addressing diversity 99 Programs with course addressing physiological challenges 25 Programs with course addressing socially classified diversity 19 Programs with course addressing both 12
Physiological Access as a Social Justice Type in LIS Curricula 125 access is an underlying topic in the LIS cur ricula while focus on specific populations is represented through devoted course of ferings. According to this population the areas of critical importance are adaptive technologies and universal access. These topics may not be explicitly evident in course titles, brief course descriptions, or course objectives. But they may exist im plicitly in class discussions, projects, and assignments. Discussion and Implications The ALA Library Bill of Rights declares "a person's right to use a library should not be denied or abridged because of origin, age, background, or views" (American Li brary Association, 1996). It should not be surprising given the dynamic diversity that exists in American society that this study revealed that the LIS curriculum offers an array of courses labeled as addressing diverse populations. Perhaps the propen sity for the LIS discipline to organize and categorize large sets of data into smaller sub-units to order and make sense of the world has resulted in many courses titled or described as addressing diverse popula tions limiting course content to a specific type of population. The purpose of this study has been to examine the state of LIS education as it relates to inclusion of courses in the cur riculum that address service to clientele with information access barriers based on physiological challenges. It is evident that diversity is defined by the LIS curri cula as constituting service to patrons with physiological as well as patrons classified as socially diverse. However, more often than not, the curricula reflect that these diversity topics are dealt with as mutually exclusive topics with each having a course dedicated to their specific issues. By applying Mehra et al.'s (2010) six typologies of social justice, LIS educators can consciously move the curriculum to ward a more comprehensive philosophy of access where goods and services are distributed across a more broadly defined population of both socially and physiolog ically identified user groups. Such a foun dation would consistently withstand soci etal changes and the evolution of groups considered as diverse. Further testing of the theory through a more in-depth examination of LIS curricula is underway. The researchers are conducting content analysis of LIS course syllabi and interviews with pro fessors of courses identified as centering on diverse populations. Universal access is an area of concern to higher educa tion administration (Gurin et al., 2002; Brown-Glaude, 2009; Hurtado, 2009). Therefore, social justice as a theoretical lens provides a mechanism for LIS edu cation to examine and address diversity in a broad sense assuring inclusion of all types of diversely labeled groups. Such an approach would support the vision of LIS administration where importance has been established on the need for universal access programs in the LIS curriculum. In addition to application of the theory in context of examination of the LIS cur ricula, the researchers are examining the implicit addressing of diversity in the LIS curriculum. Specifically, core courses in the LIS curriculum will be studied to de termine if issues of equity of access are covered through discussion and readings not specifically mentioned in course titles and brief course descriptions. Evidence of implicit approaches to teaching equity of access to groups with mediated access needs will further inform the emerging theory of social justice. Results from this study have raised fur ther questions about how LIS education addresses issues of diversity and informa tion access. As the rate of technological advancement accelerates, the impact of in formation and communication modes will continuously require examination of align ment with the information access needs of diverse populations. Additional efforts to examine diversity should address a typology of diversity in
126 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE Table 6: Curricular Evidence for Diversity Qualifier. Social Justice Type Brief Description Diversity Qualifier Findings (Population: (Programs=49 Courses =99) Justice-as Desert Goods provided as deserved, merited or sanctioned by society. (Pojman & McLeod, 1999). ADA law 25 programs 60 courses Egalitarianism/Equity Equal distribution of societal resourc- Civil Rights Act—in es taking account of political, eco- elusive of both socially nomic, social, and cultural aspects of and medically classified society (Stein, 2006; O'Neill, 2003). diverse populations 12 programs Utilitarianism Good of society favored over good of the individual (Stein, 2006). Diversity-socially defined 19 programs 39 courses Distributive Justice Distribution of goods to assure every one is supplied with a base level of material means (Fleishacker, 2004). NLS/BPH *See notes below Justice as Fairness Extensive and equal liberty is ensured. Benefits and burdens are established so that the least advan taged obtain the greatest benefits (Rawls, 1971; Rioux, 2010). Diversity is broadly and inclusively considered with the burden borne by the mainstream popula tion. "See notes below *The researchers surmise that NLS/BPH as a topic is implicitly addressed through specific examples within courses but not evidenced explicitly through course titles and brief course descriptions. **Data regarding the burden requires a micro-analytical examination of the curricula including content analysis of course syllabi and interviews with instructors of courses identified as covering populations addressed as broadly diverse. LIS curricula. Formal classification of diverse groups would contribute to a sys tematic evaluation of LIS education to de termine the extent to which future infor mation professionals are being prepared to serve the information needs of a society more openly discussing what it means to be "differently," "uniquely," or "dissimi larly" identified. Appendix A: Survey Questionnaire Researchers at the University of Ala bama and the University of South Florida are seeking to determine the status of LIS curricula in addressing issues of universal access as well as accommodation of stu dents registered as having a disability. Your response to this brief survey by March 3, 2009 would be greatly appreciated. IRB ap proval has been received and responses will remain confidential. Thank you very much for your participation. Universal Access: Courses that address services to persons with physiological challenges including age-related informa tion access issues. Section I. Universal Access 1. Does your school's masters program in clude a specific course devoted to uni versal access issues? Yes No Not sure 2. Does your program offer a course which covers a significant amount of material on universal access? Yes No Not sure
Physiological Access as a Social Justice Type in LIS Curricula 127 Section II. Curriculum 3. Which of the following do you believe are critical to the LIS program? HC - Highly critical C - Critical MC - Moderately critical NC - Not critical NS - Not sure Universal access _____ Accessibility for special needs patrons Adaptive technologies Services to people with physical challenges W3C and Section 508 Compli ance 4. Does your program offer courses which address these issues? Yes No Not sure 5. Are there plans for offering courses in your program curriculum that address these issues in the next 1-2 years? Yes No Not sure Section III. Faculty 6. Do any of your faculty specifically ad dress issues of universal access in their research agendas? Yes No Not sure 7. Does your university require faculty to include a statement on disability servic es in their syllabi? Yes No Not sure Section IV. On Campus Program 8. Now or in the past, have you had stu dents enrolled in your on-campus pro gram who have registered with your university's office of disability services as having a disability? Yes No Not sure Section V. On Campus Students 9. Of your on-campus students with dis abilities, what types of disabilities have been reported? (Select all that apply) a. Visual impairment b. Hearing impairment c. Deaf-blindness d. Orthopedic impairment e. Speech language impairment f. Traumatic brain injury g. Emotional disturbance h. Specific learning disability i. Other health impairment j. Not sure 10. Please provide an example of how your faculty accommodate on-campus students with disabilities. If you are not familiar with, nor have an example of how faculty accommodate on-cam pus students you may answer "N/A." Section VI. Distance Education 11. Do you provide an online distance ed ucation program? Yes No 12. What course management system is used for delivery of instruction? Blackboard Web CT Other Please specify 13. What is the primary delivery mode for course content? Voice over IP (VOIP) Text-based live chat Threaded discussion
128 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE Instructional Television-ITV Video conferencing Other Please specify Section VII. DE Students Special Access 14. Now or in the past, have you had stu dents enrolled in your distance-based program who have registered with your university's office of disability services as having a disability? Yes No Not sure Section VIII. Distance Education Students 15. Of your distance education students with disabilities, what types of dis abilities have been reported? (Select all that apply) a. Visual impairment b. Hearing impairment c. Deaf-blindness d. Orthopedic impairment e. Speech language impairment f. Traumatic brain injury g. Emotional disturbance h. Specific learning disability i. Other health impairment j. Not sure 16. Please provide an example of how your faculty accommodate distance-based students with disabilities. If you are not familiar with, nor have an example of how faculty accommodate distance students you may answer "N/A." References Allessios, A. B. (1949). Library work with the blind. Wilson Library Bulletin, 23, 369-75. American Library Association. (1996). Library bill of rights. Retrieved from http://www.ala.org/ala/ issuesadvocacy/intfreedom/librarybill/index.cfm Appling, R., & Jones, N. L. (2002). The Individuals with Disabilities Education Act: Overview of major provisions. CRS Report for Congress. Berry, J. W. (2003). Conceptual approaches to ac culturation. In K. M. Chun, P. B. Organista, & G. Marin (Eds.), Acculturation: Advances in Theory, Measurement and Applied Research (pp. 17-37). Washington, D.C.: American Psychological As sociation. Bowen, J., Hiley, P., & Walley, E. (1986). Working in a multicultural society: Education and training for librarians and information scientists. 1FLA Journal, 12(3), 192-202. Bonnici, L., Maatta, S. L., & Wells, M. K. (2009). U. S. National accessibility survey: Librarians serving patrons with disabilities. New Library World, 110 (11/12), 512-28. Brown-Glaude, W. R. (2009). Doing Diversity in Higher Education. Piscataway, NJ: Rutgers Uni versity Press. Carlos D. J. (2005). Instruction in disability ser vices and adaptive technology in schools of Li brary and Information Science: A Survey of the Curriculum. Master's Thesis. University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC. Chu, C. M. (1995).Commitment to multicultural li brary and information science education: Part 2 - A model for success. EMIE Bulletin, 12(4), 4-11. East, D. & Lam, E. (1995). In search of multicultur alism in the library science curriculum. Journal of Education for Library and Information Sci ence, 36(3), 199-216. Epp, M. A. (2006). Closing the 95 percent gap: Li brary resource sharing for people with print dis abilities. Library Trends, 54(3), 411 —429. Fleischacker, S. (2004). A Short History of Distribu tive Justice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Fleischmann, K. R., Robbins. R. W., & Wallace. W. A. (2009). Designing educational cases for intercultural information ethics: The importance of diversity, perspectives, values, and pluralism. Journal of Education for Library and Informa tion Science, 50(1), 4-14. Foner, N. & Frederickson, G. M. (Eds.). (2005). Not just black and white: Historical and contem porary perspectives on immigration, race, and ethnicity in the United States. New York: Russell Sage Foundation. Galler, A. M. (1997). The inclusion of library ser vices to disadvantaged persons in library School curricula: a survey. IFLA Journal 23(5-6), 365 370. Freiband, S. J. (1992). Multicultural Issues and Concerns in Library Education. Journal of Edu cation for Library and Information Science, 33(4), 287-94. Gibson, M. C. (1977). Preparing librarians to serve handicapped individuals. Journal for Education in Librarianship, 18(2), 121-130.
Physiological Access as a Social Justice Type in LIS Curricula 129 Gollop, C. J. (1999). Library and information sci ence education: Preparing librarians for a multi cultural society. College and Research Libraries, 60(A), 385-95. Gurin, P., Dey, E. L., Hurtado, S. & Gurin, G. (2002). Diversity and higher education: Theoiy and impact on educational outcomes. Harvard Educational Review, 72(3), 330-66. Hurtado, S. (2009). Assessing higher education's advancement toward a new vision of society. Di versity & Democracy: Civic Learning for Shared Futures, 12(\), 1-3. Ingram, P. D. (2001). An overview of diversity awareness. University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University. Retrieved from http://pubs.cas. psu.edu/freepubs/pdfs/ui362.pdf. jESSE elelctronic mailing list, http://web.utk. edu/~gwhitney/jesse.html Klauber, J. (1990). Disability awareness in the li brary school curriculum [at the Palmer School of Library and Information Science]. Journal of Education for Library and Information Science 31(2), 153-156. Koulikourdi, A. (2008). Library education and dis ability issues. Education for Information, 26, 203-12. Lee, J. & Rytina, N. (2009). Naturalizations in the United States: 2008. Annual flow report. Home land Security Office of Immigration Statistics. Retrieved from http://www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/ assets/statistics/publications/natz_fr_2008.pdf. Library of Congress, Division for the Blind and Physically Handicapped (1976). Survey of Ac credited Library School Programs to Prepare Librarians to Serve Handicapped Individuals. Washington, D.C. Lockett, M. W. (1988). Preparing librarians to serve ethnic communities, [experimental course at University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee School of Library and Information Science], Journal of Education for Library and Information Science, 29. 141-142. Lucas, L. (1983). Education for work with disabled and institutionalized persons. Journal of Educa tion for Librarianship, 23(3), 207-223. Lucas, L. (1986). Educating librarians to provide user education to disabled students. In A. S. Clark & K. F. Jones (Eds.), Teaching Librarians to Teach, (pp. 97-114). Metuchen, N.J.: Scare crow Press. Mehra, B., Albright, K. S., & Rioux, K. (2006). A Practical framework for social justice research in the information professions. Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 43( 1), 1-10. Mehra, B., Rioux, K. R., & Albright, K. S. (2010) Social justice in Library and Information Sci ence. In M. Maack & M. Bates, (Eds.), Encyclo pedia of Library and Information Sciences, Third Edition. Los Angeles, CA: Taylor & Francis. National Library Service (2011). NLS: That all may read. Retrieved from http://www.loc.gov/nls/ about_history.html#thirteen O'Neill, O. (2003). Agents of justice. Metaphiloso phy, 32( 1/2), 180-195. Papademetriou, D. G. & Terrazas, A. (2009). Im migrants in the United States and the current economic crisis. Migration Policy Institute. Re trieved from http://www.migrationinformation. org/F eature/display .cfm?id=723. Pawley, C. (2006). Unequal legacies: race and multiculturalism in the LIS curriculum. Library Quarterly, 76(2), 149-68. Peterson, L. (1994). Teaching the practitioners: One professor's attempt at library education and sen sitivity to multicultural diversity. Reference Li brarian, 45/46, 23-38. Pojman, L. P. & McLeod, O. (1999). What do we deserve?: A reader on justice and desert. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Rawls, J. (1971). A Theory of Justice. Cambridge, MA : Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. Reference Section, Division for the Blind and Phys ically Handicapped, Library of Congress (1976). Questionnaire on Library Science Courses: Ser vice to Handicapped Groups. Washington, DC. Rioux, K. (2010). Metatheory in library and in formation science: A nascent social justice ap proach. Journal of Education for Library and Information Science, 5/(1), 9-17. Stein, M. S. (2006). Distributive Justice and Dis ability: Utilitarianism Against Egalitarianism. London, UK: Yale University Press. U. S. Census Bureau, 2004. "US Interim Projections by Age, Sex, Race and Hispanic Origin," http:// www.census.gove/ipc/www/usinterimproj/Updated 2004, Accessed June 30, 2008. Walling, L. L. (2004). Educating students to serve information seekers with disabilities. Journal of Education for Library and Information Science, 45(2), 137—48. Welburn, W. C. (1994). Do we really need cultural diversity in the library and information science curriculum? Journal of Education for Library and Information Science, 25(4), 328-30.