AN EARLY AMERICAN ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION BY FREDERIC VINTON N PREPARING, for the "Dictionary of American Biog- raphy," a biographical sketch of Frederic Vinton, I had occasion to examine a manuscript catalog of a large private library in St. Louis, on which Dr. Vinton worked from I 85 I until 54. The catalog is now the property of the Princeton University Library. The Preface to this volume proved to be of great inter- est, as it contains what is, so far as I know, the earliest discus- sion of library classification written by an American. It is, in any event, the original of the ideas on which was based the classification which Vinton prepared in i86I for the newly estab- lished Bates Hall in the Boston Public Library, and was the basis for his later work at the Library of Congress, and as li- brarian of the College of New Jersey.-7ames Thayer Gerould. PREFACE, TO THE CLASSIFIED CATALOG OF ALFRED VINTON 'S LIBRARY I was not the hasty product of a day, But, the well-ripened fruit of wise delay. In shaping the Bibliographical scheme here presented, I had the advantage of consulting those of Horne, prepared for the Library of the British Museum; of Barbier, intended for the Library of the Council of State, at Paris; of Namur, designed for the Royal Library, at Brussels; and of Brunet, arranged "for the bookseller, and the lover of books." The enumeration of these celebrated names may cause surprise that my attempt should have been made at all; for why should an ordinary person waste time in the needless labor of preparing a mere schedule, antici- pated by celebrated productions, and serving only to show the presumption of its author. It was not with the idea of rivalling these honored models, that I undertook the task now completed: but, because I did not find them suited to my humble design. The difference is so vast, between the necessities of the great li- 502
AN EARLY AMERICAN ESSASY ON CLASSIFICATION 503 braries for which those masters labored, and the requisitions of this modest collection of books, that it may readily be conceived a harder task to adapt one of the great systems to so different a design, than, by selecting from among their features, to compile a new series of classes, adjusted to the specific occasion. When the titles of half a million volumes are to be brought together in one classification, it is obvious that the subdivisions should be very many, and very minute; while a collection of but seven thousand volumes, gathered for his own pleasure, by an unpro- fessional student, would probably be much less various, and might present no occasion for some important departments. What is here submitted pretends to no greater amplitude, or pre- ciseness, than suits its own occasion, and aims at no higher ex- cellence than correctness and intelligibility. Brunet has adopted what he calls "the Bibliographical system of the Parisian booksellers"; attributing to it, in his Introduc- tion, an honorable antiquity. It is substantially the same which has been approved by the Trustees of the British Museum, after having been carefully modified by Mr. T. Hartwell Horne. It is more generally adopted than any other, and this is no mean ad- vantage, in itself. The principal change proposed by Mr. Horne, was the divi- sion of the class, "Sciences and Arts," into two; six classes being thus made out of five. I have not ventured upon further in- novations which the great bibliographers of Europe have not proposed. But, even while deferring to their authority, I have not been able to feel that all parts of their work were harmoni- ous. Especially in the class "History," a variety of changes seem desirable. I cannot recognize the propriety of treating as a mere introduction to History that large mass of books which contain "Voyages and Travels." It is true that the narrative of events derives indispensable illustration from the description of the countries where they occurred; but similar bands of relationship connect the whole round of knowledge. Classification consists not merely in uniting things which resemble, but in separating things which differ. But if we should always amalgamate, where we perceive a resemblance, we should end by having no classifi-
504 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY cation at all. The Introduction which Brunet and Horne, and Namur and Barbier, have prefixed to "History," is as large as "History" itself. At the same time it is impossible to keep down the feeling that these books are not History, though they stand under the name. The Introduction seems like an enormous portico, built of materials diverse from those of the main edifice. Would it not be better, to make of it a new class, under the name of Geography? As if to make amends for intruding upon this department what does not belong there, bibliographers have removed from it much which really does belong there. Can any good reason be given, why church history should not stand beneath the same head with that history of nations, with which it is so closely connected? Yet we find it in the systems, as a department under Theology. Of course this is done for the convenience of theologians, and is a relic from the times when Bibliography accommodated itself to the professions. It is for the same reason that Oriental and Hellenistic philology, the criticism of the sacred text, and formerly, canon law, have been included under Theology. From a similar regard to convenience, the history of printing has been attached to Bibliography, for which M. Hesse says there is no better reason, than for connecting the art of the armourer, with the art of war. In general, the history of each art and science, has been added to the treatises whose subject is the art or science itself. I admit that on the shelves of a library, it may be convenient to find such books in contiguity. But, is it as manifest that the titles of such books ought to be arranged on the same pages of a bibliographical system? The effect of so do- ing is, to terminate logical sequence, and interrupt the natural order of thought. It is as easy to find such titles, collected under the head of literary history, as scattered among the topics to which they refer. M. Albert remarks of the prevailing system, that "having been born in a printer's shop, it has always shown signs of its commercial character." Perhaps these are some of the appearances to which he refers. Practical men may be al- lowed to sneer at the bibliographical systems prepared by phi-
AN EARLY AMERICAN ESSAY ON CLSSIFICATION 505 losophers, pointing to Bacon, Leibnitz, and Coleridge, as ex- amples, but, if the order of thought be wholly disregarded, it will be found that convenience itself has been sacrificed. My distribution of the divisions and my allotment of spaces, under the head "Theology," differs from those I have referred to. Bibliographers appear to have viewed this department from a literary stand-point, and to have treated dogmatic divinity in a perfunctory manner. The monkish origin of the prevailing systems, seems to be betrayed, in the prominence given to the Fathers, the Schoolmen, and the antiquities of Christianity. The idea of scientific dependence among doctrines, appears to be overlooked, amid the meagre disorderliness we find. When I began this classification, my ideas of Jurisprudence were so crude, that I despaired of making any intelligent of its topics. It is to Hoffmann's "Legal Outlines" that I owe the gleams of light which seemed at length to penetrate the gloom. But, I fear that my arrangement of them still gives proof that my knowledge of the subject was collected "for the nonce." Finding Theology placed foremost in many bibliographical systems, and Jurisprudence next, the reader is led to expect Medicine as the third class. He may inquire with surprise, and, if a physician, with displeasure, why the subjects which his pro- fession investigates, are sunk below the level assigned the other two, and obscurely buried among the ordinary sciences. The proper defence of bibliographers, appears to be, that medicine finds its work, and its instruments, among the subjects of natu- ral science, while Law and Divinity do not. Arranging medical knowledge by itself, would therefore break the bonds which unite the sciences, and disjoin things naturally allied. Theology ranks first, because its truths are of prime importance, and such as reason could not attain. Jurisprudence comes next, because it acquaints us with the laws of men, as Revelation had dis- closed the commands of God. Science, or the knowledge of the mind, of society, and of nature, is the next concern of man; and the gradation continues, in a progress from the graver, to the elegant departments of learning. In the department of "Literature," I have sometimes depart-
So6 THE LIBRARY 2UARTERLY ed from the practice which my predecessors had established. A usage common among them is, to bring together under the one designation "Poets," all the literary men who have composed epics, ballads, lyrics, satires, dramas and tales in verse. These are very different sorts of composition; why should they not be distinguished? If rhythmic structure were assigned as the ground for their being classed together, it would be easy to point to comedy, as a department where rhyme is not employed. Verse is the common dress of poets, but they do not all, or al- ways, wear it. I have used "Poetry" to denote a department of literature, without pretending to apply it with precision; and I have tried to mark out some of its provinces. Several bibliogra- phers have contented themselves with geographical distinctions, not only of poets, but among orators, and romancers. But it ap- pears to me that the course of a river, or diversities of speech, are much less proper as a basis for bibliographical divisions, than differences of aim, or of execution, in respect to the works pro- duced. Nor have I thought best to set what are called the "Classic authors" by themselves. However peculiar those illus- trious works may be, in respect to their age, their language, and their merit, it seems better to assign them place, from regard to the sort of composition, alone. However strange it may appear, to find among modern novels the Cyropoedia of Xenophon, it is just as much a romance, as Emilius and Sophia. No one would object to seeing among modern geometers the "Elements" of Euclid, or the "Conics" of Apollonius: there is just as little reason for refusing a place among amusing tales, to the "'Ethi- opics" of Heliodorus, or the "Golden Ass" of Apuleius. The "classic authors" are not all eminent for merit; and if they were, such a ground of separation is never proposed among the mod- erns. The languages in which they wrote, have never ceased to be used in the learned world, so that no boundary can well be fixed on that account. Their authors differ from their modern imitators, in respect to race; and so do the English from the Germans, and Frenchmen from Italians: But, if the literature of every people is to be separately arranged in classes, what aug- mentation of labor is produced, at the British Museum, and the
AN EARLY AMERICAN ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION 507 Bibliotheque Royale! How much better to classify all books with reference to their subjects, and mode of treatment, neglect- ing every other consideration. Notwithstanding the assiduity with which this classification has been elaborated, I am haunted by the apprehensions that my system will be found too complicated for practical useful- ness. Such is the number of subdivisions, and so minute are the steps of their gradation, that I fear it will often be difficult to de- termine under which of them, the desired information must be sought. Like those variable keys, meant to turn the many bolts, of which the locks on the doors of bank vaults consist, this sys- tem may be found to require of him who would use it, a knowl- edge of the very combinations employed by him who contrived it. A sentence found in M. Hesse's valuable little work called Bibliotheconomie, often dismays my mind. "The more simple a system is, and the more rational, in developing by subdivisions the nature of the principal classes, the more nearly it will agree with the methods which every logical mind pursues; but as soon as one begins to lose himself in the subtle, complicated, and doubtful mazes of metaphysics, he labors only for himself, and those who have travelled the same road." Yet my bibliographi- cal scheme does not consist of more numerous parts, or more finely attenuated, than those which have been prepared for the great libraries of Europe. The whole number of divisions which I have employed, is five hundred. Brunet has adopted at least twelve hundred, Namur, two thousand, and Horne about the same. Turning, now, from the consideration of the system itself, to my application of it to the library for which it was prepared, I suppose that the disposition I have made of many books, may appear extraordinary, if not absurd. I have endeavored to dis- cover the closest analogies-those which spring out of the heart of each subject. In so doing, there is danger, I admit, of showing the acuteness of a metaphysician, rather than the simplicity of him who desires to be useful. There are, however, three general considerations, to which I would entreat attention, whenever any singularity in the following pages, attracts attention. First,
5o8 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY the variety of mental constitution leads different men to take different views of the same thing. Secondly, a book may treat several subjects in successive parts, and it may be difficult to say what is the main purpose, or principal topic in it. Thirdly, the mature reflection which a librarian should give to every part of his work, may fix as the true place of a book, a position which would not occur on a cursory survey. To these I may add, that I did not think it best, in so brief a system, to form a new depart- ment, every time I perceived a specific difference. Brunet observes that the subject an author has named in his title, is sometimes that with which he has occupied himself the least. This diversity of parts makes it necessary to refer to it under many different heads. I have not resorted to the common expedient, of classing such works together as Polygraphical: they may often contain important discussions, or information, which ought to be referred to under its appropriate department. I have thought it would be discreditable to my industry, or my acuteness, to subjoin a numerous list of such insolubles. To the limbo of "Miscellanea," I have condemned only nine titles, so complex that they would otherwise require almost as many references, as the pages contained in the books. So small a satellite, however chaotic, revolving about the Cosmos which I have reduced to order in the following pages, cannot intercept much of the light which flows from the rest of the system. But, even when a book has a single design harmoniously de- veloped, it may be necessary to refer to it under several heads. A work on Agricultural Chemistry belongs both among works on the Art of husbandry, and among treatises on the Science of inorganic Chemistry. A book on Ethnology belongs both to Natural History, and to the History of nations. Double refer- ences of this sort, therefore, do not necessarily show indecision of mind, in him who made them. I feel anxious to make a special apology for one portion of my work, and I do it the more readily because the consciousness that error was least to have been expected there, suggests the idea that undiscovered faults probably lurk elsewhere. Who- ever attempts to trace the applicability of the divisions found
AN EARLY AMERICAN ESSAY ON CLASSIFICATION 509 under "Evidences of Christianity" to the titles which stand be- neath those divisions, will discover that the epithets "Internal" and "External" evidences are incommensurable with the titles. He may not refer his disappointment to the real cause. The error is not so much in referring titles incorrectly, as in adopting a classification because it is popular, without reflecting suffi- ciently to perceive that it is unscientific. Hopkins, the President of Williams College, and a profound thinker upon this subject, remarks, "The division of the evidences of Christianity into External, and Internal, is simple, and of long standing; but, by it, heads of evidence are classed together, having so little affinity for each other; and in regard to some of them, it is so difficult to see on what principle they are classed under one rather than the other, that its utility may be doubted. The evidence from testi- mony, from prophecy, from the mode in which the gospel was propagated, and from its effects-topics resembling each other scarcely at all-are classed under the head of external evidences; while the various marks of honesty in the New Testament, the agreement of the facts with each other, its peculiar doctrines, its pure morality, its representation of the character of Christ, its analogy to nature, its adaptation to the situation and wants of man-topics still more diverse-are classed under its internal evidences." I have only to add a word respecting the references to various parts of this volume, and of the alphabetical catalogue. All the terms employed in the classification, with others equivalent to some of them, are arranged in an alphabetical list, on pages xvi-xx, with references to the pages of this volume, devoted to the subject which those terms are used to designate. These let- ters and figures placed at the sides of each page in this volume, as in the alphabetical catalogue, refer to the cases and shelves where the books containing the desired information, may be found. When a line is drawn beneath a proper name, it indicates the surname of the author of the work whose title has just been given. It is, therefore, equivalent to "See" such a name in the alphabetical catalogue. When such a line distinguishes any
sIO THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY other word than a proper name, it implies that the work re- ferred to is anonymous, but that the full title may be found if looked for under that word. The small letters which may sometimes be noticed at the right of an author's name, indicate that the required informa- tion must be sought beneath his name, in that line which is headed, at the left, with the same letter. Thus, on page eighth of this volume, headed "Genuineness," the words "Edwards. B. B. j." indicate that in the alphabetical catalogue, under the name "Edwards, Bela Bates," and in the line following that name, marked "j." will be found the title of an article on the "Authenticity of the Pentateuch." The abbreviated expression, (Bib. Sac. II.) shows that this article may be found in the second volume of the Bibliotheca Sacra; and the characters "B. 3," in the left hand margin direct to look for that periodical, in book- case "B," on shelf third from the top. A more important statement remains to be made respecting the spaces which I have allotted to individual subjects. I was much at a loss in respect to this appointment being confined within fixed limits by the binding of my volume before I began to write. To ensure for every subject, room for subsequent addi- tions, proportioned to what the original entries required, I re- solved to fill only the left hand half of each page, so that at least one half the volume is regularly reserved for the future growth of the library. In addition to this, I have interposed blanks, several pages in length, between the principal subject, applicable to the wants of either the preceding or following department. And, as a dernier resort, about sixty pages at the end of the vol- ume, remain unoccupied, to be filled as occasion may require, reference being made to their contents, from the page where their subject was first assigned. No doubt I have sometimes erred in judging of the comparative importance of topics; but I hope these expedients may suffice to neutralize the effect. [Signed] FREDERIC VINTON BOSTON, NOVEMBER 13, I854.