SOME SOCIAL ASPECTS OF PUBLIC LIBRARY DEVELOPMENT IN ISRAEL SHMUEL SEVER HISTORICAL ROOTS T HE Israeli library system must be understood as the result of a cul- tural and social tradition and a historical pattern that developed over centuries, with the modern Israel state as its culmination. The cultural tradi- tion of the Jews, a tradition transplanted to Israel, deeply respects learning and books. In the cheder, the Jew "nour- ished the roots that will eventually blos- som into a veritable passion for study- ing."' Although the culture prevailing now in Israel was brought mostly from Eu- rope, Israel's population comes, to an important extent, from Afro-Asian countries, mainly Arabic-speaking coun- tries. But even in the Arab countries where illiteracy prevailed, the Jewish child, or more exactly the Jewish male child, was not completely illiterate. He knew at least how to read his prayers and the scriptures.2 This relatively high cultural level of a large proportion of the Jewish popula- tion created a demand for books, and these traditional books were not only religious. Jewish religion and culture have, during the centuries, amalga- mated, and only in the last century or so has a division between religion and culture arisen among the Jewish masses. Even during the Middle Ages in west- ern Europe, when books were scarce and learning was nearly a monopoly of the clergy, the ownership and use of books were widespread among Jews. In Jewish communities there were many discus- sions about the degree of duty to lend books, but there was no unanimity in this respect.3 In some instances, the bor- rower was admonished to preserve the borrowed book. Sometimes special rec- ommendations from the leading scholars of the community were needed, but usually the community put pressure on the owner of books to lend them. In one instance, the community even fined the owner of books for failing to lend them. In addition to privately owned books, every Beit Midrash (a kind of school for adult education in the synagogue) had a library, with varying quantities of books. SOME ASPECTS OF THE SOCIAL STRUCTURE Israel had its modern beginnings in the late nineteenth century. There has always been immigration of Jews to Israel (Palestine), but in 1882 began the first wave of immigrants whose mo- tivation was national, not religious. The 'Mark Zborowsky, "The Place of Book-Learn- ing in Traditional Jewish Culture," in Margaret Mead and Martha Wolfenstein (eds.), Childhood in Contemporary Cultures (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1955), p. 126. 'Shlomo D. Goitein, "Jewish Education in Ye- men as an Archetype of Traditional Jewish Educa- tion," in Carl Frankenstein (ed.), Between Past and Future: Essays and Studies on Aspects of Im- migrant Absorption in Israel (Jerusalem: Henrietta Szold Foundation for Child and Youth Welfare, 1953), pp. 109-46. 'Abraham Meir Habermann, Toldoth hassefer hd ivri ("History of the Hebrew Book") (Jerusa- lem: R. Mas, 1945), pp. 10, 13. 388
PUBLIC LIBRARY DEVELOPMENT IN ISRAEL 389 first immigrants came from Russia, from Eastern Europe, and, interestingly enough, with no formal or institutional connection to the European movement, from Yemen. During the years before the estab- lishment of the Israeli State, several waves of immigration created new forms of settlement such as the Kibbutz and the Moshav. The majority of the immi- grants settled in urban settlements, but in the rural areas the Moshav and the Kibbutz prevailed. The Kibbutz has al- ways been a minority movement in the rural settlement, but its cultural impact was important because of its special hu- man element. "The men and women who built the Kibbutz movement were, in the main, intellectuals from Europe. While they deliberately changed their occupa- tion to that of farmers, they wanted at the same time to create an educated cul- tured peasant class. . . . All the major settlement unions have their own pub- lishing houses. The cultural, educational and technical publications put out by them run into the hundreds every year. . . .Practically every collective settle- ment has its own library which carries beside books, the most important na- tional newspapers and magazines and a collection of phonograph records."4 The main influence of the Kibbutz on Is- rael's culture has been on youth. For many years the ideal of Israeli youth has been to live in a Kibbutz, and a high proportion of the Sabra generation (Israeli born) did so for various periods of time. This has always been an elite movement and consequently could not attract a high percentage of immigra- tion. The Moshav, the co-operative farm, was less revolutionary in its "Leben- sanschauung" and could, during the years, attract more people. When mass immigration began in 1949, the Moshav form was adopted for the new settle- ments. In the veteran Moshavim organ- ized prior to 1948, cultural aims were still close to the Kibbutz pattern. Ac- cording to the United Nations Survey Mission findings in 1954, "Each Moshav Ovdim has a cultural committee which plans and executes local programmes. . .. This Committee also concerns itself with the maintenance of the local li- brary."5 In the immigrant Moshav settle- ments, founded after 1948, however, the situation was different. While the older Moshavim were primarily volun- tary, the newer immigrants were sent to the settlements by the Jewish Agency without their having a previous cultural or ideological basis for this kind of life.6 Since Israel is a democracy, no one was forced to live in the new Moshav, and, indeed, many left, but the foundation of this settlement was not a voluntary one. The population from both the European and Afro-Asian countries in the immi- grant Moshav was of a lower educa- tional and cultural level than that of the veteran population of Israel. Thus cul- tural institutions had to be supplied from outside, or with powerful outside encouragement. In the fifties, the new settlements were planned within the state by the Settlement Department of the Jewish 'United Nations Series on Community Organi- zation and Development, "Monograph on Com- munity Settlements and Report of the Survey Mis- sion on Community Organization and Develop- ment: Israel" (United Nations Department of So- cial Affairs, 1954), pp. 10-11. 5Ibid., p. 33. 'Judah Matras, Social Change in Israel (Chi- cago: Aldine Publishing Co., 1965), gives a thor- ough survey of modern Israel social structure and currents.
390 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Agency, and a new concept of settle- ment evolved-the "comprehensive re- gional settlement." The system intro- duced some industry into the rural areas in addition to agriculture and tended to bring to the rural population health and cultural services comparable to those of the city dwellers. It organized several small rural settlements around a "rural center" where tractor stations, elemen- tary schools, a clinic, a meeting hall, and sometimes a small library are found. Several such units of rural settlements with their rural centers are part of a larger region, usually with a town as its center. The larger center accommodates larger industrial plants, a health center with some specialized medical care, a regional high school, a community cen- ter, and, in recent years, a library. The radius of such a region usually does not exceed ten miles, and its population varies from ten thousand to twenty thousand people.7 The mass immigration of the late forties and fifties brought with it, in addition to other economic and social problems of a mass immigration, the awareness of group differences arising from cultural and ethnic origins. It be- came clear that the social differences were not only between the immigrants and the veterans but they were also a product of the country of origin. These problems had existed prior to 1948, but with less public emphasis.8 In 1948, the European-American born accounted for 54.8 per cent of the Jewish population and the Oriental Jews (born in Asia and Africa) only 9.8 per cent, the rest being Israeli born. The relative number of Oriental Jews increased to 2 7.6 per cent in 1951 and to 27.8 per cent in 1960. The percentage of the European-born population decreased to 47.2 per cent in 1951 and to 35.1 per cent in 1960.9 The government, as well as public in- stitutions like the Jewish Agency, the Histadrut, and many others, tried to raise the cultural and social level in a few years, but the problem persisted be- cause of unsuitable methods10 and also because blending so many people of such diverse backgrounds into a com- mon culture is not a process to be carried out in a short time. Literacy campaigns were pursued through compulsory education to age fourteen, and many adult education courses were instituted (mostly in He- brew). In courses sponsored by the gov- ernment, thousands of adults partici- pated.'1 Courses were also organized by the Histadrut and the Jewish Agency. The army had, and still has, important acculturation roles: courses in Hebrew and elementary subjects are provided to every soldier needing them. Since in Israel military service is compulsory for every citizen eighteen years of age, the army exerted a powerful educational in- fluence. In the last few years many girls, upon graduation from high school, have served as teachers of Hebrew for adults in rural areas as part of their military service. It is probable that social upward mo- bility is a function of education. In Is- rael, high school education is not com- pulsory and is rather expensive. The European born or sons of European 7Raanan Weitz, The Next Stage in Agricultural Settlement (Jerusalem: Jewish Agency Settlement Department, 1964). 8 Matras, op. cit. (see n. 6), p. 35. 9Statistical Abstract of Israel, Vol. 13 (1962), Pt. B, Table 16, p. 51. "Alex Weingrod, Israel: Group Relations in a New Society (London: Pall Mall Press [published for the Institute of Race Relations], 1965). 'Statistical Abstract of Israel, Vol. 17 (1966), Table T/32, p. 610.
PUBLIC LIBRARY DEVELOPMENT IN ISRAEL 391 born, for whom studying is a tradition and who usually have a better economic and social status, tend to give their chil- dren high school and higher education, thus providing a better social status for them. The tradition of formal education is absent among Oriental Jews. Parents having poorer education and lower eco- nomic and social status themselves do not tend to promote continuance of their children's education, thus tempering the social status of their sons. This situation creates, understandably, tensions in Is- raeli society. In the fifties, the government sought to improve the high school education (including vocational) of the under- privileged classes, mostly of Oriental stock or the new immigrants, by assign- ing scholarships to worthy children. The system did not fully fulfil its expecta- tions. In 1957 the government decided to participate more actively in the high school education by providing graded fees12 which took into account income, number of children, and housing condi- tions of the family as well as the student achievements at school. Because the Oriental Israelis are a sizable part of this group, having lower incomes and many children, this arrangement seemed more beneficial to them than for oth- er groups. In addition, a preferential scheme, which was implemented but not much publicized, was developed. On the assumption that lack of scholarly tradi- tion and conditions at home do handicap the Oriental child, in order to provide more impetus the official preferential scheme graded its school fees for stu- dents from Oriental stock, even when their academic achievements were lower than those of the children of the Euro- pean or Israeli born and even if the father's income was relatively higher. The system also provided additional courses in the afternoons and in summer to help bring these students up to the needed standards. It also proposed to avoid the lowering of the academic standards by trying to have mixed popu- lations in high school. In the elementary schools of neighborhoods with predomi- nantly Oriental population the school day was extended. Educational televi- sion was also instituted in order to help the student population of rural and de- velopment towns in getting better teach- ing. When the system began in the school year 1957-58, only 7,063 stu- dents benefited from it; in 1964-65, there were 81,735 students in the sys- tem, a significant number in a country with a population of two and a half mil- lions. Existing social studies cannot yet measure the impact of this reform upon the note of social change, but one may guess it will help the social integration of the Oriental Jews,13 who already show features of upward mobility. "It is of considerable interest to note that many years, often generations, of resi- dence in Arab countries where upward mobility for Jews was very difficult ap- parently did not cause the Jews in these countries to internalize a norm of im- mobility. . . . Among the Jewish immi- grants observed here, however, a latent desire for mobility seems to have pre- vailed."14 Integration will be helped also by the fact that although intergroup tensions exist the moral and ideological standards prevailing in the country dis- courage prejudice. The war of June, 1967, was undoubtedly an integrating 12Ibid., Tables T/22, T/23, pp. 603-4. 13 Weingrod, op. cit. (see n. 10), p. 66. :"Judith T. Shuval, Immigrants on the Thresh- old ("The Atherton Press Behavioral Science Se- ries" [New York: Atherton Press, 1963]), p. 173.
392 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY factor, although it is difficult to know to what extent. Before leaving the subject, it is of some value to consider the relative mag- nitude of the rural population in Israel. Only 18.2 per cent of the total popula- tion of Israel is rural. The Jewish rural population is only 11.6 per cent of the total population; of this, the Kibbutzim have 3.5 per cent, the Moshavim 5.4 per cent (roughly divided as 3 per cent veteran and 2.4 per cent new), and 2.6 per cent are in private rural settlements. The 6.6 per cent non-Jewish rural popu- lation are the majority of the Arab pop- ulation of Israel and should be treated separately. READING PATTERNS A survey of book and newspaper reading in Israel, taken from a repre- sentative sample of the adult popula- tion, was carried out in the budget year 1965 (April 1, 1965-March 31, 1966) by the Central Bureau of Statistics.'5 We will confine ourselves here to the examination of the book-reading part of the survey. Subjects were asked if they had read at least one book during the month preceding the survey. The result- ing picture of the book-reading habits of the Israeli population shows data dif- ferent from those of other countries."6 At least 53.1 per cent of Israelis read one book the month preceding the survey. Of those surveyed, 53.2 per cent of the men were readers and 52.9 per cent of the women, unlike other countries where women account for a higher proportion among readers. The disparity arises from the fact that women of Oriental origin, coming to Israel after school age, are less educated. Another unusual feature is that 64.9 per cent of the age group 18-29 years were readers."7 The percentage declines to 50 per cent for the group of 45-59 years and to only 34.2 per cent for the 60 years and over group. The difference in reading pat- terns is sharpened by the fact that the 18-29 age group includes the period of military service (18-21 for men, 18-20 for women) as well as the time of achieving a career and building a family and home, while the group of 60 years and over includes the retired. Better education of the younger generation helps explain these differences. The country of origin has a significant influence on the reading habits of the Israeli. Of the Israeli born, 74.8 per cent read, compared with only 34.3 per cent of the Oriental Israelis and 60.7 per cent of the European born. Relevant to practical implications for the libraries is the spread of reading, by type of settlement: in older urban settle- ments, founded before 1948, 54.5 per cent read, while in the newer urban set- tlements, having a higher percentage of new immigrants, only 44.7 per cent read. For the rural population the figures are: 77.8 per cent for veteran settlements and only 39.9 per cent for newer settlements. The high reading percentage in the older rural settlements probably arises from a relatively high cultural level and less competition for reading time than in the city. The lower reading habits of the new rural settlements, lower than the new urban settlement, is due not only to dif- "5Statistical Abstract of Israel, Vol. 17 (1966), Table T/40, p. 616. 16 Dan Lacy, "The Adult in a Changing Society: Implications for the Public Library," in Lester Asheim (ed.), New Directions in Public Library Development (Chicago: University of Chicago Graduate Library School, 1951), pp. 57-71. 1 Compare findings to Y. Deligdisch and R. Co- hen, "Reader Survey at the Kiriat Ha yovel Li- brary," UNESCO Bulletin for Libraries (1961), 15: 194-96.
PUBLIC LIBRARY DEVELOPMENT IN ISRAEL 393 ferences between rural and urban pat- terns, for these patterns have not had time to develop in Israel, but because the newer rural settlements are popu- lated almost entirely by new immigrants with a high percentage of Afro-Asian origin. The survey also concerned itself with the languages in which the readers read and discovered that 51.2 per cent of the readers read only Hebrew books, 33.7 per cent read only in a foreign lan- guage, and 15.1 per cent read both He- brew and a foreign language. Unsur- prisingly, the younger generation reads more Hebrew than the older generation. The reading of the Israeli born is He- brew, or Hebrew plus a foreign lan- guage, but it is quite surprising to find that 4.6 per cent of the Israeli born read only a foreign language. The fact has not been investigated, but one of its causes may be that some readers switched to English in the fifties when foreign paper-back books were espe- cially inexpensive; another factor may be the poor quality of detective stories in Hebrew. The European born read more in a foreign language than in Hebrew (38.6 per cent Hebrew, 46.3 per cent foreign language), understandably, since not all have mastered Hebrew enough to enjoy reading it. The situation is different with the Afro-Asian born: 55.7 per cent read only Hebrew, while 31.5 per cent read only in a foreign language, which may be explained by the fact that they ac- quired their reading habits in Israel. It is worth noting that children and teenagers did not participate in the sur- vey. Presumably, their reading patterns are higher than those of the adult popu- lation, and their main reading language is Hebrew. Casual surveys of the read- ing habits of children strengthen this belief."8 Book reading is not necessarily con- nected with libraries. In Israel, as in the United States, there are inexpensive pa- perback editions, book clubs, etc. Book buying is quite widespread in Israel, more so among the Israeli and European born than among others. It is probable that the library can play an important role in widening the reading habits of that part of the population not yet fa- miliar with it."9 THE PUBLIC LIBRARY The roots of the Israeli public library can be traced to the end of the nine- teenth century, when the Beit Sefarim Le-Bnei Israel (Library of the Israel People),"2 Petach Tikva, and other li- braries were founded. The Beit Sefarim Le-Bnei Israel, later also known as the Chazanowitz Collection, was predeces- sor of the Jewish National and Univer- sity Library (JNUL). In 1905 Dr. Heinrich Loewe of Berlin advocated in his book Eine Jiidische National Biblio- thek the founding in Palestine of a library which would include functions of a public library modeled on British and American libraries and would also establish a library school for the train- ing of librarians. Dr. Loewe proposed sending a young librarian, at the be- ginning of his career, to Palestine to accomplish these goals. In effect, fifteen years later in 1920, Dr. Hugo Berg- mann, from the University of Prague, was sent by the Zionist Organization to 8 Y. Deligdisch, "Reading Survey in a Children's Library," Yad la-Kori (June, 1962), 6:221-30. (In Hebrew.) 19 Rivka Guber, "The Library Educates New Im- migrants," Yad la-Kore (July-August, 1967), 8:121-22. (In Hebrew.) ' Arundell Esdaile, National Libraries of the World: Their History, Administration and Public Services (2d ed., completely revised by F. J. Hill; London: Library Association, 1957), p. 367.
394 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY set up the Jewish National Library.21 He remained as the director for fifteen years. Under Bergmann the library grew from the 30,000 unorganized volumes of the Chazanowitz Collection (which formed the nucleus of the new library) to 225,000 in 1929. In 1925, after the founding of the Hebrew University, it became the Jewish National and Uni- versity Library.22 Librarians were sent to study in Europe, most of them at the American Library Association-spon- sored school in Paris. The collection was organized under the influence of two American librarians,23 the Dewey Deci- mal classification was adopted, and cata- loging generally followed ALA rules. A special classification scheme for books on Judaica was developed by Professor G. Shalom as an extension of Dewey's classification system. The library was influenced by the German library tradi- tions in some cataloging features and also in the adoption of closed shelves. In 1936, Professor G. Weil, the second di- rector, clearly divorced the public li- brary features, concentrating on its na- tional and university roles with regard to book selection and administration.24 He also reorganized its shelving rules according to running numbers in four large categories, but he retained the Dewey classification for the catalog. Isolated and cut off from its location on Mount Scopus after 1948, the library was rebuilt in new Jerusalem under its third director, Dr. Curt Wormann, the first librarian who devoted all his time to the library and librarianship. (The first two librarians had teaching com- missions in philosophy and Oriental studies, respectively.) At first scattered in several buildings in Jerusalem, the JNUL was housed in a new multimil- lion-dollar building in the middle of the new university site at Givat Ram in 1960. Its revival was characterized by Leon Carnovsky in 1955: "In the face of this situation the reconstruction of the Jewish National and University Li- brary in the seven years of the State's existence is little short of spectacular."25 The JNUL is probably one of the best in its region and can compare favor- ably with large libraries of the West. "Overlooking" some fine East European libraries, Thompson's definition that "this library is unquestionably the best- rounded and best-administered collec- tion of books between Budapest and Tokyo"2" gives the right perspective. It is true that in its collection and ad- ministration the library is not a public library. But having an important influ- ence on public libraries and librarian- ship as a profession puts it at the top of Israel libraries-public, academic, or special. The spirit it has instilled in the profession is best illustrated by the fact that in 1947, during the stay of the U.N. Inquiry Commission for Palestine, rep- resentatives of the Arab Higher Com- mittee (the extremist nationalistic and strongly anti-Jewish, Arab organiza- 'Curt D. Wormann, "Israel," Library Trends (October, 1963), 12:211-12. 22Ibid., p. 212. 'Shlomo Shunami, "Israel's Library Pioneer," Library Joulrnal (November 15, 1960), 85:4112. 24 G. Weil, Report on the Administration of the Jewish National and University Library, Jerusa- lem, for the Period of 3rd September 1935-30th September 1946 (Jerusalem, 1947); D. Gold- schmidt, "In Memoriam: Prof. A. G. Weil, an Ap- preciation," Yad la-Kore' (June, 1961), 6:172-73. (In Hebrew.) 'Leon Carnovsky, Report on a Programme of Library Education in Israel (Paris: UNESCO, 1956), p. 3. ' Lawrence S. Thompson, "Awakening Library Consciousness in the Middle East," Library Quar- terly (April, 1954), 24:158.
PUBLIC LIBRARY DEVELOPMENT IN ISRAEL 395 tion) came to the JNUL on Mount Scopus seeking material on the subjects of anti-Zionism and anti-Semitism. This material was intended for use by those representing the Arab extremist views to the Inquiry Commission. They were served, maybe not with joyous heart, but they were given all the material they asked for. Another institution with an impor- tant early influence on Israel's libraries and librarianship has been the Histad- rut (General Federation of Labor).27 Its roles are quite different from those of other federations of labor: "Follow- ing the army service, the majority of young people who begin to work in some kind of employment, and even those who become self-employed, be- come members of the Histadrut.... The Histadrut provides them not only with considerable economic and social bene- fits ... but also provides for practically all their cultural needs. It gives them a daily paper (Davar), another daily with vocalized Hebrew for those who do not know the language well enough, [and] books which are published by the His- tadrut publishing house."28 In the thirties, the Histadrut opened in its cultural department a section for libraries, which helped organize and ad- minister libraries in the Kibbutz and Moshav settlements, opened libraries in cities and towns, provided short elemen- tary courses in librarianship, and pub- lished books in practical library tech- niques, sometimes with the help of li- brarians from the JNUL. In 1946 it issued a library journal, Yad la-Kore, which subsequently was taken over by the Israel Library Association (ILA) in 1952 and by the Guidance Center for Public Libraries in 1966. An extension library journal, Kuntras Bibliography, is still published by the Section for Li- braries of the Histadrut. Libraries, often with quite large col- lections, were founded continuously from the beginning of the century in the cities and towns of the country as well as in the Kibbutz and Moshav settle- ments. In Tel Aviv, the Shaar Zion Li- brary was founded at the beginning of the century and was later taken over by the Municipality of Tel Aviv and de- veloped into an impressive collection, despite a poor budget,29 cramped quar- ters, and lack of professional personnel. In Haifa, the Pewzner Library faced al- most the same difficulties, until it was reorganized and housed in an adequate building in 1960.80 Jerusalem had no public library until the 1960's, the func- tions of the public library being inade- quately filled by a Histadrut library31 and the Jewish National and University Library. In 1960, following library ex- periments in the suburbs of Jerusalem, a bookmobile service was instituted by the municipality,32 and in 1962 a munic- ipal public library, which developed into a model public library, was instituted.33 The other libraries in the country, veteran libraries founded before 1948 7 Y. Deligdisch, "Public Library Development in Israel," Library Association Record (December, 1965), 67:434. ' Raphael Patai: Cultures in Conflict: Three Lectures on the Socio-Cultural Problems of Israel and Her Neighbors (New York: Herzl Institute, 1958), Pamphlet 1, pp. 28-29. 9 Shlomo Shunami, "Library Organization Need- ed in Palestine," Library Journal (November 1, 1945), 70:1008. ? M. Jungstein, "Libraries and Librarians in Haifa and Northern Israel," Yad la-Kore' (1967), 8:142. (In Hebrew.) 3' Shalom Joeli, "Workers' Library at Jerusa- lem," UNESCO Bulletin for Libraries (1959), 13:5-6. 2 Noam Carmi, "The Jerusalem Bookmobile," Yad la-Kore (June, 1963), 7:29-30. (In Hebrew.) 3'Wormann, op. cit. (see n. 21), p. 223.
396 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY and the newer libraries founded during the fifties, had, with one exception (the Naharya public library) ,3 the same fea- tures in common: "Israel presents the somewhat novel situation of book pro- vision far beyond its present capacity to organize and service adequately.... One often encounters home-made or nonexistent systems of book classifica- tion; in some libraries the books seem to be chaotically assembled and the rec- ords so confused that it is impossible to know what is available. Thus the wholly admirable zeal for books becomes stifled by the very mass of books assembled in inadequate quarters and poorly ad- ministered."35 School libraries, which are very simi- lar in outlook and philosophy to the public libraries, were even worse. With few exceptions, most schools had no li- brary at all until 1950. In the fifties and sixties, they grew in quantity, until nearly every school had a library, but what was referred to as "the library" was closed cupboards opened once or twice a week when the teacher "changed" the books, or a dark corner where browsing was impossible. Read- ing is now encouraged by teachers, but it tends to become part of the curricu- lum, thus being hardly conducive to love of reading or libraries, especially for children who lack a reading tradition at home. This situation is better in the new schools, especially in the develop- ment towns, where more space is pro- vided for book collections and budget allocation (from the Ministry of Edu- cation) is larger.30 In some development towns interesting experiments have been carried out,37 but special space for li- braries is not included in the physical facilities of most elementary schools, and the professional library of the ele- mentary school is still a hope of the future. In high schools the situation is better: many high schools developed li- braries with large collections, modern administration systems have been intro- duced, and professional librarians are beginning to enter this field, but here too much more is needed. The develop- ment of school libraries will probably occur as part of an over-all library pol- icy and library system during the next decade. NEW TRENDS OF THE PUBLIC LIBRARY A landmark in the development of Israel's public libraries was the estab- lishment in 1958 of a small public li- brary in a suburb of Jerusalem, Qiriat- Ha-Yovel (formerly Beit Mazmil), with the help of UNESCO and under the supervision of the then new Grad- uate Library School of Hebrew Univer- sity. This suburb served as a human laboratory38 for intergroup relations. In 1953, a sociological survey, also spon- sored by UNESCO, was carried out there on intergroup tensions and affini- ties.39 In 1959-60, in the newly estab- lished library, a study of library needs in a multigroup society was carried out,40 and its impact on library develop- 84Ephraim Joel, "The Public Library of Nahar- ya," Yad la-Korg (April-September, 1959), 6:52- 55. (In Hebrew.) ' Carnovsky, op. cit. (see n. 25), pp. 4-5. w Jacob Rothschild, "The Elementary School Li- brary," Yad la-KorJ (August, 1964), 7:110-23. (In Hebrew.) 37Rivka Guber, "Lending Library of Regional Schools of Immigrant Settlements" (Jerusalem: Is- rael Library Association, 1965 [mimeographed in Hebrew]). ' Margaret Mead, Israel and Problems of Iden- tity (New York: Herzl Institute, 1958), Pamphlet 3, p. 27. 5 Judith T. Shuval, "Patterns of Inter Group Tension and Affinity," International Social Science Bulletin (1956), 8:75-123. "Deligdisch and Cohen, op. cit. (see n. 17).
PUBLIC LIBRARY DEVELOPMENT IN ISRAEL 397 ments was important far beyond its ac- tual findings. The main stimulus toward a real change in public libraries came from outside the library field. In the mid- fifties and early sixties, it was felt that the much sought integration of the new immigrants was proceeding slower than expected. "Merely" providing the im- migrants with houses, elementary edu- cation, jobs or even job training was not enough.41 "The integration of disjointed communities from all over the world into a unified nation is more of a social than an ethnic problem. It depends mainly on education in the schools and outside. . . . It is with a great deal of satisfaction that we can point to the splendid achievements in the field of education: 97 per cent of Jewish and 70 per cent of Arab children go to school, and constant efforts are made to include every child in Israel. More and more teachers are trained, school rooms added, vocational training expanded; very little, however, is done for educa- tion outside school walls."42 Education was by no means the only proposal the sociologists voiced in Israel long before their ideas were crystallized in print, but education in a broad mean- ing was adopted by the government as the key to integration. Abba Eban, serv- ing as minister of education, in his opening address to the second ILA Con- ference in 1962, summarized the impor- tance of public libraries as an educa- tional tool, emphasizing their social role. He stressed the fact that in Israel, at least, the population migration from rural and town settlements toward the big cities is due not only to better eco- nomic conditions but to better educa- tional facilities, the library being one of these facilities. In this address, he de- fined the future policy of the ministry of education toward the public li- braries 43 1. The public library should be en- couraged in every settlement. 2. The school library should be de- veloped along the principles of public libraries. 3. The Ministry of Education will sub- sidize libraries and provide profes- sional help only to settlements which are unable to support a library serv- ice themselves. 4. The Ministry will seek the help and advice of professional librarians and their representative bodies in imple- menting its policy toward libraries. 5. Universities should be required to provide academic programs for li- brarians, and academic status should be granted to librarians. It is interesting to discover, five years later, that this policy has been carried out almost to the letter (with the excep- tion of school libraries) by the Ministry of Education. A Committee for Public Libraries was appointed by the Ministry of Edu- cation, under the chairmanship of Dr. C. Wormann, director of the JNUL and the Graduate Library School of Hebrew University. This committee includes one representative for each of the Parlia- mentary Committee for Education and Culture, the Ministry of Education, the Jewish National and University Li- brary, the Graduate Library School, the Technion, the Municipal Library of Tel 4 Weingrod, op. cit. (see n. 10), p. 43. 42Itzhak Kanev, Social Policy in Israel: Achieve- ments and Shortcomings (Tel Aviv: Social Re- search Institute, 1964), pp. 2-3. I Abba Eban, "Opening Address of the I.L.A. Conference (4.2.1962)," Yad la-Kord (June, 1962), 6:181-84; "Our Culture at Crossroads," Yad la- KorJ (April-September, 1959), 6:52. (In Hebrew.)
398 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Aviv, the libraries of the Kibbutz move- ment, the local authorities, the Cul- tural Division of the Histadrut, and the Publishers Association. The committee had only advisory power, but its recom- mendations were taken seriously into account. It divided into subcommittees in order to work more efficiently. Its primary tasks have been: (1) preparing a plan for public library development in 1964-69, (2) preparing material for a public library law to be submitted to the Parliament, and (3) preparing a plan for vocational library education in sev- eral high schools.44 The plans for library development were forwarded to the Ministry of Edu- cation in an informal manner, but they influenced strongly its policy. The Sub- committee on the Library Law is still continuing its work.45 Its recommenda- tions for establishing high school voca- tional library education were imple- mented, and two high schools will teach library techniques in addition to the humanistic curriculum. After gradua- tion, the students will have to undergo an additional training period in order to qualify as library technicians.46 CENTER FOR PUBLIC LIBRARIES AND THE LIBRARY SECTION OF THE MINISTRY OF EDUCATION In 1962 the Ministry of Education re- vived a Section for Public Libraries, which had existed in the fifties but which had not been very active. In Sep- tember, 1965, this section combined with the ILA and the Graduate Library School to form the Center for Public Li- braries.47 The center is run as a section of the Ministry of Education and fi- nanced by it, and it recommends poli- cies for the development and adminis- tration of public libraries. The center took over from the ILA the publishing of the irregular Yad la-Kore, which is, for the first time, published on a regu- lar basis, and the "Catalogue Card Service" (which will be treated further on). It also publishes books and exten- sion material in librarianship. In 1962 and 1963 a survey on public libraries was conducted by the Section for Public Libraries (later the Guidance Center). While completeness of this survey is to be questioned, its findings are of great interest and influenced fur- ther developments in the field of public libraries. Questionnaires were sent to 728 Jewish settlements (63 urban and 665 rural), and answers were received from 640 settlements or 87.9 per cent. From the answers it was found that 372 settlements had 462 libraries (with no specification of their quality). Another 268 settlements (7 municipalities, 10 towns, and 251 rural settlements) had no public libraries at all. Of the 251 rural settlements, thirty-six were vet- eran and the rest were immigrant. In other words, 11.2 per cent of the veteran rural population had no library service, while 52.9 per cent of the immigrant population lacked it. The budgeting in most new settlements that did have a library was below par. The per capita number of books in the new settlements was 0.3 compared with nineteen books per capita in the Kibbutz settlements. (It is important to note that the popula- " Y. Deligdish, "New Developments in Israel's Public Libraries," Yad la-Kore' (September, 1965), 8:1-7. (In Hebrew.) 4 "Public Libraries Bill in Abeyance" (editorial), Yad ia-Kore (July-August, 1967), 8:113-14. (In Hebrew.) 4' Ilana Peled, "The Teaching of Librarianship in a High School," Yad la-Kore (July-August, 1967), 8:137-38. (In Hebrew.) ""The Functions of the Centre of Public Li- braries" (editorial), Yad la-Kore' (March, 1967), 8:65-66. (In Hebrew.)
PUBLIC LIBRARY DEVELOPMENT IN ISRAEL 399 tion of the new development towns and new rural settlements forms only ap- proximately 10 per cent of the total Jewish population of Israel in 1965; thus the magnitude of the problem must be viewed in the right perspective.) Of the 462 existing libraries, only 109 (23.6 per cent) were located in buildings spe- cially designed for this task, while only 40 per cent had a reading room. The personnel situation looked even gloom- ier: from 686 "librarians" employed in public libraries, only 3 were professional librarians with an academic degree, 209 had some library courses, and the rest had no formal training at all.48 Some librarians had not even completed sec- ondary school, but this was not checked, at least not published, by the survey. Clearly, the libraries studied could not be well administered. The Ministry of Education, following its policy, decided to assist in the crea- tion and development of libraries in the new rural settlements, development towns, and in older towns with an im- portant immigrant population. Two kinds of libraries were thus helped: lo- cal libraries in towns and cities and regional libraries designed to serve rural areas. The ministry also decided that no li- brary would be established directly by the ministry, since libraries were con- sidered a local affair, but the local au- thorities should be encouraged to erect and administer libraries. The govern- ment would contribute up to 50 per cent of the library budget, according to the local need. Actually, in a few exception- al cases, the participation rate was up to 66 per cent and higher in some regional libraries. The Section for Public Libraries es- tablished standards that libraries were required to meet in order to qualify for its subsidy. These standards include open shelves, special corners for chil- dren, if not an additional reading room for children, an inventory book, a card catalog, and the approval of the build- ing as suitable for library service. New library buildings are sometimes erected as a part of a community cultural center and come under the jurisdiction of an- other section of the Ministry of Educa- tion, as well as the Ministry of Housing which participates in the costs of build- ing and supplies local authorities with long-term loans. A panel of librarians is consulted (in most cases) before library plans are approved. The hiring of librarians is considered a local affair, but the prospective li- brarian has to be approved (not certi- fied) by the Ministry of Education. The minimum requirements are as yet quite low: high school education, good knowl- edge of Hebrew, some knowledge of a foreign language, and some library tech- niques. The ministry provides every candidate with on-the-job training at several better public libraries (mainly Jerusalem, Lod, Haifa, and Dimona). The new librarian, if he is not qualified, is required to take the examinations of the ILA during a period of several years. Prospective salary increases pro- vide some motivation for taking these examinations. Another step toward improvement of the new library standards is the new in- stitution of library counselor. The counselors are recruited only among professional librarians with formal aca- demic qualifications and considerable administrative experience. They are not employed by the government, and they continue to hold usually senior positions '4 K. I. Golan, "The Ministry of Education and Culture and the Public Libraries," Yad la-Kor6 (August, 1964), 7:124-28. (In Hebrew.)
400 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY in different libraries, performing their work on a part-time basis. They visit the libraries under their jurisdiction ap- proximately once a month, providing professional advice and exercising a certain amount of supervision of the work of the local librarian. In 1963 the Section for Public Li- braries dealt with only 19 libraries, but had extended its services to more than 123 libraries by November, 1967, and had an impact on all the public libraries of the country (561 in 1966 as com- pared with 462 in 1963). This section, staffed by only one full-time profession- al librarian and his secretary, employs many librarians on a part-time basis. The Catalog-Card Service, founded by the ILA in 1962, began its activities in the summer of 1963 and in 1966 was transferred to the Center for Public Libraries together with other functions. It catalogs most new Hebrew books of interest to public libraries, approximate- ly 1,000 to 1,200 titles a year. The cata- loging is done according to simplified ALA-LC rules, and the revised Rules are used. Every card bears also the Dewey classification. The bulk of titles for the current cataloging comes from the acquisition department of the Jeru- salem Municipal Library, whose acqui- sitions include every title published in Israel. The Publishers Association co- operates with the service with financial support and by early announcement of new titles. The service is inexpensive; the annual rate of a standing order of three cards for every title amounts to I?154 or about $51.00. The card service fills a much needed service for public libraries, especially in Israel where pro- fessional personnel is scarce.49 The Cen- ter of Public Libraries also sponsored a retrospective "basic catalog" of 12,000 Hebrew titles most frequently found in public libraries; this was not prepared by the staff of the Current Catalog Service, and the cataloging, as well as the printing, was poor and not well re- ceived by librarians. It will probably be reissued in a better form. Several private funds for helping li- braries have been active in Israel during the last few years. In the sixties, the most important one has been the Ed- mond James de Rothschild Memorial Group (known as Yad Rotschild). In 1960, its first step in helping libraries was the allocation of a bookmobile to Jerusalem. It also conducted four surveys on the need for libraries in Jewish and Arab settlements. Once per- suaded about the need for libraries, it allocated IE3 ,500,000 (approx. $1,170,- 000) toward the construction of several libraries in cities and rural areas. Thus, Jewish-Arab libraries were built, one in Haifa and one in Jaffa, a public library was built at Lod, and also several re- gional libraries were erected.5' The allocations of the Ministry of Education and of the Rothschild Memo- rial Foundation had an effect far be- yond the sums they contributed direct- ly. They served as catalysts for channel- ing more money into public libraries and, more important, for changing exist- ing attitudes toward the public libraries. PUBLIC LIBRARIES IN URBAN SETTLEMENTS Changes in the libraries of the big cities have not been directly influenced 49 Hannan Wellish, "The Catalogue Card Service of the Israel Library Association," Yad la-Kord (September, 1965), 8:41-45. (In Hebrew.) 5 Deligdish, "Public Library Development in Is- rael," op. cit. (see n. 27), pp. 8-10. 5'Edmond James de Rothschild Memorial Group, "The Need for Regional Libraries in Israel: A Survey" (Jerusalem, 1963).
PUBLIC LIBRARY DEVELOPMENT IN ISRAEL 401 by the activities of the Center of Public Libraries. It should be noted that the classification of urban settlements is less clear than that of rural settlements and, to some degree, is deceiving; towns existing before 1948 will rate as veteran, even if, for all practical pur- poses, their population is not; for in- stance, Bat Yam, with a population of 2,325 in 1948 and 53,100 in 1965, will rate as an old settlement, as will Akko (Acre) with a population of 4,016 in 1948 and 32,300 in 1965. Nonetheless, something can be learned from a survey conducted by the Central Bureau of Statistics on "Libraries in Urban Set- tlements" in three alternating years, 1961-62, 1963-64, and 1965-66, the very time of the beginning of the public library expansion, and at a time when new immigration had almost ceased.52 The total number of libraries in urban settlements was 150 in 1961, increasing in number to 189 in 1963 and 198 'in 1965. The number of readers registered as patrons increased by 50 per cent in the five-year span; the percentage of the total population reading in libraries increased from 5 per cent in 1961 to 7.5 per cent in 1965. The book collections grew at the same rate. In the three big cities of Jerusalem, Tel Aviv, and Haifa, the number of libraries remained rela- tively static (60 in 1961; 63 in 1965), but their collections were consolidated, and the number of readers grew by 40 per cent. In other urban settlements, new and veteran, the growth has been more marked: in 1961, 90 libraries existed, with a total book collection of 386,100 volumes and 54,000 registered readers. In 1965, forty-five new libraries were opened, bringing the number to 135, with total collections to 812,500 volumes and 94,200 registered readers. In the new settlements only (which were part of the last group), the libraries' number grew from forty-two to fifty- five, and the number of readers more than doubled, as did the number of books, but they still lagged behind the rest. This lag diminished in 1966 and 1967, but it should be stressed again that although the Ministry of Education helps and encourages establishment of new libraries, if the local authority is not prepared to participate, no library is opened. Because the population and authorities in some new towns and Arab settlements were unprepared to even partially support a library, the libraries did not open. In 1966 and 1967, new libraries were opened in development towns, sometimes not because the need for a library was felt but because a li- brary in town became a status symbol, and the Ministry wanted to help develop this cultural symbol. Nonetheless, the youth of these cities used their libraries and enjoyed them. PUBLIC LIBRARIES IN RURAL SETTLEMENTS In rural settlements, group sociocul- tural differences and, therefore, varia- tions in library patterns are more clear- ly seen than in the urban settlements. In the rural settlements, there were, in 1962,53 270 libraries compared with 150 in urban settlements. These libraries were found mainly in the Kibbutz or the veteran Moshav. The per capita number of books in the Kibbutz is double the number of books available per registered reader in a public library: 19 volumes per inhabitant of the Kib- butz compared to 9.3 volumes for the 12Statistical Abstract of Israel, Vol. 17 (1966), Table T/39, p. 615. 3 Israel, Ministry of Education and Culture, Li- brary Section, "List of Public Libraries" (Jerusa- lem, June, 1967), pp. 14-20. (In Hebrew.)
402 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY reader in the public library. One of the factors is undoubtedly better reading habits among Kibbutz inhabitants, as we have already seen, but another factor is the fact that private buying of books is more restricted in the Kibbutz than in urban settlements, because the amount of money available to Kibbutz members is limited. With few excep- tions, the Kibbutz libraries are not at- tended by professional librarians; in some the librarian works part-time or even on a voluntary basis after working hours. The trend is toward full-time workers in libraries, but even now the situation is not serious, owing to the re- stricted number of readers and to sep- arate children's libraries which are affil- iated with schools or with the separate children's quarters which exist in most Kibbutzim. The libraries of the 89 per cent of veteran Moshavim vary widely in their standards, but a majority of them have small collections with few resources. The situation of the immi- grant Moshavim was much more seri- ous; their economic situation and, more, their cultural tradition and sense of values held little hope for library devel- opment. The solution could be only the regional library. As a matter of fact, in 1962 a group of Moshav librarians, ac- tually led by one of them, planned the establishment of a regional library in Emek Hefer.54 The situation began changing in 1963 when the Section for Public Libraries entered the field, en- couraging establishment of regional li- braries and subsidizing them heavily al- so with the help of Yad Rotschild.55 Until March, 1967, ten such regional li- braries were established, serving 110 settlements, mostly Moshavim. In some instances, the central region- al libraries were located in development towns that is, centers of comprehensive regions, thus serving also the local pop- ulation. In other instances, the centers of regional libraries were located in cities-Jerusalem and Petach Tikva, for example. The centers located in cities are not the well-developed public li- braries of these same cities but actually processing and storing centers for col- lections circulated to the branches or circulated through bookmobiles. This duplication of library resources is prob- ably uneconomical, both in terms of money and manpower. SOME SHORTCOMINGS OF THE LIBRARY SYSTEM The libraries of Israel have taken an important step forward in the last few years. Their development can be re- garded as a developing library system. Still, several shortcomings which pos- sibly could be avoided and might have a lasting influence on their future are discernible. Israel being a small nation, within a small area, a more centralized administrative system than that in ex- istence could be envisioned and was proposed in broad lines by Carnovsky in 1955, but it was not implemented. The peril of censorship from any na- tionally authoritative office is, as yet, very slight in Israel, because the govern- ment and all local authorities are run by a coalition of parties ranging from socialist to conservative, from atheistic to ultra-religious. Besides, the govern- ment interference which exists in the system is, so far, beneficial: centraliza- tion could bring only more efficiency to the extent of central influence which already exists. Co-ordination of acqui- ' Ruth Porath, "The Emek Hefer Region Plans the Setting-up of a Central Library," Yad la-Kore (June, 1963), 7:36-38. (In Hebrew.) 5 Edmond James de Rothschild Memorial Group, op. cit. (see n. 51).
PUBLIC LIBRARY DEVELOPMENT IN ISRAEL 403 sition policies between the individual li- braries is non-existent, and any econo- mies of such co-ordination are lost. In Jerusalem itself, the municipal library is buying every book published in Is- rael, while less than two miles away the JNUL has kept the same policy for more than half a century and now re- ceives by law two copies of every book published. Co-ordination between His- tadrut libraries and public libraries of the same city is all but non-existent. The distances in Israel being short, some co-ordination in acquisition pol- icies could be developed in the whole country between the cities themselves. Another unfortunate aspect of this prob- lem is the lack of well-defined acquisi- tion policies in most individual libraries. Another expression of this lack of co- operation is the absence of interlibrary loans, a peculiar inadequacy since the system exists within special and science libraries of the country. Union catalogs do not exist in the public library, al- though they are used by science li- braries; a union catalog of scientific periodicals has been issued in two edi- tions, and a third edition is planned, and a union catalog of science books ex- ists at the Technion library. The success of the "Card Catalog Service" only emphasizes how much more could be done in centralizing processing of books. As hinted else- where, the regional libraries are serving restricted areas and populations. It is interesting to note that while "local pa- triotism" is not developed in Israel in the political and social life, or health services for that matter, it is developed where libraries are involved. One is led to suspect that this development is due in no small measure to librarians, and it is a pity that the Ministry of Education did not try to restrict this phenomenon. The fact that regional libraries have in- dependent centers and do not use the next door public libraries is a somewhat extravagant feature in a far from out- standingly wealthy country. RECOGNITION OF LIBRARIANSHIP AS A PROFESSION Library development of the last years, though not prompted mainly by librar- ians, could not occur without the estab- lishment of librarianship as a profession in Israel. Since the 1920's, professional librarians could be found in Israel. Some came to Palestine after finishing library schools in Europe and the United States, while others were sent to Europe by the JNUL, in the late twenties, to study librarianship. Still, librarianship has been recognized as a profession only in the last few years. It is worth men- tioning that two library traditions amal- gamated in Israel, the American and the German. The last three directors of the JNUL were trained in Germany and held important positions in German- speaking libraries before arriving in Is- rael. In the late twenties, several librar- ians of this library were sent to Paris to study at an ALA-sponsored school. An American librarian, Sophia Udin, in- fluenced the establishment of Dewey classification at the JNUL as well as the organization of other libraries, notably the Knesset (Parliament) Library and the University of Tel Aviv Library. Outside JNUL, with few exceptions, the librarian was thought to be a custo- dian of books and the library a refuge for an aging scholar, or even for some- one who had failed in other occupations. Inside the profession, the largest group of professionals was found at JNUL; this group, and Dr. C. Wormann, the di- rector of JNUL, contributed most toward the recognition of librarianship.
404 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Three formal landmarks can be recog- nized in this development. 1. The founding of the Israel Library Association (ILA) in 1952.-In 1952 the total number of librarians (of all kinds) was estimated to be around 750. Professional librarians accounted for less than 10 per cent of this number, but they were concentrated at the JNUL and at the Technion. At the initiative of some librarians, ILA was founded. It published library material but concentrated in leading the struggle for professional recognition and better salaries for librarians. In the six- ties, it also instituted external examina- tions for certifying non-academic li- brarians.56 2. The establishment of the Graduate Library School of Hebrew University in 1956.-The need for training librar- ians in the country was felt after World War II and was advocated by Wormann in 1947.57 The War of Independence and the task of rebuilding JNUL post- poned the opening of the school. Israel turned to UNESCO for help, and Car- novsky was sent in 1955 as an advisor.58 Upon his recommendations59 a Gradu- ate Library School was opened in 1956 at the Hebrew University. Its curric- ulum was modeled on American and British practice. From 1957, fifteen to twenty librarians graduated annually, and many hold key positions in Israel's libraries. The shortage of librarians pre- vailing now in Israel denies early fears of limited possibilities of their absorp- tion in the foreseeable future. 3. The recognition of professional sal- ary schedules by the government in 1965.-The existence of a relatively im- portant body of academic librarians, graduated in Israel and abroad, certifi- cation of non-academic librarians by the ILA, as well as its professional struggle, brought to the recognition of the profession, first by the Histadrut, and later, the social conditions being favorable, by the government, the need for professional salary schedules. The first step was taken in 1958 on the rec- ognition by the Histadrut of a salary scale, for librarians beginning with a grade parallel to that of a medium grade clerk.60 The government did not recog- nize this scale, but it was adopted by several academic institutions, thus influ- encing librarians' salaries throughout the country. In 1963 another scale for librarians with degrees was recom- mended by the Histadrut and was re- ceived by several universities for their librarians. In 1965 the government rec- ognized this scale, thus extending its recognition to the profession as a whole: The local authorities and public bodies to which most of Israel's libraries belong use the governmental scales in grading their employees. This scale linked sal- aries to those of engineers, and although the beginning librarian usually starts one or two grades lower than the be- ginning engineer, the change of the sal- ary situation, compared to that of the fifties, is remarkable. A new scale also was worked out for the non-academic librarians, improving their salaries.6' One may hope that improved salaries will also improve the social status and the professional prestige of librarians 6 Deligdish, "New Developments in Israel Public Libraries," op. cit. (see n. 44). 6 Thompson, op. cit. (see n. 26), p. 167. 68Wormann, op. cit. (see n. 21), p. 217. 9 Carnovsky, op. cit. (see n. 25), pp. 8-15. I M. Z. Barkay, "Israel Library Association Report," Yad la-Kore (June, 1962), 6:257-65. (In Hebrew.) I M. Z. Barkay, "Activities of the IL.A.," Yad la-Korl (March, 1967), 8:blue pages 9-18. (In He- brew.)
PUBLIC LIBRARY DEVELOPMENT IN ISRAEL 405 and will help bring capable young men into the field. CONCLUSION This paper has stressed the several forces that had a role in the develop- ment of the Israeli public library. The link between library development and social conditions is generally ac- knowledged, but one feels that in Israel this was actually proved in a near-lab- oratory condition. The love of books is an ancient tradition of the Jewish peo- ple, but neither this love nor the ex- istence of large collections of books brought the development of a public library movement. Books were accumu- lated, but a library is more than merely a collection. It has to be organized and to have the goal of serving a well-defined community in order to become a library. It was the need for social integration which triggered this movement in Israel, as in the United States. In Israel, the need for social and cultural integration was more crystallized and the discom- fort accompanying it more strongly felt. Being a very small nation and struggling for its nationhood and exist- ence, Israel could not disregard any of its composing elements, and tried, not always successfully, to develop a single nation with one culture, perhaps plural- istic, from the different groups forming it. One is very much tempted to see the current development of public libraries as one of the mechanisms tried, rightly or not, for the raising of cultural stand- ards and integration of all groups of Israel's society, but mainly of what was called the "second Israel" formed by Israelis of Afro-Asian stock. That this was regarded as such is attested to by several addresses of the Minister of Education.62 It was only after the feeling that not enough had been done penetrated the consciousness of the qualified public that the government and other public institutions made possible the expansion of libraries. With all the shortcomings of the system, mainly consisting of frag- menting and duplication of effort, the public library has become more and more a reality felt in everyday Israeli life. 62 Eban, "Our Culture at Crossroads," op. cit. (see n. 43).