Gendered Narratives of Innovation Through Competition: Lessons From Science and Technology Studies Scout Calvert Department of Informatics, Donald Bren School of Information and Computer Sciences, Donald Bren Hall 5042, Irvine, CA 92697-3440. Email: scalvert@uci.edu Library and information science is a technologically intensive profession with a high percentage of women, unlike computer science and other male-dominated fields. On the occasion of the 201 1 ALISE conference, this essay analyzes the theme "Competi- tiveness and Innovation" through a review of social psychology and science and tech- nology studies literature. Both theme concepts have ramifications for LIS education. Librarianship and teaching are both professions that resist commodification because they rely on embodied labor and personal interaction. Competition, as a management or learning style, may not promote meaningful innovation in LIS education, and in- stead risks creating a climate that is hostile to its chief demographic. The feminization of LIS can be seen as a strength insofar as it promotes the relative parity in numbers of men and women full-time faculty. LIS education should build on this strength in its in- novation practices, enabling friendly encounters between technologies, and men and women alike. Keywords: science and technology studies, self-determination theory, gender, technol- ogy, equity, education Introduction This 201 paper 1 conference will inspect of the the Association theme of the for 201 1 conference of the Association for Library and Information Science Educa- tion, "Competitiveness and Innovation," through a feminist science and technol- ogy studies framework. The purpose of this analysis is to tease out the implicit values of competition and innovation for library and information science educa- tion, and to open up some of the literature from the interdisciplinary field of science and technology studies for use in LIS. This analysis begins at the implicit no- tion that competition and innovation are a natural fit, entailing each other, and that therefore, competitiveness could be help- ful and fruitful in an educational setting. The ostensibly quantitative, measurable, and hence objective concepts of competi- tion and competitiveness stand in contrast with the qualitative, descriptive concepts of both "Culture and Collaboration," the previous year's theme. I will then examine cultural accounts of technological innovation and progress in the context of pedagogy and librarianship. My analysis will draw on social psychol- ogy and sociological literature, as well as accounts of technological innovation from science and technology studies and femi- nist science studies, to reflect on aspects of education for librarianship that are re- sistant to the "measure, control, and au- tomate" rationality of US-style economic competition. Particularly, I will: 1 . Argue that competition and innovation are not causally linked, while analyzing and troubling both concepts. 2. Show that competitiveness and inno- J. of Education for Library and Information Science, Vol. 54, No. 1 - (Winter) January 2013 ISSN: 0748-5786 © 2012 Association for Library and Information Science Education 3
4 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE vation are gendered in ways that make them troubling ideals for LIS and LIS education. 3. Make a case for an approach to pedago- gy that is effective, appropriate to LIS work, and difficult to commodify. There are some preliminary caveats: First, when we talk about the co-construc- tion of technology and gender, we have to be careful to avoid essential izing. This means not taking apparent differences be- tween men and women to be timeless, nec- essary, or inevitable; descriptions of the particular ways that competition, innova- tion, and labor manifest in our culture are not intended to be prescriptive. They are also statistical generalizations: not all men and women behave in the ways described. Additionally, the characteristics described in this essay are not presumed to be static and stable characteristics that happen in all times, all cultures, and all places, or for all people who are men or women. Rather, one of the purposes of this review article is to historicize and denaturalize the con- cepts of competition and innovation, and that includes the social configurations in which they arise. This is informed by Bowker and Star's (1999) pragmatist in- sight that "things perceived as real are real in their consequences" (p. 1 3). Competition I will start by examining the concept of competition. We typically understand competition as a sport or game with two or more opposing forces, ways of keeping score, and a clear endpoint that determines when the best rival has won. Competition is goal driven and rule-bound. Certain kinds of play are ruled in or out, and the criteria for winning or losing are explicit. This kind of competition tests the skill of players in relationship to one another. Sometimes competitions are between teams, and sometimes between individuals, and sometimes teams and individuals also compete against their own personal best. The kind of competitiveness that the 201 1 ALISE conference theme invoked shares some things in common with games of sport. Two or more actors attempt to solve a problem of some kind, and there are objective measurements of some sort that serve to score the outcomes, which means there are also end points or mea- suring points. Unlike games, which have relatively few clear and agreed-on mea- sures (primarily score) and agreed-on end points, market competitiveness has a plethora of measures. The idealized mea- surement for market success is when the consumer chooses one product or service over another. Profit is the seller-centric proxy measure of consumer interest. In this idealization, the consumer is the judge of the best product or outcome, at the best price: an indexical measure of competi- tiveness and innovation. Our idealized notion of competition as a generator of innovation black-boxes a host of processes for competition, includ- ing unfair practices, externalizing costs, marketing, deception, and deskilling. Hence, there is no guarantee that consum- ers choose the best products, or that the best products make it to market in the first place. And "best" is itself such a prob- lematic measure: best for whom, in what ways? As these questions highlight, this kind of measurement can obscure unsa- vory elements of competition; for exam- ple, the extremely low cost of food in the US is underwritten by squalid labor con- ditions for migrant workers in agriculture. Scoring market success is not really about having the objectively best product. A giv- en company might find ways to be profit- able even when its product is not typically selected. Furthermore, the competition can be won not only by creating what others haven't, but also by stopping them from creating. In other words, competition is no guarantor of creating new innovations or knowledge. Like a game, market competitions have winners and losers; this kind of compe- tition is figured as a zero-sum game. In
Gendered Narratives of Innovation Through Competition 5 addition to the market rationale embed- ded in the concept of competition, there is another register of the term, which is an evolutionary one, with individualistic and social Darwinist overtones. The term evolution is often used in an unscientific, teleologica! way. We might describe an individual as highly evolved, when we mean more intelligent, ethical, spiritual, or rational. But evolution is value neutral and non-teleological; there is no guaran- tee that culturally important qualities will be the outcome of evolutionary processes. Evolution fits organisms to their environ- ments: if competition for resources and re- productive competition pressures require more stupid and less attractive organisms, then more stupid and less attractive organ- isms will be the winners of the game. Innovation Innovation is no less loaded a term. In- novation means making again, renewing, or the making of something new. In con- temporary US culture, we often take for granted the assumption that competition assuredly produces novel solutions to pro- fessional and social challenges that will be tested on the playing fields that we call markets. Like competition, innovation is a word laden with cultural meanings, and in the current context, innovation implies technological outcomes and the changes that come with them. This invocation of innovation is a "form of wishful thinking that aims to bring about the desired trans- formations without the associated costs in time and human effort" (Suchman & Bishop, 2000, p. 332). But of course, it is not necessarily new technological prod- ucts being innovated, but new processes or technologies for creating or packag- ing other products or services. This is not always beneficial. As STS scholar Judy Wajcman (1995) demonstrates, "capital- ism continuously applies new technology designed to fragment and deskill labor, so that labor becomes cheaper and subject to greater control" (p. 191 ). So while one important register of inno- vation is the marketing of consumer tech- nologies, or using technologies in clever new ways, very often what is being created are processes that reduce corporate costs and increase corporate profitability. These innovations are by definition new but not necessarily better. For example, when the compositor's linotype keyboard was re- placed with a typewriter-style QWERTY keyboard, a complex, male dominated field was reduced to a steno pool, which enabled women to compete for these now lower paying jobs (Cockburn, 1991). Another concern with the concept of innovation in relation to competitiveness is the degree to which new products and services are necessary or rational, or the degree to which they present truly novel solutions to problems. As Suchman and Bishop (2000) argue, " 'innovation' can be understood as a construct activated in the service of what is, on closer inspection, a fundamentally conservative (in the sense of reproduction of existing orders) proj- ect" (p. 331). So much of marketing new products is about rendering older but func- tional versions of commodities obsolete. Sometimes this means merely repackaging an older product; the "new and improved" label on a box of detergent is a modern marketing cliché. Sometimes obsoles- cence is created through minor redesigns of consumer commodities. One novelty of the cell phone age is the purportedly free phone that comes with a two-year service contract. Of course, the phone isn't free; the costs are built into the contract. But every two years, customers will cast off old phones in order to receive the maxi- mum benefit from the service contract that they would renew anyway. This sells more mobile phones, of course, but has impor- tant undesirable consequences for human rights, global trade in rare metals, and tox- ic waste disposal. As this establishes, competition and markets are not value neutral. And inno- vation can produce damaging products or techniques, just as well as it produces help-
6 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE ful ones. This leads to one of the problems with the cult of innovation, and that is its relationship to technological determinism and optimism: the belief that the present social arrangements and technologies were the inevitable byproducts of historical de- velopment, and that any problems entailed in our technologies and their production processes can be eliminated with further technological innovations. As Sally Wyatt (2008) argues, "one of the most mislead- ing and dangerous aspects of technologi- cal determinism is its equation of techno- logical change with progress" (p. 168). But as Wyatt and many other sociologists of technology argue, this view "leaves no space for human choice or intervention and, moreover, absolves us from respon- sibility for the technologies we make and use" (Wyatt, 2008, p. 169). I will return to this point shortly. Competition and Technology are Gendered Not only are competitiveness and in- novation not neutral or innocent concepts in the ways discussed above, but they are also gendered. Both sport and business - the two fields most obviously oriented around competition - are male dominated fields. Competitiveness and the technolog- ical savvy implicit in innovation are them- selves markers of contemporary masculin- ity. Again, this is not an essentialist claim, but a description of the current social con- figuration. As Wajcman (1995) puts it, "The enduring force of the identification between technology and manliness is not an inherent biological sex difference. It is instead the result of the historical and cul- tural construction of gender" (p. 201). Or, to put it Melvil Dewey's (1979) way: "the boys have been trading jack knives and developing the business bumps while the girls were absorbed with their dolls" (p. 10). Dewey, however misogynist, seems to understand that gender is historically situated and performative. This gendering has high stakes for li- brary science. As we know from empirical studies, women in our current social con- figuration prefer not to compete. Although this is well established in the sociologi- cal literature, Niederle and Vesterlund's (2006) research offers more insight into the situation. In their experiments, they controlled for skill level while offering the choice to be rewarded by task or by tour- nament performance. Women chose com- petition half as frequently as men, even when skill and risk-aversion were con- trolled. Matched by skill, men were more likely to be overconfident in their perfor- mance than were women. As Niederle and Vesterlund (2006) argue, the fewer women who compete for jobs and promotions, the fewer there will be in these environments. Although there are multiple explanations for women's reluctance to enter competi- tion environments, "anticipated discrimi- nation" may be a factor in this preference. "Stereotype threat" is a related phenome- non. When people in marginalized groups are tested on characteristics that invoke negative stereotypes, they perform worse than when the challenge is presented in a way that avoids reference to negative ste- reotypes. For example, when primed with the idea that women perform less well than men on computer tasks, women are more likely to blame themselves than a com- puter failure for lack of success (Koch, Muller, & Sieverding, 2008). Implications for Library and Information Science and LIS Education Competition is clearly gendered. I will recount only a few instances from the im- mense literature in sociology of technol- ogy that surfaces women's long engage- ment with information and computing technologies (ICTs). A big part of the problem is that women's technological labor is culturally invisible. Katie King (n.d.), in her research on writing technolo- gies, argues that when technologies are reduced to singular, stable, self-contained
Gendered Narratives of Innovation Through Competition 7 devices, rather than assemblages, "work by women is made invisible in such mét- onymie reduction by definition. Thus 'technology' - reduced to what women do not do - becomes tautologically 'male' as it misrepresents the relational ecology of the worksite and the technical devices and skills employed there" (p. 59). For example, in Ellen Balka's (2009) study of technologies in health settings, healthcare workers experiencing difficul- ties with a newly installed patient man- agement system that was malfunctioning received subpar help from tech support be- cause they were presumed to be using the system incorrectly. As Wajcman (1995) argues, "Men affirm their masculinity through technical competence and posit women, by contrast, as technologically ig- norant and incompetent. That our present technical culture expresses and consoli- dates relations among men is an important factor in explaining the continuing exclu- sion of women. Indeed, as a result of these social practices, women may attach very different meanings and values to technol- ogy" (pp. 201-202). Paul Edwards (1995) corroborates this, arguing that "computers are culturally constructed in such a way as to stamp them with gender and make them resistant to the efforts of women to 'make friends' with them (p. 281). But more than this, competition and in- novation, alone and together, have serious implications for LIS and LIS education. According to the 2009 ALISE statisti- cal report, 78% of students enrolled in an MLIS program in fall 2008 were wom- en; this crept up to 79.5% in fall 2009, as shown in the 2010 data from ALISE. Although this suggests negative social forces that contribute to the feminization of the field (which I discuss below), this is a strong advantage over computer sci- ence and electrical engineering, insofar as LIS is a technology-centric field that has been seen as an appropriate profession for women. Whereas computer science and electrical engineering, like philosophy, physics, and film, have very small num- bers of women PhDs, let alone tenured faculty, LIS has near parity between men and women in terms of full time faculty. LIS's very large female master's degree population has been a resource for an al- most gender-balanced faculty. This is of course a problem of its own, given that in an unconstrained social world we would expect the gender and racial identities of those earning PhDs to mirror those earn- ing MLIS degrees. Nevertheless, in com- parison to these other high profile fields, LIS education has a noteworthy position in terms of educating large numbers of women to master, and hopefully innovate, ICTs. The example of education in these high status and very masculinized fields holds insights about the pitfalls of these environ- ments for women. Particularly worrisome is the declining numbers of women in computer science in recent years (Stross, 2008). Gains in undergraduate women's participation in computer programming have been lost. Although more women have turned to technically sophisticated work like web development, computer programming and engineering are dispro- portionately masculine (with an accompa- nying salary difference). But LIS remains a technology-intensive field that is friend- ly to women. Problem Identification and Competition in Education The demographic composition of these high-status, high-stakes fields matters deeply, particularly in regard to the issue of problem identification. Historians and philosophers of science like Sandra Hard- ing (1991) argue that one reason why rep- resentation of women and people of color in the sciences is so crucial is because question setting happens and research agendas are formed from the standpoints of those doing science. This poses at least two problems for the question of competi- tion and innovation in library science. The first problem is about the kinds of
8 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE questions that will be amenable to solv- ing through competition. Competition re- quires measures and endpoints at which to measure. Problems that cannot be con- ceptualized in this way, or which involve holistic, qualitative solutions, will be at a disadvantage for selection. If competition is the motor of innovation, then competi- tive work risks being about novel ways to turn a profit or increase market efficiencies rather than novel solutions to actual social problems. When competition and inno- vation are linked, then profit-generating solutions to social problems will be the ones that "win" whether they are best or not. For example, though malaria has long killed far more people than AIDS, it hasn't been given very much attention, because the people who are at risk are unable to pay for vaccines or cures. Malaria has been a third world problem. Only since one of the world's richest entrepreneurs, Bill Gates, decided to fund research has this dire issue been given due attention. So when we use competition as a tool to produce innova- tion, we must ask: what kinds of problems are likely to attract the attention of people who thrive in competitive environments? And what kinds of solutions will be con- sidered acceptable and successful? The second problem for library science is the perspective from which problems are identified and solutions generated. The presumption is that problems identified through competition and tested in mar- kets are of universal interest and common good. Yet power differentiated groups are less able to participate in the measurement of their success (i.e., in the marketplace). And the research questions selected on behalf of marginalized groups may not be problems they would choose to study were they to design the research program. This leaves crucial questions: What kinds of innovation can we expect to emerge from competitive environments, given the kinds of actors who are drawn to them and who succeed in them? What problems will be selected for research and development, given that competitiveness valorizes certain values and points of view while excising others? For example, Cow- an (1983) shows that the development of new household technologies did not free women from the domestic sphere. Rather, it allowed women to enter the paid labor force while leaving the gendered division of labor in the home untouched. Domestic technologies developed by those who do not use them, as Cowan shows, actually entailed new levels and expectations of work, paradoxically extending women's work inside the home. In her study of early electrical communication, Marvin (1998) argues that "men . . . wanted control of all communication conducted through the technology that belonged to them. Rules of expertise that invested the knowledge- able with power over the less knowledge- able transformed stories of women's elec- trical ineptitude into homilies that justified men's control of women's communica- tion" (p. 24). Nevertheless, Martin (1991) notes that women's use of the phone did not align with the male designers' inten- tions for it (p. 146). Co-opting it for their own purposes, women shaped the conven- tions for use of this early technology (p. 1 4 1 ). This is instructive to a techno-centric field that often seems to believe that wom- en are afraid of technology, its own history to the contrary. Creativity and Autonomy, and Sources of Innovation I now want to return to an earlier claim I made about technological determinism, and that is in relation to the presumed link between competition and innovation. It is the dogma of the current age that innova- tion arises from competition. However, a body of research over the last 30 years lev- ies a strong argument against this belief. The now large literature of self-determi- nation theory convincingly demonstrates that the kinds of reward systems used to cultivate competitive environments actu- ally take a toll on the kinds of creativity needed to develop novel solutions to prob-
Gendered Narratives of Innovation Through Competition 9 lems. As the self-determination theory lit- erature shows, people are more creative and happy when their work allows them to be autonomous, related, and competent (Ryan & Deci, 2000; Ryan, Bernstein, & Brown, 2010; Weinstein & Ryan, 2010). Autonomy is defined as self-willing, vo- litional, as being an agent in the action rather than being a "pawn" (Weinstein & Ryan, 2010, p. 223). The need for related- ness is satisfied through work that makes people feel close and connected to others. Competence is the feeling that comes from the opportunities to use skills, and to take effective action. When test subjects were offered rewards for solving problems, their interest in solving problems decreased, because their actions were no longer self- directed, but controlled by another. Ryan and Deci's research shows that rewards destroy curiosity and innovation, and that competitive, rewards-based systems lose their effectiveness when they are not ap- plied to more basic, rote work. Innovation in Action Competitiveness has costs of its own and poses measurement and other chal- lenges in spheres where processes and out- comes have been the name of the game, particularly in the traditionally feminized fields of education and librarianship. But even in the high status realm of techno- science, the best player is not always the winner. H. M. Collins' (1999) well-known study of the development of TEA lasers in the US and UK examines how scien- tific knowledge is transmitted through networks between laboratories. Although published accounts of how lasers were built existed, labs were unable to build them from these instructions. Tacit as- pects of that specialized knowledge could not be communicated through publishing channels, even when scientists had every intention of transmitting that knowledge transparently. Labs that developed lasers required collaboration with other labs. While there was often a desire for some sort of knowledge exchange, networks of relationships played a necessary role in this innovation. In his refinement of Thomas Kuhn's (1970) concept of scientific paradigms, Peter Gallison (1999) describes "trading zones" as a metaphor for understanding how cooperation between researchers en- ables new scientific paradigms. Physics researchers in the subfields of theory, ex- perimentation, and instrumentation ratchet the field along, asynchronously, as "inter- calated" series of paradigm shifts occur in one domain and then make their way to new domains, via "trading zones." Trad- ing zones allowed collaboration between specialist subfields that benefited each specialty. In these localized opportuni- ties for exchange, trading partners are not required to share the same meanings and purposes for the traded information in or- der to participate. Our often teleological and determinis- tic understanding of scientific progress is deconstructed in a case study from chick- en virology by Hans-Jörg Rheinberger (1999). Although Peyton Rous discovered what turned out to be viral chicken sarco- ma in 191 1, his project was shelved as in- terests in oncology and virology changed. Half a century later, Albert Claude won the Nobel Prize for his work in virology. Only then could Rous's work be under- stood as part of virology. Retrospectively, the development of this research looks like a continuous trajectoiy, but the trajectory was actually discontinuous and ruptured. The fact that we have invented or discov- ered something makes that development seem inevitable, but things could always have turned out some other way. That is evident from Cowan's (1985) famous study, which explains "how the refrigera- tor got its hum": the electric refrigerator became standard in US households even though gas refrigerators were silent, more durable, and generally superior. As Cowan puts it, "The machine that was 'best' from the point of view of the producers was not necessarily 'best' from the point of view
1 0 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE of the consumer" (p. 2 1 4). Other apocry- phal examples of technological victories that defy the belief that the best competitor wins include the well-known case of the battle between VHS and Betamax video technology, and the QWERTY keyboard (Bowker and Star, 1999, p. 14). I want to give one more example from science and technology studies. Not only is competition not a guarantor of innova- tion, our cultural belief in it can obscure other explanations for innovation. Alison Wy lie's ( 1 999) study shows how archaeol- ogy's enshrined belief that male-centered hunting activities dominated prehistoric caloric intakes made it difficult to generate plausible hypotheses for the transition to agriculture, it wasn't until archaeologists began accepting evidence that the gather- ing activities of women were crucial to the survival of prehistoric people that archaeo- logical evidence could be interpreted in re- lation to this transition. Women's leading role in the development of agriculture - arguably the most significant innovation in human history - could finally be detected. Gendered Division of Labor Having now established that innova- tion and competition do not entail each other, and that our notions of technology connote masculinity, I want to turn now to the particular work of library science and education. At the core of people-centric work like library science and education, is the sense that the person offering the ser- vice cares enough about the person being served that she ensures a positive outcome in a way that is sensitive to the feelings and perceptions of the person being served. Arlie Hochschild (2003) calls this man- agement of feeling "emotional labor," and her fine-grained study documents the ways women are called on to manage their and others' feelings in a way men are not (p. 178). Feminized work that involves care of others is underpaid, and the skill that makes it successful is invisible, because it is believed to emanate naturally from ap- propriate women's bodies. Organizations often "seek ways to buffer their custom- ers from the rougher edges of competition and rationalization," relying on skillful employees to "fill the gap between old and new, taking up the emotional labor of 'service with a smile', or 'total customer satisfaction' " (Suchman & Bishop, 2000, p. 330). Successful education and mentorship depend on this skill, which, like house- hold labor, is difficult to account for in "competitive" economic analysis. But, as Hochschild's study shows, the work is of- ten done in hostile circumstances because those being served have higher expecta- tions for this kind of skillful management when women are providing the service. Bowker and Star's (1999) case study of nursing work speaks to the invisibility of this labor as well. Care work marks a feminized profes- sion and position, no matter the sex of the worker. Technology is positioned in our culture as rational and precise and there- fore masculine and unemotional. The emphasis on (silicon-based) technologi- cal skill in the last two or three decades can be seen as a bid for status by denying the feminized and second class aspects of library work, while emphasizing the mas- culinized connotations of ICTs. This bid is paradoxical because the labor of care is at the core of libraiy work, whether or not that work is read through a lens of "cus- tomer service." And the bid is anti-female because it fails to properly understand that interpersonal labor is in fact work, and that it is essential to the negotiation between expert users - librarians - and their clien- tele. This is what Susan Leigh Star (1999) calls "articulation work": the labor nec- essary to make technologies fit together seamlessly. As Star demonstrates, "In- formation systems . . . may leave gaps in work processes that require real-time ad- justments, or articulation work, to com- plete the processes" (p. 385). In fact, few technologies fit together seamlessly; con-
Gendered Narratives of Innovation Through Competition 1 1 flicting proprietary standards, and layers of old and new software and hardware, mean that every system is an assemblage. There's usually someone behind the scenes doing articulation work that makes the fit invisible, or seamless. In the case of LIS, all sorts of invisible work goes on to get patrons hooked up with the materials they need. In her essay on the conditions for objec- tivity in high stakes techno-science, Don- na Haraway (1991b) argues that we must take responsibility for our enabling condi- tions, including our technologies, which serve as prostheses, or enabling technolo- gies (p. 249). If we are to apply Haraway's insight and think of technologies as sig- nificant prostheses, we can see that the work of librarians is primarily work that hooks up people with their technologies. Not only do librarians articulate technolo- gies so they work together more smoothly, they help people adapt technologies to their own individual and collective uses. The articulation work required of library workers is both technological and affec- tive, rather than competitive. Pedagogy As 1 have noted, innovation does not just produce new commodities, it creates new ways to decrease the costs of com- modity production and distribution, essen- tially by suppressing labor costs, typically by deskilling, so that more vulnerable la- bor pools that command lower wages can have the chance to compete in the labor market. In Haraway's (1991a) analysis: To be feminized means to be made extremely vulnerable; able to be disas- sembled, reassembled, exploited as a reserve labor force, seen less as workers than as servers; subjected to time arrange- ments on and off the paid job that make a mockery of a limited work day; leading to an existence that always borders on being obscene, out of place, and reducible to sex. Deskilling is an old strategy newly applicable to formerly privileged workers, (p. 166) Education has been difficult to corn- modify, and remains labor intensive. But innovations in online education are creat- ing inroads in the deskilling and commod- ification of teaching labor (Lewin, 2010), and we see some of the consequences of that in our changing language. Course curriculum has been renamed course con- tent and teaching is now called delivery. Whereas publishing and photocopying have long enabled the reuse of course ma- terials, and correspondence courses have been around for at least a century, video technologies and now the internet allow the most crucial aspects of teaching, face to face, interpersonal relating, to be cap- tured and reused, enabling new depths of commodification. These forms of instruc- tion are arguably very helpful for the tradi- tional demographic of LIS students: wom- en who, in heterosexual marriages and the primary caregivers for their children, are seeking a career change. Because the mo- bility required to move to a university and attend full time is substantially and dispro- portionately not available to these women, distance education opened the possibility of an advanced education for a meaning- ful career for people who otherwise are socially constrained from doing so. It is worth noting that most library work satis- fies the psychological needs for autonomy, relatedness, and competence identified by Ryan and Deci (2000), which makes it at- tractive to women and men both. At the same time, technologies for on- line education also have some negative consequences. While online education al- lows students to take on a course of study while out of phase with the space-time of the institution or instructor, it does not improve pedagogy itself. Rather, online education creates new labor burdens that must either be absorbed by the instructors or shifted off onto students. It makes some kinds of academic labor vulnerable, par- ticularly when it is unclear which materi-
1 2 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE als belong to the instructor and which to the institution, or when veteran instructors are paid to produce "course content" that will then be administered and managed by less expert and more exploitable course assistants or adjuncts. Optimistically, what we learn from re- working education with new technologies is about the aspects of excellent pedagogy that resist commodification. Particularly, teaching, like technology, is always a re- lationship, and that relationship is under- girded by the labor of care. This labor is embodied labor, and although technolo- gies can facilitate that labor, it is time and energy intensive. As Hochschild (2003) demonstrates in her classic study of flight attendants, affective labor is literally vital to the successful delivery of other kinds of services. The insights generated from Ryan and Deci's work on self-determination theory are also at the core of Alfie Kohn's work on education. Kohn (1999) has long ar- gued that reward systems, like the reward systems supposed to spur innovation through competition, actually backfire and harm students' learning. We must be on guard against educational strategies that make LIS education look like No Child Left Behind. None of this is to say that competitive play has no place in LIS pedagogy. Rather, what is at issue is how we conceive LIS education as a project. As the foregoing analysis indicates, innovations whose cen- tral purpose is to decrease program costs by reducing the amount of time available to instructors for mentorship and for quali- tative (and labor-intensive) assessments are ideological. The affective labor need- ed to translate challenging material to stu- dents who can then "make friends" with both technologies and theories should be affirmed and protected in LIS education. This means that the kinds of conservative innovations, as described by Suchman and Bishop, that seek to make schools of li- brary and information science more finan- cially competitive at the expense of peda- gogy that is relational and expert can be challenged and rejected. LIS educators can shift the narrative of innovation; for ex- ample, internet technologies can be used provide rigorous, asynchronous learning and mentorship, or they can be used to decrease labor costs, but they cannot do much of both simultaneously. In short, LIS educators have the choice to model re- spect and appreciation for the kinds of la- bor that will be needed for effective work in the collaborations in which MLIS hold- ers will be expected to thrive - between co-workers and clients. Insisting on the necessity of embodied, engaged teaching labor is necessary for producing creative and critical thinkers who are able to invent and innovate, and who, in turn, will be competitive on the MLIS job market. Conclusion Librarians and library educators alike are facing deskilling and de-profession- alization under the intertwined guises of competitiveness and innovation. I have shown that competition and innovation are ideological concepts that are also gen- dered. Avoiding essentialist responses, I argued that the stakes in library science are high because it is a feminized profession. I have challenged the idea that there is a causal connection between competition and innovation; I have also provided evi- dence that approaches that support related- ness, autonomy, and self-direction would be more helpful for spurring innovation in LIS, and would inform more appropriate pedagogical strategies. Additionally, this review essay offers an entry point to litera- ture from science and technology studies that would be useful for both LIS research agendas as well as for LIS curriculum. STS literature provides theories of tech- nology in society and methods for those who wish to move beyond the clichés of technological determinism. Finally, I have argued that teaching and learning are im- portantly relational, and that both knowl- edge and the affective labor needed to help
Gendered Narratives of Innovation Through Competition 1 3 students acquire it resist commodification. Is competition one way of spurring so- lutions to problems? Yes, it is one form, and sometimes a useful one, for generat- ing problem solving. However, for com- petition to be a useful strategy, it has to happen in a larger context of cooperation and collaboration. Competition it is only one strategy, and a problematic and limit- ed one at that, in an array of helpful styles for innovating and learning. Library sci- ence practices successfully put all kinds of people and technology together. This is a home team advantage that could inform strategies in the LIS education playbook. References Balka, E. (2009). Gender, information technology, and making health work: Unpacking complex relations at work. In E. Balka, E. Green, & F. Henwood (Eds.), Gender, Health and Informa- tion Technology in Context (pp. 104-121). New York, NY: Palgrave MacMillan. Bowker, G. C., & Star, S. L. (1999). Sorting things out : Classification and its consequences. Cam- bridge, MA: MIT Press. Cockburn, C. (1991). Brothers: Male dominance and technological change. London, UK: Pluto Press. Collins, H. M. (1999). The TEA set: Tacit knowl- edge and scientific networks. In M. Biagioli (Ed.), The science studies reader (pp. 95-109). New York, NY: Routledge. Cowan, R. S. (1983). More work for Mother: The ironies of household technology from the open hearth to the microwave. New York, NY: Basic Books. Cowan, R. S. (1985). How the refrigerator got its hum. In D. A. MacKenzie & J. Wajcman (Eds.), The social shaping of technology: How the refrig- erator got its hum (pp. 202-218). Milton Keynes, UK: Open University Press. Dewey, M. (1979). Women in libraries: How they are handicapped. In K. Weibel, K. Heim, & D. J. Ellsworth (Eds.), The role of women in librarian- ship, 1876-1976: The entry, advancement, and struggle for equalization in one profession (pp. 10-12). Phoenix, A Z: Oryx Press. Edwards, P. N. (1995). From "impact" to social process: Computers in society and culture. In S. Jasanoff, G. E. Markle, J. C. Petersen, & T. Pinch (Eds.), Handbook of science and technology stud- ies. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Gallison, P. (1999). Trading zone: Coordinating ac- tion and belief. In M. Biagioli (Ed.), The science studies reader (pp. 137-160). New York, NY: Routledge. Haraway, D. J. (1991a). A cyborg manifesto: Sci- ence, technology, and socialist-feminism in the late twentieth century. In Simians, cyborgs, and women: The reinvention of nature (pp. 149-1 82). New York, NY: Routledge. Haraway, D. J. (1991b). Situated knowledges: The science question in feminism and the privilege of partial perspective. In Simians, cyborgs, and women: The reinvention of nature (pp. 1 83-202). New York, NY: Routledge. Harding, S. G. (1991). Whose science? Whose knowledge?: Thinking from women 's lives. Itha- ca, N.Y: Cornell University Press. Hochschild, A. R. (2003). The managed heart: Commercialization of human feeling. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. King, K. (in press). An introduction to feminism and writing technologies. Koch, S. C., Muller, S., & Sieverding, M. (2008). Women and computers: Effects of stereotype threat on attribution of failure. Computers & Edu- cation, 4/(4), 1795-1803. Kohn, A. (1999). Punished by rewards: The trouble with gold stars, incentive plans, A 's, praise, and other bribes (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Mariner Books. Kuhn, T. S. (1970). The structure of scientific revo- lutions. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. Lewin, T. (2010, November 10). Scrutiny takes toll on for-profit college company. The New York Times, p. Al, A22. Martin, M. (1991). "Hello central?": Gender, tech- nology, and culture in the formation of telephone systems. Montreal, Canada: McGill-Queen's University Press. Marvin, C. (1988). When old technologies were new : Thinking about electric communication in the late nineteenth century. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. Niederle, M., & Vesterlund, L. (2007). Do women shy away from competition? Do men compete too much? Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(3), 1067-1101. Rheinberger, H. -J. (1999). Experimental Systems: Historiality, Narration, and Deconstruction. In M. Biagioli (Ed.), The Science Studies Reader (pp. 417-429). New York: Routledge. Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2000). Self-determi- nation theoiy and the facilitation of intrinsic motivation, social development, and well-being. American Psychologist, 55(1), 68-78. Ryan, R. M., Bernstein, J. H., & Brown, K. W. (2010). Weekends, work, and well-being: Psy-
1 4 JOURNAL OF EDUCATION FOR LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SCIENCE chological need satisfactions and day of the week effects on mood, vitality, and physical symptoms. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 29( I ), 95-122. Star, S. L. (1999). The ethnography of infrastruc- ture. American Behavioral Scientist, 43(3), 377- 391. Suchman, L., & Bishop, L. (2000). Problematiz- ing "innovation" as a critical project. Technol- ogy Analysis & Strategic Management, /2(3), 327-333. Stross, R. (2008, November 15). What has driven women out of computer science? The New York Times, p. BU4. Wajcman, J. (1995). Feminist theories of technol- ogy. In S. Jasanoff, G. E. Markle, J. C. Petersen, & T. Pinch (Eds.), Handbook of science and tech- nology studies (pp. 189-204). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Wallace, D., & Naidoo, J. (Eds.). (2009). Library and information science education statistical re- port 2009. Association for Library and Informa- tion Science Education. Wallace, D., & Naidoo, J. (Eds.). (2010). Library and information science education statistical re- port 2010. Association for Library and Informa- tion Science Education. Weinstein, N., & Ryan, R. M. (2010). When help- ing helps: Autonomous motivation for prosocial behavior and its influence on well-being for the helper and recipient. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 98(2), 222-244. Wyatt, S. (2008). Technological determinism is dead; Long live technological determinism. In E. J. Hackett, O. Amsterdamská, M. Lynch, & J. Wajcman (Eds.), Handbook of science and technology studies (3rd ed., pp. 165-180). Cam- bridge, MA: MIT Press. Wylie, A. (1999). The engendering of archaeol- ogy: Refiguring feminist science studies. In M. Biagioli (Ed.), The Science Studies Reader (pp. 552-567). New York, NY: Routledge.