THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Volume 63 APRIL 1993 Number 2 SEGREGATING PROPAGANDA IN AMERICAN LIBRARIES: RALPH ULVELING CONFRONTS THE INTELLECTUAL FREEDOM COMMITTEE' Louise S. Robbins2 At the 1951 annual conference of the American Library Association, Detroit Public Library director and former ALA president Ralph A. Ulveling challenged the ALA's newly adopted Statement on Labeling with a proposal to segregate library materials containing propaganda into the reference collection and to make them available only to "researchers." His proposal forced the Intellectual Freedom Committee to confront the lack of consensus on intellectual freedom issues within the association. The necessity to respond with one voice to the issues raised by Ulveling preoccupied the committee for almost a year. The confrontation also caused the committee to make an educational effort, aimed at librarians, its top priority. "For months I have thought of the incompatibility of this library policy with my obligation as an American citizen," said Ralph A. Ulveling con- cerning the Library Bill of Rights. The director of the Detroit Public Library and former president of the American Library Association (ALA) spoke at a membership meeting in June 1951 to advocate the segregation of communist propaganda materials [1, p. 1170]. His chal- lenge to the ALA's newly adopted Statement on Labeling precipitated 1. I wish to thank the following for their assistance and advice in the research and writing of this article: David K. Berninghausen, former chairman of the Intellectual Freedom Committee; Maynard Brichford and the staff of the University of Illinois Archives; and Wayne A. Wiegand, professor, School of Library and Information Studies, Univer- sity of Wisconsin-Madison. 2. School of Library and Information Studies, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Helen C. White Hall, 600 N. Park Street, Madison, Wisconsin 53706. [Libra}y Quarterly, vol. 63, no. 2, pp. 143-165] C 1993 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0024-2519/93/6302-0001 $0 1.00 143
144 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY an extended debate that revealed the lack of consensus within the associ- ation concerning librarians' adherence to their intellectual freedom credo and convinced the Intellectual Freedom Committee (IFC)3 to pur- sue a program to indoctrinate librarians in their professional role as defenders of access to all points of view. The years immediately following the 1948 adoption of the revised Library Bill of Rights-to the "ordinary interpretation" of which Ulve- ling objected-were busy and contentious for the IFC. Its first eight years had not been so active. As Evelyn Geller's Forbidden Books in Ameri- can Public Libraries, 1876-1939 [2] recounts, librarians had only gradu- ally accepted a role as guardians of the freedom to read, adopting in 1939 the initial Library's Bill of Rights [31, which extolled the value of representing all sides of controversial issues but did not specifically pro- hibit censorship. Established in 1940, the Committee on Intellectual Freedom to Safeguard the Rights of Library Users to Freedom of In- quiry had gotten off to a slow start.4 While the need for effective action was evident, the IFC found it difficult to respond, according to 1945-48 chairman Alice Higgins, who complained about the arduous process of arriving at important policy decisions through correspondence [5]. As World War II ended, the United States found itself facing a world in which the Soviet Union had expanded its sphere of influence and over which the mushroom cloud of atomic weaponry hung ominously. The Cold War, with all its fears and suspicions, had begun.5 If commu- nism was a threat from without, many believed it also posed a threat from within. Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) Director J. Edgar Hoover and the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) warned against communism's insidious influence.6 The Federal Loyalty Program stood as testimony to the dangers; public employees- including librarians-were required to sign loyalty oaths as a condition of their employment.7 Many states established antisubversive commit- 3. The name was changed in 1947 to the Committee on Intellectual Freedom and later, through usage, to the Intellectual Freedom Committee. 4. For an overview of the years 1939-48, see [4, pp. 12-62]. For name, see ibid. 5. For a look at the politics of the time, see [6]; for an excellent overview of the period as a manifestation of a recurring pattern of intolerance and repression, see [7]. 6. For an excellent contemporary examination of the operation, effectiveness, and costs, both monetary and personal, of the Federal Loyalty Program, see [8]; for a comparable look at loyalty tests generally, see [9]. The types of information gathered by the FBI concerning writers and the uses to which it was sometimes put is examined by [10]. A fascinating collection of case studies about the period can be found in [ I1]. A readable study of the House Un-American Activities Committee can be found in [12]. 7. In my research in progress, I have discovered that between 1947 and 1956 librarians in at least Los Angeles and Oakland, California; Maryland; Seattle, Washington; and Massachusetts were fired for refusing to sign or resigned rather than sign loyalty oaths
SEGREGATING PROPAGANDA 145 tees, such as California's Tenney Committee, which scrutinized not only individuals' actions, but also their associations and reading materials. As Ellen Schrecker points out in No Ivoiy Tower: McCarthyism and the Universities, many academics' careers were ruined, not because of any finding of guilt by one of the investigatory committees, but because of suspicion cast upon them by their being called to testify [ 13]. Librarians were confronted more than ever with would-be censors who often saw controversial, unfamiliar, or critical ideas as a threat to the American way of life. Unable to maintain her efforts on behalf of the IFC, Higgins resigned as chairman in late 1947 [14]. Although David K. Berninghausen, librar- ian at Cooper Union for the Sciences and Arts, had never been active in ALA, President Paul North Rice named him to replace Higgins on the strength of an article, "Book-Banning and Witch Hunts" [ 15], which Berninghausen had sent to him [ 16]. Under Berninghausen's leadership and with Higgins's blueprint for action [14], the IFC began a period of intense activity. This activity pushed the ALA to make hard choices that helped define not only its stance with regard to specific intellectual freedom issues, but also the identity of librarians as guardians of free access to ideas, even questionable ideas. The unanimous approval of the strengthened Library Bill of Rights by the ALA Council in June 1948 [171 was followed immediately by a two-year controversy over what, if anything, the ALA should do to pro- test the use of loyalty oaths and investigations in libraries.8 In February 1950, Senator Joseph McCarthy of Wisconsin launched his series of attacks alleging Communists in government itself. By late 1950, as the Cold War heated into the Korean conflict, the IFC was forced to re- spond to demands that libraries remove films from circulation and label books accused of being communist. This time of ferment exposed the differences within the ALA concerning the role of the librarian in de- fending the freedom to read.9 The much-publicized conflict between Ulveling and the IFC epito- mized the dilemma in which the ALA found itself as it attempted to forge a unified position on intellectual freedom in this difficult period. The conflict was at base a struggle between the concept of the librarian as one who provides only those materials that are "good for" the reader, according to the values of the librarian, or as one who provides access as a condition of employment. These oaths generally included an anticommunist affi- davit and in some cases a list of "subversive" organizations in which the signer had to acknowledge membership. 8. For a discussion of this controversy, see 14, pp. 102-22]. 9. For an earlier, much more unanimous attitude of the ALA and librarians generally toward censorship and propaganda, see [18].
146 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY to a variety of materials-even those on contested and controversial ideas-and trusts the reader to make judgments for himself.'0 Brought on by the problems presented by the handling of propaganda materials, the conflict developed at the 1951 annual conference and lasted a full year. The seeds for the dissension between Ulveling and the IFC were sown in positions taken by the IFC and endorsed by the ALA Council in response to challenges to library materials from organizations such as the American Legion and the Sons of the American Revolution (S.A.R.). In September 1950, Berninghausen reported to the members on a case of censorship in Peoria, Illinois, involving films. This episode [21] pitted librarian Xenophon Smith against the Peoria American Legion, which protested the circulation of several United Nations films, including the award-winning Brotherhood of Man, on the grounds that they contained communist propaganda that was too subtle to be detected as such [22, pp. 37-451. Smith had the backing of many people in the community, the Educa- tion Film Library Association, the IFC, and Audio-Visual Board chair- man Raynard C. Swank. Still, he and the library board decided to restrict circulation to the library screening room [21, pp. 447-48]. According to Berninghausen, Smith felt that the Library Bill of Rights did not cover films; Berninghausen asked the members whether it should be revised to clarify that it covered all media [23]. At a midwinter 1951 joint meeting of the IFC and the Audio-Visual Board, some three hundred attendees unanimously approved a footnote to the Library Bill of Rights, sending it on to the ALA Council, where it was enthusiastically passed [24, 25]. The footnote extended the Library Bill of Rights to "all materials and media of communication used or collected by libraries" [26, p. 312]. Although the footnote embodied a consensus at the midwinter confer- ence, a second item-labeling-did not generate such unity. The label- ing question was first raised by ALA executive secretary John Mackenzie Cory, who forwarded to Berninghausen inquiries from Ulveling [27] and Harold W. Tucker [28], director of the Gary, Indiana, Public Li- brary. Each requested ALA assistance in evaluating foreign language materials. While the selection of these materials always posed problems, in 1951 they seemed more pressing. A selector had to be cautious about what to include in open shelf collections, since so many books published in the Soviet bloc were believed to "contain Communist propaganda in 10. These ideas are labeled the "censorship theory" and the "sponsorship theory" in a quotation sent by Rutherford Rogers to David Berninghausen during the height of the controversy [191. The quotation is found in [20, p. 44].
SEGREGATING PROPAGANDA 147 some degree" [27]. Ulveling asked ALA to bring together people at the midwinter meeting to discuss the issue. Cory posed two problems to the IFC: "the desirability (or undesirability) and the methods by which some kinds of library materials may be labeled to clearly identify their origin and special point of view" and "the extent to which and the manner in which library materials may be restrained in use although not actually withdrawn from the collection." These dilemmas, Cory remarked, were closely related to the film censorship issue with which the IFC and the council had just dealt [27]. The problem surfaced again, in more dramatic fashion, when the Montclair, New Jersey, S.A.R. called for labeling and restricted circula- tion of all "Communistic or subversive" literature and for keeping a roster of those who used it [29]. Margery Quigley, librarian of the Mont- clair Public Library, wrote Berninghausen (by this time executive secre- tary of the IFC), asking for advice in order that she and her library board "should act in accordance" with IFC recommendations [30]. Ber- ninghausen forwarded the request to chairman Rutherford Rogers, who suggested formulating a statement for the executive board to consider [31]. Meanwhile, the Montclair S.A.R. sent copies of their resolutions to all New Jersey newspapers and to ALA president Clarence Graham. Other New Jersey libraries were experiencing similar challenges [32]. The IFC arrived at a unanimous decision opposing labeling. Rogers, however, concerned that IFC members might be "unusually sensitive to the subject of intellectual freedom" and that they did not represent a cross section of types of libraries [33, p. 241], sent questionnaires to a number of librarians asking their opinions on labeling, "inasmuch as this problem is growing in scope and in seriousness."' Rogers said the IFC felt that "once labeling is recommended it will be impossible to restrict it to Communist literature alone. This conclusion is supported by reports to ALA that certain religious groups have demanded that libraries label material unfavorable to them" [35]. To present the IFC's report to the council on July 13, 1951, Rogers reviewed the S.A.R. proposal and quoted from many of the twenty sur- vey responses [33, 36]. The "fire of some critics" [37] that Berning- hausen expected did not materialize, and the council unanimously adopted the statement on labeling. "Librarians should not use the technique of labeling as a means of predisposing readers against library materials," the statement read, and then enumerated six reasons why: (1) Although totalitarian states find it proper to establish criteria for judging materials to be subversive, to 11. Berninghausen opposed the questionnaire as appearing to put the IFC on the defen- sive when it had been working hard to establish its authority, according to [341.
148 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY do so is contrary to democracy and leads to "injustice and ignorance rather than justice and enlightenment." (2) The fact that a magazine or book is in a library does not indicate its endorsement by the library. (3) People would be unlikely to agree on the material that should be labeled as subversive or the sources of information that should be regarded as suspect. (4) "Labeling is an attempt to prejudice the reader, and as such, it is a censor's tool." (5) Labeling "violates the spirit of the Library Bill of Rights." (6) Although librarians are opposed to communism and con- cerned about the threat it poses, "if materials are labeled to pacify one group, there is no excuse for refusing to label any item in the library's collection." American librarians are opposed to any group "which aims at closing any path to knowledge" [38, p. 242]. As Berninghausen had suspected, however, the council's approval was not the end of the labeling issue. Shortly after Rogers's report was adopted, Ralph Ulveling rose to raise some issues concerning "Book Selection Policies in This Time of Crisis" [1; 36, pp. 116-17]. His state- ment had apparently been formulated as a result of discussions earlier in 1951 with the Detroit Public Library Commission [39]. As associate director and, since 1941, director of the Detroit Public Library, Ulveling had become known throughout the ALA. Not only did he write a great deal (more than sixty articles in his career), but he was in demand as a speaker, especially in the Midwest. Through his writings and speeches, Ulveling shared his vision of the social role of the library, that of leading individuals to higher and higher levels of educational attainment. A liberal on civil rights issues, he responded to the Detroit race riots of 1943 by publishing a brochure aimed at promot- ing understanding and tolerance. He was highly regarded for his politi- cal acumen. In 1944 he used his political talents to prevent the Detroit police department from removing Lillian Smith's Strange Fruit from the library shelves. On the other hand, he felt that librarians had an obliga- tion to guide readers in "right thinking," and he had strong opinions on "cheap and shoddy" books, such as children's series books, which he confined to the reference collection. He had served as president of ALA in 1945-46 [40]. Ulveling began his address to the membership meeting with a brief preface on the menace of communism. He then stressed the importance of the role of the librarian as book selector. During an "ideological war" in which propaganda "is second only to military strategy," he said, a failure of librarians to censor reading materials kept channels for enemy propaganda open. Thus he found the "usual interpretation" of the Li- brary Bill of Rights to be incompatible with his citizenship obligations. Ulveling called for "educational statesmanship of a high order" in the preparation of a suitable book selection policy.
SEGREGATING PROPAGANDA 149 Ulveling cited the Detroit Public Library's policies for the home read- ing and the reference-research services. Materials for the former, in- tended for the branches, were intended to assist users in their "best personal development," not with "the refinement or extension of knowl- edge" and so were collected "without regard to any obligations the total institution may have for preserving knowledge in its most comprehen- sive sense," he said, "or for maintaining open avenues for the fullest exercise of intellectual freedom of inquiry" [1, p. 1170]. Materials for the reference-research services, located in the main library, were de- signed to provide all kinds of material, "even the socially, economically, religiously or politically unorthodox materials necessary for research, for freedom of inquiry and for information of all types." In practice, Ulveling said, informational books on communism would be found in both, while "communist expressions of opinion or misleading propa- ganda" would only be in reference, "where duplication of titles is lim- ited." In that way, people "with inquiring minds" would have access to them, but "general readers" would have "placed before them only the books which have been chosen because of their importance in helping people to realize their best development and to carry out their obliga- tions ably and well" [1, p. 1171]. Coming as it did right after the adoption of the Statement on Label- ing, Ulveling's prescriptive and protective policy raised questions that could not be dealt with briefly. ALA president Clarence Graham re- ferred them to the IFC with instructions to report no later than the 1952 midwinter meeting. The membership greeted with applause a re- quest that the issue be discussed in the American Library Association Bulle- tin (ALAB) [36, p. 121]. As IFC member Marion Hawes suggested to Berninghausen later, the Detroit practice was not unusual in larger libraries, which could not af- ford to put all titles in all the branches but which purchased single copies of some titles and kept them in large, central collections, at least some portion of which was relatively open."2 The statement of the policy as Ulveling had articulated it, however, Hawes commented, implied "a more restrictive screening" [42]. In fact, the practice was commonplace, justified by finances or the need to provide "professional guidance" in the use of the more sensitive materials. It was also a manifestation of the librarians' awareness that book selection was, at least in part, a political process. Librarians, who generally shared the dominant community values, exercised "constant vigilance" in selecting books. Not only did public librarians as a group tend to segregate potentially controversial 12. Joseph Turow has discussed the differences in collection practices between branch and central collections in [41].
150 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY materials in order to block access to them, but they did so all the while insisting on "the stereotypes of democratic freedom of expression and diversity of opinion" [43, p. 133].'s This contradiction grew out of librar- ians' shifting understanding of who they were and their desire for pro- fessional autonomy. As guardians of cultural values, they defended their autonomy by keeping censorship of materials within their own jurisdic- tion, since they assumed they knew what reading material contributed to the "best personal development" of their patrons. As guardians of free access, they defended their autonomy by defending their right to make available to their patrons all kinds of materials, even those deemed "subversive" by some groups.'4 Berninghausen wryly suggested that committee members "make a new heading in your files.... I can predict with great assurance that this folder . . . will be a thick one by January, 1952" [45, p. 1]. As new ALA executive secretary David Clift, ALAB editor Alice Dunlap, and IFC chairman Rogers defined the assignment, the IFC would prepare a paper commenting on each item raised by Ulveling so members could prepare for midwinter discussion [45, p. 1]. The ALAB would not pub- lish Ulveling's statement [46], nor would it publish any comment by Ulveling on the IFC's response to his speech, Dunlap added, since to do so might give the impression that Ulveling's statement represented official ALA policy [471. Committee member Frederic Melcher, publisher of Library Journal (LJ), learned from the journal's editor, Helen Wessells, that "a large number of librarians seem to like Mr. Ulveling's program" (48]. Ulveling told Wessells that he was "amazed" at the many requests for his state- ment and at the number who had told him "they were glad that at least somebody had come out with a workable policy statement which can be followed in practice by librarians and not just in theoretical discussions" [49].15 Wessells told Ulveling that his statement would appear in full in the August LJ. Predicting they both would "be subject to brickbats," she promised "to go to bat" in order to achieve "some sound policy." After years in which "every purchase was dictated by the reaction of Con- gress," she said, "I know full well that a compromise has to be reached" [50]. 13. Leon Carnovsky expressed this duality of attitude in [44, p. 21]: "I have never met a public librarian who approved of censorship or one who failed to practice it in some measure." 14. See [2] and [4] for a full discussion of the relationship between librarians' struggle for professional autonomy and the development of the defense of freedom to read. 15. I could not locate in the director's file of the Detroit Public Library Archives any of the letters in support of his position to which he alluded, in spite of an imaginative search of file names.
SEGREGATING PROPAGANDA 151 Berninghausen sent the text of Ulveling's speech to committee mem- bers and asked for their comments [45, pp. 4-8]. Between August and November, he repeatedly solicited opinions from the IFC, council mem- bers, and other correspondents and attempted to express the devel- oping consensus. The task was not simple. Earliest responses came from ALA president-elect Robert B. Downs and the librarian of Rice University, William S. Dix. Downs cautioned that the problem could "become controversial if we allowed our emo- tions to be involved." Saying that Rogers's report "appealed to my heart, and Mr. Ulveling's to my head," he called the former an ideal and the latter a "realistic . .. compromise" [51].16 Dix did not find Ulveling's statement so "serious as it seemed to me at first." The IFC could not "prescribe to the individual librarian what his basis of selection is to be beyond the broad terms of the Bill of Rights," he said. Ulveling's stature as the director of a large city library and a former ALA president meant his opinion would have "great weight"; he must be answered "very care- fully but very calmly" [53]. The "complacency" of Dix and Downs bothered Rogers: If Ulveling's proposal had merely been a call for intelligent book selection, as sug- gested, Ulveling had no reason to address the ALA with his ideas [54, p. 1]. He faulted Ulveling for putting librarians in the "unenviable role" of protecting the "less intelligent and discriminating segment of the population by deciding what is 'good' and 'safe' for them to read" [55]. "Ulveling's proposal seems to me to be labeling," he noted in a confiden- tial postscript. "If so, it is labeling of a most insidious character-shall we say a 'nice' way to label" [54, p. 1]. Marion Hawes, a librarian at the Enoch Pratt Free Library in Baltimore, sent her own and assistant direc- tor Amy Winslow's comments. Both took exception to Ulveling's use of Pratt's collection development policy to support his position. Hawes agreed that Ulveling's position had implications "as disturbing as do those for labeling" [56]. Berninghausen's second letter asked further assistance. In order to try to capture "a complete picture of the attitudes of the members of the committee," he asked them to respond to several questions: (1) Did Ulveling's position conflict with "the usual interpretation of the Library Bill of Rights"? (2) Was the Library Bill of Rights incompatible with librarians' responsibilities as American citizens? (3) How would propa- ganda be defined? Who would decide what was propaganda? (4) Was Ulveling's position based upon the principle of protecting citizens by "screening" their reading? "If so, is this a tenable position?" Who should have access to controversial materials-just the scholar, or the general 16. For a picture of Downs as a champion of intellectual freedom, see [521.
152 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY reader as well? (5) Was this the same question as the labeling question or not [57]? Thurston Taylor, who had recently withstood a challenge to library materials at the Free Public Library of Worcester, Massachusetts, wrote that Ulveling was "as worried about Allen Zoll [a right-wing propagan- dist against the school systems] as by communism" [58]. Hawes agreed that one must label mentally before segregating library materials [59]. Although confused about the issue, Ralph Ellsworth, a former IFC member, said he felt that "we ought to encourage our profession to be against the kind of labeling that most librarians would do if they were encouraged to do so" [60]. Hiller C. Wellman, an IFC member and also a former ALA president, cautioned against "making a mountain out of a molehill." Speaking "heresy" in an attempt to "be practical rather than doctrinaire," Well- man asserted that, while placing "less desirable" books in reference "to diminish their use" did constitute a degree of censorship, "the important point is that this censorship be sound and sensible, and not swayed by outside pressure." It might even allow a library to pursue a liberal policy by stilling public clamor [61]. Wayne Shirley, dean of the Library School at Pratt Institute and not an IFC member, shared Wellman's opinion and urged making no report [62].'7 Mabel Conat, a new IFC member who had recently retired after years at the Detroit Public Library, said Ulveling's position did not conflict with the Library Bill of Rights, since the Detroit Public Library did present materials on all sides of controversial issues. Conat believed Ulveling was trying to find "a positive and practical way of handling propaganda material ... when people are jittery and overly suspicious of public institutions." His policy had enabled him to keep the support of city officials. Admitting that portions of Ulveling's statement smacked of censorship, she attributed that to "unfortunate wording" [63]. Ulveling himself wrote to the IFC, enclosing a letter to Conat. He stressed that he had not intended an attack on the Library Bill of Rights (LBR) but, rather, had hoped it would be clarified. ("Then why did he stress the incompatibility of the LBR and his duties as a citizen?" Berninghausen asked in the margin.) Ulveling urged that only the pol- icy paragraphs in his speech be examined in detail, not those that were intended to give the reasons for writing it. ("Yes, and he's afraid to have this fringe examined too closely," Berninghausen jotted.) Ulveling cited 17. The discussion of the importance of keeping censorship within the purview of the librarian was carried on in correspondence. No one contributed an article with this thesis or even supported it in a letter to the editor of the three widely read journals: ALAB, LJ, or the Wilson Library Bulletin.
SEGREGATING PROPAGANDA 153 his "fan mail" as evidence that many librarians felt the Library Bill of Rights needed clarifying or supplementing [64]. Ulveling's letter had an unintended effect on the previously "compla- cent" Dix, who was "shocked" to realize that Ulveling did believe in some form of labeling. If Ulveling had "weakened to this extent," the "pressures to back up" on censorship issues were stronger than Dix had supposed. Since Ulveling's feelings would have "considerable weight," the IFC needed to be careful to keep the support of the ALA member- ship. "We must somehow contrive to make it clear," Dix said, "that Ulveling's position is an untenable one without branding him officially as one who has violated our basic principles." He did not believe the IFC would have any trouble defeating any amendment to the Library Bill of Rights that Ulveling might propose. His confidence derived, at least in part, from a straw poll he had taken among a group of two hundred librarians attending a meeting at which he had spoken the previous Saturday [65]. A coherent report did not appear any easier than it had previously. Dunlap, however, urged the IFC to meet its "moral obligation" to pub- lish "a fairly detailed analysis" of Ulveling's statement before the mid- winter meeting. She suggested that Rogers and Berninghausen write a statement as IFC members without speaking for the IFC, excerpting comments, both pro and con, already received. They could send this report to IFC members, especially those who had not responded, for additional remarks [66]. Berninghausen followed Dunlap's suggestion [67]. Dix approved of publishing the statement, with modifications; the IFC could not "dodge the issue" by failing to respond [68]. Conat op- posed the report and took issue with the wording of a question the draft called "fundamental": "Is it the responsibility of the librarian to screen the materials placed before readers, thus protecting them from the dan- ger of exposure to 'propaganda'?" Conat found the use of the word "screen") a "smear." "Where does 'screening' start and 'book selection' stop?" she asked. "What is the purpose of librarians and why have book selection courses if they are not to screen and select from the products of the presses for their libraries?" [69]. She sounded much like Wellman, who found that the whole controversy arose "from trying to dodge the fact that some censorship by a librarian is inevitable; and the whole question depends on how he exercises his censorship" [70]. By October 29, at least one other draft had reached the members. Lachlan MacRae, an IFC member who had previously been silent, re- sponded to both drafts by suggesting that the Detroit Public Library's position ran contrary to the Library Bill of Rights and Ulveling was trying to make the position more tenable by encouraging others to join
154 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY it [71]. Hawes [72] and Dix offered few editorial comments but enjoined against "engaging in open debate" with Ulveling, who appeared to be revising his thinking [73]. Dunlap advised that the report should "refer to Mr. Ulveling indirectly as much as possible" [74]. A newly appointed IFC member, John E. Smith of the University of California, Los Angeles, Library, jumped "squarely in the Hawes-Taylor- Rogers-Berninghausen camp." Alluding to Ulveling's reference to the "clear and present danger" of communist propaganda, Smith said that the growing suspicion of unorthodox opinions, the increasing number of censorship attempts, and the punitive measures taken against those suspected of ever harboring "dangerous thoughts" presented a far greater menace. He added, "(And what is propaganda? . . . Whose statement that this or that idea is 'subversive' do we follow? . . . Where do we start and how do we stop, if we embark on this thing?)" [75]. Berninghausen had now achieved a measure of agreement and deter- mined to meet the November 10 deadline. A sheet in his handwriting identified six members and two others (former member Miriam Mat- thews and editor Dunlap) as "Pro," supportive of the draft statement, two members as "Con," and two as "Non-Voting" [76]. The next round of letters, just days later, referred to another revision. The majority had approved the report, but to make it acceptable to Conat, Berninghausen had incorporated a number of her comments on the Detroit policy. He asked her to call him collect to discuss the revision [77]. Dix, who suc- ceeded Rogers as IFC chairman, found the latest draft "definitely an improvement" and voted to publish. "A continued program of indoctri- nation is one of the lines of activity clearly indicated for the Committee," he concluded [78]. The article appeared in the November ALAB [79]. Berninghausen had woven together IFC members' individual comments with excerpts from Ulveling's statement and transitional and summarizing statements. Following background information on Ulveling's speech, Melcher's com- ments enunciated the IFC's position that a program that protected gen- eral readers from contact with books that expressed any attitude other than direct antagonism toward communism was "contrary to good li- brary practice and untenable as a principle." Democracy depended, he said, on the availability of many points of view on which citizens could base their opinions. The article asked whether it is "the responsibility of the librarian to 'protect' branch library readers by rejecting books considered 'unorthodox"' and answered with "an unqualified NO" [79, p. 347]. The segregation of materials, the committee concluded, was "so closely akin to labeling that it must be ruled out as a solution to the problem of handling 'propaganda"' [79, p. 3501. Conat's defense of Ulveling-that he had chosen his words "unfortunately" and that what
SEGREGATING PROPAGANDA 155 he was really talking about was "not censorship but careful judicious book selection"-was included; it was, however, clearly rejected by a majority of the committee [79, p. 348]. In the article's final paragraph, Berninghausen reiterated the ALA's commitment to the Library Bill of Rights and the Statement on Labeling and articulated firmly the stance of the IFC "that librarians who live up to their professional responsibili- ties must oppose any practice or policy which attempts to 'protect' the 'less intelligent or less discriminating citizenry' by deciding what is 'good' or 'safe' for them to read" [79, p. 350]. The IFC's report generated considerable response, both negative and positive. The diplomatic Dix responded to one writer who applauded Ulveling for speaking out on "a most unpopular cause" and found the IFC's case that Ulveling was "compromising freedom" unconvincing [80]. The IFC had written a full statement on the Ulveling paper, Dix said, in hopes of generating open discussion and coming ultimately to "as much unanimity of opinion as possible" where there was apparent widespread difference of opinion, "since we seem to be in a period when the principles of freedom of expression are under rather serious fire" [81]. Some expressed strong approval of what another writer called the IFC's clear thinking on "the interesting book selection policy of the Detroit Public Library" [82]. Both Thurston Taylor, who had earlier sent his letter to Berninghausen, and Paul Bixler of Antioch College, who was to succeed Berninghausen as secretary of the IFC, wrote letters to Li opposing Ulveling's policies [83, 84]. Taylor bemoaned the "pres- ent prevailing climate of opinion," which could cause a librarian of Ulve- ling's sincerity and devotion "to the best in American librarianship" to propose such a "booby trap" [83, p. 2065], while Bixler warned that the use of Ulveling's suggested policy would destroy small or medium-sized libraries as institutions and would amount to imitating the "censoring, repressive tactics of the enemy" [84, pp. 2064-65]. At the midwinter meeting, Ulveling blasted the IFC's report in an extended "Reply to the IFC Committee" [85]. He recalled his defense in 1944 of Lillian Smith's Strange Fruit and his work in promoting civil rights "not with prolific writing in journals but on the field of action." He accused the IFC of using "propaganda devices," like putting quota- tion marks around prejudicial words not his own to distort his remarks [85, p. 73].8 He referred to the IFC's criticism of his apparent distinc- tion between "general readers" and "people with inquiring minds" and concluded that the IFC "probably didn't understand me!" Describing 18. Berninghausen had put quotation marks around comments taken from the responses he had received from members of the IFC; he had, however, failed to indicate that he was doing so.
156 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY the reference and branch collections, he decried the IFC's statement that placing a book in the reference services collection was labeling [85, p. 741. Trying to explain the nature of the IFC's report, he concluded that the IFC was so sure it was right it was willing to use unethical tactics. He wished "they had been sufficiently objective to realize that the Library Bill of Rights is credo, but that the implementation of that credo calls for sound hard constructive thought. . . by all of us." The problem was not localized, Ulveling asserted; the basic question of the handling of propaganda remained unanswered [85, pp. 74-75]. Later in the day, meeting attendees were stunned to discover that Ulveling had taped both his speech and the subsequent discussion. "The steam generated during the morning," one observer put it, "was as noth- ing compared with the response this news produced" [86]. In presenting to the council the midwinter 1952 report of the IFC [87, pp. 81-83], Dix quoted Ulveling's statement referring to the "in- compatibility" of the Library Bill of Rights with his "obligation as an American citizen" to guard against propaganda. He noted that some people had construed the IFC's analysis of Ulveling's statement as a personal criticism of Ulveling, but that the IFC had not intended such. He hailed Ulveling's "long and distinguished record as a defender of freedom of ideas" and voiced hope that the contention was past and that the ALA could now turn its attention "to a calm consideration of the principles involved" [87, pp. 82-83]. Dix acknowledged that "any statement of general principles is subject to varying interpretations," and that the IFC never presumed "to institute a probe into any librar- ian's interpretation of the Library Bill of Rights." But, he insisted, "We must not let the fear of freedom divide us at a time when we most need unity. We do believe that there is nothing in the Library Bill of Rights that is incompatible with the best of the American heritage" [87, P. 83]. In the discussion, Ulveling reiterated that "the Bill of Rights is a theo- retical policy statement, and that we now have to move down to the next level to find some way of implementing this statement" [87, p. 86]. Dix announced the IFC's plans to do just that through the continued airing of the basic issues at an Institute on Intellectual Freedom to be held in connection with the upcoming annual conference in New York. The institute would deal, Dix said, with "the whole basic philosophy of book selection which I am afraid goes back to even bigger questions of philos- ophy-the whole philosophy of American librarianship" [87, p. 88]. While sparring continued about the surreptitious tape recording [88- 90], Dix sent a conciliatory note to Ulveling expressing gratitude for the opportunity to get together and talk [91]. On the surface, at least, calm began to return. Hawes, writing Dix a few days after the meeting, re- ferred to the "Ulveling matter" as having "upset the schedule.... Mem-
SEGREGATING PROPAGANDA 157 bers of our own staff reported with some amusement seeing you at luncheon with Mr. Ulveling in a very conspicuous position after a Coun- cil meeting on Friday," she remarked, and she joined the speculation "as to whether this was a public demonstration of burying the hatchet" [92]. Dix wrote the members in March that he hoped "the whole Ulve- ling affair is now fairly quiet and that we may get to work on a construc- tive program" [93, p. 1]. He did protest, however, a report in LJ that the IFC and Ulveling had reached an "accommodation of views," reiter- ating that while the IFC had no intentions of being an "inquisitorial body," it still differed with Ulveling [94]. Dix trusted the Institute on Intellectual Freedom would help clarify the thinking of the profession on issues of book selection and handling raised by Ulveling. "How may librarians implement conscientiously the abstract provisions of the Library Bill of Rights," Dix put it, "and at the same time avoid becoming the tool of the Communist conspiracy or of any other group which seeks to impose its own restrictive ideology upon the American people?" [95]. The Ulveling controversy revealed how far the IFC still had to go in resolving issues in book selection and censor- ship and in educating librarians to their role in upholding the Library Bill of Rights. In requesting permission from Clift to spend grant funds for the institute, Dix wrote, "It should help clear the air still further on the whole Ulveling matter" [96]. He wrote the IFC that the need for the institute had grown out of "the Chicago discussions" [93]. He hoped the institute, attended by "several hundred" librarians, might "serve to ease some of the internal tensions produced by differences of opinion concerning the application of generally accepted principles. It could not, of course, produce any dogma, any authoritarian rules for the gov- ernance of all libraries" [97, p. 330]. As if to point up the pertinence of the institute, the library press in early 1952 carried reports of a book burning in Sapulpa, Oklahoma [98], and an attempted book labeling in Burbank, California [99]. Helen Haines's 1950 edition of the classic Living with Books was attacked as communistic in the January 14, 1952, issue of the Freeman [100]. In Congress, the Velde Committee proposed the labeling of "subversive" books in the Library of Congress [ 101]. A notice of the pending institute appeared in the May ALAB, which expanded a brief LJ mention [102] with a statement of the conference's purpose: "To provide a forum for exploring the various concepts of intellectual freedom and its applica- tion in library practices" [103]. The program was structured around four sessions followed by discus- sion. The planning committee had hoped to have Ulveling himself among the speakers [104], but he did not appear in the final program
158 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY [105]. As surrogate, the planners chose Ralph Munn, director of the Carnegie Library, Pittsburgh, who had endorsed Ulveling's position during the 1952 midwinter meeting [106]. Munn discussed book selection in the large public library in the sec- ond session, which dealt with "The Present Problem in Book Selection." He was joined by Chief Assistant Librarian of Congress Verner Clapp who spoke on the research library; Salina, Kansas, Public Library direc- tor Jerome Cushman, who spoke on the small public library; and Robert L. Collison, reference librarian at the City of Westminster Library, Lon- don, who presented the British view. Each dealt with the handling of controversial materials, especially propaganda [105, pp. 38-68]. Clapp asserted that research libraries are "based upon the premise of the right of free inquiry by the individual citizen" and that attacks on that premise endanger the library. The very fact that a book is contro- versial makes it important to purchase. As the "expert selected by the community" to run its library, the librarian would have to decide what principles are too vital to be compromised. Clapp suggested that free access to library materials was such a vital principle [105, pp. 39-43]. His small library, Cushman said, treated all materials in the same manner; none were segregated. While he did not buy every book re- quested by patrons, he secured those he did not through interlibrary loan. He urged being conscious of the role of the library as a "citadel of free communication" [105, pp. 50-54]. Collison called keeping "ob- jectionable" books in a special place where they were available only on request a "vile practice." If a book was worth having, it should be used; segregating reduced its use and thus its value [105, p. 58]. Munn expanded on the policy Ulveling had articulated at the 1951 annual conference. Librarians have a duty to "eliminate disguised pro- paganda from the general collection." Doing so is justified, he said, on the grounds that such works are lacking in integrity, that they "are not what they purport to be" [105, p. 45]. Librarians make "provision" of books in a variety of ways, from actively displaying them to putting them on "restricted shelves from which they can be secured only by personal application to a librarian." Munn suggested that communist propaganda receive this treatment or be labeled [105, p. 46]. Referring to the "lim- ited physical facilities of branch buildings," which make it hard to segre- gate materials, he said it was a "long-standing practice to eliminate cer- tain items from their collections." Sex books, "novels not suitable for general circulation," and expensive technical manuals received such treatment. Munn advocated that communist propaganda materials also be restricted to the central branch, where they could be under the librar- ian's watchful eye [105, p. 47]. The discussion that followed raised again the very issues encountered
SEGREGATING PROPAGANDA 159 in the debate with Ulveling. Who would determine what is disguised propaganda? How can librarians differentiate between legitimate criti- cism of the American system and genuine communist propaganda, when pressure groups say that critical works on such topics as race relations or housing are following the communist line [105, p. 65]? The debate grew sharp when the discussion turned to the authority for book selection: Did librarians constantly have to defend their decisions not to purchase an item? Or could they stand on their professional expertise [105, pp. 66-67]? There was little resolution of these questions. Alan Barth, a newspaperman, summarized the conference proceed- ings from a layman's point of view [105, pp. 124-30]. To report on the institute to the ALA Council at the New York annual conference, Dix used portions of Barth's synthesis [97, pp. 333-37], thereby distancing himself from any charges of personal bias for or against points of view expressed. Barth began by enunciating the substantial areas of consensus [105, pp. 124-26]: that freedom implies responsibility, "that libraries are an essential element in the system of free communication," that freedom to read is "a right of the public to know." There was agreement that "there is no such thing as wise censorship," that book selection was imperative, and that "selection poses a challenge," especially when pro- fessional librarians were in short supply. Finally, they agreed that "the American faith in freedom . . . is an asset to us in our endeavors to provide leadership in the free world." Then Barth cut to the areas of disagreement. Munn's statement that the Library Bill of Rights must be interpreted with some regard for "administrative feasibility" and that the public library is a part "of local government and cannot get too far from or go too far in advance of local public opinion" had met with general approval [105, pp. 127-29]. When Munn began to speak about how to handle communist propa- ganda, however, consensus disappeared. His assertion that librarians should discover and eliminate "disguised propaganda" from libraries, to segregate it and make it available to readers only under special condi- tions, drew sharp dissent. Barth concluded that, while Munn repre- sented a minority viewpoint, there were "no absolutes." The problem had "to be worked out . . . in terms of individual and conscientious judgments about particular books, and perhaps no formula would serve . . . to solve the whole problem" [105, p. 129]. Dix's report to the council was broadcast on the radio on July 4, 1952, and published in the August 1952 LJ [97, 107]. In a letter of thanks to Milton Lord of the Boston Public Library for his evenhanded chairing of the controversial book selection session, Dix evaluated the institute. While it did not "settle all our problems," it
160 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY helped "to establish an atmosphere of thoughtful discussion in terms of basic principles. ALA is surely large enough and mature enough professionally to permit honest differences of opinion" [108]. Perhaps the ALA as a whole did have the maturity to tolerate differ- ences with which Dix credited it. Some among ALA's leadership, how- ever, were not willing to brook the IFC's clash with an "established" librarian. Downs, who became ALA president in 1952-53, considered Berninghausen a "young turk" [16, 109]; he was "almost too aggressively interested" in intellectual freedom [1091. In fact, when the membership of the IFC was named for 1952-53, Ulveling appeared as a member; Berninghausen and his most recent recruit, John E. Smith, did not [110]. "There are several interesting new names," Dix wrote to Bixler. "I suppose that Dave's term was really up, but I hate to lose John Smith. I wish I had been consulted just a bit" [1 11]. Bixler's comment to Smith was more colloquial: "They left you off the new committee-dirty work at the crossroads" [112]. Ulveling was not active as an IFC member; he served "in amicable relationship" only one year of a two-year term and then left "because of the press of other work," Bixler wrote [113] to a librarian who complained about the IFC's treatment of Ulveling [1 14]. Apparently appointing Ulveling to the IFC served the purpose of salv- ing wounds and taming excess devotion to intellectual freedom-and gave the IFC a way to answer the charge of cruelty to Ralph Ulveling. It also presented at least the appearance of unity, if not unanimity, to the world at large. And in 1956 ALA presented Ulveling with the $500 Lippincott Award, lauding him as a "courageous defender of free access to all shades of opinion and types of information" [115]. The problem made apparent by the Ulveling controversy-the lack of consensus among librarians concerning their role in protecting "the right of library users to freedom of inquiry"-was not solved by the first Intellectual Freedom Institute. The institute highlighted clearly the fine line between the professional act of book selection and librarians' self- censorship in the guise of book selection.'9 The relatively new role of librarians as activists in the cause of freedom of inquiry had only par- tially overtaken the role of librarians as preservers and uplifters of pub- lic taste and morals. The process of moving librarians from supporters of truth to defenders of access-a position clearly articulated by John Swan in The Freedom to Lie: A Debate about Democracy [118]-was hardly 19. Lester Asheim tackled the problem in the 1953 intellectual freedom preconference [ 1 16]. Leon Carnovsky dealt with it in a paper presented at the Fourth Annual Library Symposium at Kent State University in May 1939 and published the following year [44]. The problem of self-censorship to avoid difficulties was extensively documented among California school and public librarians a few years later in the famous Fiske study [117].
SEGREGATING PROPAGANDA 161 complete. Educating librarians concerning their role became the main thrust of the Intellectual Freedom Committee. Ulveling served the ALA well by dramatically revealing that the membership of the ALA in 1951 was far from unanimous in its philosophical or practical adherence to its intellectual freedom credo. On that score he was correct-and likely remains so. REFERENCES 1. Ulveling, Ralph A. "Book Selection Policies." Library Journal 76 (August 1951): 1170-71. This essay also appears in Proceedings (see [36] below). 2. Geller, Evelyn. Forbidden Books in American Public Libraries, 1876-1939. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood, 1984. 3. "The Library's Bill of Rights." American Library Association Bulletin 33 (October 1939): P-60-6 1. 4. Robbins, Louise S. Toward Ideology and Autonomy: The American Library Association's Response to Threats to Intellectual Freedom, 1939-1969. Ph.D. diss., Texas Woman's University, 1991. 5. Higgins, Alice G. "Intellectual Freedom." American Library Association Bulletin 41 (Os- tober 15, 1947): 393-94. 6. Theoharis, Athan. Seeds of Repression: Harry S Truman and the Origins of McCarthyism. Chicago: Quadrangle Books, 1971. 7. Caute, David. The Great Fear: The Anti-Communist Purge under Truman and Eisenhower. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1978. 8. Bontecou, Eleanor. The Federal Loyalty-Security Program. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell Univer- sity Press, 1953. 9. Brown, Ralph S., Jr. Loyalty and Security: Employment Tests in the United States. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1958. 10. Robins, Natalie. Alien Ink: The FBI's War on Freedom of Expression. New York: William Morrow, 1992. 11. Kutler, Stanley 1. American Inquisition. New York: Hill & Wang, 1982. 12. Goodman, Walter. The Committee: The Extraordinary Career of the House Committee on Un-American Activities. New York: Farrar, Strauss & Giroux, 1968. 13. Schrecker, Ellen W. No Ivory Tower: McCarthyism and the Universities. New York: Ox- ford University Press, 1986. 14. Higgins, Alice G., to Milam, Carl. January 24, 1948. RG 2/1/24-3, ALA Archives, University of Illinois, Urbana (hereafter cited as "ALA Archives"). 15. Berninghausen, David K. "Book-Banning and Witch Hunts." American Library Associ- ation Bulletin 42 (May 1948): 204-7. 16. Berninghausen, David K. Interview by Louise S. Robbins. Sun City, Ariz., September 20, 1990. 17. "Library Bill of Rights." American Library Association Bulletin 42 (July-August 1948): 285. 18. Wiegand, Wayne A. An "Active Instrument for Propaganda": American Public Libraries during World War 1. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood, 1990. 19. Rogers, Rutherford, to Berninghausen, David K. N.d. RG 69/1/5, box 3, ALA Ar- chives. 20. Sherman, Clarence. "The Definitions of Library Objectives." In Current Issues in
162 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Libraty Administration, edited by Carlton Joeckel. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1939. 21. Berninghausen, David K. "Film Censorship." American Library Association Bulletin 44 (December 1950): 447-48. 22. Berninghausen, David K. The Flight from Reason: Essays on Intellectual Freedom in the Academy, the Press, and the Libray. Chicago: American Library Association, 1975. 23. Berninghausen, David K., to the Committee on Intellectual Freedom. October 28, 1950. RG 18/1/56, box 6, ALA Archives. 24. Berninghausen, David K. Personal communication with Louise S. Robbins. July 1990. 25. Berninghausen, David K. "The History of the ALA Intellectual Freedom Commit- tee." Wilson Librayy Bulletin 27 (June 1953): 814-17. 26. Proceedings of the Midwinter Meeting, American Library Association: Council Meetings. January 31, 1951, February 3, 1951 (held at the Edgewater Beach Hotel, Chicago). ALA Archives. 27. Berninghausen, David K., to the Committee on Intellectual Freedom. December 23, 1950. Contains copy of letter from Ulveling to Cory and Cory's comments on the letter. Berninghausen Papers, University of Minnesota Archives, Minneapolis (here- after cited as "Berninghausen Papers, UMA"). 28. Tucker, Harold W., to Cory, John Mackenzie. October 3, 1950. RG 69/1/5, box 2, ALA Archives. 29. "Resolution Passed by the Montclair Chapter of the Sons of the American Revolu- - tion." October 5, 1950. Berninghausen Papers, UMA. 30. Quigley, Margery, to Berninghausen, David K. December 8, 1950. Berninghausen Papers, UMA. 31. Rogers, Rutherford, to Berninghausen, David K. March 15, 1951. Berninghausen Papers, UMA. 32. Melcher, Frederic, to Graham, Clarence. April 13, 1951. Berninghausen Papers, UMA. 33. "Labeling-A Report of the ALA Committee on Intellectual Freedom." American Library Association Bulletin 45 (July-August 1951): 241-42. 34. Berninghausen, David K., to Rogers, Rutherford. April 22, 1951. Berninghausen Papers, UMA. 35. Rogers, Rutherford. Master letter to representative librarians. N.d. (but after April 1951). Berninghausen Papers, UMA. 36. Proceedings of the 75th Anniversary Conference, American Library Association: ALA Council, ALA General Membership Meeting. July 9, 13, 14, 1951 (held at the Stevens Hotel, Chicago). ALA Archives. 37. Berninghausen, David K., to Rogers, Rutherford. June 26, 1951. Berninghausen Papers, UMA. 38. "Recommendations Unanimously Adopted by the ALA Council, July 13, 1951." American Library Association Bulletin 45 (July-August 1951): 242. 39. Ulveling, Ralph A., to the Commissioners. March 7, 1951. "Book Selection Policies" folder, box 3, Director's File (Ulveling, Ralph), Detroit Public Library Archives, Detroit (hereafter cited as "DPLA"). 40. Ring, Daniel. "Ulveling, Ralph Adrian (1902-1980)." In Supplement to the Dictionary of American Library Biography, edited by Wayne A. Wiegand. Englewood, Colo.: Li- braries Unlimited, 1990. 41. Turow, Joseph. "The Impact of Differing Orientations of Librarians on the Process of Children's Book Selection: A Case Study of Library Tensions." Library Quarterly 48, no. 3 (1978): 276-92.
SEGREGATING PROPAGANDA 163 42. [Hawes, Marion], to Berninghausen, David K. November 1, 1951. RG 69/1/5, box 3, ALA Archives. (While this letter is missing a signature, it appears to have been typed on the same typewriter as other letters from Hawes and is referred to in another letter from Hawes.) 43. Garceau, Oliver. The Public Library in the Political Process: A Report of the Public Library Inquiry. New York: Columbia University Press, 1949. 44. Carnovsky, Leon. "The Obligations and Responsibilities of the Librarian Concerning Censorship." Library Quarterly 20 (January 1950): 21-32. 45. Berninghausen, David K., to Committee on Intellectual Freedom. August 10, 1951. RG 18/1/56, box 6, ALA Archives. 46. Dunlap, M. Alice, to Rogers, Rutherford. July 27, 1951. RG 69/1/5, box 3, ALA Archives. 47. Dunlap, M. Alice, to Rogers, Rutherford. August 9, 1951. RG 69/1/5, box 3, ALA Archives. 48. Melcher, Frederic, to Berninghausen, David K. August 1, 1951. Berninghausen Papers, UMA. 49. Ulveling, Ralph A., to Wessells, Helen E. July 18, 1951. "Library Journal" folder, box 17, Director's File (Ulveling, Ralph), DPLA. 50. Wessells, Helen E., to Ulveling, Ralph. July 24, 1951. "Library Journal" folder, box 17, Director's File (Ulveling, Ralph), DPLA. 51. Downs, Robert B., to Berninghausen, David K. August 28, 1951. RG 69/1/5, box 3, ALA Archives. 52. Downs, Robert B. Perspectives on the Past: An Autobiography. Metuchen, N.J.: Scare- crow, 1984. 53. Dix, William S., to Berninghausen, David K. September 1, 1951. RG 69/1/5, box 3, ALA Archives. 54. Rogers, Rutherford, to Berninghausen, David K. October 1, 1951. Berninghausen Papers, UMA. 55. Rogers, Rutherford, to Berninghausen, David K. August 10, 1951. RG 69/1/5, box 3, ALA Archives. 56. Hawes, Marion, to Berninghausen, David K. August 29, 1951. RG 69/1/5, box 3, ALA Archives. 57. Berninghausen, David K., to Committee on Intellectual Freedom. September 26, 1951. RG 69/1/5, box 3, ALA Archives. 58. Taylor, Thurston, to Berninghausen, David K. October 1, 1951. RG 69/1/5, box 3, ALA Archives. 59. Hawes, Marion, to Berninghausen, David K. October 9, 1951. RG 69/1/5, box 3, ALA Archives. 60. Ellsworth, Ralph, to Berninghausen, David K. October 10, 1951. RG 69/1/5, box 3, ALA Archives. 61. Wellman, Hiller, to Berninghausen, David K. October 2, 1951. RG 69/1/5, box 3, ALA Archives. 62. Shirley, Wayne, to Berninghausen, David K. October 5, 1951. RG 69/1/5, box 3, ALA Archives. 63. Conat, Mabel, to Berninghausen, David K. October 8, 1951. RG 69/1/5, box 3, ALA Archives. 64. Ulveling, Ralph A., to the Committee on Intellectual Freedom. October 9, 1951. Encloses Ulveling, Ralph A., to Conat, Mabel. October 8, 1951. RG 69/1/5, box 3, ALA Archives. 65. Dix, William S., to Berninghausen, David K. October 17, 1951. RG 69/1/5, box 3, ALA Archives.
164 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 66. Dunlap, M. Alice, to Berninghausen, David K. October 22, 1951. RG 69/1/5, box 3, ALA Archives. 67. "A Report of the ALA Committee on Intellectual Freedom." [October 1951]. RG 69/1/5, box 3, ALA Archives. 68. Dix, William S., to Berninghausen, David K. October 25, 1951. RG 69/115, box 3, ALA Archives. 69. Conat, Mabel, to Berninghausen, David K. October 25, 1951. RG 69/1/5, box 3, ALA Archives. 70. Wellman, Hiller, to Berninghausen, David K. October 24, 1951. RG 69/1/5, box 3, ALA Archives. 71. MacRae, Lachlan, to Berninghausen, David K. October 29, 1951. RG 69/1/5, box 3, ALA Archives. 72. Hawes, Marion, to Berninghausen, David K. October 31, 1951. RG 69/1/5, box 3, ALA Archives. 73. Dix, William S., to Berninghausen, David K. October 30, 1951. RG 69/1/5, box 3, ALA Archives. 74. [Dunlap, M. Alice], to Berninghausen, David K. October 30, 1951. RG 69/1/5, box 3, ALA Archives. (While the second page, and thus the signature, of this letter is missing, it is on American Library Association Bulletin stationery and continues the kind of direction Dunlap had been giving Berninghausen.) 75. Smith, John E., to Berninghausen, David K. November 1, 1951. RG 69/1/5, box 3, ALA Archives. 76. [Tally sheet] in the hand of Berninghausen, David K. N.d. RG 69/1/5, box 3, ALA Archives. 77. Berninghausen, David K., to Conat, Mabel. November 4, 1951. RG 69/1/5, box 3, ALA Archives. 78. Dix, William S., to Berninghausen, David K. November 6, 1951, and November 9, 1951. RG 69/1/5, box 3, ALA Archives. 79. "Book Selection Principles." American Libraty Association Bulktin 45 (November 1951): 346-50. 80. Hamlin, Arthur, to Dix, William S. December 17, 1951. RG 69/1/5, box 3, ALA Archives. 81. Dix, William S., to Hamlin, Arthur. January 7, 1952. RG 69/1/5, box 3, ALA Ar- chives. 82. Branscomb, Lewis, to Clift, David. December 31, 1951. RG 69/1/5, box 3, ALA Archives. 83. Taylor, Thurston. "Keep Calm and Support the Library Bill of Rights." Library Journal 76 (December 1951): 2063-65. 84. Bixler, Paul. "Don't Split Collections." LibraiyJournal 76 (December 1951): 2063-65. 85. Ulveling, Ralph A. "A Reply to the CIF Committee." American Library Association Bulltin 46 (March 1952): 73-76. 86. Markley, Anne E., in Librarian's News 7 (February 7, 1952): 8-9 (a mimeographed newsletter two pages of which were in RG 69/1/5, box 3, ALA Archives). 87. Midwinter Council Meeting of the American Library Association. January 30- February 1, 1952 (held at the Edgewater Beach Hotel, Chicago). ALA Archives. 88. Dix, William S., to Ulveling, Ralph A. February 15, 1952. RG 69/1/5, box 3, ALA Archives. 89. Ulveling, Ralph A., to Dix, William S. February 7, 1952. RG 69/1/5, box 3, ALA Archives. 90. Dix, William S., to Ulveling, Ralph A. February 22, 1952. RG 69/1/5, box 3, ALA Archives.
SEGREGATING PROPAGANDA 165 91. Dix, William S., to Ulveling, Ralph A. February 7, 1952. RG 69/1/5, box 3, ALA Archives. 92. Hawes, Marion, to Dix, William S. February 15, 1952. Berninghausen Papers, UMA. 93. Dix, William S., to Committee on Intellectual Freedom. March 10, 1952. Berning- hausen Papers, UMA. 94. Dix, William S. "Library Bill of Rights" (letter to the editor). Library Journal 77 (April 15, 1952): 610. 95. Dix, William S. "Committee on Intellectual Freedom, Report for 1951-1952." N.d. RG 18/1/26, box 3, ALA Archives. 96. Dix, William S., to Clift, David. February 28, 1952. Berninghausen Papers, UMA. 97. Dix, William S. "Intellectual Freedom Today: A Report of the ALA Committee on Intellectual Freedom, July 4, 1952." Proceedings, 71st [sic] Conference of the American Library Council [sic], June 30, July 2, July 4, 1952 (held at the Waldorf Astoria Hotel, New York). ALA Archives. 98. "On Burning Books." Library Journal 77 (March 1, 1952): 406. 99. Smith, John E., and Detchon, Evelyn Benagh. "It Happened in Burbank." American Library Associatiwn Bulktin 46 (March 1952): 85-87. 100. Earle, Elinor S. "Reply to Carlson." American Library Association Bulletin 46 (April 1952): 105-10. 101. Oboler, Eli. "Congress as Censor." Library Journal 77 (November 15, 1952): 1927-30. 102. "Institute on Intellectual Freedom." Library Journal 77 (April 15, 1952): 697. 103. "Conference on Intellectual Freedom." American Library Association Bulletin 46 (May 1952): 151. 104. Berninghausen, David K., and Dix, William S. "ALA Institute on Intellectual Free- dom: Memo on Program (Preliminary suggestions by David K. Berninghausen and William S. Dix)." March 10, 1952. Berninghausen Papers, UMA. 105. Dix, William S., and Bixler, Paul, eds. Freedom of Communication: Proceedings of the First Conference on Intelkctual Freedom, New York City, June 28-29, 1952. Chicago: American Library Association, 1954. 106. "Midwinter Highlights." Library Journal 77 (March 1, 1952): 403. 107. Dix, William S. "Intellectual Freedom Report." Library Journal 77 (August 1952): 1243-46. 108. Dix, William S., to Lord, Milton. July 7, 1952. Berninghausen Papers, UMA. 109. Rogers, Rutherford. Telephone conversation with Louise S. Robbins. December 30, 1991. 110. Intellectual Freedom Committee [Roster]. July 13, 1953. RG 69/1/5, box 3, ALA Archives. 111. Dix, William S., to Bixler, Paul. August 15, 1952. RG 69/1/5, box 3, ALA Archives. 112. Bixler, Paul, to Smith, John E. August 28, 1952. RG 69/1/5, box 3, ALA Archives. 113. Bixler, Paul, to McCann, Eleanor. December 29, 1955. RG 69/1/5, box 3, ALA Archives. 114. McCann, Eleanor, to Bixler, Paul. September 29, 1955. RG 69/1/5, box 3, ALA Archives. 115. "ALA Gives Awards and Citations for 1956." Library Journal 81 (July-August 1956): 1764. 116. Asheim, Lester. "Not Censorship but Selection." Wilson Library Bulletin 28 (Septem- ber 1953): 63-67. 117. Fiske, Marjorie. Book Selection and Censorship: A Study of School and Public Libraries in California. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1960. 118. Swan, John, and Peattie, Noel. The Freedom to Lie: A Debate about Democracy. Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland, 1989.