MECHANICS' AND MERCANTILE LIBRARIES SIDNEY DITZION SUBSCRIPTION LIBRARIES IN ORDER to provride a historical background for the treat- ment of mechanics' and mercantile libraries a brief descrip- tion of the subscription libraries must be given. This pic- ture is particularly important when one considers that these so- called "professional" institutions had many of the features of the subscription libraries which antedated them.' For the pur- poses of this discussion the library established by Franklin at Philadelphia in 1731 may be treated as representative of a type.2 It was, in truth, "the mother of all the North American sub- scription libraries"3 which sprang up throughout the colonies and, especially, in the New England states. By the middle of the nineteenth century, when the Boston Public Library was organized as the first of its kind-being public in every sense, including the mode of support-two-thirds of the towns in Massachusetts boasted subscription libraries.4 Since in the nature of the Franklin library there existed no need for publicizing its purposes toward gaining support from donors or legislatures, little is to be found which describes in detail the philosophy which nurtured this institution at its be- ginnings. At best, we must apply to it what we know of the age which Franklin and his friends typified. This was a period in which the American middle class was t After i825 practically all mechanics' and mercantile libraries required annual membership fees. X For a history of the Franklin library see Austin K. Gray, Benjamin Franklin's library (New York: Macmillan [19371). 3 John Bigelow (ed.), The complete works of Benjamin Franklin (New York: Put- nam's Sons, I887), I, 158-6. 4 Boston Public Library, Preliminary report, 1852, p. I 2. 192
MECHANICS' AND MERCANTILE LIBRA4RIES 193 riding swiftly to power on the backs of French and English rationalism, when there was a growing acceptance of the scien- tific method, of the individualism so ably defended by Locke and his successors in English thought, and of the utilitarian philosophy which easily followed from the method of experi- mental science. This was a period in which the faith in indefi- nite perfectibility left no excuse save ignorance for the failure of men and their institutions to show progress. Realizing that progress would proceed more rapidly by an interchange of individual thinking, discussion groups-such as the Junto and the later, more formal, American Philosophical Society-came into existence. Thus the intellectual activity of individuals could be pooled so as to constitute a means of con- solidating and providing new bases from which inventive genius could proceed. The idea of self-help, taken over from Locke, brought to the fore, among other means of self-education, the obvious utility of books as media for disseminating knowledge to the self-improving middle class.s It was inevitable, then, that the signal convenience of pooling books should occur to the members of the Junto, for "by thus clubbing our books to a common library, we should .... have each of us the advantage of using the books of all the other members, which would be nearly as beneficial as if each owned the whole."6 Another advantage of placing the books together in one room was that they would be there "ready to consult in our conferences."7 Membership in this library was almost immediately extended to include such "citizens in the middle and lower walks of life" who could afford a subscription rate which was considered mod- erate.8 The humanitarianism of the middle class, functional to its cohesiveness at the time as well as to the narrow economic 5 Much of this material is treated in Merle Curti, The social ideas of American educa- tors (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, I935), pp. 34-40. 6 Bigelow (ed.), op. cit., p. I19. 7 Ibid. I dutobiography of Benjamin Franklin (New York: Arundel Print [188 i]), pp. I54- 55.
194 THE LIBRdRY QUdRTERLY range of its composition, made this extension of privilege an expected one. Among Franklin's boasts were that this library was started by the "Philadelphia youth (then chiefly artifi- cers)'"9 and that "our people .... became better acquainted with books, and in a few years were observed by strangers to be better instructed and more intelligent than people of the same rank generally are in other countries.""' From the management of this library in 1832 came the statement that it (the library) sprang from the grave, sober, and as the Friends call it, the solid disposition of producing something to be read and studied .... to the improvement .... of the domestic virtues of the business part of our citizens; and [quoting from a short account of the library prefixed to the Catalog of i 807] it is well known that this great man [Franklin] was at times particularly desirous of penetrating the families of the indus- trious classes with useful knowledge." Middle-class virtues are thus seen to be inherent in the library thinking of the period. Although the broad political and ethical ideals of the middle class are not stated by Franklin in his remarks concerning the library, they do appear in Dr. Stuber's interpolation (cf. n. 8) and are certainly implicit in the library's purchase lists and catalogs. Dr. Stuber speaks of the maintenance of liberties, nat- ural rights, and the struggle against tyranny-all of which are bound up with knowledge and the light of science which public libraries so admirably provide. Moreover, in the catalog of the Library Company (1757) one writer sees all the philosophical implementation and political speculation so necessary for the struggle to follow against the mother country. "In short, the volumes contained the ripest fruition of scientific and rationalistic modernity. One can only conjecture the extent to which this library would perplex, aston- ish, and finally convert men to rationalism and scientific deism, 9 Reuben A. Guild, The librarians' manual (New York: Charles B. Norton, i858), P. '5'. 'I Bigelow (ed.), op. cit., p. I69. I" Franklin (pseud.), Philadelphia library (Philadelphia: Reproduced from Poulson's American daily advertiser, I 832), p. 4.
MECHAINICS' AND MERCANTILE LIBRARIES 195 and release them from bondage to throne and altar."12 The books upon which these conclusions were based were regarded by the eighteenth-century reader as "useful knowledge." Whereas this form of knowledge can be called useful only in a limited sense and in context with the aims of their readers, the company's purchase lists contained titles which were in the fullest sense practical. Examples of such titles are The compleat tradesman, and Bradley's improvements of husbandry and his other books of gardening.13 The inclusion of such books fore- shadows a later stress on reading for economic self-improvement. Considering the aims and class composition of the "social" library's clientele, its erosion might almost be assumed when the upper and lower limits of this class drifted wider and wider apart. The incompatibility of this type of institution with the democratic aims of the society became all the clearer when the lower strata of the middle class became a wage-earning group; all the more so when the security of this class was no longer guaranteed and when its income generally forbade the payment of a subscription rate for the use of books. The first libraries having to undergo modification of form were the proprietary libraries whose members bought "perma- nent property in shares of considerable cost .... thereby re- ceding farther and farther from the command of those who are cramped in their pecuniary circumstances." These institutions were seen by contemporaries as incompatible with the means and wants of a great part of societiy Many who possess the means of purchasing a share in a library "rate property too high and knowledge too low .. . Others who do not possess these means have an ardent desire for intellectual improvement by reading but it is out of their reach."'4 Many proprietary librar- ies were thus forced to admit readers on the basis of annual subscriptions. 22 Frank Luther Mott and Chester E. Jorgenson, Benjamin Franklin: representative selections (New York: American Book, I936), p. xxxviii. "3 Listed in Albert J. Edmunds, "The first books imported by America's first great library," Pennsylvania magazine of history and biography, XXX (I906), 301, 14 "The passenger," Boston weekly magazine, 11 (I 804), 53.
196 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY The story of the slow decline of the subscription libraries is marked by loss of membership in periods of economic depres- sion, loss of income from investments in hard times, and compe- tition from public libraries of the tax-supported type. Of great significance, moreover, is the relationship of the subscription library's low survival rate in the last quarter of the nineteenth century to its failure to draw in the mass of wage earners. Consciousness of this difficulty arose early in the minds of the directors of the Lowell, Massachusetts, City Library. It was felt that fifty cents a year was keeping many inhabitants of this mill town from the library-especially in large families where fifty cents per person would total a sizable bill.-I The directors also let up a trial balloon in the form of a suggestion that per- haps the taxpayers would feel it much less if the library were made free.'6 A report of the Toledo Public Library remarks ret- rospectively that, when it was seen that "the masses of people not disinclined to read would not pay even small subscriptions for membership, it was seriously realized by some of our citizens that such an institution ,was not keeping pace with the wants of a rapidly growing city," the library was made free.'7 As soon as subscription librarians had available the circula- tion statistics of free libraries they began to cite these as evi- dence of the narrow appeal of their own institutions. In seeking to explain this difference they did not have to go far to find that where "every dollar is needed for the necessaries of physical life" the smallest fee would keep the books out of the hands of the people."8 One library, despairing because it attracted only twenty subscribers in a population of sixty-five thousand, de- cided that "this is not a reading community."'9 More realistic people could see why fee libraries were poorly IS Lowell, Massachusetts, City Library, Annual report, 1877, pp. 8-9. 16Ibid. '7 Thirteenth annual report, t886, p. 3. 8 St. Louis Public Library, Annual report, 1888-89, p. 27. Also Frederick M. Crunden, The free public library: its useS and value (St. Louis, Mo.: R. P. Studley, 1893), P. 12. '9 "Reading (Pa.) Library Association report," Library journal, XV (i89o), 2I8.
MECHANICS' AND MERCANTILE LIBRARIES 197 patronized, and they hailed the reduction or abolition of sub- scription charges. Thus the Chattanooga News welcomed a new circulating library whose fee was one dollar as opposed to the "public" library charge of four." The Hartford, Connecticut, Library Association noted a decided increase of circulation when the annual fee was reduced first from five dollars to three and then to one dollar, pending the complete removal of fees within a short time.21 MECHANICS AND APPRENTICES LIBRARIES It was at the end of the second decade (1820), about the time when the subscription libraries were beginning to show signs of weakening, that interest in mechanics' and mercantile libraries began to appear. (The mercantile libraries will be treated sepa- rately; the writer feels that their history presents problems which require independent treatment.) Although the cause both of the failing strength of the sub- scription library and of the rise of mechanics' libraries may be traced to the expanding economic limits of the American middle class-so that its lower branches embraced larger and larger portions of the urban population of the period-the conception of the mechanic-apprentices' library was neither new nor in- digenous. It grew out of the workingmen's lecture idea started at Glasgow in 1760 and continued by Birkbeck in I799. The first Artisans' Library seems to have been established at Bir- mingham in I795 to distribute useful reading to the working people at the subscription price of a penny a week:, By 1823 Glasgow and Liverpool both had mechanics' institutes and the libraries that went with them.22 In I823, when Timothy Claxton of the London Mechanical Institute came to Methuen, Massachusetts, he found that there had been established in this town in about 1819 the Methuen Social Society for Reading and General Inquiry. Although 20 Library journal, XV (I890), 214. ai Ibid., p. 278. 23 C. R. Aurner, "Mechanics' institutions," Iowa journal of history and politics, XIX (I92I), 389-413.
198 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Claxton seems to have classified this as a mechanics' institu- tion,23 it may merely have been one of the social library clubs which were quite popular in New England. The first institute libraries of importance were those established in Boston, Port- land, Philadelphia, and New York in I820. Of these only the ones in Boston and Philadelphia were newly organized institu- tions. The General Society of Mechanics and Tradesmen had been organized in 1785 (incorporated I792) as a mutual benev- olence society for the assistance of mechanics in financial dis- tress and for aid to their widows and children. The Mechanics' Library of Portland, Maine, was established by the Maine Charitable Mechanics' Organization whose purpose at the time of incorporation (I8I5) was to relieve "the distresses of unfor- tunate mechanics and their families, to promote inventions and improvements in the mechanic arts, by granting premiums for said inventions and improvements, and to assist young me- chanics with loans of money."24 The movement for libraries seems to have been accelerated- if not initiated-by such popularizers of science and education as John Griscom and William Wood. Griscom's activities con- sisted largely in traveling about, gathering before him groups of mechanics and merchants, apprentices and clerks, for lectures on science.2S Wood, a liberal merchant who had been instru- mental in stirring up feeling in the United States in favor of the Greek cause and in behalf of the Polish exiles, had his hand in the establishment of at least a half-dozen libraries. His first tri- umph was the Apprentices' Library of Boston, the success of which seems to have stimulated him to further operation in the field of library establishment. New York, Albany, Philadelphia, 23 Ibid. 24 William J. Rhees, Manual of public libraries, institutions, and societies in the United States and British provinces of North America (Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott, x859), p. 73. Benjamin Franklin, by the terms of his will, dedicated a large portion of his wealth to similar purposes. See Francis Newton Thorpe (ed.), Benjamin Franklin andthe University of Pennsylvania ("U.S. Bureau of Education circular of information," No. 2 [Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 8A92), pp. ig-21i. as John H. Griscom, Memoir of 7ohn Griscom (New York: R. Carter & Bros., I 859), pp. 320-44.
MECHANICS' AND MERCANTILE LIBRARIES Igg New Orleans, and other cities received his personal attention in library building.26 Interest in establishing an apprentices' library and school in New York dates back to 18i9, when the Library Committee of the General Society reported the benefits to be derived by edu- cating the apprentices whose parents had not been able to afford to send them to school: every means that can be devised to further the improvement of such .... in order to remedy, as far as practicable, the privation suffered in their early years, and which .... cannot be more effectually promoted than by affording to all who are desirous of improving themselves, the means by which to attain that object, to wit: the gratuitous reading of elenmentary, moral, religious and miscellaneous books, and such others as may have a tendency to promote them in their several avocations.27 On November I, I820, this same committee announced that it had rented rooms in the Free School Society building on Chatham Street. On November 25 a library of 4,000 volumes was publicly opened, blessed by the presence of the mayor and several members of the common council and state legislature at the inaugural ceremonies. In the evening of the same day the library was crowded with apprentices who borrowed nearly 300 books. The number of applicants who took advantage of the privilege dissipated all fears that the library would not be used.28 In I829 the library possessed io,ooo volumes and was used by sixteen hundred apprentices in that year.29 By 1857 the institution was serving a city population of nearly three-quar- 26 General Society of Mechanics and Tradesmen of the City of New York, Some me- morials of the late William Wood, Esq., the eminent philanthropist ... presented in a report of the Apprentices' Library Committee to the General Society of Mechanics and Tradesmen of the City of New York, December 2, 1857 (New York: John Amerman, I858), pp. i8-26. A letter written by De Witt Clinton to Wood illustrates both Clin- ton's interest in libraries and the role played by Wood in their establishment. See E. A. Fitzpatrick, The educational views and influence of De Witt Clinton (New York: Teach- ers College, Columbia University, I9I I), p. 88. 27 General Society .... , ibid., p. 17. "8 General Society .... , nnals of the General Society of Mechanics and Tradesmen of the City of New Yorkfrom t785to S88o; edited by Thomas Earle and Charles T. Congdon (New York: The Society, I882), pp. 6o-6i. 29 General Society...., Reports of the Library and School Committee (New York: Mercein, I 829), p. 4.
200 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY ters of a million people, "of which the working classes form a large majority."30 And so the society kept expanding its serv- ices, soon adding to its clientele the female operatives of the city, offering elementary-school facilities (until public educa- tion was free in New York), expanding its physical plant and book collection (6o,ooo volumes in i88o).3' At Philadelphia (I820) "it was agreed to form a Society for the purpose of establishing a Library for the free use of appren- tices"32 "believing that many benefits would arise from the establishment of a library of suitable books for the use of ap- prentices; that it would promote orderly and virtuous habits, diffuse knowledge and the desire for knowledge, improve the scientific skill of mechanics and manufacturers."33 It is inter- esting to note at this point that, although the mechanics' li- braries were started with the same general purposes as the sub- scription libraries of the previous century, they were sustained entirely at first by the associative effort of employer groups in manufacturing towns. A study of the backgrounds of some of the moving spirits of the Apprentices' Free Library of Philadel- phia reveals a configuration of surprising scope and breadth of interest. There were Thomas Kimber, a Quaker bookseller and stationer, who at one time held the position of controller of the public schools; Samuel L. Shober, a boot and shoe manu- facturer; Daniel B. Smith, a pharmacist and member of the Academy of Natural Sciences, American Philosophical Society, Franklin Institute, and Historical Society of Pennsylvania; Robert Evans, a flour merchant who "employed his leisure time in literary and scientific studies, with talents and acquirements remarkably devoted to the good of his fellow creatures"; and 30General Society .... , Inaugural address ... February 4, 1857, by Thomas Earle (New York: The Society, 1857), p. 3. 3I General Society .... , Report, February 5, r868, p. I9. 32John F. Lewis, History of the Apprentices' Library of Philadelphia, z82o-.r92o (Philadelphia, 1924), p. 4. The "free" aspect of mechanics' and mercantile libraries had to be eliminated and a small subscription charge for apprentices introduced. The pressure of subscription libraries forced these institutions to charge for borrowing privileges. 33 Ibid., pp. 24-25 (quoted from the preamble to the charter).
MECHANICS' AND MERCANTILE LIBRARIES 201 Roberts Vaux, early abolitionist, writer, educator, humani- tarian, and politician.34 Before attempting an analysis of the social ideas which mo- tivated these mechanics' institutes with their libraries, schools, museum collections, and exhibits of models of mechanical inven- tion, something needs to be said of the variations from type which were established in the 1840's and i8so's. There is much evidence to show that institutions incorporated toward mid- century attempted to embrace the whole of a community popu- lation and required membership dues from all users. Fees were generally lower for those below thirty-five years of age.35 As has been remarked, the original idea behind the me- chanics' institute was the protection and support of the widows and children of members. When industries began to multiply libraries and other educational instruments were instituted to cover a larger incidence of indigence among the urban industrial population.36 The boast of the Library of the General Society continued for many years to be that it was the only library in the city "especially designed for the use of that portion of the community the most in need of information, and the least able to pay for it, viz., the working boys and girls of New York."37 With the development of city life and its attendant evils 34 Most of this material was obtained from biographical sketches in the Dictionary of American biography. 35 Rochester Athenaeum and Mechanics' Institute, The charter and the constitution (Rochester, I840), p. 5; Bessie L. Pierce, a history of Chicago (New York: Knopf, 1937), 1, 286. 36 General Society ...., Annals, p. 59; General Society ...., Charter and by-laws (New York: Amerman, I 866), pp. 5, 20-22, 43-44; Rhees, op. cit., pp- 73, 378-79. 37 General Society .... , Annual report ... Feb. t, 1873, p. 9; also New York Daily Tribune, September 24, I850, p. I, col. 3: "If a poor little ragged apprentice boy feels disposed to drink deep at the Pirenean Spring, where is he to go to slake his thirst? He can have access to no private library .. . If he wanders into the valuable Library, established through the munificence of the late Mr. Astor, he will be told that there is no provision in the bequest which can embrace his case; he looks around with a sigh and .... he sees the rich and well-educated enjoying the rich banquet, but, alas, he who is in search of knowledge is not an invited guest. He has only the inheritance of rags; his mind is clear, his intellect bright, his desire to learn and improve is intense, but his hands are black from labor, and his dress coarse from poverty ..... He can enter here, as proudly as those who enter other libraries, there is no rude janitor who will thrust him forth to live and die in ignorance .......
202 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY middle-class humanitarianism began to accommodate its con- tent to new conditions. Those who agitated for support of ap- prentices' libraries pointed to the moral and social effects of occupying the leisure hours of youth in the wholesome pastime of reading. These institutions were signally adapted to keeping young men-later, young women-out of bad company.38 Employers were impressed with the importance of encourag- ing virtue and discouraging vice39 and were reminded of what might result from "the hard labor, the fatigues, the crosses, the vexations of the day" if reading were not provided for evening hours.40 Toward the end of the nineteenth century when sweat- shop conditions were beginning to make a widespread impres- sion on the people the General Society of New York offered its facilities as an evening's refuge from the arduous, "oft times pernicious and hurtful" conditions of the factory.4' In short, books were to provide a new attraction to insure the security and blessedness of the home against the "temptations of idle- ness and vice," and to draw the younger generation of me- chanics away "from the haunts where they annoy others and seriously injure themselves."42 When the labor of the day is over, instead of the apprentice scouring the streets, visiting bar-rooms or theatres, mingling with idle, vicious com- panions, he takes his seat in this library with a rich intellectual repast before him, or, being privileged to take a book home with him, he trims his lamp and reads aloud to his little brothers and sisters, scattering good seeds among them to take root hereafter .. . 43 Realizing that apprentices were not disposed to solid reading after a laborious day, library managements introduced into their collections novels and light magazines. If this practice did 38 General Society .... , Reports of the Library and School Committee, pp. 4, I I. 3' From preamble of I 829 quoted in David C. Haverstick, "History of the Mechan- ics' Library," Lancaster County Historical Society, IX (I905), 338. 40 General Society ... . , Reports of the Library and School Committee, pp. I I-I 2. 41 General Society .... , Annual report, 1894, p. 13. 42 John Sergeant, An address delivered at the request of the managers of the Apprentices' Library Company of Philadelphia, November 23, 1832 (Philadelphia: James Kay, I 832), p. 34; see also New York Daily Tribune, September 4, I 850, p. 4, col. 6. 43 New York Daily Tribune, September 24, i850, p. I, col. 4.
MECHANICS' AND MERCANTILE LIBRARIES 203 not meet the level of serious learning, it did prevent exposure to the moral uncertainties of the streets.44 Of course, it was hoped that novel reading would build up the habit of reading and, since many of the novels were historical, would lead to the study of history.45 The crime-prevention argument, which was used in later years to promote all types of educational institutions, appeared to a small extent in connection with the mechanics' institutes. Whereas fear of punishment could only "restrain from the com- mission of grosser crimes," intelligence was looked to for the habituation of men in honesty and morality, and education was depended upon to warn men against questionable conduct.46 The Rochester Young Men's Association presents an instance of direct cause and effect; it was after the first crime punished by execution in the history of Monroe County that ways and means were sought to provide "means of rational amusement' for young men in order to keep them out of trouble.47 If one takes an overview of the social changes of the first half of the nineteenth century, humanitarianism recedes to a sec- ondary position as a force which motivated the establishment of mechanics' and apprentices' libraries. A primary force con- sisted in the changing character of apprenticeship. The educa- tional advantages of indentureship were no longer as valuable as they had been formerly. The master having more than one apprentice-the number growing larger as the mode of manu- facture increased in size and complexity of unit-could no longer give the same time and attention to such general educa- tion as the terms of indentureship required. The actual manu- facturing process was rapidly changing and improving, a condi- tion which made it difficult for any one master to give ap- propriate technical education to his apprentices. These and 4 Young Men's Association, Rochester, Proceedings of the YoungMen's Association at the first annual meeting, Nov. 26, 1838 (Rochester, N.Y.: Printed at the office of the Daily advertiser, by Luther Tucker, I 839), pp. 6-7; General Society .... , Reports of the Library and School Committee, p. 9. 4u General Society .... , ibid. 46'American journal of education, IV ( 829), 538-39. 47 Young Men's Association, Rochester, op. cit., pp. 5-6.
2O4 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY other considerations (to be discussed later) militated toward the establishment of "schools and libraries for the use of appren- tices and the improvement of the arts."48 The school functions of these institutions were performed by public lectures and formal evening schools. Symptomatic of the underlying purposes of the mechanics' and apprentices' libraries were the museums, the fairs and ex- hibits of mechanical prowess, and such slogans as "the promo- tion of the Mechanic Arts and the dissemination of useful knowledge."49 The prosperity of large industrial cities was by axiom a result of the skill, ingenuity, and enterprise of me- chanics. Was it not, then, sensible for the wealthy citizens of a community to insure future prosperity "by doing something for Apprentices."so The employers who supported these institutions were divided as to motive. It was a difference between those who still thought that there was "room for all" and those who did not relish the idea of competition from young blood.sA The purely trade societies, dominated by employers-employee domination was rare-did not aim at increasing the number of competitors. They did not grant loans. Their benefits to the employed con- sisted only in the enhancement of skill and the possibility of an increased wage.s2 The employers in the other camp, however, recognizing the needless struggle which they had suffered for lack of education in their youth and realizing the value of such education in at- taining a place of respectability in the business world, went about setting up their mechanics' societies for the purpose of elevating the character of those concerned in them to their just standard, and advancing their general interest and welfare. To attain these ends it be- 48 American journal of education, IV (I829), 66; Lewis, op. cit., pp. 24-25. 49 Pierce, op. cit., p. 289; General Society ...., Annals, pp. 319, 329. So Sergeant, OP. cit., P. 33. Si John R. Commons et al., History of labour in the United States (New York: Mac milan, 1935), I, 79. s2 Ibid., pp. 78-79.
MECHANICS' AND MERCANTILE LIBRARIES 205 hooves us, while we labor to meet competition on fair grounds and to en- courage each other in our several avocations, to provide the means of instruc- tion and improvement to our apprentices.53 The spirit of free competition expressed here passed out of existence with the Civil War. Beneath many an argument which spoke of community and national progress, of increased physical security and comfort (which would follow from the spread of scientific and mechanical knowledge), lay the more direct and convincing appeal to the individual."4 "The object of our institution is," said George Emerson, "to give persons, whose time is chiefly occupied with the business of labor, knowledge of a kind to be directly useful to them in their daily pursuits."ss Lest the mechanics persist in their suspicion of theoretical knowledge to be derived from books, Emerson proceeded to demonstrate how a knowledge both of the principles of mechanics and of the nature of the materials used in manufactures would save time and prevent the failures which were so frequent when the trial-error method was used. "A few principles of philosophy [enter the mind, then] it ceases to be a dark mechanical process ..... He [the mechanici begins to penetrate the reasons and acquires a new mastery over his own instruments."56 Books assisted not only in the mastery of the processes of pro- duction but also in the revelation of vast power in the broad expanse of knowledge which had hitherto been the property of the privileged few. The multitudes from workshop and field could now march triumphantly through the "gates of the temple of science" and share in the complete culture of the times.57 S3 Haverstick, op. Cit., pp. 337-38; also General Society ...., Annualreport, z857, p. 17 (from minutes of the meeting, March 17, I8I9); General Society ...., AInnals, p. 321- 54 George B. Emerson, "Mechanics' institutions," A4merican journal of education, II ( 827), 273-78. Ss Ibid., p. 273- s6Ibid., p. 276; also Jesse Torrey, The intellectualtorch (i 8i5; reprinted Woodstock, Vermont: Elm Tree Press, I912), p. 3. 57 Emerson, op. cit., p. 278; John Sayward, "The means and ends," American laborer, 1 (I843), 325; Sergeant, op. cit., pp. 5, 8; also General Society .... , Reports of the Library and School Committee, pp. 6-7.
206 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY Here we had the basis of true equality, i.e., the equal oppor- tunity to rise in proportion to one's talent and effort. Herein lay the incentive to the good life. Ambition begets knowledge; knowledge begets wealth and power. These "certainly do create differences among men .... [but] they are prizes equally open to all: and this is real equality."s8 Just as the Old World class structure united with ignorance to keep economic power in the hands of the ruling class, so did the exclusive possession of knowledge keep political power in these same hands. But in the United States no one had any reason to withhold knowledge from another since there were no classes. One person's gain was not another's loss. Political slavery was indeed made possible by ignorance; but whatever of freedom was allowed by tyranny to remain would be adequate to work out a complete restoration through revolution. "The aim of the philanthropist and the patriot should be .... to guard against the occurrence of the necessity which sooner or later will in- evitably drive men to the ultimate resort of the oppressed."'9 There is evidence which shows that this bright light of exu- berant democracy was, at an early date, beginning to fear the shadow of class antagonisms. Paternalism was slightly pol- luted by self-interest. The benefits of a mechanics' institute were immediate to the apprentice but ultimate to the com- munity in the form of "their [apprentices] faithfulness, and in the greater security of property, and even of life." How im- measurably better it was to see the apprentice reading patriotic biographies than to have him waste his time in vicious pursuits "either in the company of his contemporaries in outdoor meet- ings, striving for notoriety, even by extravagance in speech, bordering on blasphemy; or, in the more retired rendezvous .... whilst he is stealing his own destruction, is ruining his employer."6e These ideas, ill defined in the early history of apprentices' 58 Sergeant, op. cit., p. io. A good statement of this and some of the ideas to follow is contained in Torrey, op. cit., passim. 59 Sergeant, op. cit., p. i9; also American journal of education, IV (I829), 54I. 60 General Society .... , Reports of the Library and School Committee, pp. 4-5.
MECHANICS' AND MERCANTILE LIBRARIES 207 libraries, took on clarity in the I870's and I890's when industry began to be harassed by organized labor. In speaking of the Ap- prentices' Library, the New York Observer of September 6, 1877, said: "Too much encouragement cannot be given to institutions of this description. They are the antidotes of strikes and com- munism, the only educators of many of our voters."6' In I894 and I895 the annual reports of the General Society of Me- chanics and Tradesmen used the subject of technical education as the springboard of an attack on the trade-unions. The patriotic sentiments of the employers who comprised the Gen- eral Society were appealed to in an effort to have the society's school used as an instrument for combating the foreign leader- ship and un-American practices of the unions.2 Former Mayor Abram S. Hewitt, in a stirring speech which was incorporated in the 1894 report, spoke of time-honored American freedom of contract. The "antidote" front this time had to be broadened to include "anarchism" and "populism," diseases which would destroy society itself if they were not checked. "The small frac- tion which has made itself so conspicuous and so noxious during the last ten years must be checked and relegated to their proper position in the social scale. If they will not work, let them starve." In any case the wealthy must be left in peace to per- form their invaluable services to society.63 The idea of "indefinite perfectibility" with regard to man and his institutions appears in connection with the educational ac- tivities of mechanics' institutions, although the plhrase itself- and its variants-has been abandoned. Faith in progress was indeed justified by the undeniable spread of intelligence in the period.A By dint of its republican institutions in which no class had political power which it feared to lose, the United States had the possibilities of rising to unknown heights. Each citizen had the opportunity of rising to the full measure of his abilities, and the totality of intelligence knew no bounds. So then, since 6r Quoted in Library journal, II ( 877), 78. 62 General Society ...., Innual report, 18o9, p. 2I. 63 Ibid., pp. 36-39; ibid., 1895, p. 42. 64 Sergeant, op. cit., p. 23; American journal of education, IV (I 829), S40.
208 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY "a comparative estimate of nations and cities depends upon the state of knowledge in a body of people," what indeed could be the limit of our progress ?5 And more, there was a very compelling political reason for supporting institutions of this kind. The republican form of government depended for its very life upon the education and elevation of the mechanic and laborer.66 Whether or not this country was to pass back into the hands of despots and oligarchs hinged on the maintenance of workers' education.67 The world was awaiting the results of this experiment in self-government! Upon its success hung the fate of universal freedom! Knowledge was the one and only safeguard against failure! What we see in the social backgrounds of the mechanics' and apprentices' libraries are the same solid virtues of the middle class which first organized subscription libraries nearly a hun- dred years before. We see the same outlook on scientific knowl- edge as the key to progress in economic as well as political realms. Three new elements enter the situation: i. Extreme individualism has been modified to allow an increasing number of less fortunate young men to partake of the springs of knowledge 2. In some quarters the confidence in, and the desirability of, everyone's rising to a position of economic independence was put to question 3. National economic and political ends were added to the small group aims of the century before These new ideas were manifestly functional to the growth of a distinct wage-earning class, the emergence of contradictions which were inherent in free-competition economics, the rising feeling of national self-consciousness with an accompanying desire for cultural independence. MERCANTILE LIBRARIES In giving the mercantile libraries separate treatment the writer does not wish to indicate that they were at all points dis- tinct from the mechanics' institutions. There is some reason to 6s Sergeant, op. cit., pp. 28-3 I; American journal of education, IV (1829), 538. 66 General Society .... , Reports of the Library and School Committee, pp. 3,7-8. 67 General Society .... , Annals, pp. 324-34 (address of President Hutchinson, February 3, I858).
MECHANICS' AND MERCANTILE LIBRARIES 2o9 believe that many general subscription libraries were called mercantile because they were established in trading towns where the mercantile proportion of the community population predominated.68 Many communities had institutions of this kind which catered to both a mechanical and a commercial clientele but which were called by one or the other name. In at least one place a mechanics' library seems to have opened as a result of a misunderstanding of the nature of the local mercan- tile library.69 However, where in the larger cities two institutions existed side by side, the mercantile libraries were organized and run with a social philosophy quite different from that of the ap- prentices' libraries. They were established in the early 1820's, not by the employer merchants, but by groups of young clerks and merchants who were just starting in the profession. An- other difference was that the libraries were at first the sole educational feature. Discussion groups and mutual-improve- ment circles and museum features were added only after the mercantile library was well under way.70 The introduction of lectures (New York Mercantile) is first intimated in I 829, when one finds mention of a proposed building "with a hall devoted to the purposes of teachers connected with our institution."7' Lec- turers were invited to address the membership, wealthy men were exhorted to endow annual lecture series, and by 1839 the lecture feature was firmly intrenched as an auxiliary service.72 The New York Mercantile Library Association73 was the out- 68James L. Goodknight, Evolution of the American library (Lincoln, III., I903), p. 4. 69 San Francisco Mercantile Library,First annual report of thepresident, i8g-54, P. 7. 70 New York Mercantile Library Association, Annual reports of the Board of Direc- tion of the Mercantile Library Association of the City of New York, from I8zi to 1838 (New York: Reprinted for the Association, I868), p. 9I. 7' Ibid., p. 46. 72 Ibid., pp. 9I, 99-i00; John H. Gourlie, an address delivered before the Mercantile Library Association at its eighteenth annual meeting, 7anuary 8, 838 (New York: James Van Norden, I839), pp. I-12. 73 The New York association is the basis of this treatment because of the availability and fulness of its reports. Although in the broad details of its history this association seems to typify the setup of others, the writer offers it as a good example rather than as a type.
210 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY come of a meeting of merchant's clerks at the Tontine Coffee House on November 9, I820.74 Its organizers found cause to boast not only of the excellence and grandeur of the literary institution they had conceived but also of the youthfulness of the group which was responsible for it.7 Setting the association in motion, however, was not enough. The officers soon began to complain that, whether for lack of inclination or money or be- cause of the poor location of the library, the number of young clerks and merchants who were joining was not enough to sup- port the library.76 Confident that the clerks were remaining outside the association because of disinclination rather than opposing circumstances," a circular was sent to the city's mer- chants asking them for their blessing.77 Shortly afterward it was announced with keen satisfaction that the chamber of commerce had voted not only to donate two hundred and fifty dollars to the association-the more gratifying because funds were not solicited-but also to become patron saint to the clerks' venture.78 The jubilance with which this action was received was due mostly to the fact that the approval of the merchants and their influence with clerks would cause an increased membership. But this still did not make a going concern. The next step was to map a campaign to get merchants to donate books and to pay subscription fees for their clerks. The "honorary" members-merchant donors-were ap- pealed to for assistance in the campaign.79 A year later the opening wedge was begrudgingly conceded: We must have a still greater increase of subscribers. These constitute our strength, our chief dependence. We desire the approbation of our employers; we are truly thankful for their aid; we are anxious that they should continue their donations, yet our members should feel that the effective force comes from them.8 74Gourlic, op. cit., p. 6. 75 New York Mercantile Library Association, op. cit., p. 3. 76 Ibid., pp. 10, I6, 32, 37, 39. 77Ibid., pp. 10-12. 79 Ibid. pp. i C-t i 1 9 79 Ibid., pp. 23-24, 29-30. soIbid., p. 34.
MECH4NICS' AND MERCANTILE LIBRARIES 211 From this it was but a step to amend the constitution to include life-subscriptions at twenty-five dollars and annual subscrip- tions (for merchants) at five dollars.8' By 1835 the older mer- chants probably had the controlling voice in the New York Mercantile Library Association-at least the annual report of that year would make it seem S0.82 On the whole, the membership in mercantile library associa- tions must have lived on a higher social plane than the readers in mechanics' libraries. The need for uplift, which the writer has treated under the general term "humanitarianism," does not figure as frequently or as seriously with the protagonists of mer- cantile libraries. Ornate but mild figures of speech set forth the moral value of a mercantile library or describe the exemplary conduct of its young members.83 The importance of excluding immoral and irreligious books is mentioned;84 the necessity of counteracting the penny press, with its general tone of ribaldry and mendacity, its details of "horrible murders," "infamous seductions," and "astounding defalcation," is stressed.85 In general, those who sought recreation from the library shelves would not "have a taste for idle pursuits and dissolute pleas- ures."86 Employers were urged to see the benefits for themselves. Among the members of the mercantile library association they would see "none who are frequenters of the dram-shop, none who seek the society of the vicious and profane, and few, if any, who are devoted to the theatre."87 The employer who prized honesty in those to whom he intrusted his property would see in this institution a teacher of correct principles.88 Finally, be- fore hiring a clerk, it would be well to find out if he is a member "tIbid., P. 39. 2 Ibid., p. IOI. 83 Ibid., pp. 6, I8) 83, 101. 84 Ibid., p. 62. 8 Phillip Hone, An address deliuferd before the Mercantile Library Association . . . October3, s813 (Boston: W. D. Ticknor, 1843), p. 23. "6Ibid., p. 20; San Francisco Mercantile Library, op. cit., p. 8. 97 New York Mercantile Library Asociation, op. cit., p. 35. U Ibid., p. 4I.
212 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY of the mercantile library and "what is the character of his read- ing."x89 Perhaps the best humanitarian plea made in behalf of a mer- cantile library was that delivered by John Gourlie in 1839. This address spoke of the temptations to which many of the clerks, away from home and without parental influence, were exposed. The ardent spirit of youth, its tender susceptibilities, and that love of inde- pendent and unrestrained action which it exhibits, are the weak points which are first assailed by the temptation to error. From the counting-house, after the labours and occupations of the day are over, the thoughtless foot- step ofttimes leads its victim to the brothel or the gambling table." In the days of universal gloom in the depression of 1837 the New York Mercantile Library claimed that in a crisis like this the importance of its facilities was "more palpably felt than at any other time." The unemployed, with little in the business world to occupy their attention, could spend their idle hours in profitable reading. Peculiarly enough, thought the officers, in these times of suffering and distress, the association has been in a favored position. Its social utility had increased!9' Because of the exalted position which the clerks held in their libraries as compared with the lowly place of the apprentices in theirs there is little in the mercantile library literature which refers to utilitarian benefits from the employers' point of view. Citations which speak of a clerk or apprentice as too busy to read92 or of professional reference material of direct utility in the transacting of business"3 are rare. The highest function of a mercantile library association was to afford adequate educational facilities for those who were destined to become the future merchants of Boston, 94San Fran- '9 Ibid., p. 54. 9? Gourlie, op. cit., p. I6. 9x New York Mercantile Library Association, Seventeenth annual report, 1837, pp. g-IO. 92 Ibid., pp. 7-8. 93 New York Mercantile Library Association, Annual reports of the Board . . 182! to 1838, p. 24. 94George W. Tyler, Address delivered before the Mercantile Library Association of Boston on the evening of their sixteenth anniversary, March zt, 1836 (Boston: Hitchcock,
MECHANICS' AND MERCANTILE LIBRARIES 213 cisco,95 New York,96 or any other trading city. Some assurance must be had that when the unassuming clerk takes on the mer- chant's cloak and enters into competition with the older men of the community the respectability of the merchant class would be sustained.97 The practical advantages of the mercantile library were soon evident to the merchant community-even to that sector which had thought at one time that it would "divert the attention of the young men from their professional duties."98 On the con- trary, successful practice of the merchant's calling required that he set aside a given time during the working day for reading. It was a grievous error to believe that the merchant could get along merely on what he learned in the conduct of enterprise. He had to know the latest laws and regulations which governed his trade; he had to be aware of production and consumption trends, of monetary expansion and contraction. The market was becoming so intricate that experience had to be supple- mented by study if property were to remain secure. Another fallacy was the idea that educated men succeeded less frequent- ly than their uneducated competitors. While this may have been true in the early settlement of the country when the popu- lation urgently needed foreign goods and when competition was almost nonexistent, it no longer was the case. The country had grown, competition had stiffened, and education had become the sine qua non of a respectable successful life.99 The merchant was under obligation to himself and to his pro- fession, not only to learn what was useful, but also to inform himself as widely as possible so that he could command the i836), pp. i ff.; Robert C. Winthrop, An address delivered before the Boston Mercantile Library Association on the occasion of their twenty-fifth anniversary, October i5, i845 (Boston: Marvin & Co., I845), pp. 7-9. 9s San Francisco Mercantile Library, op. cit., pp. 12-I3; cf. Mercantile Library Association of New Orleans, First annual report, November, i858 (New Orleans: William Bloomfield, i858), p. 4. 96 New York Mercantile Library Association, Annual reports of the Board..., p. 25. 97 Ibid., pp. 32, 40-4I, 49-50. 53-54, 57, 62, 67. 98 Gourlie, op. cit., p. 8. 99 Tyler, op. cit., pp. 7-8, 26-3c.
214 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY utmost respect and make his greatest contribution to com- munity life.I00 One had to have a care that the favored position which the merchant had in society was maintained.x0I No knowledge was foreign to the merchant: geography, history, economics, the humanities-all were within his sphere. "The merchant should possess an intimate practical acquaintance with human nature-a knowledge of the human heart-its affections and passions; he should be, indeed, a moral phi- losopher, although not wrapt up in the abstract speculations which both begin in the closet and end there."102 Whatever temptation one may have to define the merchants' conception of culture-with all its breadth-as utilitarian, is dispelled if one takes at face value the overwhelming stress in the annual addresses on the purely literary and humanistic studies. Wealth was despised(!) as an end in itself. Cultural elevation was sought as solace and substance of preoccupation in times of commercial adversity,103 in old age,'04 and in retire- ment.'0s Foremost in the minds of some of the merchants was a desire to achieve real class distinction-to rank with the most cultivated classes in society."'6 Standard and classical works had a preferred place in the library collection. Works of the imagination (fiction) and maga- zine literature were tolerated only in so far as it was hoped that such reading would start the clerks on the road to more serious studies.'07 In line with the general high cultural level at which "OoNew York Mercantile Library Association, Annual reports of the Board .... PP. 42, 50. 10, Tyler, op. cit., p. 32; Edward Everett, an address before the Mercantile Library Association (Boston: W. D. Ticknor, I838), PP. 35-36. zo0 New York Mercantile Library Association, Annual reports of the Board..., p. I17; Tyler, op. cit., p. 8. '0' Gourlie, op. cit., p. I8. 104 Hone, op. cit., pp. 2o-21. los Tyler, op. cit., p. 6; George Lunt, Anniversary poem delivered before the Mercantile Library Association of Boston, October3, 1843 (Boston: W. D. Ticknor, 1843), ?o6 New York Mercantile Library Association, Seventeenth annual report, p. 7. 107 New York Mercantile Library Association, Annual reports of the Board..., pp. 4, II, 77; Hone, op. cit., pp. 21, 24-25.
MECHANICS' AND MERCANTILE LIBRA4RIES 215 the mercantile library associations were aiming many of the poems and papers read at annual meetings represented the last word in scholarship.I0o A favorite theme was the history of the world told in terms of the mercantile profession. It was regular- ly demonstrated how the superiority of some nations was trace- able to the activities of its merchants;109 how New York and Boston had grown great on the foundations laid by commerce; and how the charitable, scientific, and literary institutions in these cities had been founded by the merchant class.KIo In place of specific history the clerks sometimes heard long hymns to commerce, to ships, to the sea, to the merchant and his love of literature and the arts, to his knowledge of science and its applications."'I In addition to the practical and cultural values of literary and scientific knowledge the merchant could think of another, per- haps oblique, advantage to the acquisition of learning. As the nation and its cities grew in size and complexity, new political responsibilities would devolve upon the citizens. In order to protect their own special interests the merchants had to send to the councils of the city and nation men who could "do proud" by the profession. "But, unfortunately, such has been the want of cultivation among our business men, so little way have they traveled out of the daily routine of the counting house, that it might be difficult to find any considerable number, who united to practical experience sufficient acquired knowledge to qualify them for filling those honorable stations."II2 Another indirect benefit of the library association to the merchants was its contribution toward producing mutual good IC$ E.g., Robert C. Winthrop, A1lgernon Sidney: a lecture delivered before the Boston Mercantile Library Association, December 2, 1853 (Boston: Whipple, :854). 10 Tyler, op. cit. t10 Hone, op. cit.; pp. 26-44 of this addreu conist in a treatise on thc study of history and oratory; sec also New York Mercantile Library Association, Annual reports of the Board. . . ., pp. 76, 88,, II. II James T. Fields, Anniversary poem, delivered before the Mercantile Library Associa- tion of Boston, September r3, ;838 (Boston: W. D. Ticknor, I 838). 112 New York Mercantile Library Association, Seventeenth annual report, 1837, pp. 8-9; Gourlie, op. cit., pp. I7-I9.
2X6 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY feeling, as well as discouraging the discordant spirit of partisan- ship whether political, religious, or other.113 More positively, it was asserted that no member who took his reading seriously ever "defrauded his employer, or abused his confidence." "This it is [literary pursuits] which will render them good citizens- elevate them into patriots, and insure to society a race of men, whose intelligence and love of order will preserve it from the storms of civil revolution.""14 Moreover, an educational correc- tive had to be supplied for the benefit of those who had recently come to our shores and hadn't as yet been adequately informed as to the meaning of our institutions. Some measures had to be taken to modify their misinformed opinions which were begin- ning to produce disorder in certain circles."s Whatever "correct" information the clerks failed to get from their reading they sometimes got from a lecturer. During the hard times of the late 1830's Edward Everett held forth on the erroneousness of instituting a comparison between the produc- ing and the accumulating classes. While accumulation was the basis of commerce, he explained, it did not create commerce. In order to satisfy needs and desires, the enterprise of exchange was necessary; it was in this process of mutually beneficial ex- change that accumulation was possible. It was a system of mu- tual accommodation. The difference between barbarism and civilization was inherent in the security gained by accumulation of capital. When one considered, too, that production could not go on without capital, that labor could not be employed without capital, it was incomprehensible that anyone should draw con- trasts between capital and labor or should dislike the capitalists as a class. Just look at the comforts which have been produced for man by capitalist enterprise. It is unthinkable that govern- ment should invest in the branches of industry necessary to supply the wants of men. Capital must be given a free hand to expand. "3 New York Mercantile Library Association, Annual reports of the Board..., pp. 80-84. 1T4yGourlie, op. cit., p. 36. l15 Tyler, op. cit-, p. 31 -
MECHANICS' AND MERCANTILE LIBRARIES 217 When one came to analyze the causes of prejudice against capital he would see that it was a carry-over from the Old World where, in a semifeudal stratified society, the poor had reason to hate the rich. In the United States laws and unprecedented op- portunity left the path open to all. Large accumulations were necessary in order to keep smaller ones in action. Joint stock companies were justifiable as an in- strument which allowed large capital investment on the part of those who possessed comparatively small accumulations. No money was hoarded; everything was invested in further business operation. As desirable as equality of condition was, it was wrong to achieve it by an equal division of fortunes among the people. This would result only in general impoverishment. The right inheritance laws, philanthropic practices, "an effective system of popular education, would unquestionably restore harmony and concord to society and bring the great mass of the physical strength of the community into alliance with its moral and in- tellectual elements."" 6 DECLINE OF THE MECHANICS' AND MERCANTILE LIBRARIES Although the mechanics' libraries continued to serve their purpose well beyond the middle of the century,"t7 they gradually fell prey to the oncoming public libraries and to the weakening of their own economic base. Some interest was still being shown in mechanics' libraries in the last quarter of the nineteenth cen- tury;""8 but it is safe to say that by that time those in the smaller communities had died or had been absorbed by the public li- brary. The apprentices' libraries in the largest communities seem to have persisted for several reasons: viz., the wealth of "z6Everett, op. cit., p. 40. 1"7 Reportfrom the Select Committee on Public Libraries; together with the proceedings of the committee, minutes of evidence, and appendix, pp. 97-104, quoted by James Howard Wellard in Book selection: its principles and practice (London: Grafton, 1937), p. 22. Ila Cf. "Mansfield, Ohio, Library of the Order of American Mechanics (I872)" in C. B. Galbreath, Sketches of Ohio librarits (Columbus, Ohio: Heer, 1902), p. 2I8; also "Altoona, Pennsylvania, Mechanics' Library," Library journal, XIV (1889), 483.
2218 THE LIBRARY Q,UARTERLY the organizations behind them, their large, well-developed book collections, and even the sheer impetus acquired in the days of their popularity. An early example of the merger of one of these libraries to form a public library occurred in Cincinnati-in i 8S6 the library of the Ohio Mechanics' Institute was combined with the Common School Library.1x9 A somewhat later instance is noted at St. Joseph, Missouri, where the Mechanical Library was annexed to the public library of that city.120 Mercantile libraries suffered the same fate as the mechanics' and apprentices' libraries. Whereas they managed to keep alive in a few large cities, they virtually disappeared under the name ''mercantile" in the hundreds of cities where they had existed. Even in Boston the Mercantile Library had to relinquish its identity.121 As in the case of the decline of mechanics' libraries, the sources yield very little which would explain their disappear- ance. One must infer that the mere existence of the public li- brary with its superior book stocks caused the obsolescence of the older form. However, there is adequate evidence that hard times were felt keenly by the mercantile libraries;I22 that the number of subscribers fell off and income decreased correspond- ingly."23 After the depression period, I873-78, the removal of the Mercantile Library in New York brought the suggestion that the new building be constructed with a view to its ultimate transformation into a free public library. 124There began to grow a consciousness that even the smallest fee would tend to keep readers out of libraries. It was noted that when the Mercantile Library of Peoria, Illinois, was turned over to the city and made II9 U.S. Bureau of Education, Report on art and industry (Washington: U.S. Govern- ment Printing Office, I897), III, 614. "32 Libary journal, XVI (I 891), 284. I}I Willam I. Fletcher, "The proprietary library in relation to the public library movement," in Gertrude G. Drury (ed.), The library and its organization (New York: H. W. Wilson, I924), pp. 25-26. 122 Mercantile Library Awciation of New Orleans, op. cit., p. 6. "S Mercantile Library Association of Baltimore, Annual report, 1874, p. 4. 24 Library journal, IV (I879), 443-44.
MECHANICS' AND MERCANTILE LIBRARIES 219 free the borrowers register increased from 275 to 4,500.12s In I900 there was a proposed merger of the Philadelphia Mercan- tile with the Free Library of Philadelphia. The directors voted down the proposal.126 If one seeks the meaning of the rise and decline of the "occu- pational" libraries which flourished in the first half of the nine- teenth century, he finds something like this: With the disap- pearance of equal position and wealth in all sectors of the American middle class some agency had to be instituted to carry on its cultural and utilitarian aims. In the first years of the mechanics' library institutions there was a great deal of stress on educating the apprentice upward to the solid position of the enterprising middle class. As there was an increase in the wage-earning portion of the lower middle class, and as it became less usual for the working mechanic to rise, paternalistic zeal transferred its attention to obtaining taxv.supported free li- braries. The merchant group, at first secure and confident, seems to have lost its cohesiveness after the Civil War. The activities of finance and industrial capital doubtless made it difficult for merchants to continue maintalning a separate group interest. The greatest single factor to make inroads on the "territory" of these institutions was the free public library, whose position became stronger as the wage-earning group moved to numerical dominance in the American population. X25 Henry H. Barber, "The free public library," in A. E. Bostwick (ed.), The library and society (New York: H. W. Wilson, I920), p. 179. Other examples are Tacoma, Washington (I894), and Denver, Colorado (1898). See American library annual (19I6-17), pp. 277-366. 2 6 Library journal, XXV (I 900), 139.