THE NATURE OF PAPER B. L. BROWNING DEFINITION AND ORIGIN Paper is so ubiquitous in our daily lives that it is difficult to imagine effec- tive functioning of our technological society without it. Indeed, we often measure the level of contemporary cultures by the amount of paper con- sumed. In the United States the amount is more than 500 pounds per capita annually and is rising year by year. The contributions of paper are not without drawbacks: a limited supply of fibrous source materials, problems of air and water pollution in manufacturing processes, and ques- tions of disposal of the paper once it has served its intended purposes. Paper has not always held so im- portant a place in the human economy; the multitude of demands that paper now fills were necessarily satisfied by other materials. It is significant that the earliest use of paper was in written communication. In this, it was preceded by other less-abundant or less-appro- priate materials; baked clay tablets in the Near East, sheets of papyrus in the Nile valley, parchment or vellum in the Near East and Europe, cloth or strips of wood and bamboo in China, and sheets of macerated barks in Oceania, Africa, and the early Ameri- cas. The word "paper" is used to describe a felted sheet of fibers formed by pass- ing a liquid suspension of the fibers through a fine screen. The liquid drains away to leave a mat of fibers which is removed from the screen and dried. The definition is general. The fibers commonly used are composed chiefly of cellulose, although paper can be and is made from fibers of many other types, including glass, asbestos, wool, metals, and synthetic polymers. The liquid is almost always water, although other liquids can be used. Water is inexpensive and plentiful, and its inter- action with cellulose fibers contributes unique properties-in swelling of fibers during mechanical processing and in formation of the paper sheet, and in fiber-to-fiber bonding which occurs as the sheet is dried and which is respon- sible for the greater part of the mechan- ical strength of paper. Paper is reported to have been in use in China before the Christian era, although Hou Han Shu (Book of the Second Han Dynasty) credits its in- vention in A.D. 105 to Ts'ai Lun, who is said to have made sheets of paper from macerated tree bark, hemp waste, old rags, and fishnets [1]. The craft soon spread to Korea and Japan, and found its way into Central Asia and Persia by the routes of the camel cara- vans. The Arabs began making paper about A.D. 750, and the art spread to Syria, Egypt, and Morocco. The Moors introduced paper into Spain about A.D. 1150. In 1268 a paper mill was estab- lished at Fabriano, Italy. Papermaking began in France and Germany in the fourteenth century and in England in the fifteenth. The first American paper mill was established in 1690 near Ger- mantown, Pennsylvania, by William Rittenhouse, a Dutch papermaker. Until the invention of the paper machine, paper was made by a labori- 18
THE NATURE OF PAPER 19 ous hand process. Common materials in Europe were cotton and linen rags, and hemp. The wet fibers were stamped or pounded by hand until they reached a condition suitable for papermaking, and then made into a dilute suspension in a large tank or vat. A portion of the suspension was dipped up into a rec- tangular mold fitted at the bottom with a wire screen, and the water was al- lowed to drain away while the paper- maker gently shook the mold from side to side to ensure even formation of the sheet. The wet sheet was "couched" from the screen by pressing a felt or blotter against it, and a stack of felts and paper sheets was compacted in a screw press to flatten the sheets and to remove additional water. The stack was then separated and the sheets were al- lowed to dry in the air. The surface of the paper was smoothed or bur- nished by rubbing it with a polished stone, and sizings of animal glue or starch were applied to writing paper to prevent feathering of inks. The invention of the printing press with movable type in the fifteenth cen- tury and the growing demand for print- ing and writing papers created increas- ing pressure on the supply and on the requisite raw materials. These needs were met by the paper machine and by the use of fibers from wood. In 1798 the Fourdrinier machine was invented by Nicholas Louis Robert of France, and development by the Fourdrinier brothers in England fol- lowed soon thereafter. The paper ma- chine forms, presses, and dries the sheet in one continuous operation. Machine- made papers were introduced in the early 1800s and rapidly found their way into newsprint, writing, and printing papers. Today, except for the making of some special art papers, the craft of hand papermaking in the United States is restricted to a few hobbyists. Handmade paper is still pro- duced in Europe and the Far East. As production of paper grew, an increasing scarcity of cotton fibers de- veloped, and there was intense com- petition in the markets for used cotton clothing and rags. Cloth wrappings from Egyptian mummies were im- ported in large quantities in the early nineteenth century, sometimes over the violent opposition of many citizens who feared they might transmit disease. Other sources of fibers also proved in- adequate, and attention was directed to wood. The first suggestion that paper could be produced from wood appears to have been made in 1719 by the nat- uralist Reamur, who observed the pa- perlike quality of wasps's nests made from wood. The idea was not reduced to practice, and only with the invention of chemical pulping processes with wood as an abundant raw material was the production of paper on a large scale made possible. THE MATERIALS OF PAPER FIMERS Cellulose fibers are the chief source of fibrous materials for papermaking; only a few specialty papers include fi- bers of other compositions. Cellulose fibers from many sources are used. Fibers from the seed hair of cotton are the purest form of cellulose; raw cot- ton after dewaxing and a mild alkali cook is essentially pure cellulose. Cellulose is a high polymer; that is, it is made up of many single, relatively simple units combined chemically into very large molecules. The individual units are composed of molecules of glucose (or grape sugar) combined, with loss of one molecule of water from
20 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY each glucose unit added, into long linear chains. The structural form of glucose as drawn by the chemist is shown in figure 1; that of glucose units CH20H H0 HO OH H OH GLUCOSE FIG. 1.-The chemical formula for glucose (in the preferred chain form) as they are combined in the cellulose chain molecule is shown in figure 2. The link- age between units in the chain depends on how the plane of the individual units are disposed. In cellulose, each unit is located at 1800 to the plane of the adjacent units, and the glucose units are said to be ,B linked (fig. 2). Starch (the amylose portion) is identical with cellulose except that all glucose units are in the same relative positions in the chain and are described as being a linked. The linear chains of glucose units in cellulose are very long. In native cel- lulose as grown in the plant, the chains are composed of 7,000-10,000 units [2]. Purification processes degrade and shorten the cellulose chains, which typ- ically are composed of 500-1,500 units in common papermaking fibers. The length of the chain molecules can be visualized if one imagines that each glu- cose unit is one-eighth inch in length; a native cellulose chain then would be about 100 feet in length. A cellulose fiber from wood is about one to seven millimeters in length (about one twenty-fifth to one-third inch) and twenty-five to fifty microns in diameter. About 1,000 fibers ar- ranged alongside in parallel fashion would be required to cover a span of one inch. The tiny fibers are also very light; between one million and ten mil- lion are required to weigh one gram (equivalent to one-thirtieth ounce). Each fiber has a central cavity or lu- men that contains the protoplasm in the growing cell. The lumen is collapsed in the processed fiber, which then com- monly assumes a ribbonlike form. The chains of glucose units in the cellulose molecule are grouped in parallel fash- ion to form fibrils, which are arranged spirally around the axis of the fiber in concentric layers (fig. 3). Wood is the major source of paper- H H ~H-C-H c %O ~~I H HO 1 H H ln-2 FIG. 2.-A glucose unit in the cellulose chain molecule
THE NATURE OF PAPER 21 making fibers; approximately 95 per- cent of the papermaking pulps pro- duced in the United States are derived from wood. Other fiber sources include straws, bamboo, and sugarcane ba- gasse; these are important in countries in which they are available in quantity and which lack adequate wood re- sources. All these fibrous materials con- tain ligneous binding substances to- gether with the group of carbohydrates which accompany cellulose in plants and are called the hemicelluloses. The fibers must be separated from the lig- nin and the major portion of the hemi- celluloses by processes of chemical di- gestion and bleaching to yield fibrous pulps that are suitable for paper- making. Pulps are manufactured from wood by several processes [see, for example, 3-5]. Mechanical pulp or groundwood is produced by grinding peeled bolts of wood against a rotating abrasive stone under a stream of water or by grinding chips in a disk-type mill. Properly pre- pared groundwood consists of separated fibers and fiber bundles; it contains all the components of the original wood except for the slight loss of water- soluble materials. Chemical wood pulp is prepared by digesting wood chips with a cooking or pulping liquor at elevated temperatures (140?-180? C) under pressure. In the acid sulfite process, the cooking liquor contains calcium, sodium, or ammo- nium bisulfite with an excess of free sulfurous acid. The bisulfite process uses a less-acid liquor in which the chemical is magnesium or sodium bi- sulfite. In the neutral sulfite (or neu- tral sulfite semichemical-NSSC) pro- cess, the cooking liquor contains sodium sulfite plus sodium bicarbonate; the pulping reactions take place in a weak- ly alkaline solution. The oldest chem- ical pulping process is the soda process, in which the chips are cooked with a solution of caustic soda. This process produces a bulky pulp with good opac- ity and was in the past favored for manufacture of book papers, but pro- duction is now unimportant in com- parison with other processes. Over 75 percent of the chemical wood pulp is now produced by the sulfate or kraft process, in which the cooking liquor contains sodium hydroxide (caustic soda) plus sodium sulfide. The spent FiG. 3.-Schematic representation of the cell wall of a softwood fiber (after H. Meier). M = middle lamella; P = primary wall; SI, S2, SS = secondary wall. liquor is concentrated and burned for recovery of inorganic chemicals; so- dium sulfate (salt cake) is frequently used to make up chemical losses, ac- counting for the name "sulfate pro- cess." Chemical pulps produced by any of these processes are tan to brown in color and contain residual lignin not removed by pulping. A white pulp is produced by a bleaching process to remove residual lignin and other or- ganic impurities. Common bleaching agents are chlorine gas, hypochlorites, chlorine dioxide, and peroxides. These are applied in one or another sequence with washing or alkaline extraction be- tween stages. Pulps for conversion to
22 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY cellulose derivatives or for preparation of papermaking "alpha" pulps are given additional treatment with hot, dilute, caustic soda solutions, either at the end of the bleaching procedure or as an intermediate step in the bleach- ing sequence. Groundwood is bleached by application of peroxides or of so- dium or zinc hydrosulfite; the process is one of "brightening" rather than bleaching, since little of the ground- wood is dissolved during the process. Pulps are made from both hardwoods and softwoods. Each has properties which especially adapts it to specific grades of paper. The fiber furnish of many papers is a blend of several types of pulp. A wood pulp from any one source consists of fibers which differ considerably in length, width, and struc- ture. Cotton fibers account for only a small part of total paper production; they are generally more expensive than wood pulps and their use is limited to pa- pers in which they lend qualities not obtainable with wood pulp fibers. Many papers are manufactured from blends of cotton fibers with purified wood pulps; "rag content" papers are re- quired to contain at least 25 percent cotton fibers. Cotton fibers are obtained from new and used rags, cotton wastes and cuttings, and cotton linters. Fine "rag content" papers are made almost entirely of new rags. The purification of cotton materials for papermaking is usually accomplished by an alkaline cook with soda ash or lime (or both) followed by bleaching. Cotton fibers are used principally for high-grade bond, writing, and ledger papers, where durability and permanence are impor- tant, and in drawing, index, onionskin, and technical papers, such as blueprint and direct line. These fibers are also used in the manufacture of blotting papers, saturating felts, and vulcanized fiber, where absorbency, fiber length, and fiber strength are necessary. NONFIBROUS MATERILS A paper made of cellulose fibers alone has only limited applications. The extraordinary versatility of paper arises from the ease with which the basic sheet of fibers can be modified by addition of nonfibrous materials and the wide range of properties which can be achieved to meet the requirements of a multitude of end uses. The appli- cation of sizing, loading, coloring, coat- ing, impregnating, and laminating ma- terials illustrates only a few of the additives commonly employed. Fire- proofing and flameproofing agents, anti- oxidants, microbiological control agents, insect and rodent repellents, wet-strength agents, internal adhesives, and many others are introduced for special purposes. Composite structures of paper with metal foil, wood veneer, plastic films, fabrics, asphalt, waxes, and others extend possible applications. The grades of paper comprising writ- ing, printing, and book papers are of particular interest in the fields of pub- lishing, advertising, and communica- tions. They cover a wide range of qual- ity, depending on the intended use. These papers are always made of cellu- lose fibers, mostly derived from wood pulp and, in the more inexpensive pa- pers, containing groundwood. The pa- pers are normally internally sized with starch or rosin. Most printing and book papers are loaded; that is, inorganic white pigments or loading materials, such as clay or calcium carbonate, are introduced to improve opacity and printing quality. The printing and book grades are often coated with a compo-
THE NATURE OF PAPER 23 sition containing a white pigment and an adhesive such as starch or casein in order to increase surface smoothness and printing quality. Practically all papers are colored, even white papers into which are introduced small quan- tities of tinting colors to increase ap- parent whiteness. MANUFACTURE OF PAPER The paper mill is designed to pre- pare fibrous and nonfibrous raw mate- rials for papermaking and to manu- facture paper by means of a paper machine [see, for example, 3, 4]. The first step is called "stock preparation' the supply of fibrous pulps or blend of pulps (called the "furnish") is sub- jected to mechanical action in the presence of water by a process known as "beating" or "refining." In this process, the fibers are swollen in water, they are somewhat shortened, and, most important, they develop fraying and fibrillation at the surface so that the surface area is increased and bond- ing in the sheet is enhanced. Sizing, loading, coloring, and other nonfibrous materials may be added during the re- fining or before the paper sheet is formed. The prepared fibrous stock is diluted with water and introduced onto the paper machine. The wet sheet is formed as the water is drained away through the moving wire screen, then pressed and dried by passage over a series of cylindrical, steam-heated driers. The present-day high-speed Fourdrinlier pa- per machine is a costly and complex mechanism. It forms and dries the sheet, and in many cases introduces coatings or other surface treatments as a part of the operation. Some machines make a continuous web 360 or more inches wide; others operate at speeds of 5,000 or more feet per minute (about sixty miles per hour!). Recent modifi- cations employ a method in which the sheet is formed between two moving wire screens so that the water is re- moved from both sides as the sheet is formed [6]. Another kind of paper machine is known as the cylinder machine, in which a wire screen-covered cylinder rotates in a vat containing the suspen- sion of fibers. Suction applied inside the cylinder forms the mat of fibers on the screen; the wet sheet then is carried to presses and driers. The cylin- der machine is used mostly in produc- tion of paperboard; it may comprise several cylinders, wet sheets from which are combined before pressing and dry- ing. Coatings and surface sizes may be introduced as a part of the machine operation; the treatment is applied to the partially dried sheet, and drying is completed through the remainder of the drying section. Many printing pa- pers are manufactured in this way by the process known as "machine coat- ing." The application of coatings and surface sizes is sometimes accomplished also as a separate operation after a "base sheet" has been dried. Almost all paper is calendered to improve smoothness and gloss of its surface. The calender is a set or "stack" of horizontal cast-iron rolls with chilled, hardened surfaces, resting one on the other in a vertical bank at the end of the drier section of the paper machine; the paper is passed between all or part of the rolls [7]. Supercalendering is performed as an operation separate from the paper machine; it increases the depisity, smoothness, and gloss of the paper. The supercalender is a cal- ender stack which has alternate chilled
24 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY cast-iron and soft rolls of highly com- pressed cotton or paper. The effects of supercalendering are governed by the pressure, the water content of the sheet during the process, the temperature, and other factors. Watermarks in handmade papers are produced by preparing raised lines to form a design on the wire screen. The mat of fibers is thinned in areas corresponding to the design so that the watermark is thrown in bold relief when the paper is viewed by transmit- ted light. Light-and-shade watermarks are produced by embossing the screen so that the design is formed by vari- ations in thickness of the sheet. Water- marks in machine-made papers are pro- duced by a "dandy roll," which is a screen-covered roll bearing a raised pattern and rotating above and in con- tact with the wet sheet as it passes un- der the roll on the paper-machine wire. "Laid" and "wove" marks in writing papers are made by use of a forming screen or dandy roll bearing the desired design. "Chemical watermarks" are formed by impregnation in areas corre- sponding to the design with a material which partially transparentizes the pa- per. (An extensive collection of water- marks, many exhibiting a high degree of artistry, may be seen at the Dard Hunter Museum, Institute of Paper Chemistry, Appleton, Wisconsin.) MEASURABLE PROPERTIES OF PAPER The properties of paper which are important to the user may be classified as physical, optical, and chemical. A prospective purchaser of paper may judge its quality by subjective obser- vations, for example, color, opaque- ness, smoothness, surface texture, stiff- ness or limpness, and water or oil re- pellency. For more dependable and ob- jective evaluation of paper properties, and to provide specifications for sale or purchase, it is necessary to employ instrumental methods of measurement. Even these fail on occasion, and subtle differences that one can feel or detect often cause much agony in attempts to describe them instrumentally. Nev- ertheless, much effort has been devoted to standardization of methods for test- ing of paper, and considerable progress has been made. Standard methods have been established in the United States by the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) and the Tech- nical Association of the Pulp and Paper Industry (TAPPI) [8, 9], and inter- nationally by the International Stan- dards Organization (ISO). Most of the physical tests are pro- foundly influenced by the moisture content of the paper at the time of test. Cellulose and paper are hygroscopic and maintain under normal conditions of relative humidity a water content amounting to several percentage points by weight. Typical sorption isotherms are shown in figure 4 (from [10]). Be- cause of hysteresis, the desorption iso- therm always lies above that for ad- sorption; that is, the amount of sorbed water at any relative humidity depends on whether the measurement is made after passing from a higher or a lower relative humidity. The desorption iso- therm in figure 4 is that for a paper which is dried from the wet condition; a closed hysteresis loop is obtained only when the desorption isotherm is determined after the adsorption iso- therm for the paper in an initially dry condition. Constant testing conditions and reproducible test values can be obtained only if the paper is properly conditioned and tested at a specified temperature and relative humidity to
THE NATURE OF PAPER 25 assure a standard moisture content; for example, according to the TAPPI Standard [9, b], a temperature of 230 ? 1? C and a relative humidity of 50 ? 2 percent. As we have seen, paper is essentially a mat of fibers. We must now ask what holds the fibers together. What is the character of the fibers which lends to paper its remarkable strength? In brief, the mechanical properties of paper are determined by complex interactions of individual fiber properties and by the nature and extent of bonding between the fibers. The following are basic fac- tors which establish paper strength: fiber dimensions, fiber strength, bonded area, bonding strength per unit bonded area, distribution of bonds (sheet for- mation), fiber conformability (flexibil- ity), and stress distribution [ 11]. Many of these factors are influenced by chem- ical composition, mechanical treatment and degree of swelling of fibers during stock preparation, pressing of the wet sheet before and during drying, and the presence of additives (adhesives, sizing agents, fillers, etc.) in the fur- nish. No completely satisfactory theo- retical treatment of paper strength has yet been achieved, although models based upon idealized fibrous structures 30 I 28- 26- 24- $ 22 - z 0 20 w z '214- 0 12 D 10 0 20 40 60 80 100 RELATIVE HUMIDITY, 0/0 FIG. 4.-Typical moisture sorption isotherms for paper. A - adsorption; D = desorption.
26 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY have aided mathematical analysis (see, for example [12]). The bonding between fibers depends largely upon the surface area in con- tact in the finished paper. This is es- tablished by the swelling and fibrilla- tion of the fibers during stock prepa- ration, the flexibility and compressi- bility of the wet fibers, the extent of wet pressing, and other factors. The bonding between fiber surfaces or fibrils TABLE 1 TENSILE BREAKING LENGTH OF MATERIALS Material Breaking Refer- (kilometers) ence Steel wire .41 [161 Copper wire (hard drawn). . . 4.7-5.4 [161 Rayon (acetate) .75 [16] Hemp .52-58 [16] Flax (Irish). 40-75 [161 Silk .25 [161 Cotton. 18-53 [16] Wood fibers (coniferous woods) .23-68 [17] Wood (coniferous) .11-30 [161 Greaseproof paper (wood pulp) .9.2* [18] Tracing paper (wood nulp) ... 8.7 [18] Document paper (rag) 8.1 [18] Duplicator paper (esparto)... 4.1 [18] Newsprint (wood pulp) 2.3 [181 Blotting paper (cotton) 1.6 [18] * Breaking lengths for papers are in the machine direction. at the molecular level is attributed to "hydrogen bonding," which is effective through the hydroxyl (OH) groups on adjacent cellulose chains or on surfaces in sufficiently close contact. Failure of paper under stress may occur by break- ing of fibers or by failure of the bonds between the fibers. Usually it is a com- plex phenomenon involving both kinds of failure, either simultaneously or suc- cessively, as the stressing proceeds. Additives which contribute to fiber bonding, such as starch, mannogalactan gums, and several other high polymeric materials are known as "beater adhe- sives." They act as a cementing ma- terial between the fibers; they increase the strength properties and at the same time alter the contributions of fiber strength and bonding at failure caused by stress [ 13]. PHYSICAL PROPERTIES The tensile strength of paper is meas- ured by a "tensile testing machine." Strips of paper fifteen or twenty-five millimeters wide are stressed to failure [9, c, n]; the tensile strength at failure, the stretch, and sometimes the total work to failure (tensile energy absorp- tion) are recorded [9, n]. Paper is a remarkably strong ma- terial. For purposes of comparison, it is convenient to express tensile strength as tensile breaking length, that is, the length of a freely suspended strip of material which will break under its own weight. When expressed in this way, the tensile strength is not depen- dent on thickness or width of the speci- men (the breaking length is the tensile strength of the material divided by the density when both are expressed in the same dimensional units). The breaking length of several papers, together with some values for fibers and other ma- terials, are given in table 1. The tensile strength of paper does not attain the value which theoretically could be achieved if it were determined solely by the strength of the individual fibers. Tensile failure occurs primarily because of failure of the interfiber bonds, although observation of tensile breaks shows that many individual fi- bers are broken [14]. The zero-span tensile strength is measured by a modified tensile-testing procedure in which a strip of paper is
THE NATURE OF PAPER 27 held in two pairs of jaws which are in contact when initial tensile stress is applied [15]. The test provides a meaningful measure of average fiber strength; bonding between the fibers has little or no effect in the testing of most papers. Resistance to tearing is an important property in many grades of paper. It is expressed as the force required to initiate and continue a tear [9, d], but the preferred approach defines the property as tearing energy, that is, the force times the distance through which the tear is continued. Most of the data on tearing "resistance" have been ob- tained by a procedure in which the force is exerted at a right angle to the paper; uncertainty arises when the tear does not occur cleanly across the sheet. In a recently developed method [19] known as the "in-plane" procedure, the tearing energy is measured by exerting a force in the plane of the sheet. The two methods do not always give com- parable results because the nature of the tear is different. The folding endurance is measured by an instrument (commonly the M.I.T. Tester) which subjects a strip of paper fifteen millimeters wide to folding through a total angle of 270? while it is held in jaws having a radius of curvature at the folding edge of 0.38 + 0.005 millimeters [9, p]. The pa- per strip is held under a tension of one kilogram (or 0.5 kilogram) during the folding endurance test, so that the folding endurance measures the num- ber of double folds which can be ac- complished until the paper fails under the specified tension. The folding en- durance test is especially important in papers which are subjected to folding during use, for example, record papers, map papers, currency papers, and book papers. The range of values for folding endurance is very large; some high- quality papers will endure, 1,000 or more double folds at one kilogram ten- sion, whereas very weak or degraded papers may fail after one or two folds or may even break under an initial tension of 0.5 kilogram before any fold is made. Values of one or only a few folds are not usually considered signif- icant. Unfortunately, the folding en- durance test is less reproducible than most other physical tests, and a con- siderable scatter of values is commonly obtained even on relatively uniform machine-made papers. Finish and smoothness are judged most reliably on the basis of printing quality, which at present is adequately determined only by making test prints with commercial equipment. There is a variety of smoothness tests, which are usually concerned with the printing quality of the paper. The gloss of some coated papers is measured with a "glossmeter" [9, m]. Absorption of water or oil is impor- tant in many sized papers, including those designed for writing, printing, and packaging. Resistance to absorp- tion of water is measured by the time required for a drop of water of specified size to be absorbed into the paper or by the time required for penetration of liquid water into or through the sheet when one side is placed in con- tact with water [9, g, i,]. Resistance to absorption is contributed by sizing agents, such as, rosin, waxes, proteins, and fluorocarbons. Resistance to pas- sage of liquids through the paper is important in applications such as filter- ing papers. Resistance to passage of gases and vapors [for example, 9, 1]
28 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY is important in filtering applications (for example, vacuum-cleaner bags), food-packaging materials, and many others. OPTICAL PROPERTIS Color is probably the first property of paper noted by an observer. A colored paper is produced by intro- duction of a dye or colored pigment during the papermaking process. Al- most all papers are colored. Even "white" papers are colored by addition of a blue dye or pigment to make the paper appear whiter, although in fact it is made grayer. The color of paper is determined by the extent to which light of various wavelengths is absorbed or reflected. Color is defined instrumentally by re- cording the percentage reflectance at wavelengths within the visible spec- trum, that is, 400-700 millimicrons (mg) or micrometers (gm). Typical reflectance plots for several papers are shown in figure 5 (from [20]). Brightness is the most frequently measured and specified optical prop- erty. It is defined as the percentage re- flectance at 457 miu when measured by a carefully standardized procedure [9, j]. Since this wavelength is at the blue end of the spectrum, changes in bright- ness reflect increase or decrease in "yellowness" of white pulps or papers. Optical whiteners or brighteners are often added to make papers appear whiter; these are fluorescent dyes or pigments which absorb radiation in the ultraviolet region and reemit it in the blue region of the spectrum. Opacity is especially important in printing papers to avoid "show- through" when the paper is printed on both sides. The relative opacity of papers can be judged easily in a sub- jective fashion by placing the sheets over a printed page. The property is measured instrumentally with an "opacity meter" or Opacimeter [9, e]. CHEMICAL PROPERTIS The composition of paper is estab- lished by the fiber furnish, by the various sizing, filling, coating, coloring, and other nonfibrous materials added, and by impurities introduced from pro- cess water, mill equipment, or other sources. The analysis of paper is designed to detect the presence of or to determine the amount of various materials used in manufacture or pres- ent as impurities. The fiber composition of a paper is found by methods of "fiber analysis," in which the paper is disintegrated, the fibers are stained by an appropriate reagent, and the pro- portion of each kind of fiber is deter- mined by counting with observation under the microscope [9, a]. Chemical analysis for any specific constituent is performed by suitable methods, many of which have been accepted as "standards" [8, 9]. A recent book gives a detailed description of procedures for detection and determination of the constituents of paper [20]. Methods for analysis of paper must include those for a wide range of components because of the extraordinary diversity of materials intentionally added during manufacture or present as impurities. Analysis frequently becomes a difficult undertaking because of the many com- ponents which may be present, the necessity for determining many sub- stances present in small amounts or in traces, and the complex composition of many components which are commer- cial products and not pure compounds. Sometimes the analyst is presented with a still more perplexing problem- a paper is observed to have unusual properties, and he is required to deter-
90 70 t Black l~Blu ?40506070 Wavelength, m, 0I c~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~lc 30 400 500 600 TOO Wavelength, m,"a FIG. 5.-Typical reflectance spectra of papers
30 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY mine whether in fact anything has been added to contribute to these properties. Minor or trace impurities may be present which profoundly affect the use properties of some grades of paper. These impurities may occur as specks or spots which detract from appearance and which may impair usefulness of the paper, for example, conducting spots in electrical papers or specks of corrosive materials in metal-wrapping papers. Other impurities may be dele- terious even if they are distributed uni- formly throughout the paper in very small amounts. Examples are water- soluble sulfates and chlorides which may promote tarnishing and corrosion of metals with which the paper comes into contact, sulfur compounds which cause corrosion of silver, metallic com- pounds which may contribute to cata- lytic deterioration of paper or of food and other materials which may be packaged in paper, and toxic materials such as compounds of mercury and arsenic (the Food and Drug Adminis- tration specifies zero tolerance for mercury in food-packaging papers). Because of the influence of acidic and alkaline materials on the stability of paper, methods for determination of these substances have assumed con- siderable importance. The methods commonly used are of two types: (a) the paper is extracted with water and the total amount of acid or alkali ex- tracted is determined by titration [9, f or (b) the paper is extracted with water and the hydrogen ion concen- tration (pH) of the water extract is measured. In method (b) the extrac- tion is performed with cold water [9, o] or with hot water [9, h]. The pH is defined as the negative logarithm of the hydrogen ion concen- tration in moles (or equivalents) per liter. At 250 C, neutrality is repre- sented by a pH of 7.0; lower values indicate increasingly acid solutions; higher values, increasingly alkaline solutions. Earlier investigators usually determined acidity or alkalinity by the titration method; since the develop- ment of simple and reliable laboratory meters, the pH method has been pre- ferred. A method of measuring "con- tact pH" is based on direct application of measuring electrodes to the wetted paper or to a drop of water placed on the sheet; the values found are in essential agreement with those obtained by measuring the pH of the cold water extract, but deviations may result ow- ing to time of contact, the uniformity of the paper throughout its thickness, the buffering capacity of substances in the paper, and other factors [21]. Although the term "pH of paper" is often used, it does not represent a meaningful statement of composition. The concept of pH was developed to describe the physicochemical properties of dilute aqueous solutions and has no fundamental significance in application to a heterogeneous solid material con- taining only adsorbed water. If the paper contains alum or other substances that become more acid or basic upon hydrolysis, the amount of acid (in the case of alum) that appears in the extract will be greater when the hot extraction method is used, and the pH will be lower. The greater potential acidity (or alkalinity) may or may not be effective during the natural aging of papers at normal temperatures. STABILITY OF PAPER DURABILITY AND PERMANENC Paper is by its nature a perishable material. It can be burned, it decays, it can be attacked by insects and
THE NATURE OF PAPER 31 rodents, and it is degraded or destroyed by chemical reaction with many mate- rials. Nevertheless, in the absence of seriously deteriorative influences, paper endures for many years or even for many centuries. Any paper product must last long enough to serve its intended function. Many uses of paper do not demand any great degree of per- manence; once the use requirement has been satisfied, the paper has no further utility. On the other hand, in papers used for record keeping, legal docu- ments, library books of permanent value, art works, and similar applica- tions, it is vital that the paper retain its original character without alteration over periods of many decades or cen- turies. The permanence of paper used for books and records has been a subject of concern for more than 200 years (see, for example [22]). The results of many observations and researches (have been published; additional in- vestigations are now underway in sev- eral laboratories. In 1962 the Cotton Fiber Paper Group of the Writing Pa- per Manufacturers Association estab- lished at the Institute of Paper Chem- istry a research project on the perma- nence and durability of writing papers which is being continued currently. The objectives of this research have been primarily to study the validity of accel- erated aging procedures for prediction of permanence and to establish the more important factors influencing perma- nence. Paper is complex in composition and structure. The profound effects of source and nature of fibers, of the response of fibers during processing and stock preparation, of variables during the complicated processes of sheet forming, pressing, and drying on the paper machine, of the addition of sizing, filling, coating, and other ad- ditives, of the introduction of impuri- ties from raw materials or in processing -all of these contribute to the fabri- cation of a product which cannot be described or evaluated simply. The sensitivity of measurable physical properties of paper to variations in moisture content, as well as to forma- tion and relaxation of internal stresses which may be induced by mechanical treatment and by temperature or hu- midity cycling, contribute to difficulties in interpretation of test results. More research will surely be necessary to elucidate the behavior and properties of paper under various conditions of storage and use and to evaluate the relative contributions of factors which influence permanence. Papermakers prefer to distinguish between the concepts of durability and permanence. Durability is the property of resisting deterioration by use, that is, the handling to which paper may be subjected, the hazards incident to heavy use of books in libraries, or the ability of sandpaper to hold together until the user finishes his work. Perma- nence, on the other hand, refers to the degree to which a paper retains its original qualities during storage [7]. In a sense, permanence may be defined as the retention of durability, whether the latter be small or great. A paper may be durable but not permanent that is, durability may be lost rapidly be- cause the paper contains an excessive amount of acids), or it may be perma- nent but not durable. The quality of durability is built into a paper when it is made, that is, by choice of fibers, conditions of manu- facture, and the inclusion of additives which may enhance resistance to dam-
32 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY age during use. Permanence is deter- mined by the composition of the paper and by external conditions to which it is subjected during storage or use. FACTORS INFLUENCING PERMANENCE The factors which influence perma- nence may be divided into: (a) inter- nal factors, which are established pri- marily by the composition of the paper; and (b) external factors, which are determined by conditions during stor- age and use, for example, temperature, relative humidity of the atmosphere (which controls the hygroscopic mois- ture content of the sheet), exposure to light, atmospheric contaminants (sul- fur dioxide, nitrogen oxides, ozone), and the existence of biological hazards (decay by bacteria or fungi and attack by insects or rodents). The control of internal factors is in the province of the manufacturer, who must choose the raw materials and processes which are requisite for pro- duction of paper having the necessary stability for intended uses. Control of external factors is the responsibility of the user. Methods for control of atmos- pheric contamination and biological deterioration are obvious and well known, even if burdensome. Hence, for any selected paper, the additional im- portant conditions for maintaining sta- bility available to the user are control of temperature and relative humidity. Permanence of the fibers is governed largely by the resistance of cellulose to deterioration. Pure cellulose is a relatively stable organic compound; when stored under optimal conditions it can be preserved for centuries or millennia without severe deterioration. Nevertheless, it is subject to alteration by several types of chemical attack, of which the most important from the viewpoint of permanence are oxidation, hydrolysis, and photochemical reac- tions. Cellulose is oxidized by atmospheric oxygen, although under normal condi- tions the rate of oxidation reactions is slow. Oxidation leads to formation of carbonyl (reducing) groups and of carboxyl (acidic) groups at one or more locations in the glucose units which comprise the cellulose chain molecule. Oxidation also results in formation of peroxides [23], which con- tribute to further oxidation and side reactions. Ozone in the atmosphere, even in minute concentrations, is a very active deteriorative reagent. The formation of oxidation products may be accompanied by immediate scission of the polymeric chain molecule, or it may result in a sensitivity to further deterioration by a variety of influences. The poor stability of "oxycellulose" has been abundantly established [24, pt. 1, chap. 3]. The hydrolysis of cellulose by acid attack leads to decrease in length of the polymeric chain molecule through random scission of the chains. The strength of the fiber is decreased; de- terioration may proceed so far that the fiber becomes very weak and brittle and finally can be reduced to a fine powder. Hydrolysis may be caused by the presence of acids introduced into the paper during manufacture, for ex- ample, from the alum used in sizing or from some wet-strength resins. Oxi- dized cellulose or the acidic hemicellu- loses associated with the cellulose in wood and wood pulps contain carboxyl (acid) groups which are a part of the polysaccharide chain molecules. Wood contains acetyl groups; hydrolysis of these groups in wood or in pulps from which they have not been removed
THE NATURE OF PAPER 33 introduces additional acidity. External sources of acids arise from the atmos- phere of urban or industrial areas that may contain sulfur dioxide (which is readily oxidized to sulfuric acid) and oxides of nitrogen (which form nitric acid); these atmospheric sources con- tribute to acid deterioration. The extent to which hydrolytic re- actions proceed depends upon the amount (or concentration) of acidic substances originally present in the paper and upon the acids introduced later through oxidation of cellulose and hemicelluloses or through absorption of acidic gases arising from atmos- pheric contamination. The amount of acidic materials in paper introduced subsequent to manufacture may be large in comparison with that originally present. The contribution of such acids to deterioration is minimized if the paper contains buffering materials (a "buffer solution" is one which resists change in pH when acids or alkalies are added). Many papers exhibit a considerable buffering capacity; a high buffering capacity can contribute much to stability of paper during aging by partial neutralization of acidic sub- stances formed or introduced. Deterioration of cellulose by the chemical reactions of oxidation or hy- drolysis proceeds more rapidly with increase in temperature. There is a rule-of-thumb (and useful approxima- tion) among chemists that the rate of a reaction is doubled for each increase in temperature of 100 C. Many studies on aging of paper (for example [25]) have confirmed the profound effect of temperature and suggest the importance of this factor in the preservation of paper. Hydrolysis and oxidation generally proceed more rapidly in the presence of moisture. Paper is hygroscopic and has a moisture content of 5-7 percent in equilibrium with relative humidities in the range of about 50 percent. The effect of moisture content during natural aging has not been well estab- lished, although it has been shown that aging reactions at temperatures in the range of 80?-120? C are much more rapid in the presence of moisture [25, 26]. Deterioration is promoted by the presence of many metallic salts, partic- ularly those of iron and copper which are unavoidably introduced in small but measurable amounts during manu- facturing processes. Photochemical degradation, that is, the degradation produced by light, is not important in many uses of paper where prolonged exposure to strong light is not to be expected. Cellulose is degraded photochemically, but lignin is especially subject to deterioration from this source. Papers containing groundwood are observed to have poor stability upon exposure to light, partic- ularly to strong ultraviolet sources. PREDICTION OF PERMAENCE The prediction of permanence is necessary in evaluation of papers for which this property is important. The manufacturer needs to determine the probable permanence of his product; the user wishes to know whether the paper meets his requirements [25]. Any practical predictive test must de- pend on some accelerated aging test. If accelerated aging is to have any pre- dictive validity, it is necesary to dem- onstrate that there is a meaningful and reproducible relationship between such aging and aging under "normal" con- ditions. An accelerated aging procedure based on heating the paper in an oven
34 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY at circa 1000 C was developed at the Swedish Government Testing Institute and at the U.S. Bureau of Standards in the period 1925-35 [27, 28]. Rasch and Scribner [29] considered the heat- ing test (seventy-two hours at 1000 C) as a valid means for estimating the relative aging quality of papers. Later investigators concluded that acceler- ated aging under these conditions is empirically equivalent to approxi- mately twenty-five years (a range of about eighteen to forty-eight) aging at normal temperatures. The oven aging test can be valid only if the reactions leading to deterior- ation are essentially identical at circa 100? C and at "normal" temperatures. The profound effect of moisture con- tent on rate of aging [25, 26] suggests the necessity of taking this factor into account. In any case, the reactions in question can be only those whose rates are dependent on temperature; changes associated with photochemical effects, access to atmospheric contaminants, and other extraneous factors are not evaluated in oven aging. It is necessary to establish that de- teriorative reactions proceed in a regu- lar and predictable way as a function of temperature. The relation of reaction rate to temperature has been deter- mined for many systems; this is the scope of chemical kinetics. In the case of chemical reactions which can be studied in a fundamental way, it has been shown that a reaction rate is re- lated to the temperature at which the rate is measured. The rate constant, k, at one temperature is described by an appropriate relationship which yields a linear plot of chemical composition versus time of reaction. The rate constant, k, is then used to describe the temperature depen- dency of reaction rate according to the exponential form of the Arrhenius equation: k = Ae-EIRT where k = rate constant; A = a fre- quency factor; e = the base of the nat- ural system of logarithms (2.71828 ...); E = activation energy in kilocalories per mole; R = the gas constant; T = absolute temperature in degrees Kelvin (degrees centigrade + 273). The Ar- rhenius equation is usually used in its logarithmic form: log k = log A - E/2.303RT. For any specific reaction, log A and R are considered constant, and E is the activation energy which is constant if only one reaction occurs within the temperature range employed. Hence, a plot of logarithm of k versus 1/T will yield a straight line having a slope which is the activation energy E (fig. 6). The changes of a paper property (for example, folding endurance or development of color) with time are not determined by any single chemical re- action whose effects can be isolated and controlled. Hence, applications of conventional kinetic treatment of aging data on paper are largely empirical. In any case, the results of kinetic treat- ment of data can be undertaken with confidence only if both the rate plots and the Arrhenius plots are linear. The rate plots for loss of folding endurance are linear or nearly so for many papers if the reaction is treated as first order; that is, the logarithm of the property is plotted versus time of aging. However, many papers give nonlinear plots, and it is evident that not all papers exhibit the same type
THE NATURE OF PAPER 35 of behavior [25]. Other physical prop- erties (for example, zero-span tensile strength, tearing energy) have also been plotted according to first-order kinetics; it appears that this is the most suitable general relationship for these tests, but again many rate plots are nonlinear [25]. The development of colored substances during aging is shown by a plot of specific absorption coefficient versus time of aging; these plots are also linear for some papers and nonlinear for others. If the Arrhenius plots (log k versus 1/T) are linear, it becomes possible to extrapolate the relationship obtained upon aging at elevated temperatures and to determine the rate at a specified lower temperature, for example, 200 C or 70? F. One can then predict the value of the measured property after any specified time of aging or deter- mine, as in the case of folding endur- ance, the time for this to be reduced to one-half or other fraction of its original value. It has been shown that the Arrhenius plots for aging of paper are in fact approximately linear, but de- viations are large enough that accurate predictions of changes taking place at lower temperatures can be established in only a very approximate manner. Nevertheless, the effect of temperature on aging rates is profound, and the relationship found, even if only an ap- proximation, can be of great service in comparing stability of paper and in estimating rates of deterioration as a function of temperature during storage or aging [25]. Interpretation of aging -I- z .4 z 0 w Slope = Activation energy IL 0 41 0 -J I /T FIG. 6.-Relationship of the logarithm of the rate constant and the redprocal of absolute temperature
36 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY data in this way assumes that all fac- tors (including moisture content of the paper) other than temperature are held constant. The relative stability of papers can be expressed by comparing the rates of change (rate constants k) in physi- cal or other properties with time of aging. However, a strength property of a paper at any given time depends upon the initial value as well as upon the rate of change. For example, if two papers change at identical rates, indi- cated by rate constants ki and k8 in figure 7 (from [20]) the one having the higher initial strength will maintain a higher strength throughout its life. Two papers may both have high initial strength values (designated by rates ki and k2 in fig. 7), but the one having the higher rate of strength loss (k2) will deteriorate more rapidly than the other (k1). A high initial strength is desirable but alone is not sufficient; a paper (indicated by rate ks) may have lower initial strength than another (indicated by rate k2) but maintain a usable strength for a longer time. If it is possible to establish a critical level below which the paper loses its essen- tial utility, the information furnished by the rate constants and by this criti- cal level may serve for comparative evaluations of useful life. Lii a- Li. 0 Z) ~~~~~CRITICAL LEVEL U 4 TIME OF AGING -k FiG. 7.-Idealized values for rate constants of three papers as determined by accelerated aging REFERENCES 1. Hunter, D. Papermaking: The History and Technique of an Ancient Craft. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1943. 2. Timell, T. E. "Molecular Weight of Na- tive Celluloses." Svensk Papperstidning 60 (November 30, 1957) :836-42. 3. Libby, C. E., ed. Pulp and Paper Science and Technology. New York: McGraw- Hill Book Co., 1962. 4. Casey, J. P. Pulp and Paper-Chemistry and Chemical Technology. 2d ed. New York: Interscience Publications, 1961.
THE NATURE OF PAPER 37 5. Rydholm, S. A. Pulping Processes. New York: Interscience Publications, 1965. 6. Wolfe, D. L. "Commercial Operation of the Twinverform." TAPPI 49 (December 1966) :69A-72A. 7. American Paper and Pulp Association. The Dictionary of Paper. 3d ed. New York: American Paper and Pulp Associ- ation, 1965. 8. American Society for Testing and Ma- terials. 1969 Book of A.S.T.M. Standards and Related Material. Philadelphia: ASTM, 1969. 9. Technical Association of the Pulp and Paper Industry, TAPPI Standards and Suggested Methods. New York: TAPPI, n.d. (a) T401m-60, "Fiber Analysis of Paper and Paperboard," 1960; (b) T402m- 49, "Conditioning Paper and Paperboard for Testing," September 1949; (c) T404ts- 66, "Tensile Breaking Strength of Paper and Paperboard," 1966; (d) T414ts-65, "Internal Tearing Resistance of Paper (El- mendorf Tester)," 1965; (e) T425m-60, "Opacity of Paper," 1960; (f) T428su-67, "Hot Water Extractable Acidity or Alka- linity of Paper," 1967; (g) T433m-44, "Water Resistance of Paper and Paper- board (Dry-Indicator Method) ," June, 1944; (h) T435su-68, "Hydrogen Ion Con- centration (pH) of Paper Extracts-Hot Extraction Method," 1968; (i) T441m-60, "Water Absorptiveness of Nonbibulous Paper and Paperboard (Cobb Test)," 1960; (j) T452m-58, "Brightness of Paper and Paperboard," July 1958; (k) T453m-48, "Heat Test for Relative Stability of Paper," July 1948; (1) T460os-68, "Air Resistance of Paper," 1968; (m) T480- ts-65, "Specular Gloss of Paper and Paperboard at 75?1," 1965; (n) T494su-64, "Tensile Energy Absorption of Paper," 1964; (o) T509su-68, "Hydrogen Ion Concentration (pH) of Paper Extracts- Cold Extraction Method," 1968; (p) T51 1, "Folding Endurance of Paper (M.I.T. Tester)," in press. 10. Wink, W. A. "The Effect of Relative Humidity and Temperature on Paper Properties." TAPPI 44 (June 1961): 1 71A-180A. 11. Swanson, J. W., and Jones, E. J. "Fac- tors Which Affect Strength Properties of Paper." Pulp and Paper Magazine of Canada 63 (May 1962):T251-58. 12. Van den Akker, J. A. "Some Theoretical Considerations on the Mechanical Prop- erties of Fibrous Structures." In Trans- actions of the Symposium on Formation and Structure of Paper. London: Tech- nical Section, British Paper and Board Makers' Association, 1962. 13. Swanson, J. W. "The Science of Chemi- cal Additives in Papermaking." TAPPI 44 (January 1961):142A-181A. 14. Van den Akker, J. A.; Lathrop, A. L.; Voelker, M. H.; and Dearth, L. R. "Im- portance of Fiber Strength to Sheet Strength." TAPPI 41 (August 1958): 416-25. 1S. Wink, W. A., and Van Eperen, R. H. "The Development of an Improved Zero- Span Tensile Test." TAPPI 45 (January 1962):10-24. 16. Kollmann, F. F. P., and Cote, W. A., Jr. Principles of Wood Science and Tech- nology. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1968. 17. Jayne, B. A. "Mechanical Properties of Wood Fibers." TAPPI 42 (June 1959): 461-67. 18. Meredith, R. Mechanical Properties of Wood and Paper. Amsterdam: North- Holland Publishing Co., 1953. 19. Van den Akker, J. A.; Wink, W. A.; and Van Eperen, R. H. "Instrumentation Studies LXXXIX. Tearing Strength of Paper. Tearing Resistance by the In- Plane Mode of Tear." TAPPI 50 (Sep- tember 1967) :466-70. 20. Browning, B. L. Analysis of Paper. New York: Marcel Dekker, Inc., 1969. 21. Smith, R. D. "A Comparison of Paper in Identical Copies of Books from the Lawrence University, the Newberry, and the New York Public Libraries." Un- published report, June 24, 1969. 22. Smith, R. D. "Paper Impermanence as a Consequence of pH and Storage Con- ditions." Library Quarterly 39 (April 1969) :153-95. 23. Marracinni, L. M., and Kleinert, T. N. "Aging and Color Reversion of Bleached Pulps. I. Peroxide Formation during Aging." Svensk Papperstidning 65 (Feb- ruary 28, 1962):126-31. 24. Ott, E.; Spurlin, H. M.; and Grafflin, M. W., eds. Cellulose and Cellulose De- rivatives. 2d ed. New York: Interscience Publications, 1954.
38 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY 25. Browning, B. L., and Wink, W. A. "Stud- ies on the Permanence and Durability of Paper. I. The Prediction of Paper Per- manence." TAPPI 51 (April 1968):156- 63. 26. Richter, G. A., and Wells, F. L. "Influ- ence of Moisture in Accelerated Aging of Cellulose." TAPPI 37 (August 1956): 603-8. 27. Hall, G. "Permanence of Paper." Paper Trade Journal 82 (April 8, 1926):52-58. 28. Rasch, R. H. "A Study of Purified Wood Fibers as a Papermaking Material." Bu- reau of Standards Journal of Research 3 (September 1929) :469-506. 29. Rasch, R. H., and Scribner, B. W. "Com- parison of Natural Aging of Paper with Accelerated Aging by Heating." Bureau of Standards Journal of Research 11 (De- cember 1933) :727-32.