THE LIBAY QUARTERLY Volume XXIV JULY 1954 Number3 TrIHE PAPER-BOUND BOOIK: TWENTIETH-CENTURY PUBLISHING PHENOMENON KURT ENOCH T ODAY the inexpensive paper-bound book is the most widely discussed phenomenon of publishing. It is attacked as a threat to hard-cover pub- lishing and a miienace to mnorals or praised as a revrolutionary cultural tech- nique that brings books to a new audi- ence of millions who could not buy them before. Everyone agrees that paper- bound books exert a dynamic influence on contemporary Almlerican publishing. Yet, despite the discussion that these ubiquitous volunes have inspired, there has been relatively little thoughtful evaluation of the economic organiza- tion, the editorial problems, and the so- cial role of paper-bound publishing. The inexpensive book in paper bind- ing has a long and honorable history both in Europe and in tlhe United States. In pre-World War II Europe, paper-bound books fell into three broad categories of reprints: in English, in domestic lan- guages, and in local-language editions of public domain titles. The best-known of the English-language reprints were the Tauchilitz Editions, the Albatross Mod- ern Continental Library, b)oth with sales restricted to the non-English-speaking countries, and the British Penguin Books. The famous Tauchnitz Editions, founded in 1837 in Leipzig, contained over 5,000 English-language titles of American and British authors, licensed for reprint on a royalty basis, priced at the equivalent of about 50 cents. This was probably the mnost comnplete selec- tion of the classics and of important con- tem-iporary American and English litera- ture available in uniformn editions pub- lished under one imprint. The Albatross Modern Continental Library, founded in 1932 in Hamburg, followed the same pattern but stressed contemporary writing and created a mnore attractive format for its series, which eventually included about 400 titles. In 1935, Albatross took over the mianagement of Tauchnitz. Th-ese two firms, linking a century of continental reprint experience, established the basic pattern for the modern fonrm of paper- bound book publishing. The Albatross forinat was adopted by Penguin Books, organiZed in England in 1935. Penguin quickly becamne tlhe largest and most promiinent paper-bound publisher in a domestic language and began not only to 211
212 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY change the publishing picture in the British Commonwealth, its home mar- ket, but quickly to penetrate the foreign book markets, previously the almost ex- clusive domain of Tauchnitz and Alba- tross. The largest prewar series of inexpen- sive paper-bound editions of titles mainly in the public domain was Reclam's Uni- versal Bibliothek. Started in Germany in 1867, it published ten titles per month in a slightly smaller size than the stand- ard book of today. The basic price of these books was 20 pfennig, equivalent in value to today's dime. Within fifty years the list grew to 6,000 titles. Sta- tistics for this period show a sale of 18 million copies of the German classics, 82 million of Greek and Roman classics, and 5 million copies of philosophical lit- erature, including 790,000 copies of Kant. Dictionaries and law texts were also very popular. The best-selling sin- gle title was Schiller's Wilhelm Tell. Part of this success stems from the close co-operation between Reclam and the Gesellschaft fuer Volksbildung ("So- ciety for Popular Education"), which established during approximately the same period about 137,000 libraries with 4,000,000 volumes and 22,500 traveling libraries with over 900,000 volumes. The pattern of European paper-bound book publishing changed after the war. Attempts to revive Tauchnitz and Alba- tross, which had ceased operation during the war, and to continue a number of new English-language series started in neutral Sweden and Switzerland as substitutes for these series, failed or had only limited success. The English-language Continen- tal editions had to yield to the less-expen- sive and more up-to-to-date American and English reprints exported to Europe. But the American inexpensive paper- bound book, with its format denrved from Tauchnitz and Albatross and a publishing pattern strongly influenced by Penguin Books, began now to be widely adopted by European publishers for domestic-language reprints. Soon after the war, paper-bound reprints hardly distinguishable from their Ameri- can counterparts, except for language, appeared in almost every European country. Paper-bound books have substantially as long a history in the United States as they have in Europe. Their beginnings can be traced to the Boston Society for the Diffusion of Knowledge which was founded in 1829 "to issue in a cheap form a series of works, partly original and partly selected in all the most important branches of learning." This society spon- sored the American Library of Useful Knowledge, which in 1831 issued the first books in inexpensive paper editions and opened up the so-called "great revo- lution in publishing," made possible by the invention and improvement of ma- chine-made paper, mechanical typeset- ting, and fast cylindrical presses. A char- acteristic of this phase was the publica- tion of books in the form of unbound "supplements" to periodicals. This flow- ering ended in 1843 when the post office decided to charge book postage instead of the lower newspaper rates for the transportation of these supplements, and overproduction led to a serious price war. The most flourishing, dynamic, and controversial era of paper-bound book publishing in this country began with a large-scale revival of the industry in the 1870's. A new impulse had come from the development of groundwood paper for book use, which made it possible to exploit inexpensively the wide popular interest in English and French novels, unprotected, incidentally, by copyright. Following a revival of "extras" pub-
THE PAPER-BOUND BOOK 213 lished as by-products of the New York Tribune in 1873, at prices ranging from 5 cents to 15 cents, and the Tribune nov- els, also in sheet form in quarto and oc- tavo size, at 10 cents or 20 cents, the Chicago firm of Donnelly, Gassett & Lloyd pioneered with its independent and famous Lakeside Library of uncopy- righted quarto paper novels at prices from 10 cents up. Soon fifteen firms were publishing such "libraries." In 1878 Har- per and Brothers introduced the Frank- lin Square Library. Several other trade publishers prominent today, including D. Appleton and Company, Henry Holt and Company, Dodd, Mead and Com- pany, and Funk and Wagnalls, followed suit. These senres contained principally standard fiction and current popular novels by foreign, particularly British, authors, on which no royalty had to be paid. Simultaneous publishing of hard- cover and paper-bound editions was cus- tomary, and the same titles were often published by several competing publish- ers in progressively more popular form. The pressure of steadily increasing com- petition forced editorial expansion to more serious types of reading matter, in- cluding biography, poetry, history, trav- el, and literary history, and also led to the use of more expensive but more ap- pealing duodecimo and sexagesimo for- mats. Distribution was handled general- ly by the American News Company, the only national distributor at that time, by newsdealers, and gradually also by bookstores. Use was also made of yearly subscriptions at a price below the cost of the separately purchased volumes. The enormous significance of inexpen- sive paper-bound publishing in that era is clearly illustrated by the fact that in 1885, out of a total of 4,500 titles pub- lished, almost 1,500 were paper-bound, compared with about 1,000 paper-bound titles out of a total annual production of 12,000 titles today. Yet once again pa- per-bound books failed. Cutthroat com- petition, exhaustion of the supply of foreign royalty-free material, and in- creased production costs prepared the ground for the coup de grace dealt the in- dustry by the Copyright Act of 1891, which for the first time enabled foreign authors to obtain American copyright and hence ended the era of free piracy of foreign writers. From then until the mid-thirties, when the phase of paper- book publishing with which we are here concerned began, no important activity took place in this field. The contemporary American era of paper-book production, after a few lim- ited or specialized ventures, such as Mod- em Age Books, Hillman novels, and Mer- cury Mysteries, began with the estab- lishment of Pocket Books, in 1939. Avon- Books followed soon thereafter, and Pen- guin Books, previously imported from England, organized an American branch from which later on -the independent American firm, the New American Li- brary of World Literature, Inc., derived. During the war paper shortages limited the growth of the commercial production of paper-bound reprints. With the ending of these shortages after the war, a tremendous develop- ment took place: In 1939, Pocket Books reported a production of 1,508,000 copies of 34 titles. The census figure for the year 1945 already shows four firms printing 83 million copies of 112 titles. The es- timates for 1953 indicate a production of 292 million copies of 1,061 titles by sixteen firms. In 1949, the dis- tribution of paper-bound books ap- proximated that of hard-cover trade books, including book clubs, and in 1953 ran some 100 million copies ahead. Also, compared with library circulation es-
214 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY timated at slightly over 400 million in 1953, the present level of paper-bound book distribution has become impres- sive. Furthermore, sales of individual titles reached tremendous proportions. An average paper-bound mystery, west- ern, or novel rarely falls below 150,000 to 200,000 copies, and many best sellers, fiction and nonfiction, soar to several million copies. Even scholarly nonfiction and classics frequently reach or surpass half a million in sales. The total amount of royalties paid for reprint rights in 1953 can be estimated at between $5,000,000 and $6,000,000. The majority of American inexpen- sive paper-bound books are complete and unabridged editions of copyrighted books originally published in hard covers at $2.50 or higher. They are bound in a flexible laminated or lacquered paper cover, priced at 25 cents, 35 cents, 50 cents, and recently also at 75 cents. They offer a wide and ever increasing range of reading matter. According to the most recent tabulation, the total 1953 produc- tion included 51.3 per cent general fic- tion, 18 per cent mysteries, slightly over 18 per cent westerns, 6 per cent nonfic- tion, and about 7 per cent miscellaneous, such as poetry, humor, and short-story collections. Today, works of virtually every prom- inent wnrter and many of the more popu- lar classics are available. Winners of Nobel prizes, Pulitzer prizes, National Book awards, and other literary acco- lades, and talented novelists from many countries in the world, appear side by side on drugstore display racks. Nonfic- tion has mushroomed from a few isolated editions of reference, how-to-do, and self- help books to an abundance of books on science, philosophy, religion, history, the arts, the classics, economics, and anthro- pology. And, recently, experimental and avant-garde writing has found its place in the mass market, first in New Ameri- can Library's biannual anthology, New World Writing, followed by a variety of similar collections by other publishing houses. Available in nearly 100,000 outlets in the United States and Canada, paper- bound books may be found in drug- stores, variety stores, stationery stores, cigar stores, confectionery stores, super- markets, railway stations, airports, bus termninals, hotel stands, and army and navy installations, as well as in book- stores, departmnent stores, and public libraries. They have actually altered the literary landscape of the United States by making books available in every ham- let, village, and whistle stop, as well as in that disturbingly large number of cities which have no bookstores and only in- adequate library facilities. More and more paper-bound books are used by schools, colleges, and adult-education activities, by the armed forces for recre- ational and informational purposes, and by the United States Information Serv- ice for foreign libraries. Substantial quantities are exported commercially to practically all foreign countries outside the Iron Curtain with the exception of the British Commonwealth, where only a limited selection of American titles is available because of agreements between British and American publishers. This amazing growth of the paper- bound book industry in less than fifteen years raises many questions. What caused this development? What are the editorial impulses or effects? What is the impact on hard-cover book publishing? What do paper-bound books mean to the author and the reader? What are the problems of this adolescent industry?
THE PAPER-BOUND BOOK 215 What distinguishes it from former periods of flourishing inexpensive paper-bound book publishing? What is its future? Although a study of the paper-bound book business is handicapped by the same lack of objective statistics that be- sets the iesearcher who investigates any area of book publishing, the answers to most of these questions seem clear-even though experience may vary with the policy of each publisher. Yet I think everyone will agree that the phenomenal growth of the industry may be ascribed to two major coriditions-the rapid tech- nical advances in mass production of books and the marriage of book publish- ing and magazine distribution. Paper-back books are printed on high- speed magazine presses and, more re- cently, on huge new special book presses printing from rubber plates at the rate of 18,000 impressions of 128 pages, or 12,000 copies of a 192-page book, per hour. So-called "Perfect" binding ma- chines, which eliminate the expensive process of sewing, have been adapted for the binding of paper books and can turn out approximately 12,000 copies per hour. New types of glue have made this type of binding almost as strong, al- though not so permanent, as the conven- tional fonn. New developments in ma- terials have improved the glossy, dust- repellent, and even washable protection for the paper covers. These technical advances in inexpen- sive mass production, however, would have been useless without the vehicle of magazine distribution which makes pos- sible the immediate marketing of the huge quantities of every new title. Mag- azines, many newspapers, and paper- bound books in this country are distrib- uted either through a network of approx- imately 800 independent wholesalers or by the American News Company with its 350 branches. Both supply more than 100,000 retail dealers in the United States and Canada, most of whom carry books as only one of many other commodities or services. The books are displayed in racks provided by the publisher and wholesaler. It is estimated that the aver- age dealer has rack-s containing approxi- mately one hundred pockets holding 3-5 copies per pocket, resulting in slight- ly less than 10 million pockets with a total capacity for the display of from 30 to 50 million books, or an average capacity of 300-500 books per dealer at any one time. The books are delivered to the dealer by truck or, in certain sparsely populated areas, by mail. The racks are filled and refilled by the whole- saler's personnel, frequently supported by special field representatives of the publishers themselves. Almost every week, sometimes even more often, new releases reach the dealer, and older or less salable titles are returned to the wholesaler. Since the books are supplied on a fully returnable or exchangeable basis, it is possible to use practically any retail out- let for books, because no special knowl- edge of books and only a very small, if any, financial investment is required. This system removes important ob- stacles which the hard-cover publisher has to overcome to reach his audience. Not only can almost anyone who wants to buy a book find a good variety of reading matter within walking distance of his home or place of work, but he can purchase a book when and where he shops for groceries, cigarettes, drugs, or stationery. Because paper-bound book outlets are self-service operations, the often reported awe of the unfamiliar at- mosphere of a bookstore does not dis-
216 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY courage the uninitiated from browsing. As a result of this direct exposure to books, many have made their first volun- tary book purchase, and this wide dis- tribution has become an important factor in expanding the book audience and de- veloping book-reading habits. Nevertheless, this system is not per- fect. Newspapers and magazines are perishable. They are released on a cer- tain day, on sale for a limited period, and returned to the publisher or destroyed if not sold when the new issues appear. Books are different. Their natural life- time is limited only by their reader inter- est and not by the release date of a new title. Consequently, books require longer display than magazines do. Each book has its own appeal and, with the excep- tion of the few works of generally known authors, a new title cannot count on the same kind of automatic acceptance that each new issue of an established maga- zine can. It has to be introduced to the potential reader from scratch. These re- quirements are difficult to reconcile with existing conditions of newsstand dis- tribution. It is natural that wholesalers are tempted to treat books and maga- zines alike. Although their business vol- ume on paper-bound books is substan- tial, it amounts to only approximately 20 per cent of their total volume, and the economics of their operation makes them prefer bigness to specialization. Every month wholesalers receive from their publishers an allotment of approximately 100 new titles for distribution to their dealers. This multitude of titles makes it difficult to devote attention to specific books. The average retail dealer's major book activity is to provide the space for the display racks. Because he generally is unfamiliar with the titles that are dis- played in those racks, he cannot be ex- pected to do an active selling job. Dis- play space is limited, and older or slow- er-selling titles, regardless of their per- manent value, have to yield prematurely to faster-selling new releases. This makes it extremely difficult to provide perma- nent display for the so-called "long-pull" titles of fiction and particularly of non- fiction. The result is that frequently the customer looking for specific titles can- not find them and that the publisher has to rely heavily on impulse rather than on selective buying. These problems are under continuous scrutiny, and solutions are being tried and developed in many directions. Currently, strong efforts are being directed toward increasing the number of dealers, substituting better dealers for unsatisfactory ones, and steadily improv- ing and enlarging the display. Obsolete equipment is replaced by new types of racks that require less floor space for more display pockets. The cost of this equipment, originally totally or partially charged to the dealers, is now under- written by the publishers or wholesalers. Several million dollars have been invested in such equipment since the end of the war. The display itself is being segre- gated according to publishers' imprints, permitting easier recognition by the pub- lic, as well as more efficient check-ups, title identification, and reorder service by those in charge of servicing these dis- play racks. Separate display units are installed for special categories of books, like New American Library's nonfiction Mentor Books or Pocket Books' Library of Great Art, to attract the substantial audience of readers with special reading interests but previously not aware of the availability of such books. Important titles are highlighted by point-of-sale promotion, such as rack cards and post- ers attached to the display or by smaller
THE PAPER-BOUND BOOK 217 display units which can be placed in other locations of the dealer's store. More and more wholesalers are organiz- ing book departments separate from their magazine operation, with trained personnel familiar with titles and au- thors. They operate special book trucks carrying a well-assorted stock of books and manned by so-called "bookmen" who regularly check the dealers' racks, rearrange the display, and replace lag- ging titles with faster-selling books or new issues. More and more detailed records are being kept by the wholesalers, disclosing the sales and return activity of each deal- er and providing other valuable informa- tion which helps wholesaler and pub- lisher to establish better controls over distribution and supply. Side by side with these operational refinements goes the constant penetra- tion into new types of outlets. Along with magazines, paper-bound books are moving into new and untapped retail facilities. But their distribution also ex- pands independently from magazines. Increasingly, bookstores and depart- ment stores, originally disinclined to handle paper-bound books because of their low price, have been convinced that these books not only are profitable but also are very potent traffic builders. College bookstores find them a good sup- plement to textbooks. And lately expen- ments with special stores handling noth- ing but paper-bound books and carrying every new or old title of interest seem to be successful in such cities as New York, Detroit, and San Francisco. These de- velopments are encouraging but thus far mainly benefit the most widely popu- lar books. Their effectiveness is more un- certain for the adaptation of mass-dis- tribution methods to the slow but per- manent' "long-pull" titles or titles with a selective or thinly spread audience. Without the possibility of large print- ings, many desirable and important books in those categories would have to remain excluded from the lists of paper- bound book publishers. A solution has to be found without resort to the expen- sive promotion methods of the tradition- al hard-cover edition, which would de- feat the basic low-cost, low-price objec- tive of paper-bound books. It is also necessary to find means of salvaging the substantial numbers of still perfectly salable and useful books which had to yield their display space prematurely to new or faster-moving titles-victims of the fast turnover requirements of mass distribution. To achieve this, supplementary dis- tribution and promotional activities have steadily gained in importance. By increased publicity the publishers try to widen their audience and to increase its density. They seek the co-operation of organizations and groups that will pro- mote and purchase books of special inter- est. They recognize the value of better bibliographical material and more in- formation for potential users as to the existence and the sources of supply of such books. The serious publishers have become fully aware of the large poten- tialities of library, college, school, and adult-education use of paper-bound books and are making great efforts to serve their needs. Increasingly the li- brary profession has experimented with the use of paper-bound books, in spite of their physical shortcomings. Many col- lege and university libraries have used paper-bound books to help solve their reserve problems and to develop an in- terest in nonassigned reading and stu- dent book collecting. Some public li- braries are utilizing these books for cir- culation or adult-education programs,
218 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY or as fill-in stock, and almost all buy paper-bound books for reference depart- ments when no cloth-bound editions are available. Paper-bound book publishers are ea- gerly exploring these areas and seek guid- ance in making their service more useful. They are fully aware of the necessity of developing reading interest in the young in order to nourish the adult market of the future. They recognize the great opportunities of export markets. Even where the stand- ard of living is low, the price of Ameri- can paper-bound books is still within reach of large numbers of people. The higher education which usually accom- panies the knowledge of the English lan- guage makes the foreign reader an ideal customer for the better book and the foreign market more receptive for back- list titles. These are some of the opportunities to fill the gaps which still exist and which cannot be filled except by adaptation of magazine-distribution techniques to books. Paper-bound book publishers and their distributors are constantly chal- lenged to seek further perfection in order to tap fully the enormous potential audi- ence for good books and to fulfil the cul- tural and social obligations which endow publishing with so much of its special traditional and professional character. In considering the editorial problems of paper-bound publishing, I shall ex- clude the relatively small number of manufacturers of reading matter who have little or no interest in the literary or cultural value of their product. The nine or ten major paper-bound book firns are responsible publishers with editorial policies as individual as their trade publishing colleagues. Just as mag- azines are designed to appeal to different types of audiences, so do the lists of the various paper-bound book publishers reflect the varying tastes and standards of each house. Some specialize in books for entertainment-mainly mysteries, westerns, and light fiction. Most, how- ever, try to satisfy the widest possible range of the reading market with vari- ations of emphasis on different categories of interest. Also, similar to the periodical pub- lication of magazines, the books are is- sued in monthly groups of eight to twelve assorted titles-the whole group representing the kind of varied literary diet which one finds in an issue of a mag- azine. Within this monthly package, however, each book has to make its own way, and it is the individual title and not the pattern which decides the success of the publishing enterprise. If the editorial policy of paper-bound publishers in the early stages of the industry may have seemed to reflect the idea that a pub- lisher for the mass market must aim downward, the impressive list of avail- able authors and books indicates that some publishers have always boldly as- sumed that the taste and interest of the audience for mass-distributed books does not differ radically from that of the audience for hard-cover editions. In vlew of the large investment every title requires and the small leeway be- tween profit and loss, many attempts have been made to predetermine the acceptance of books by scientific market analysis. Efforts have been made to de- tennine who buys paper-bound books and what types of books and for what reasons. Do such impulses come from recognition of authors' names, word-of- mouth promotion, the success of a hard- cover edition, a book-club selection, or familiarity with a movie based on the book? Are certain categories preferred to others? Research of this nature can,
TIHE PAPER-BOUND BOOK 219 however, be of only limited value in the practical publishing situation, particu- larly since the information is necessarily after the fact. In our own experience, we have found that there is no clear parallel between the sales picture of hard-cover best sellers or book-club selections and that of paper- bound reprint editions of the same books. That is really not so surprising as it might appear at first glance. The status of a best seller is not necessarily deter- mined by merit. It can be pumped up by advertising, it may reflect a special ap- peal to a particular section of the audi- ence, or, in the case of book clubs, its wide distribution may be secured through pressure on a more or less as- sured audience. The paper-bound book competes in a market place strikingly free of these influences, is rarely adver- tised, and seldom reviewed. Of course there are many books which have be- come best sellers because of their genuine appeal, and in these cases the reprint edition has greatly benefited from the already established reputation of the onginal hard-cover edition. Movies have been of help only in cases where an exceptionally good film coin- cided w'ith the availability of an excep- tionally good or widely accepted book on which it was based. Typical examples are Moulin Rouge, From Here to Eternity, A Streetcar Namted Desire, The Cruel Sea, Duel in the Sun, etc. All this indicates that the paper-bound book publisher in his selection of titles depends on the yardsticks used by the regular trade publisher-his own taste, judgment, flair, courage, and experience, plus assiduous reading. Selecting the best books for a wide audience is as demand- ing a chore for the reprint editor as the trade editor's hunt for the right original manuscript. In our own finn, for exam- ple, our editors read about 4,000 books a year-galleys, advance copies, out-of- print copies, and foreign editions-in order to select the 100-odd titles we will ultimately reprint. However, a paper- bound book publisher is not completely free in developing his program according to his liking. The great majority of paper books are reprints of hard-cover editions for which the original publisher, alone or jointly with the author or agent, con- trols the decision as to whether and when a paper-bound edition will be author- ized. Furthermore, there is stiff com- petition between the various reprint houses and, more often than not, the reprint rights are awarded to the bidder of the highest royalty guarantee. In addition, the supply of suitable new titles-at least in the fiction category- is limited, and the number of useful back-list titles is more or less exhausted. This situation has had several important effects. On the positive side, it has be- come an incentive to widen editorial scope. It has stimulated expansion into new fields, such as anthologies, reference books, and other nonfiction. Also on the positive side, it has been an incentive to bring back to the market through re- issues good books which at one time or another had their day in mass circula- tion but for which a new audience has developed. This periodic reappearance of good titles has done much to alleviate the limitations in time and space imposed by the mechanism of mass distribution. On the negative side, the limited sup- ply has increased the temptation to pub- lish titles which were not deemed desir- able when there was an abundance of material, or which were rejected by the older of better-supplied houses, most of which have no part in such process of downgrading. Nevertheless, even that is not entirely without virtue. As Free-
220 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY man Lewis, in his Bowker Lecture in 19521 pointed out: The capacity for enjoying books has almost as many levels as there are readers, and any pub- lisher professing to distribute books to the bulk of our population would be thoroughly re- miss in his duty if he did not try to provide titles which would give pleasure to as many levels of reading taste as possible. Furthermore, any improvement in reading taste must have a place of beginning and that place can never be the top. Because of the existence of low-priced books, many people are now reading some books who never read books before. Many other people are reading more books than they ever read before. The result, at all levels, is bene- ficial and germinant. Another consequence of the limitation of titles available or obtainable for re- print is an increase in the number of originals published in paper-bound edi- tions. In 1953 it is estimated that 18 per cent of the titles on the lists of ten re- print publishers were originals, and two firms, organized to publish only paper- bound originals, turned out 117 titles between them. Do paper-bound originals threaten the traditional form of hard-cover publish- ing? So far the majority of titles are light fiction, and it is quite possible that here the original paper-bounds will in- deed cut in on the sales of hard-cover editions. But it is unlikely that a similar trend will develop in the area of more serious fiction. The editorial investment is substantial, and it is doubtful whether the same reviewing space would be avail- able for original paper-bound editions without the advertising support that hard-cover publishers give their pub- lications. It would be impossible to fit these additional costs into the budgetary structure of the paper-bound book with- out increasing its price. Nor would the rather perishable format of paper-bound originals wholly satisfy the requirements of libraries, schools, and private collec- tions. One might, of course, think that these problems could be solved if paper-bound book publishers would themselves issue hard-cover editions, or hard-cover pub- lishers paper editions. Examples of both cases exist, but they are far too few to permit any reliable conclusion. The suc- cess of a few titles published in that fashion is no yardstick. It would rather seem that such practices might lead to a far-reaching diffusion of paper-bound production that would risk the loss of the advantages of the present method of distribution. Moreover, the natural reluctance of an original publisher to re- lease reprint rights to one who is his com- petitor in original publishing would re- strict the dual edition activity of hard- cover or paper-bound houses more or less to their own properties and impede a well-planned publishing program with free access to a wide literary market place. The situation is somewhat different in the field of nonfiction. Most serious nonfiction titles have greater permanence than does average fiction. They represent the bulk of the back lists which are one of the most important assets of hard- cover publishing houses. Therefore the hard-cover publisher of nonfiction is particularly sensitive to the risk that an inexpensive paper-bound edition might harm the sale of the original. Further- more, many nonfiction titles, although their topics are of wide interest, are writ- ten in a style unsuitable for a very wide audience or are too costly to reproduce at a low price. On the other hand, it is less expensive to assign specific nonfic- tion projects to selected authors or edi- tors than to maintain the substantial 1 Freeman Lewis, Paper-Bound Books in America (Sixteenth Bowker Memorial Lecture [New York: Public Library, 19521), pp. 19-20.
THE PAPER-BOUND BOOK 221 editorial department required for a com- petent original-fiction publishing ac- tivity. These factors create both a greater need and a greater opportunity for orig- inal production by the paper-bound book publisher. Here, however, a new pattern of co-operation between the hard-cover and paper-bound book pub- lisher seems to develop. The majority of nonfiction titles, originated on the initiative of paper-bound book publish- ers for the specific requirements of the mass market, are published jointly with a hard-cover publisher, sometimes be- fore-sometimes simultaneously with- the release in paper. The hard-cover publisher's sales of such titles do not conflict with the paper-bound edition, since less than 10 per cent of their cus- tomers overlap, and, of this number, many outlets, such as libraries or schools, prefer more durable binding. This prac- tice results in production savings when the trade publisher uses the composition or printing plates of the paper-bound edition. Such joint editions maintain the reprint pattern, although the procedure itself is reversed. Because of all this, there are strong indications that editori- ally paper-bound book publishing can- not and will not become a substitute for hard-cover publishing-although it might become predominant in certain limited areas. But will the paper backs cut in on the sales of hard-cover books? This has long been a controversial issue. Only an indus- try-wide study would give a fairly con- clusive answer. A sampling of cases of about a dozen fiction and nonfiction titles which we had an opportunity to check with original publishers disclosed no adverse effects on the continued sales of their hard-cover editions after the re- lease of our reprints; and in some cases their sales increased. It is also indicative that very often those titles which pro- duced record sales in reprint forn had only moderate or average sales as origi- nals. Furthermore, evaluating a statisti- cal survey of hard-cover and paper-bound sales during recent years, Robert W. Frase concluded in his Windsor Lecture in 1953:2 These general statistics would seem to indi- cate that this vast paper-bound output has had relatively little over-all effect on hard- bound original publishing which has continued to inch ahead in total number of copies during the post-war period. These two types of books may be serving two fairly distinct and sepa- rate markets and may not be in direct competi- tion except perhaps in the field of mysteries, and westerns, and light fiction. In other words, the paper-bound books may be attracting new book readers, perhaps from the much larger category of magazine readers. If one considers also the fact that hard- cover books are distributed through ap- proximately only 1400 outlets, compared with 100,000 paper-bound outlets, these observations suggest that the continued development of paper-bound book pub- lishing will largely supplement hard- cover publishing and that mutually bene- ficial co-operation of the two branches will increase. Another factor influencing the over-all picture is the author's royalty. The stand- ard royalty rate paid by the paper- bound book publisher on 25-cent books is 1 cent per copy on the first 150,000 copies and 1H cents thereafter. On higher priced editions these rates are increased proportionately. With very few excep- tions, however, a minimum guarantee is paid against these royalties, regardless of whether eamed by sales or not. These royalties-in case of reprints shared 2 H. K. Guinzburg, R. W. Frase, and T. Waller, Books and the Mass Market (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1953), p. 34.
222 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY usually 50-50 by the original publisher and the author-have become a very important source of income for the hard- cover publishers and offer many authors the key to the freedom of writing un- harassed by the pressure of finding other ways of livelihood. Competition for titles, however, has often driven the royalty guaranty to levels substantially exceeding the amounts earned by sales. Royalties earned by the average sale of 200,000 copies of a mystery, western, or average novel amount to $2,250.00. Yet guaran- ties of $4,000.00-$5,000.00 for such ti- tles have been more the rule than the exception. For more important proper- ties the figures are much higher. That does not mean that in certain cases roy- alty guaranties exceeding the average earnings are not justified and do not re- main in the realm of economic reason. The big books obviously have larger than average sales potential, and there are cases where a paper-bound publisher is willing to pay such guaranties in order to obtain a title which would fill a vital gap in his editorial program. But, gen- erally, a guaranty of royalties in excess of those earned is economically unsound. The margin for royalties in the cost breakdown of low-price books cannot be widened any more than can the margins for the cost of paper, printing, binding, and other cost factors without affecting the low retail price-the cornerstone of in- expensive paper-bound book publishing. Moreover, this margin is not a fixed one. It is narrowed in various degrees by returns of unsold books, which often play havoc with the cost structure-a fact easily overlooked by those who try to make a case for a larger share. It should also be noted that the higher roy- alty rates offered in a recently widely discussed scheme of simnultaneous hard- bound and paper-bound book publish- ing are not made possible by a new magic forrmula but by an increase of retail prices above the levels which yield the customary royalty rates (35 cents in- stead of 25 cents or 50 cents instead of 35 cents). In my opinion this device of overpricing reduces the sales potential of the books and therefore tends to limit rather than increase the total royalty income based on sales. I have spoken thus far, as it were, from inside the industry, endeavoring to show the operations and the prob- lems of the paper-bound field as they appear to a publisher. I should like now to venture a few remarks, from as de- tached a point of view as I can achieve, about the social functions of inexpensive books. We would all, I believe, recognize that books fulfil certain cultural and educa- tional purposes of society not readily served by any other medium. This has been in part because of so simple a quali- ty as length. It is possible in a book to deal extensively, thoughtfully, and in detail with complex ideas and bodies of fact. In part it has been because books afford an unusually effective voice for diversity, with the thousands of titles annually appearing providing a vehicle for every point of view and every form of cultural expression. In part it has been because books have been freer than any other medium from legal and economic pressures toward conformity of manner or of viewpoint. In a word, the peculiar services of the book to society have seemed to derive from the fact that it has not been a "mass" medium. We now seek to make it one. It seems to me altogether necessary that we do so. As the problems of society become more complex, and a wider segment of the population becomes more really in-
THE PAPER-BOUND BOOK 223 volved in their solution, it is no longer safe, or indeed possible, for the sort of diverse communication "in depth" af- forded by books to be confined to an elite. A democracy today cannot be well governed by a people whose insight into contemporary problems and their back- ground is derived solely from newspapers and broadcasts. Nor can it be spiritually whole if it does not have bonds of union growing from such a common experience of the fundamental meaning of Western civilization as can be conveyed only in books. Yet we have seen other media, as they have been extended by modem technolo- gy, suffer distortion and depreciation of meaning. That happens to drama as it reaches the film or the television screen, the short story as it reachies the mass-cir- culation magazines, the lecture as it reaches the loud-speaker. All are likely to suffer from vulgarization, uniformity, and timidity. By vulgarization I mean the sort of depreciation of quality that anses from the conviction sometimes held that the "mass" audience is of low intelligence and cheap taste; by uni- formity, the stale sameness that comes from the illusion that there is but one mass audience, to which there is but one successful formula of appeal. Timidity is a special problem. Our so- ciety allows a wide range of unrepressed expression in all those forms of communi- cation addressed to an elite. In a Broad- way play or a university lecture or a five- dollar book one may with little con- straint express unorthodox political or social views or speak with candor in those areas of human experience, such as sex, race, and religion, in which taboos are likely to be most pervasive and most violently upheld. But as any form of ex- pression reaches out to a popular audi- ence, pressure rises against it to assure that it does not disturb or offend in these respects. This is universally true: One may not say into a microphone what one may utter from a soapbox. Movies en- counter censorship not met by the legiti- mate stage. In general, the mass media, confronted with the necessity of holding very large audiences in order to meet heavy costs of production or to satisfy advertisers, have acquiesced in these pressures, often through voluntary codes. They have sought not merely to avoid obscenity but to evade the honest confrontation of many of the more sensitive and taboo- ridden areas of life. There has been a sort of law: the wider the audience, the less provocative or disturbing to established ideas and taboos the medium has to be. If such a conformity is to be the price of the extension of the book audience, ob- viously there is little gain to the cause of cultural and political freedom which I believe books peculiarly serve. The fundamental problem of states- manship, from the social viewpoint, in the paper-bound book industry, is thus to achieve a mass audience while pre- serving the special virtues of books. It will not be altogether easy. I have point- ed out that the assumption has not been absent from the industry that the mass audience is an inferior audience; and many inexpensive books, and more par- ticularly their covers and blurbs, con- form to this idea. Unquestionably there is a sterile repetition of formulas in many westerns, detective stories, and historical novels. But I believe it can be done. One rea- son for this belief is that even the inex- pensive book audience is not really a mass audience as compared with the size of radio or film audiences. Though it may take sales of 200,000 or more to make a paper-bound book profitable, it
224 THE LIBRARY QUARTERLY does not necessarily require any broader public interest to achieve such a sale through 100,000 outlets at 25 cents or 35 cents a copy than it does to achieve 5,000 to 10,000 sales through 1,400 book- stores at $5.00 a copy. As I have pointed out, even quite specialized books can be sold successfully in paper-bound form. Nor is it necessary for a paper-bound publisher, any more than an original pub- lisher, to create a uniforn product which will retain the same audience for issue after issue. Each book finds its own audi- ence, and any one publisher may success- fully serve quite different and even, so to speak, contradictory audiences with different books. Finally, the substantial reprint pub- lishers are, like their colleagues, and like librarians, devoted to the book. They do not publish a different product, bowdler- ized or with a happy ending tacked on. They publish the books themselves, con- fident in the belief that the millions who buy inexpensive books want and deserve the same books as those produced in hard covers for a more expensive mar- ket. We do not believe that one must be timid in speaking to the mass of Amenr- cans and withhold from a larger audi- ence that which is available to a smaller one. In this, of course, we follow and share the faith of librarians, who have found the millions they freely serve to be as eager and mature an audience as exists anywhere. We have had these principles before us as we have confronted the widespread efforts to apply a special standard of censorship to inexpensive books through police intimidation and through group pressures. There can be no question that a part of the provocation to this alarm- ingly general pressure has come from or has been helped by a needless and dis- tasteful sensationalism and salacity on covers. But the conception that covers produce censorship is not generally true. Actually the most serious censorship ef- forts have disregarded covers almost en- tirely and aimed directly at those works most disturbing to the censoring group. This has, in fact, frequently tended to mean a concentration of censorship ef- forts on better books which have more effectively penetrated areas of sensi- tivity. Though responsible reprint publishers have taken very seriously the sometimes well-founded criticism of means of pro- motion used in the early days of an indus- try highly competitive not only within itself but within the whole field of period- icals, they have not been prepared to compromise on content. I am glad to say that in this policy they have had the vig- orous collaboration of original publish- ers who share the conviction that books must retail their essential indivisible character at whatever price and through whatever channels they are distributed. With all its fantastic gains in sales, distribution, and production techniques, its heavy responsibilities to trade pub- lishers and authors, its sobering moral commitments to the vast public it serves, what is then the future of this adoles- cent industry-the role of enfant terrible or wunderkind? Will history repeat it- self? Are we again heading toward disas- ter? Do we not again have overproduc- tion and price wars and too many inferior books which will make us lose our friends? Yes, we have some of all that, to a greater or lesser degree. But we have many other assets which did not exist in earlier periods. We offer predominantly contemporary American literature, with- out neglecting to make available a good cross-section of the best or most impor- tant foreign writing. Infonnative or scholarly nonfiction is steadily increas-
THE PAPER-BOUND BOOK 225 ing. So is the usefulness of our books for education and enlightenment. We are not the natural enemies but the natural friends of the hard-cover publishers who are our main source of supply. Our pub- lications are books and not only in name in spite of certain limitations in typog- raphy and durability of binding imposed by the requirements of mass production. Constant progress in manufacturing equipment and methods makes it pos- sible to improve the format of our books without increasing their low price level. Our distribution benefits from all the ad- vantages of the twentieth century's technological progress-the automobile, airplane, modern communications sys- tem, office and warehouse mechaniza- tion, etc. Our wholesalers operate effi- cient, sometimes huge, organizations penetrating into the smallest and far- thest corners of the country. We can make use of the refinements of advertis- ing and promotion methods and of the many new modem media at their dis- posal. We are not dependent upon or limited by special conditions such as in- fluenced the course of events in the past, but operate under the same rules and laws as the rest of the publishing frater- nity. Therefore, to the degree that inexpen. sive paper-bound book publishers are able to contribute to the objective of bringing books to millions at low cost without in the process sacrificing the tough independence and diversity of thought or the rich variety that books have always meant, they will be partici- pating in an encouraging and significant cultural revolution-another demonstra- tion that in a maturing America we are learning to achieve in matters of the mind and the arts, as we have already achieved in the economic area, the broad and general distribution of goods that are a vital factor in the dynamic expan- sion of a free society.